Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner, a Superintendent Electrical and Mechanical Grade II in the General Reserve Engineer Force, claims that he was wrongly superseded for Promotion to Grade I from May 19, 1975 to September 12, 1981 during which period a number of persons junior to him were promoted without considering his claim.
2.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been inter alia pointed out that the claim of the petitioner was considered alongwith that of various other eligible persons but persons junior to him were promoted as they were found to be better than him.
It has been specifically mentioned that while the petitioner was assessed to be `Good' the juniors were found to be either `Outstanding' or `Very Good' and were, thus, promoted.
It has been further pointed out that the petitioner had submitted representation on August 27, 1981, reply to which was sent vide letter dated October 20, 1981.
A similar representation was again submitted by the petitioner on August 26, 1982.
Since no new point was raised in this representation, no reply was, sent to him.
He was actually promoted in pursuance to the recommendations of the Departmental Promotion Committee which met on November 4,1982, and he assumed the charge of the post w.e.f.
April 10, 1983.
The claim made in the petition that the petitioner had been sending representations, has been denied.
3.
The petitioner has filed a replication in which the averments made in the petition have been substantially reiterated.
I have heard Mr. Ashwani Kumar Chopra, the learned counsel for the petitioner.
4.
The petition merits dismissal on two grounds.
Firstly, the promotions from November 1975 to September 1981 are sought to be challenged through the present petition which was filed in November 1991.
There is no explanation for the inordinately long delay of more than 8 years.
The petitioner claims that he had submitted representations in the year 1981 and finally given a legal notice on August 9, 1990.
So far as the petitioner's representation is concerned, it was rejected by the respondents vide letter dated October 20,1981.
A perusal of this order (Annexure R-2) produced by the respondents shows that the petitioner had submitted a representation on August 27, 1981 against the promotions of certain persons.
The petitioner was categorically informed that his case was considered for promotion at his appropriate seniority in the DPCs held and that he could not be promoted as he had secured lower gradings, than his juniors.
Thereafter, the petitioner submitted another representation on August 26, 1982.
This representation was primarily directed against the order dated October 20, 1981.
There is no rule under which this representation may be competent.
In any event, the petitioner was not entitled to wait from the year 1982 till 1990 before moving this Court.
The only thing done by the petitioner was the issue of a legal notice on August 9, 1990.
Apparently, even a suit filed after such an inordinately long delay, would be barred by limitation.
In a case, where a suit would be prima facie barred by limitation, a writ petition would not normally be entertained by this Court.
5.
Even on merits, I find no ground to interfere.
The categorical stand taken on behalf of the respondents is that the persons junior to the petitioner had better grading than him.
It has been categorically averred that while the petitioner was found to be `Good', those junior to him were graded as `Outstanding' or `Very Good.'
Apparently, the appropriate authority had considered the petitioner's claim and promoted those who were found to be more meritorious than him.
6.
Mr. Chopra then contends that the criterion adopted on behalf of the respondents for consideration of the claim is contrary to the instructions issued by the Department of Personnel and Training.
He has relied upon an extract of the instructions issued vide letter dated April 10, 1989.
The averments in this behalf have been made in paragraph 4 of the replication.
Mr. Chopra contends that in view of these instructions, the Departmental Promotion Committee had to assign a bench mark of `Good' and all persons who were found to be `Good' or better had to be arranged in the penal in order of seniority.
On this premises, he contends that the action of the respondents in superseding the petitioner is legally untenable.
7.
This contention deserves to fail on two counts.
Firstly, even if, it is assumed that the learned counsel is right in his contention, the claim being highly belated, there is no ground to interfere with the promotions after the lapse of such a long time.
Secondly, the instructions quoted by the petitioner were issued on April 10, 1989.
These instructions have no relevance to the promotions made during the years 1975 to 1981.
Still further, there is nothing on record to indicate the group of Service to which the petitioner belongs.
It has not been shown that it was a Group `C' post.
In any event, even the persons alleged to have been wrongly promoted are not parties to this petition.
I find no infirmity in the action of the respondents if they preferred more meritorious persons to the Petitioner.
Viewed from any angle, I find no ground to interfere with the action of the respondents.
Accordingly, this petition has no merit.
It is dismissed.
In the circumstances of the case, I make no order as to costs.