Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioners herein are aggrieved by the grant of benefit of service rendered by respondent No4 in the General Reserve Engineer Force (hereinafter referred to as the `GREF').
Since the grant of this benefit affected their seniority adversely, the petitioners contended that the benefit could not have been granted to the said respondent.
A few facts as relevant in the case may be noticed.
2.
Respondent No. 4 had joined service as L.D.C.
in the Punjab State Electricity Board on August 23,1962.
He worked as such till March 13,1963.
On March 15,1963, the petitioner joined service with GREF.
He worked there till March 14, 1966.
On his release from GREF, the said respondent joined the post of clerk in the office of Deputy Controller of Printing and Stationery, Punjab on March 15,1966.
He worked there till April 6, 1966.
On April 7,1966, he joined the office of Director Achieves and Curator, Punjab as Steno-Typist.
He held this post till Oct 31,1966.
Therefore the respondent was recruited as a Steno-Typist on Dec 14,1966 in the office of Punjab State Elecy.
Board.
3.
In the year 1967 certain posts of Junior Scale Stenographers were advertised by the Haryana State Electy Board.
The petitioner applied for one of these posts.
He was selected and appointed on Dec., 26 1967.
While he was working as such he claimed the benefit of service rendered by him in the GREF towards the fixation of his seniority.
Vide order May 4, 1972, a copy of which has been produced alongwith the petition as Annexure P-4, the Board decided to allow the benefit of the period of service rendered by respondent No4 in GREF from March 15, 1963 to March 14, 1966 towards his pay fixation, seniority and pension.
Even though this order was passed on May 4, 1972, yet this order, it appears, was not implemented.
As a result, respondent No4 represented to the Board.
Various persons, including the petitioner, whose interests were likely to be affected also submitted representations.
The matter was then considered and vide order dated Jan 31, 1992 the Board has granted the benefit of the period of service rendered by the petitioner in GREF in the matter of fixation of his seniority as a junior scale stenographer.
A copy of the order dated Jan.31, 1992 has been produced by the petitioners as Annexure P-19.
This order has been challenged inter alia on the ground that the service rendered in GREF is not a military service and as such the benefit of this service is not admissible to the respondent in the matter of fixation of his seniority.
It has also been contended that the benefit of the service in GREF has already been given to the said respondent on the post of Stenotypist and as such it could not have been given to him again on the post of junior Scale Stenographer.
It is also contended that the claim of respondent No4 had been rejected by the Board on earlier occasions and there was as such no occasion for the grant of this benefit after a lapse of so many years.
4.
Two separate written statements have been filed on behalf of the respondents.
In a nutshell, the plea raised on behalf of the respondents is that the Punjab Govt. has issued instructions vide letter dated March 29, 1965 by which it had been decided to grant certain concessions to employees who joined the General Reserve Engineer Force.
In paragraph `G' of this letter, it has been provided as under :-  "Temporary State Government Employees' who after release from service in GREF are absorbed in the posts from which they proceeded on service in GREF or are appointed to posts with equivalent or similar grades will be treated in the same manner as permanent State Government employees in respect of pay, seniority and pension on their return, irrespective of whether or not the posts on which they were working at the time of their joining service in GREF continued to remain in existence during the period of their service in GREF.
Temporary State Government employees who do not return to the same post or to a post in an equivalent or similar grade shall be treated in the same manner as new entrants under para 1(a) and (b) of Punjab Government circular No. 7477-4GS-63/24400 dated the 8th July, 1963.
This concession, however, will not have the effect of over-riding the provisions of concessions at (a) above."
A copy of these instructions has been produced as Annexure R-4/2 with the written statement filed by respondent No. 4.
5.
A perusal of the above shows that in case temporary employees who did not return to the post held by them before their preceding to join service in GREF, the benefit had to be given in accordance with the Punjab Govt. circular issued vide letter dated July 1963.
A copy of this circular has been produced as Annexure R4/1.
It provides for the grant of benefits in the matter of increments, seniority and pension, It is accordingly claimed that respondent No4 having served in GREF was entitled to the benefit of the actual service rendered by him in GREF towards the fixation of his seniority on the post of Junior Scale Stenographer to which he had been appointed in the Haryana State Electy Board by direct recruitment.
It has been further said that instructions issued by the State Government vide letter dated March 29, 1965 had been adopted by the Punjab State Electy Board and a circular in this behalf was issued vide letter dated April 30,1966.
Mr. OP Sharma, learned counsel for the Board has also produced before me a copy of the letter dated May 10, 1967 issued by the Haryana State Electy Board showing that it had been decided that "Rules/Regulation Orders of the Punjab State Electy Board as obtained on May 1, 1967 be adopted by the Haryana State Electy Board for facility of working of this office subject to such amendments as might be made from time to time."
This letter is placed on record as mark `A'.
Accordingly it is claimed by the respondents that the benefit as actually admissible to respondent No. 4 has been rightly given to him.
6.
It is in the background of these pleadings that the contentions raised by the learned counsel for the petitioners have to be examined.
Mr. Ravi Kapoor has contended that service in GREF is not military service and as such no benefit could have-been given to respondent No. 4.
He has placed reliance on the judgment of a Division Bench of this Court in Shri Brij Pal Singh v. State of Punjab and others, 1990 Vol. 11 Recent Services Judgment 1966.
The limited question that fell for consideration before the Division Bench was as to whether or not service in GREF fell within the definition of military service under the Punjab Govt. National Emergency (Concession) Rules, 1965.
The question was examined by the Division Bench and it was held that the service in GREF was not military service within the meaning of 1965 rules.
7.
In the present case, however, respondent No. 4 has not been given any benefit under the 1965 rules.
The benefit has been granted under the instructions issued by the government which had been duly adopted by the Board.
These instructions were not the subject matter of the decision of the Division Bench.
Consequently, the judgment of Brij Paul Singh's ease is of no assistance in the present case.
8.
Learned counsel then contended that even under the instructions issued by the State Government, the respondent is not entitled to the benefit towards seniority etc.
Learned counsel has contended that the petitioner after his release from service in GREF was entitled to be absorbed on the post from which he had proceeded on service in GREF and that he could not have been given any benefit under the instructions of July 8,1963.
Reliance for this contention has been placed on the stipulation in paragraph `G' noticed above.
9.
I am unable to accept this contention.
Respondent No. 4 after his release from GREF did not come back to the post of L.D.C.
held by him in the Punjab State Electy Board prior to his proceeding for service in GREF.
In fact he joined as a clerk in the office of Deputy Controller of Printing and Stationery.
Thereafter he worked on another post in the office of Director Achieves and Curators.
Ultimately on Dec 14, 1966 he was appointed as a steno-typist in Punjab State Electy Board.
After the re-organisation of the State of Punjab and the re-constitution of the Board, the petitioner was appointed as a Junior Scale Stenographer in the respondent Board.
Consequently so far as the respondent No. 4. is concerned, he did not return to the post held by him prior to his proceeding to service in GREF and as a result, he was entitled to be treated in the same manner as new entrants in accordance with Punjab Govt. circular letter dated July 8, 1963.
It was in accordance with those instructions that the respondent has been given the benefit of the actual service rendered by him in GREF.
He had been actually appointed as a Junior Scale Stenographer in the Board on Dec.26, 1967.
By giving him the benefit of service from March 15,1963 to March 14, 1966 viz. 3 years, the Board has antedated his appointment as Junior Scale Stenographer to Dec.26, 1964.
It is on this basis that his seniority etc. have been determined.
This in my view, is not only equitable and fair but also in conformity with the instructions issued by the Govt., which had been adopted by the Board.
10.
Learned counsel then contended that there was no warrant for granting this benefit to respondent No4 after the lapse of so many years in 1992.
He contends that the claim had been rejected earlier and as such the benefit was not admissible to the petitioner.
This ground also is lacking in merit.
Firstly a perusal of the petition itself shows that decision to grant this benefit had been taken by the Board as early as in the year 1972.
In fact the order dated May 4, 1972, had been actually issued by the Board.
A copy of the order has been produced by the petitioners as Annexure P-4 with the writ petition.
Once the Board passed this order, there was no justification for delaying its implementation.
It appears that on representation submitted by the concerned persons like the petitioners, the order dated May 4, 1972 was not implemented and the respondent was not given his due.
Even if it is assumed, though there does not appear to be any basis that at some stage the Board had declined the claim of respondent No. 4, it is not necessary that a wrong has to be perpetuated.
Injustice can be undone at any time.
There is no limitation under any law during which a benefit has to be afforded to an employee.
There is nothing in the law which may entitle the petitioners to claim that once the benefit had been denied, even though wrongly, the error had to be perpetuated and the relief had to he declined.
I am of the view that the Board has only rectified a mistake by passing the impugned order and it has only implemented an order which it had passed almost 20 years earlier.
There is as such no merit in the contention raised by the learned counsel.
11.
Mr. Kapoor has then contended that even the instructions dated March 29, 1965 have been considered by a Division Bench of this Court in CWP No. 10968 of 1990.
He has relied upon an order of the Motion Bench.
This order reads as under :-  "In view of Annexure R-3, the petitioner could not be given the benefit of being dependent of Ex.serviceman.
Moreover, the petitioner accepted admission in discipline of Civil Engineering vide Annexure R-2.
Accordingly, we decline to interfere in writ petition.
Dismissed."
A perusal of the above does not show that the instructions of March 29, 1965 were actually considered by the Bench.
It is also clear that their Lordships were only considering the case of admission to an educational institution and the question as to whether or not the petitioner could be described as the dependent of an ex-serviceman.
In the present case no such question arises.
Respondent No. 4 does not claim to be an ex-serviceman.
He does not claim the benefit of any military service.
He had claimed the benefit under the instructions issued by the Govt. which had been found to be admissible by the appropriate authority of the Board.
Accordingly, I find no infirmity in the impugned order.
The writ petition is wholly lacking in merit.
It is dismissed.
In the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.