MS Liberhan, J - The petitioner has challenged order dated February 20, 1990, passed by Assistant Labour Commissioner-cum-Conciliation Officer, staying the transfer of respondent No. 2 till further orders.
2.
Respondent No. 2 was employed as Senior Operator with the petitioner.
As per clause 13 of the appointment letter, respondent No. 2 could be posted any where in India.
In exercise of its right, the petitioner transferred the respondent No. 2 to Calcutta w.e.f.
February 5, 1990, (Annexure P/2), to provide better service to the customers.
Respondent No. 2 filed a complaint under Section 25-T of the Industrial Disputes Act (hereinafter referred to as `the Act') against the General Manager of the petitioner, complaining of commission of unfair labour practice.
It was prayed that the prosecution be lodged against the General Manager of the petitioner for commission of unfair labour practice, committed by transferring respondent No. 2.
Further prayer for stay of the transfer of respondent No. 2 was made.
The Conciliation Officer sent copy of the complaint to the management of the petitioner and stayed the transfer order till further orders.
3.
The sole question which arises for consideration and has been put forth by learned counsel for the petitioner is whether Labour Commissioner Cum-Conciliation Officer has the jurisdiction to stay operation of transfer order of an employee from one place to another Learned counsel for the petitioner argued that the powers of the Reconciliation Officer are circumscribed by Section 12 of the Act and he cannot travel beyond that.
Specific powers have been conferred by Section 12 of the Act on the Reconciliation Officer.
He has no power to pass any interim or final orders.
It has been vehemently argued that his functions are only conciliatory.
He can only persuade the parties to effect a compromise, arrive at some understanding.
On his success in bringing about a reconciliation, he is to record the compromise and to report to the appropriate Government along with the compromise arrived at as well as the memorandum of settlement signed by the parties to the dispute.
On the other hand, on his failure to bring about the settlement, he is to send report to the appropriate Government, stating the steps taken by him and ascertaining the facts and circumstances relating to the dispute and the reason on account of which in his opinion settlement could not be arrived at.
It is the appropriate Government, which is to refer the dispute to the Industrial Tribunal or Courts, in case the appropriate Government is of the opinion that the industrial dispute exists and requires settlement by the duly authorised persons.
4.
It was argued by learned counsel for the petitioner that the conciliation officer has no jurisdiction to adjudicate upon the matter.
His functions are totally administrative and for an attempt for reconciliation, he does not act either judicially or quasi judicially.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner in order to support his submissions, relied upon General Manager, Security Paper Mills, Hoshangabad v. RS Sharma 1986(56) Indian Factories and Labour Reports 358; Madhav Kutty v. Union of India, 1982(2) LLJ 212; Krishnarajendra Mills Workers' Union v. Assistant Labour Commissioner, 1968(1) LIC 153; Royal Calcutta Golf Club Mazdur Union v. State of West Bengal 1957(1) LLJ 218; Wadhu Mal Agani v. Rulia Ram Sharma, AIR 1964 Punjab 389 and K Syed Gani v. State of Madras, AIR 1961 Madras 58.
6.
Learned counsel for the respondent though refuted the submissions made, yet no substantial argument has been addressed worth noticing.
He has argued that the Conciliation Officer could initiate proceedings suo moto and has inherent jurisdiction to stay the operation of transfer order.
It was further argued that the Conciliation Officer could evolve his own procedure and could stay the transfer order.
In support of his submissions, he has relied upon M/s Kalinga Tubes Ltd v. Kalinga Tubes Mazdoor Sangh and others, 1981(1) Labour and Industrial Cases 277 and KV Aboo v. The Workmen's Compensation Commissioner, Kozhikode and another, 1977 Labour & Industrial Cases (NOC) 92.
7.
By reading of the judgments cited by learned counsel for the petitioner, it categorically emerges that the Conciliation Officer is not competent to adjudicate upon the dispute between the management and its workmen.
He is expected to assist the parties to arrive at a fair and just settlement.
He cannot adjudicate various points at issue between the parties.
The Statute has only conferred the power on him to persuade the parties and to induce them to come to a fair and amicable settlement.
He can take appropriate steps as he thinks proper in order to induce the parties to come to a fair settlement.
The statue expects from him keeping in view his forceful opinions and power of pursuation to persuade the parties for a settlement of their dispute outside the tribunals provided by the Act and on failure of the parties to come to a settlement, he is to send the report to the State within the statutory period fixed, if not extended by mutual agreement, setting forth the points in issue, laches and reasons for failure of conciliation.
It is only the appropriate Government, who is authorised, after considering the report, whether to refer the dispute to the tribunals set up under the Act.
The Conciliation Officer neither discharges judicial, nor quasi-judicial functions.
His acts are purely administrative.
He is not expected to return any finding.
The object of Section 12 of the Act is ascertaining what are the disputes between the parties, which affect the rights of theirs.
Even if some settlement is arrived at between the parties, before the Conciliation Officer, the same cannot be termed as "an order" recorded by the Conciliation Officer, nor it falls within the definition of "award" as defined by the Act.
Even this settlement is required to be reported to the appropriate Government.
His functions are purely incidental to the steps towards the industrial adjudication.
His functions are neither parameters nor they bear the character of the functions of the Industrial Court or Tribunal.
His functions can be compared with that of an Investigating Officer, more or less he is required to investigate the point of controversy between the parties to the cause and the reasons for their not coming to a settlement.
Section 2(k) of the Act defines particular disputes with an individual to be an "Industrial Dispute."
The Act enjoins by Section 4 that the appropriate Government would appoint Conciliation officers charged with the duty of mediating and promoting the settlement of industrial disputes.
In para materia with Section 4, the appropriate Government may appoint Board of conciliation.
Chapter III provides the establishment of various tribunals to adjudicate upon the disputes between the parties to it.
Chapter IV provides procedures, powers and duties of various authorities provided by the Act i.e the Boards of the Conciliation Officers, Boards as well as various Courts and Tribunals set up under the Act.
The powers and duties of the Conciliation Officer have been specifically provided by Sections 11 and 12 of the Act.
Section 18 provides that the settlements arrived at through the agency of the settlement officer during the conciliation proceedings shall be binding or all the parties to the industrial dispute, summoned to appear and participating in the proceedings before the Conciliation Officer, the employer and his successor-in-interest on any count in respect of the settlement and other workmen employed in his establishment or part of it or who subsequently get employment.
Section 19 provides the period for which the settlement shall remain operative.
8.
Reading the scheme, as referred to above, and keeping in view the awoed object of maintaining industrial peace, the Legislature has attempted to provide a machinery for reconciliation for settlement of controversies in terms of contract and law, keeping in view the interest of the employee, the employer and the society.
Reading of Section 12, wherein the duties of the Conciliation Officer have been defined, we may venture to state that it is beyond the contemplation of Legislature to confer any power on the Conciliation Officer to adjudicate upon the dispute between the rival parties.
Where any industrial dispute exists or is apprehended, the Conciliation Officer, in the interest of industrial peace, holds conciliation proceedings.
He is expected to take all persuasive steps to bring about conciliation after investigating the dispute and matters affecting the merits of the rights of the respective parties by suggesting a just settlement, which he thinks fit in the facts and circumstances of the case, to the parties.
In the eventuality of failure of his attempts to bring about the settlement of dispute, it has been enjoined by Section 12(4) that he would report the matter to the appropriate Government with his report setting forth the facts and circumstances relating to the dispute and the steps taken by him in bringing about the settlement.
It is further expected that he would state the facts and circumstances as well as the reasons on account of which in his opinion settlement could not be arrived.
It is on receiving the report of the Conciliation Officer that the appropriate Government after fully satisfying that the industrial dispute exists and requires adjudication, may refer the dispute to the labour court, tribunal or Board established to adjudicate upon the dispute.
Keeping the urgency of brining about peace at the earliest, a very short period is provided to the Conciliation Officer, i.e. 14 days from the commencement of the conciliation proceedings to bring about the compromise and/or on his failure to do so, to send the report to the appropriate Government.
It would be reasonable to infer that since the Legislature has specifically and expressly provided the duties and powers of the Conciliation Officer, the other powers would be deemed to have been excluded.
9.
We fully agree with the law laid down by the precedents, as stated above, that the Conciliation Officer has no adjudicatory powers and have nothing to add.
In view of this we can venture to state that the Conciliation Officer cannot finally ad judicate the disputes.
No statutory powers have been conferred either expressly or impliedly on the Conciliation Officer to pass interlocutory orders of the nature of adjudicating the dispute either temporarily or finally.
In our, considered view, as already stated, reading the scheme of the Act as well as the provisions of Section 12 warrants the conclusion that the Conciliation Officer has no jurisdiction to pass an interim order, staying the transfer of respondent No. 2 till further orders or even during the conciliation proceedings.
The object of providing.
for conciliation machinery provided that the conciliation is a step towards closing down the points of difference and expeditious decision by the Tribunal set up under the Act.
Courts cannot travel beyond the scheme and the statutory provisions of the Act itself.
Any order passed by the Conciliation Officer to act in a particular manner would be nothing but without jurisdiction.
10.
Even otherwise, we are further of the view that the respondent No. 2 has made a complaint to the Conciliation Officer under Section 25(T) of the Act to the effect that the employer i.e. the petitioner is indulging in unfair labour practice which may result in prosecution under Section 25(U).
We have failed to comprehend, nor it has been pointed out as to how in case of allegations of unfair labour practice being adopted by the employer, the Conciliation Officer can pass any ad interim order resulting in civil consequences, like injunction etc.  11.
We think that it is beyond argument that the Conciliation Officer has no jurisdiction to adjudicate upon or pass interlocutory orders during pendency of the conciliation proceedings.
12.
There is no dispute with the law laid down in M/s Kalinga Tubes Ltd's case (1981 Labour and IC 277), that the Conciliation Officer can initiate proceedings, suo moto or on the request of the trade union or on the asking of any person, whosoever.
We fail to comprehend how this law is relevant to the question to be answered in the present case.
Similarly in SN Hada v. The Binny Ltd, (1989 L.IC 165), it was observed that the Government can authorise a private person also to file a complaint.
It further laid down the principle of interpretation.
The words of a Statute, when there is a doubt about their meaning, are to be understood in the sense in which they best harmonize with the subject of enactment and the object which the Legislature had in view.
There can be no dispute with the law laid down but we are unable to apply the principle while answering the question raised in this case.
Firstly, the words of Section 12 are clear.
They call for no doubt.
The duties of the Conciliation Officer have been specifically provided.
Doubt in the words cannot be created by imagining the doubt.
There are no two reasonable interpretations which can be suggested and infact there can be none except the one we have put, as observed earlier in the judgment.
Even otherwise also, it were Sections 30 and 34 which under consideration.
The judgment is not para materia on the acts and law involved in this case not it even remotely influences inferences drawn by us above.
To be fair to the counsel for the respondent, we have noticed the judgment cited in 1977 L.I.C (NOC) 92 entitled KV Aboo v. The Workmens Compensation Commissioner, wherein it has been laid that quasi judicial authorities have inherent power to do any justice through the Workmen's Compensation Act.
But it is not the case where any authority beyond the one, which have been conferred specifically by legislation can be inferred.
Apart from this the Conciliation Officer is not a quasi judicial authority but is an administrative authority and has to conduct himself virtually as an advisor and use his pursuasive qualities, for bringing about the settlement between the parties.
13.
In view of the discussion made above, the petition is allowed.
Impugned order (Annexure PA) dated February 20, 1990, is quashed to the extent the transfer of respondent No. 2 was stayed till further orders.
However, the Conciliation Officer will be at liberty to proceed in accordance with law.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.