Harjit Singh Bedi, J. (Oral) - The father of the petitioner, Banarsi Singh, was employed with the Haryana Roadways at Karnal on 19th November, 1971, and was Killed in an accident in the course of his duty the very next day.
On the basis of the Government of Haryana instructions of the year 1970, Annexure P-1 to the petition, the petitioner, being a family member of a deceased employees' applied for appointment to a government service.
He was accordingly interviewed and selected by a Committee to the post of Assistant Fitter vide letter of appointment dated 22.1.1975.
Annexure P3 to the petition.
The petitioner, who sought promotion to the next higher post of Fitter, felt aggrieved by some promotions made on 29 61978 and made representations against them.
He also challenged the promotion order in this Court vide writ petition No. 694 of 1980.
The Government in its reply took the stand that the petitioner was not considered for promotion as he had not been appointed in a regular way and through proper sources and vide order dated 151980 Annexure P-5 to the petition, his services were terminated as being no longer required.
The order Annexure P-5 is being impugned by way of present writ petition.
2, Notice of motion was issued on 55,1980 and the operation of the impugned order was also stayed.
After numerous adjournments, the petition was admitted and stay was directed to continue and it is the conceded case that the petitioner is still continuing in service of the Haryana Roadways in pursuance of the stay order granted.
3.
The stand of the petitioner in the writ petition as also at the time of arguments addressed by his learned counsel Shri CM Chopra, is that the petitioner had been regularly appointed through proper procedure and, in any case, having been allowed to continue by the Department for almost five years and thereafter under the orders of this court for the last 12 years his appointment should not be disturbed even on the grounds of equity.
The stand of the respondents, however, is that as the father of the petitioner had been appointed against a leave vacancy, the every appointment of the petitioner was not regular as the benefit of the instructions, Annexure P-1 was available only to the family members of a deceased employee who was in regular employment.
This has been further clarified in the Instructions dated 951972, Annexures R-3 with the reply.
4.
After hearing counsel for the parties, I am of the view that this petition deserves to succeed.
It is clear from pleadings of the parties that the order Annexure P-5 though in terms innocuous was, in fact, based on the stand of the respondents that the very employment of the petitioner was not made according to the set procedure.
In this view of the matter, I feel that it was incumbent on the authorities to issue a notice to the petitioner before making the order Annexure P-5.
This has admittedly not been done.
it is also clear to me that the petitioner has continued in service for almost 16 years and to non-suit him at this stage would be virtually relegating him to a life of penury destitution.
Surely this is not the way that a family member of a deceased employee who has been granted employment on compassionate grounds, is to be treated.
5.
In the light of what has been stated above, I need not go into the question posed by the learned counsel for the respondents with regard to the applicability of the instructions, Annexure P-1, as clarified by Annexure R-3.
6.
For the reasons recorded above, the present petition is allowed, the order Annexure P-5 is quashed and a direction is issued to treat the petitioner as having been regularly appointed with effect from 22nd January, 1975.
All consequential benefits that flow from this order in terms of seniority, emoluments, promotion etc will be given to the petitioner.
The final decision regarding these consequential benefits and the grant thereof will be completed by the respondents within a period of six months from today.
No costs.