Amarjeet Chaudhary, J (Oral) - The petitioner is seeking mandamus directing the respondents to consider him for admission to MD (Ayurveda) Course.
The admission is sought primarily on the plea that the students having less marks than the petitioner were given admission whereas he has been ignored.
2.
In brief, the case of the petitioner is that he passed Ayurveda Acharya Examination from Nikhil Bhartvarshiya Ayurved Vidyapeetham, New Delhi in the year 1981, which was earlier duly recognised by the Punjabi University as well as the Panjab University and the students who obtained the above said qualification/degree from this Institution were given admission to MD (Ayurveda) Course.
To fortify the plea, the petitioner has given certain instances also.
It is averred in the writ petition that the petitioner applied for admission to MD (Ayurveda) Course to Government Ayurvedic College, Patiala for the session 1990-91, but the respondents have not considered the petitioner's claim for admission.
3.
On the other hand, the stand taken by the respondents is that the Punjabi University, Patiala in terms of Ordinance 2(1) relating to MD (Ayurveda) Course Examination derecognised the qualification/degree obtained from the Nikhil Bhartvarshiya Ayurved Vidyapeetham, Delhi, vide Notification dated 19690.
4.
Mrs. Charu Tuli, the learned counsel for the respondent states that the petitioner did not appear in the written examination and as such he cannot be given admission to MD (Ayurveda) Course.
She further submits that the petitioner was not eligible for admission to the said Course as he did not obtain the requisite qualification/degree from the recognised University/Intution.
The learned counsel also contends that as per notification dated 1961990 only those candidates who passed BAMS Examination from the recognised University/Institutions, which have been mentioned therein, were eligible for admission to MD (Ayurveda) Course.
She also asserts that the petitioner cannot be given admission at this stage in view of the fact that the Course has already be started.
5.
I have considered the respective submissions of the parties.
I find that the petitioner passed Examination of Avurveda Acharya in the year 1981 from the Nikhil Bhartwarshiya Ayurved Vidyapeetham, Delhi and at the relevant time this Institution was duly recognised by the Punjabi University.
The said Institution was derecognised only in the year 1990.
Thus, I am of the considered view that the students who have done Ayurveda Acharya Course prior to the derecognition of the said Institution, are eligible for admission to MD Course and there is no legal justification in denying admission to them.
In my opinion, decognition should have been given effect prospectively.
Earlier, the Supreme Court in Suresh Pal v. State of Haryana & others, AIR 1987 SC 2027 held that it would be unjust to tell the petitioners now that though at the time of their joining the Course, it was recognised, yet they cannot be given benefit of such recognition and the certificates obtained by them would be futile, because during the pendency of the course it was derecognised by the State Government.
The Supreme Court had directed the Haryana Government to recognise certificates issued to students joining Course before derecognition.
6.
In the case in hand, the petitioner was not allowed to appear in the written examination by the University and the MD (Ayurveda) Course has already started.
Therefore, at this stage, the petitioner cannot be given admission to the said Course.
Under the circumstances, a direction is issued to the respondent - University that the case of the petitioner for admission to MD (Ayurveda) Course in Government Ayurvedic College, Patiala in the next academic session be considered as per his merit in the written examination/interview.
7.
The writ petition is disposed of in the terms indicated above and the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Order accordingly.