Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner retired as an Inspector of Police on February 28, 1987.
At that time, he was working on deputation with the Haryana State Electricity Board.
Besides other emoluments, he was drawing a special pay of Rs. 75/-.
Later on, the rate of special pay was raised from Rs. 75/- to Rs. 150/- w.e.f.
January 1, 1986.
Since this revision had taken place after the petitioner's retirement, he claimed that the pension should be refixed after taking into consideration the special pay of Rs. 150/instead of Rs. 75/-.
The respondent-State not only rejected the petitioner's claim for taking into consideration the special pay of Rs. 150/- but also threatened him with the withdrawal of the benefit of special pay of Rs. 75/- already granted.
Aggrieved by this action, the petitioner has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
2.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the State of Haryana, it has been inter alia averred that "the petitioner was working on deputation with Haryana State Electricity Board and was drawing special pay from Haryana State Electricity Board.
The petitioner is not entitled for getting pensionary benefits for his special pay ........." Reliance in support of this has been placed on a letter dated September 17, 1990 issued by the Financial Commissioner, Department of Home, to the Director General of Police.
In this letter, it has been inter alia observed that "during deputation in HSEB and other Board/Corporation, the pension benefits will not be given for the special pay received during deputation."
3.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties.
4.
The payment of pension to a Government servant is covered by the provisions of Punjab Civil Services Rules Vol. 11.
According to Rule 6.19-C, the term `emoluments' when used for the purpose of pension has the same meaning as `pay' in Rule 244 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules Vol.
I Part 1.
Rule 244 defines pay as under :  "(A) Pay means the amount drawn monthly by a Government employee as :- (i) the pay, other than special pay or pay granted in view of his personal qualifications, which has been sanctioned for a post held by him substantively or in an officiating capacity or to which he is entitled by reason of position in a cadre and  ii) overseas pay, special pay and personal pay; and  iii) any other emoluments which may be specially classed as pay by the competent authority;"  5.
The provisions of the above rules have been interpreted by this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 1570 of 1989 decided on August 28, 1989 : It has been held that special pay forms a part of `pay' and `emoluments' Accordingly, the petitioner is entitled to the inclusion of an amount of Rs. 150/- per mensem which was granted to him by way of special pay towards his pay for the purpose of computation of his pension.
The writ petition is allowed.
The needful shall be done within three months from the date of receipt of a copy of this-order.
In case, the arrears of pension are not paid as aforesaid, the petitioner will be entitled to the payment of arrears with interest from the date the amount fell due till the date of actual payment at the rate of 12 per cent per annum.
In the circumstances.
the parties are left to bear their own costs.