Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioners herein are working as teachers in various Primary/Secondary schools in district Patiala.
They pray for the issue of an appropriate writ order or direction for quashing the order dated December, 28, 1988, vide which the State Government had issued instructions to the effect that dearness allowance shall not be admissible on special pay or personal pay granted to the employees.
2.
On October 25, 1983, the State Government had issued a circular to all Heads of Departments providing for certain in incentives to promote the small family norm.
One of the incentives was the grant of a special increment in the form of personal pay which was not to be absorbed in future increase in pay either in the same post or on promotion to higher post.
A copy of this circular has been produced as Annexure P.1 with the writ petition.
The petitioners aver that they had undergone the necessary procedure as contemplated in the circular letter and thus became entitled to the grant of a special increment It is further averred that the State Government issued instructions in July, 1985 informing that "DA/ADA and HRA/CCA... is admissible to an employee who adopted terminal method of Family Planning after two or three surviving children" and a special increment granted in form of personal pay".
Thereafter, the Government issued a circular letter dated December 28, 1988 providing that the special pay and personal pay shall no longer be counted for the purpose of grant of dearness allowance w.e.f.
January 1, 1986.
Aggrieved by this order, the petitioners have approached this Court through the present writ petition.
3.
A written statement has been tiled by the respondents controverting the claim made on behalf of the petitioners.
4.
The impugned order has been challenged on two grounds.
It has been averred that the impugned order is against the principles of natural justice inasmuch as the petitioners are sought to be deprived of a vested right without the grant of any opportunity.
It has been averred that the executive order can only operate prospectively and not retrospectively.
By the retrospective operation of the order, the petitioners have been deprived of their vested rights w.e.f.
January 1, 1986 to December 28, 1988.
The claim is controverted on behalf of the respondents.
5.
After considering the matter, I am of the opinion that no order to the prejudice of the employee can be passed except after the grant of some opportunity when the concerned employee has a chance to put forth his view point.
In the instant case, nothing of the sort appears to have been done.
This has resulted in material miscarriage of justice.
It has deprived the petitioners of a chance to prove that they have been actually granted an increment by way of an incentive which did not amount to special pay.
Failure to grant an opportunity has prejudicially affected the interests of the petitioners.
6.
It is, therefore, directed that the appropriate authority shall consider and decide the matter after hearing he petitioners.
In case it is found that the petitioners were entitled to the relief claimed by them, then the requisite payment shall be made to them.
In case, the petitioners are not satisfied with the order that respondents may pass after hearing them, it will be open to them to approach this Court through a fresh petition on the same.
similar or other grounds.
7.
The writ petition is accordingly disposed of.
In the circumstances, there will be no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.