GR Majithia, J - Written-reply has been filed on behalf of respondent No. 2.
It is stated that fourteen petitioners, namely, Shri Mohinder Singh, Smt. Daya Wati, Smt. Savitri Devi, Shri Ved Parkash, Smt. Santokh Bhardwaj, Shri Mohan Lal, Smt. Saroj Rani, Shri Raghbir Singh, Shri Prem Nath, Smt. Satya Devi, Smt. Santosh Rani, Shri Satya Narain, Shri Jogi Ram and Shri Ajmer Singh have been paid.
This petition had been moved for initiating contempt proceeding against the respondents for non-compliance of this Court's order dated March 31, 1992 passed in Civil Writ Petition No. 3647 of 1991.
The order reads thus :  "Present :- Mr. SP Laler, Advocate.
Notice of motion.
Mr. Arun Nehra, Addl.
Advocate, General.
Haryana,- accepts notice.
In view of the decision in Civil Appeal No. 3535 of 1990 (Zile Singh etc. v. State of Haryana etc., decided on July 23, 1990, this writ petition is allowed.
It is directed that the petitioners shall be paid all their dues for the summer vacations as per their entitlement.
The amount shall be paid within three months from today.
Writ Petition is disposed of accordingly.
But, without any order as to costs.
Sd/- BC Verma, Chief Justice  Sd/- VK Jhanji, Judge"  March 31, 1992.
2.
In response to the show cause notice issued, written-statement has been filed on behalf of Manju Gupta-respondent No. 2.
She has stated that she issued orders on August 6, 1992 to grant necessary reliefs to the concerned petitioners and in compliance with her instructions, the Distt.
Education Officers, Kaithal and Jind, vide their letters dated September 1, 1992 directed the payment to the petitioner immediately subject to the decision of the SLP filed by the State.
3.
Mrs. Ritu Bahri states at the bar that the order has been complied with partially and the payment has been made to Shri Mohinder Singh, Smt. Daya Wati, Smt. Savitri Devi, Shri Ved Parkash, Smt. Santosh Bhardwaj.
Shri Mohan Lal, Smt. Saroj Rani, Shri Raghbir Singh, Shri Prem Nath, Smt. Satya Devi, Smt., Santosh Rani, Shri Satya Narain, Shri Jogi Ram and Shri Ajmer Singh.
Now regarding other petitioner compliance will be made.
In view of the very fair stand taken on behalf of the respondents, this contempt petition has been rendered infructuous and is dismissed as such.
Petition dismissed.