RS Mongia, J (Oral) - While the petitioner was working as a part-time Lecturer in Chemistry in the Kishan Lal Public College at Rewari (hereinafter called the `College'), which is affiliated to the Maharshi Dayanand University, Rohtak (hereinafter called the University), two posts of lecturers in the subject of Chemistry, became available in the year 1988 on account of the incumbents to the posts proceeding on leave.
These two leave vacancies were advertised and the petitioner applied in response to the said advertisement and was selected on 14th October, 1988, against one of the leave vacancy by a duly constituted Selection Committee.
He was issued an appointment letter on 15th October, 1988 for being appointed as a Lecturer in chemistry against the leave vacancy of one Shri DK Paliwal, who had proceeded on study leave for doing PhD This appointment against the leave vacancy was approved by the University, with effect from 15th October, 1988 to 22nd July, 1991.
The incumbent, i.e. Shri DK Paliwal, who had gone on study leave, was granted extension of leave for another one year, and, consequently, the petitioner's appointment was also extended upto 22nd July, 1992.
This extension in appointment was also approved by the University.
2.
On 30th October, 1987, the Commissioner and Secretary to Government, Haryana, Education Department, addressed a letter to the Director, Higher Education, Haryana, Chandigarh and to all concerned regarding the appointment of Lecturers in private Colleges.
The letter reads as under :-  "In reference to letter No. 559/G-21/16-82C(1195) dated 15887 on the above noted subject.
Government has agreed that if a lecturer is appointed against a leave vacancy through a Selection Committee and later on that leave vacancy post becomes available then the incumbent appointed against such leave vacancy through a Selection Committee shall continue on regular basis,"  3.
It may be noticed here that the above letter was reconsidered at the Government level and the benefit given vide letter dated 30th October, 1987 (to which reference has already been made above), was withdrawn.
The latter instructions, which were circulated by the Director, Higher Education, Haryana, Chandigarh, on 8th April, 1991, read as under :  "Reference instructions circulated vide this office Endstt.
No. 891(G)-21/16-82-C-II(5) dated 20111987 on the above subject:  This matter has again been considered by the Govt. and it has been decided that in case any lecturer is appointed in a private college against the leave vacancy through the regularly constituted Selection Committee, such appointment would be considered against leave vacancy only.
If such post subsequently falls vacant on regular basis then it should be advertised as a regular post and appointment against it should be made through a regularly constituted Selection Committee.
It is requested that action in future may be taken according to these instructions."
4.
It is not disputed that before the issuance of instructions, dated 8th April, 1991, some regular posts of Lecturers in Chemistry became available in the College.
The Principal of the College on 11th May, 1991, addressed a letter to the Director, Higher Education, Haryana, that the petitioner, after having been selected by a duty constituted Committee, was working as a lecturer in Chemistry in a leave vacancy caused by Shri Paliwal who had proceeded on study leave and the work and conduct of the petitioner being excellent, the College Management had decided to regularise his services against a permanent vacant post.
Approval was sought for this regular appointment from the Director, Higher Education, Haryana.
The Director, Higher Education, Haryana, vide his letter dated 25th November, 1991, informed the Principal of the College that as per the new instructions issued by the Government, the petitioner could not be made regular.
5.
The case of the petitioner as put forth is that in accordance with the instructions of the Government, dated 30th October, 1987, he was entitled to be regularly appointed against one of the posts, which had become available after his appointment against the leave vacancy.
According to the petitioner's counsel, the right to be regularly appointed became available to him prior to the latter instructions, dated 8th April, 1991 and that right could not be retrospectively taken away.
It was further argued that the Management itself had decided to regularise the services of the petitioner and after the decision to that effect, even the approval was sought from the Director, Higher Education, Haryana, which was wrongly declined on the ground that new instructions had come into play.
6.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondents, submitted that as per instructions, dated 30th October, 1987, reproduced above, the benefit of regular appointment could only be given if the only leave vacancy, against which a person is appointed through regular selection, falls vacant permanently.
In other words, the incumbent who has gone on leave decides not to come back at all.
On facts, the learned counsel submitted that the leave vacancy against which the petitioner was appointed has not become available, inasmuch as incumbent Shri Paliwal is still on leave and has informed the Department that he would be rejoining the post.
That being so, according to the learned counsel, the leave vacancy against which the petitioner had been appointed, has not fallen vacant.
Otherwise also, the learned counsel submitted that the latter instructions are in consonance with Article 16 of the Constitution of India, inasmuch as a person may not apply just for the leave vacancy and when that leave vacancy becomes a regular vacancy and is advertised, many persons may like to join the regular post.
7.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I find that there is no merit in the submissions of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
The instructions, dated 30th October, 1987, reproduced above, are in a nature of concession for the incumbent who is appointed against a leave vacancy.
These have to be strictly construed.
It is evident from the reading of the instructions that the same are applicable only in case of that incumbent who is appointed against a leave vacancy and later on that leave vacancy becomes permanently available, inasmuch as the incumbent who had proceeded on leave, does not rejoin.
These instructions do not give a right an the appointee like the petitioner to claim a right of regular appointment against any other post which may become available later on after his appointment.
The Management was not right in converting the appointment against leave vacancy of the petitioner to a regular appointment, even though the initial appointment was after selection by a duly constituted Committee.
A person who may be meritorious enough may not apply for a post which is available only as a leave vacancy and may like to apply when a regular post is available.
So it cannot be said that a person who is selected by a regularly constituted Committee for a post in leave vacancy, has a right to be regularised against a regular post, which may become available later on.
If such an incumbent applies for a regular appointment, he may be treated at a better footing by the Selection Committee, having already worked against a leave vacancy.
According to me, the non-approval of the regular appointment of the petitioner by the Government communicated vide letter dated 25th November, 1991, though factually correct, may not be held to be for good reasons.
The instructions of 8th April, 1991 to which reference has been made in the letter dated 25th November, 1991, deal with those vacancies which were earlier leave vacancies and may have become regularly vacant on account of the incumbent not rejoining.
The case of the petitioner was not the one where he was being considered by the management against a leave vacancy which had become regular.
Any way, since I am holding that the petitioner could not be appointed on regular basis simply on his having been selected against a leave vacancy, the reason for non-approval by the Government for his regular appointment becomes meaningless.
8.
It has also been argued by the learned counsel for the petitioner that under similar circumstances, the services of one Kapur Singh, who was also appointed against a leave vacancy, were later on allowed to be regularised by the State Government.
The argument proceeded that there cannot be any discrimination in case of the petitioner.
9.
I am unable to agree with the learned counsel for the petitioner.
Even if the services of Kapur Singh were regularised as claimed by the petitioner, that would not entitle the petitioner to claim the same relief in view of the interpretation I have already given above regarding the instructions dated 30th October, 1987.
If some wrong was committed by the respondent in violation of the instructions dated 30th October, 1987, the respondents cannot be asked to commit another wrong.
10.
The learned counsel for the respondents fairly states that till Mr. Paliwal rejoins, the petitioner will be allowed to continue.
However, the learned counsel for the petitioner states that in fact Shri Paliwal had already rejoined and according to his instructions he has already put in his resignation, as he has been selected somewhere else.
Under these circumstances, I have no doubt that if and when the post vacated by Shri Paliwal is advertised and the petitioner applies, he will be given due weightage for his having already worked to the entire satisfaction of the Management.
It would be open to the Management to keep the petitioner in service till the post which becomes available on the resignation to Shri Paliwal is filled on regular basis.
The petitioner's counsel states that the petitioner has not been paid his salary for the period he has worked by virtue of the stay order of this Court upto 1891992.
He was relieved from duty with effect from 19.9.1992 (FN) vide order dated 1891992, copy of which has been placed on record as Annexure P-3.
Let the Management pay the entire arrears within two months of the receipt of the copy of this order.
11.
Subject to the observations made above, the writ petition is dismissed, but with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.