Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - Vide order dated February 3, 1979 the option exercised by the petitioner was accepted and he was permanently transferred from the Ministerial Cadre to the Accounts Cadre.
Unilaterally, without giving the petitioner any opportunity to show cause, the Corporation vide order dated February 21/2521980 cancelled the petitioner's transfer with retrospective effect.
Aggrieved by this action, the petitioner has approached this Court.
2.
The motion Bench having stayed the change of posting of the petitioner, he has continued to work in the Accounts Cadre.
A few facts relevant for the decision of this petition may be noticed.
3.
The petitioner entered the service of the Food Corporation of India on 1481970 as an Assistant Grade III.
On May 2, 1972, the petitioner was promoted to the post of Assistant Grade II.
On November 9, 1976 the petitioner was promoted to the rank of Assistant Grade-I It is established on the record that from 1051972 the petitioner was posted in the Finance Division of the Corporation.
He worked in this division till 7.12.1976 when he had to relinquish the charge of the post of Assistant Grade II in the Finance Division so as to able to join the post of Assistant Grade I in the Vigilance Cell of the Corporation.
On 221977, the Corporation circulated a decision regarding formation of Accounts Cadre from the level of Assistants Grade III onwards.
It was stated that the appointments will be made at the level of Assistants Grade III, II and I by transfer of the qualified persons from the General Administration Cadre.
The officers were requested to call for options from the Assistants Grade I (General Administration Grade) possessing a degree in Commerce, Mathematics or Statistics for transfer to the Accounts Cadre.
It appears that many employees including the petitioner represented and prayed that the claims of all persons for transfer to the Accounts Cadre should be considered.
Accordingly, vide letter dated 1341977, the Corporation issued a circular pointing out that it had decided to take up the matter with the Government of India for amending the existing provisions of the Staff Regulations to the effect that the qualifications prescribed for Category II and III posts on the Accounts Cadre would be relaxable in the case of deserving Corporation employees who are allready working in the Finance Division and who were otherwise found competent in their work.
On June 25, 1977 the Head Office of the Corporation circulated a letter to all General Managers pointing out that the Board in its meeting held on 12.5.1977 has approved the proposal for amending the existing provisions of the Staff Regulations to the effect, "that the qualifications prescribed for Category II and III posts in the Accounts Cadre may be relaxed in the case of deserving Corporation employees who are already working in the Finance Division and have proved their proficiency in their work."
It was further stated that "the specific options of all the Category II and III employees working in the Finance Division - whether qualified or not - for their willingness or otherwise to continue to work in Finance Division and forming part of the Accounts Cadre may be obtained."
An assurance regarding counting of past service towards seniority was also given.
It appears that the petitioner had represented for the inclusion of his name in the Accounts Cadre.
Vide letter dated 22121978 the Deputy Manager (Personnel) recommended the petitioner's case and pointed out that the Deputy Manager (Accounts) has once again stressed that in view of the official's commendable performance in compilation work while working in Finance Division during the period from 1051972 to 7.12.1976 his case for absorption in Accounts Cadre merits special consideration.
He has again been posted in local Finance Division since 831978 and his work there has been found to be quite satisfactory."
It appears that in view of this recommendation, the request of the petitioner was accepted.
Vide order dated 321979, the Corporation notified the acceptance of the options of the employees including the petitioner "for their permanent transfer to the Accounts Cadre."
The name of the petitioner appeared at Sr. No. 54 in this order.
This acceptance of the option of the petitioner's transfer to the Accounts Cadre was even acted upon.
A tentative zonal seniority of Assistants Grade I in the Accounts Cadre was circulated by the Corporation vide letter dated March 16, 1979.
In this list the petitioner's name appeared at Sr. No. 313 and extract thereof has been produced as Annexure P.9 with the writ petition.
However, in spite of these facts the Corporation issued a letter dated 21/2521980 conveying that "in compliance with the Zonal Office (North) FC, New Delhi's order No. xxxxx dated 2211980 issued from file No. xxxxx the names of the following officials notified vide Zonal Office (North)'s order No. xxxxxxxxxx dated 321979 xxxxxxxxx stand cancelled with retrospective effect."
By another order dated 2521980, the petitioner's name was also ordered to be deleted from Zonal Seniority list.
Aggrieved by these actions of the Corporation, the petitioner has approached this Court.
The orders dated February 21/2521980 (Annexure P10) and 2521980 (Annexure P11) have been challenged as being totally arbitrary, diuscriminatory and violative of the principles of natural justice.
4.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondent there is no dispute about facts.
It has inter alia been admitted that the petitioner had worked in the Accounts branch of the Regional Officer from May 10, 1972 to December 7, 1976.
It has been averred that "the petitioner's transfer from the Accounts Section to the Vigilance and Security Branch, after his transfer as Assistant Grade I was on administrative grounds as employees of the General Administration Cadre to which the petitioner belongs, are liable to be transferred to any of the Divisions of the Corporation."
It has further been stated that even after the amendment of the staff Regulations vide notifications date 521977 and 17111977, the options were called for from "the qualified persons and from those who were working at that time in the Accounts/Finance Division for their transfer to the Accounts Cadre."
The options were screened by a Committee and accordingly a notification for transfer was issued.
The petitioner had submitted a representation in February, 1977 seeking permission for option to the Accounts Cadre in relaxation to prescribed qualification.
It has further been pointed out that the notification regarding petitioner's transfer to the Accounts Cadre was made as a special case but on receipt of a reference from the Head Office that the notifications of all persons who were not qualified and who were not working in the Finance/Accounts Division at the time of their exercising options be cancelled.
It has also been stated that the petitioner does not possess degree in Commerce, Mathematics or Statistics and was also not working in the Finance/Accounts Division at the time of exercising the option.
Since the petitioner was not qualified, he was not entitled to any opportunity of being heard before the issuance of impugned orders.
5.
In pursuance of order dated 20.2.1992 passed by me, after the arguments had been partly heard, an affidavit of RP Sood, Deputy Manager (Personnel) has been filed.
It has been inter alia stated in this affidavit that, "the Regulations as amended on 17111977 contemplated that Assistant Grade I employees of all Cadres, possessing the degree in Commerce, Mathematics.
Statistics, can be absorbed in Accounts Cadre, whereas only Assistant Grade I working in the Accounts Wings, considered to be competent and capable, could be transferred to the Account Cadre."
It has also been stated that no person similarly situated as the petitioner has been allocated to the Accounts Cadre in the Haryana Region as per the records available in the office.
An affidavit has also been filed by the petitioner in which it has been inter alia pointed out that 18 persons who were not possessing the degree in Commerce, maths or Statistic or had passed only Matriculation/Higher Secondary examination have been absorbed in the Accounts Cadre.
It has also been averred that a large number of other Assistants Grade I who were either Matriculates or Graduates without the qualification of Commerce, Maths or Statistics have been allowed to be transferred in relaxation to the qualification.
It is claimed on behalf of the petitioner that even though he is a Graduate, he has been treated in a discriminatory manner.
6.
I have heard Mr. RK Chopra, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. Hemant Kumar Gupta for respondent.
7.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties I find that according to the Staff Regulations as amended vide notification dated 17111977 two categories of the persons are eligible for appointments to the Accounts Cadres.
Firstly, the Assistant Grade I of all Cadres possessing the degree in Commerce, Mathematics or Statistics are eligible.
Besides this, all Assistants Grade I working in the Accounts Wing who were considered to be competent and capable and possessing an aptitude for Accounts work could be transferred to the Accounts Cadre.
This is the existing provision in the Regulations.
According to these provisions an Assistant Grade I who was working in the Accounts Wings and was considered to be competent and capable and possessed an aptitude for Accounts work could be transferred to the Accounts Cadre.
Did the petitioner fulfil this qualification on 321979 when he was ordered to be transferred ?
8.
A perusal of the record shows that he had been posted as Assistant Grade I in the local Finance Division on 831978.
Consequently, he was one of the Assistants (Grade I) posted in the Finance Division of the Corporation.
It is further evident that the Deputy Manager (Accounts) had pointed out that "in view of the official's commendable performance in Compilation Work while working in Finance Division during the period 1051972 to 7.12.1976 his case for absorption in Accounts Cadre merits special consideration."
The Deputy Manager (Personnel) had further observe that, "the petitioner has been posted in Local Finance Division since 831978 and his work there has been found to be quite satisfactory."
Consequently, even the requirement of the Regulations regarding the petitioner being competent and capable as also possessing an aptitude in accounts work was duly met with.
In view of this position, I am unable to accept the contention that the petitioner was not eligible to be considered for transfer or that he was not qualified in accordance with the provisions of Staff Regulations.
9.
A perusal of the pleadings of the parties further shows that prior to the creation of a separate Accounts Cadre "the employees of General Administrative Cadre were eligible to be transferred to any of the Division of the Corporation."
In fact a categoric statement to that effect occurs in para 13 of the written statement.
It was on account of this reason that the petitioner who was working in the Accounts Division since 1051972 was transferred to the Vigilance and Security Branch on December 7, 1976.
The posting in the Accounts Cadre was thus not based on a special qualification or aptitude but was ordered on administrative grounds.
Just as the petitioner was transferred from the Accounts Division to the Vigilance and Security Branch, persons working in other branches may have been posted in the Accounts Branch.
If posting in a particular branch was to be the primary consideration for absorption in the Cadre without anything more, the action would have resulted in denial of fair opportunity to the petitioner who had been transferred from the Accounts Division without any fault on his part purely on administrative grounds.
Admittedly, various persons who were matriculates or had passed with higher secondary examination have been absorbed in the Accounts Cadre only on the ground that they were posted in the Division at the relevant time.
The petitioner who is better qualified than the 18 persons whose names are mentioned in the additional affidavit had a better right to be considered for absorption.
It is presumably on account of this reason that the Deputy Manager (Personnel) had recommended the consideration had been duly accepted.
The acceptance of the respondent's claim as made out in the written statement would introduce a totally arbitrary classification between the petitioner and others who were absorbed in the Accounts Cadre.
It would amount to denial of an opportunity to the petitioner.
10.
Even otherwise, the order of permanent absorption was cancelled without even giving any opportunity to the petitioner.
He was not even given any chance to put forth his view point.
11.
Taking the totality of the facts into consideration, I am satisfied that the petitioner was eligible for his absorption in the Accounts Cadre.
In fact he has worked there for a period of more than 18 years out of total about 22 years that he has put in the service of the Corporation.
12.
Accordingly, the writ petition is allowed.
The orders at Annexure P10 and P11 are quashed.
If during the pendency of this writ petition, the petitioners's claim for further promotion has not been considered on account of orders of his transfer which have now been set aside, the Corporation shall now consider him for further promotion with effect from the date the persons junior to him have been promoted.
Consequently relief that may ensue from such promotion may also be granted to him.
The needful shall be done within four months from the date of the receipt of a copy of this judgment.
In the circumstances, I make no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.