HS Bedi, J - The petitioner was employed as a Steno-typist in Govt. College, Hodal (hereinafter called the College) on 21st November, 1978, on a temporary basis.
He continued to work on that post up to 30th April, 1979.
On 13th July, 1979, he was re-appointed to the said post for a period of three months vide Annexure P6.
The Government, vide communicated dated 26th December, 1979 (Annexure P1), decided to take over the college on the conditions set out therein.
The relevant provisions relating to the absorption of staff already employed read as under :-  2(2) Only such members of the Staff of the College as are considered suitable for absorption in Government service by the Haryana Public Service Commission/Haryana Subordinate Service Selection Board shall be taken who shall be treated as new entrants.
While considering the suitability, inter alia, the qualifications shall be taken into consideration.
2(6) The college on being taken over by the Govt. should not be over-staffed and only such staff should be kept as is justified on the basis of actual work-load/norm fixed for different categories of staff.
2(9) The staff subject to their suitability may be appointed temporarily for a period of six months.
Their absorption on regular basis shall, however, be subject to the conditions laid down in sub-para 2(2) above."
In pursuance of instructions Annexure P1, the College forwarded in October, 1979, a list of all the persons employed by it and as the petitioner was in position at that time, his name too was forwarded.
However, despite the petitioner having been recommended no appointment letter was issued to him and it is alleged in the petition that one Sh. Ram Dayal who was qualified as a Librarian was absorbed as a Clerk instead.
Feeling aggrieved, the petitioner represented to the Director Public Instructions but to no effect.
The grievance of the petitioner as set out in the writ petition is that as his name had been forwarded to the DPI for absorption he ought to have been appointed in preference to Ram Dayal aforementioned.
2.
The stand of the respondent-State in its reply was that although the name of the petitioner did figure in the list sent to the DPI in October, 1979, yet as the orders taking over the college were passed on 26th December, 1979, a fresh list was called for in 1st January, 1980, wherein the name of the petitioner did not figure.
It has also been clarified that the appointment letter was not issued in favour of the petitioner, as he had been appointed for three months on 13th July, 1979 and as this period had expired on 12th October, 1979, on the relevant date, i.e. 26th December, 1979, he was not in position in the college.
3.
It appears to me that the stand of the respondents cannot be faulted and the petitioner who was at best a temporary employee for a limited period could not stake claim to regular appointment on the taking over of the college by the Government.
It is also apparent that on 26th December, 1979, which was the date of decision by the Govt. to take over the college the petitioner was not in the employment of the college.
4.
The findings recorded above would ordinarily merit the dismissal of the writ petition but I find myself faced with a deliemma as I feel that in the given circumstances it will be highly inequitable to deny the relief claimed by the petitioner.
It will be seen that notice of motion was issued in this case of 8th April, 1980, and stay of termination of the services of the petitioner was ordered.
This interim order is continuing even today.
Resultantly, the petitioner who was possibly not entitled to absorption in Government service in 1979 is still continuing in service.
It has been held by the Supreme Court in Bhagwati Prasad v. Delhi State Mineral Development Corporation, AIR 1990 SC 371 that a person long employed on a job acquires necessary experience and if the appointment continues over a length of time, it should not be disturbed.
Mr. Monga, learned Deputy Advocate-General, has however, contended on the basis of some communication that he has received from the Department that the stay granted to the petitioner could not operate in his favour, as on 8th April, 1980, the petitioner was not in service, his services having come to an end by efflux of time on 12th October, 1979.
5.
In view of the facts stated above, the order that I propose to make is that if the petitioner has continued to be in service under the shelter of the stay granted by this Court, that arrangement shall not be disturbed and the writ petition will be deemed to be allowed.
However, in case the petitioner has not continued in the employment of the respondents as he was not in position after 12th October, 1979, the writ will be deemed to be dismissed.
No order as to costs.
Order accordingly.