VK Bali, J (Oral) - A grave injustice has happened to the petitioner.
The petitioner passed her Matriculation examination in the year 1985 by securing 70% marks from the Punjab School Education Board and did her graduation from Sri Guru Nanak Dev University while securing first division in the year 1989.
Respondent No. 3 Punjab Nurses Registration Council conducted a Pre Entrance Test for the General Nusing and Midwifery Courses and Multipurposes Health Workers Female (A.N.M.)
A prospectus was issued according to which the last date for the receipt of applications was 8101991 and the entrance test was to be held on 20101991.
Petitioner applied for admission to the aforesaid course and in pursuance of application, she was allotted Roll No. 670 and was asked to appear in the test at Jalandhar.
Total number of seats for General Nursing and Mid Wifery Course were 550 and the seats were allocated for reservation to various categories like Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribes, Backward Area, Border Areas etc.
There was 2% reservation for Backward Area candidates.
Admittedly the petitioner was a Backward Area candidate and had applied.
Even though the petitioner was first in merit in her own category, she did not get any information or letter from the respondent-College and after waiting for the whole month of January and February, she approached the College on 3.3.1992 and she was told by the concerned authorities that admission cannot be given to her as she did not appear in the interview which was conducted by respondent No. 4 on 2711992.
Obviously, this was not taken by the petitioner to be a genuine ground and, therefore, she made number of visit at various concened places to seek justice but when all her attempts proved abortive, she has approached ths Court by way of present petition.
2.
On the aforesaid facts, the case of the petitioner is that even though she has stood first in the Pre-entrance examination in her category, admission to her has been denied on wholly extraneous consideration.
3.
This petition has been contested and in the reply filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been pleaded that the petitioner was absent on the date of interview i.e. 2711992 and notice of interview was notified in leading newspapers by the director, Research and Medical Education, Punjab, Chandigarh.
As the petitioner was absent in the interview, so she was not selected for the said course.
It is pleaded that in the Prospectus, it is mentioned that the candidates seeking admission will be required to appear before the Selection Committee.
Clause 3.2(x)(b)(ii) of the Prospectus is pressed into service for the aforesaid contention.
4.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the considered view that the petitioner has been kept out of admission in the course in which she was selected in the Pre-entrance test on totally non est and arbitrary grounds.
Relevant part of the clause on which reliance has been placed requires to be reproduced :-  "After declaration of results, candidate shall apply to the Head of Institution of her choice and appear before the Selection Committee if appointed by the authorities of the concerned Institute."
(Emphasis supplied) A reading of the relevant clause reproduced above would immediately make out that it was not necessary to constitute a Selection Committee and in the very nature of things, if the same was to be constituted individual intimation of the same as also with regard to appearance before the Selection Committee had necessarily to be given to the concerned candidates.
Judicial restraint guides me not to make any adverse comments and it shall be sufficient to hold that the petitioner was debarred from taking admsision after having been selected in a wholly arbitrary manner.
There is nothing mentioned in the Prospectus that even after a candidate has been selected in the Pre-entrance test and has come in the merit he/she shall have to look to the newspapers to find out if Selection Committee has been constituted as also that a date has been fixed for appearance before the Selection Committee.
Again even though, the words mentioned in the relevant clause are Selection Committee, it is nobody's case that after securing first position, a candidate had to be subjected to any interview in which he/she may even fail.
As referred to in the beginning of judgment, a grave injustice has been caused to the petitioner by throttling her rightful claim.
It is a pity that a candidate like the petitioner who secured first position has been compelled to approach this Court.
5.
In view of what has been stated above, this Writ Petition is allowed with costs.
The respondents are directed to forthwith admit the petitioner in General Nursing and Mid Wifery Course in Rajendra Hospital Patiala.
Inasmuch as the petitioner was not given provisional admission at the time of admission of this Writ Petition, she must have fallen short of Lectures.
A further direction is issued to the respondents to permit the petitioner to appear in the examination commencing next and no objection will be raised with regard to her candidature on account of lectures.
The costs are quantified at Rs. 5,000/-.
The costs must be paid to the petitioner forthwith by the Government leaving it in the discretion of the Government to pinpoint the person or persons concerned responsible for adopting this slipshod method and to later recover from him or them as the case may be.
Dasti.
Petition allowed.