GC Garg, J - The petitioners are the employees of the Haryana State Electricity Board (for short the Board) and have been working as Junior Engineers at Thermal Power Station, Panipat, in the State of Haryana.
During the year 1974, a separate Thermal organisation was created and Thermal Plants were installed to meet the demand of electricity supply.
As a result thereof, the petitioners were transferred to the Thermal Organisation on administrative exigencies from time to time during the years 1977 to 1980.
The Board revised its policy with regard to recruitment, promotion and posting of employees in its Thermal Power Projects by changing the existing staffing pattern.
The guidelines dated August 7, 1985 issued for implementing the policy are contained in letter Annexure P-1 appended with the petition.
According to the revised policy decision, two separate cadres of the employees were created, i.e.
Thermal Cadre and the Field Cadre, and the Junior Engineers who had rendered five years' service on operation and maintenance of Thermal Power Stations alone, were eligible for absorption in the Thermal Cadre.
For this purpose options were also to be obtained in writing and those who did not opt for absorption in the Thermal Cadre itself were to be shifted out of the Thermal Project, gradually in a phased manner.
Ultimately, separate seniority lists of the Junior Engineers were to be maintained with separate channels of promotion for the Thermal and Field Organisations.
In pursuance of the aforesaid decision, the petitioners were deemed to have opted for being absorbed in the Thermal Cadre.
However, the Board issued transfer orders of petitioner Nos. 2 to 12, posting them outside the Thermal Cadre at Panipat, obviously in various offices borne on the Field Cadre.
Aggrieved against this action, the petitioners have approached this Court for issuance of a writ of certiorari quashing their transfer orders and a writ of mandamus commanding the respondents to permit them to continue in the Thermal Cadre for which Cadre they have been treated to have opted.
2.
In the written statement filed by the Board, it is stated that representations of the petitioners were scrutinised and found to be without merit.
The policy decision of the Board to fill up the vacancies created by the Staffing pattern consequent upon the decision of having a separate cadre of the Thermal Power Projects has been filed as Annexure R-1.
It is further stated in the written statement that in view of the said policy and guidelines, the cases of the petitioners and other Junior Engineers were screened by the Chief Engineers, Thermal Power Project, Panipat, who after adjudging their suitability retained petitioner No. 1 and asked for transfer of others and consequently, the transfer orders were issued.
It is further stated that petitioner No. 5 did not opt for Thermal Cadre.
Thus, in nutshell, the action is sought to be justified on the ground that it is only after screening the service record of the petitioners working in the thermal Plant and considering their academic and technical qualifications and experience etc. the Screening Committee recommended that they be transferred to the Field Cadre.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that the petitioners were shifted and posted in the Field Cadre without considering their representations and giving them an opportunity of being heard.
The learned counsel in support of his submission placed reliance upon the decision in Shri SP Kapoor, Junior Engineer and others v. The Haryana State Electricity Board, 1987(4) SLR 654.
4.
The facts of the reported case are quite similar to the facts of the present case.
In that case after considering the facts and circumstances, a writ of mandamus was issued directing the respondent-Board to invite representations from the employees working in the Thermal Plants and to consider the same by a committee of senior officers and then take a decision after affording them an opportunity of personal hearing, if asked for by an employee, and it shall thereafter be open to the Board to take a final decision with regard to allocating the employees to the respective cadres.
5.
Learned counsel for the respondents has pointed out that the petitioner No. 9 has since retired and petitioner No. 1, though earlier transferred to the Field Cadre, has been retained in the Thermal Cadre after cancelling his transfer orders.
It was, thus, contended that writ petitions qua petitioners 1 and 9 be dismissed as not pressed.
Accordingly, the writ petition qua them is dismissed as such.
Regarding other petitioners, the learned counsel for the respondents submitted that their cases for transfer were considered as per the policy decision by the committee and they were transferred out of the Thermal Cadre thereafter.
6.
Having heard learned counsel for the parties and having examined their respective pleadings and other material placed on the record, I find that the matter is squarely covered by the decision of this Court in SP Kapoor's case (supra).
Under these circumstances, the writ petition is allowed and a direction is issued to the respondent-Board to consider the representations of the petitioners, other than petitioners 1 and 9, which may be filed within one month from the date of receipt of copy of this order.
The representations shall be considered by the Board or by a committee of senior officers constituted by it, after affording an opportunity of hearing of the petitioners, if asked for by them.
If shall thereafter be open to the Board to take a final decision with regard to allocating petitioners 2 to 8 and 10 to 12 to the Field Cadre or the Thermal Cadre.
If the Board comes to the conclusion that the petitioners are entitled to be absorbed in the Thermal Cadre, they shall be transferred to the said cadre immediately with continuity of service and other benefits as may be admissible to them.
If, however, the Board comes to the conclusion that they are not entitled to be absorbed in the Thermal Cadre, their representations shall stand dismissed and no further action in the matter would be called for except informing them of the decision taken.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.