Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner, a Scrutiny Inspector in the office of the Labour Commissioner, Punjab, challenges the validity of the instructions issued vide letter dated March 14, 1991 (Annexure P2).
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner who possessed the qualification of M.A.LL.B.
and a Diploma in Personnel Management and Labour Welfare was appointed as a Field Investigator in the department of Labour and Employment on January 16, 1976.
On November 21, 1988, he was promoted as a Scrutiny Inspector.
It is averred that the petitioner is the senior-most Scrutiny Inspector/Field Investigator in the department.
3.
The Scrutiny Inspectors/Field Investigators are members of the Class-III Service.
They are eligible for promotion to the post of Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer, which is a part of the Class-II service.
The recruitment to the Class-II service is governed by the Rules, called, 'The Punjab Labour (Class-II) Service Rules, 1982,' (hereinafter referred to as 'the Rules').
The provision regarding "appointment etc. is contained in Rule 7, which inter-alia provides that appointment to the Service shall be made in the manner as specified in Appendix 'B' to these rules."
In Appendix-B, so far as a Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer is concerned, it is provided that 30% shall be filled up "on the basis of a combined competitive examination conducted by the Commission........and 70% by promotion.
Out of the posts which are to be filled up by promotion, 60% are to filled up from amongst the Labour Inspectors, Grade-I and 10% from amongst the Scrutiny Inspectors or Field Investigator working in the Department of Labour and Employment."
There is a note attached to the Rules, which lays down the rotation/order in which the posts have to be filled up.
It reads as under :-  "Note - In a block of ten posts of Labour-cum-Conciliation Officers the vacancies shall be filled in the following order :- 1. by direct appointment.
2. by promotion of Labour Inspector Grade-I  3. by promotion of Labour Inspector Grade-I  4. by promotion of Scrutiny Inspector or Field Investigator.
5. by direct appointment.
6. by promotion of Labour Inspector Grade-I  7. by promotion of Labour Inspector Grade-I  8. by direct appointment.
9. by promotion of Labour Inspector Grade-I  10. by promotion of Labour Inspector Grade-I"  4.
A perusal of the above note shows that in a block of 10 vacancies, the 4th vacancy has to be filled up by promotion of Scrutiny Inspector or Field Investigator.
5.
On March 14, 1991, the Government issued instructions, in which it was inter-alia provided that "whenever an employee of a particular category vacates the vacancy, the same be filled up from that very category".
Whenever vacancies filled from amongst the Labour Inspectors Grade-I fell vacant, the same be filled up by promoting Labour Inspectors Grade-I and when the vacancy is vacated by an employee of Statistical Wing, the same be filled up from the employee of the Statistical Wing and whenever the vacancies which were filled up by way of direct recruitments, fell vacant, the same be filled up by way of direct recruitment."
It appears that the Labour Commissioner wrote a letter dated March 19, 1991 to the Government pointing out that the instructions were in conflict with the statutory rules.
The petitioner also made a representation.
When nothing fruitful ensued, the petitioner has approached this Court through the present petition.
The executive instructions have been challenged as being totally violative of the rules governing the Service.
6.
A written statement has been filed by Mr. KC Sood, Under Secretary to Government Punjab.
It has been inter-alia averred that the Scrutiny Inspectors/Field Investigators are entitled to a quota of 10% for promotion to the post of Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer.
In the cadre of 24 posts of Assistant Labour Commissioner/Labour-cum-Conciliation Officers in the Department, the Scrutiny Inspectors are entitled to only two posts.
It has been further averred that two persons from this category have already been promoted as Labour-cum-Conciliation Officers.
Accordingly, the petitioner is not entitled for promotion.
On these premises, the claim of the petitioner has been controverted.
7.
I have heard Mr. RK Chopra, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mrs. Charu Tuli for the respondents.
Mrs. Tuli points out that the rule was followed in letter and spirit so far as the first two blocks of 20 vacancies were concerned.
However, after the issue of the instructions (annexure P2), nine posts of Labour-cum-Conciliation Officers have been filled up.
Out of these nine posts, three have been filled up by direct recruitment and six by promotion of Labour Inspectors Grade-I So far as the 4th point in the block was concerned, it has been given to a person from the category of Labour Inspectors and the claim of the Scrutiny Inspector, viz. the petitioner was not considered in view of the instructions of the Government.
8.
The factual position as disclosed by the learned counsel for the respondents shows that 33-1/3% posts, viz. 3 out of 9 have been filled up by direct recruitment and 66-2/3%, viz. 6 out of 9 have been filled up by promotion of Labour Inspectors Grade-I Both categories have gained at the cost of the Scrutiny Inspectors/Field Investigators, who are assigned a quota of 10%.
The factual position completely negatives the claim as made on behalf of the respondents in the written statement.
9.
A perusal of the Rules shows that 30% of the vacancies have to be filled up by direct recruitment and 70% of the vacancies have to be filled up by promotion.
Out of the quota assigned to be filled by promotion, 10% of the vacancies have to be filled up from amongst the persons working as Scrutiny Inspector or Field Investigator.
In order to put everything beyond doubt, the rule-making authority has prescribed a roster which has to be strictly adhered to.
The instructions issued by the Government and the promotions made during the pendency of this petition are in violation of the statutory provisions contained in the Rules.
10.
Mrs. Charu Tuli points out that the promoted persons have not been impleaded as respondents.
She consequently submits that in their absence no relief can be given to the petitioner.
11.
This plea cannot be sustained.
Firstly, so far as the challenge to the instructions is concerned, the petitioner has impleaded the State of Punjab.
Consequently, the objection is not sustainable.
Secondly, the petitioner had approached this Court prior to the filling up of the fourth vacancy in the their roster.
This fact is clear from the averments made in para 9 of the written statement, wherein it has been mentioned that 20 vacancies of two blocks have already been filled up and vacancies of the third block occurring from Sr. No. 21 to 30 are in the process of being filled up.
It has been further stated that "vacancies upto Sr. No. 23 have already been filled up........" It is thus apparent that the 4th vacancy which was to fall at Sr.No.
24 and had to be filled up from amongst the Scrutiny Inspectors/Field Investigators, had not been filled up till the filing of the written statement in February, 1992.
Any promotions made after the filing of the petition have to be abide by the final decision of the case.
12.
Accordingly, it is held that the instructions dated March 14, 1991 (annexure P2) as also the action of the respondents in not filling up the 24th vacancy from the category of Scrutiny Inspectors/Field Investigators was illegal.
The instructions are quashed and the respondents are directed to consider the petitioner's claim for being appointed against the vacancy at Sr. No. 24.
The needful shall be done within two months from the date of the receipt of a copy of this order.
In case the petitioner is found suitable, he will be entitled to be promoted with effect from the date the vacancy was actually filled up.
If in this process it becomes necessary to revert any person to make room for the petitioner, the junior-most person appointed by promotion shall be reverted.
In the event of promotion of the petitioner, all consequential reliefs in the nature of arrears of salary, fixation of seniority etc. shall ensue.
The needful shall be done within two months from the date of the receipt of a copy of this order.
However, in the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Order accordingly.