SS Sodhi, Actg.
C.J.
- The controversy here is with regard to the promotion of Nursing Sisters to the posts of Sister Tutors and their inter se seniority as such.
2.
A reference to the material on record shows that the appellant Santosh Rani was appointed as staff Nurse on December 15, 1970, while respondent Bimla Malhotra had been appointed to this post earlier on November 25, 1969.
On February 23,1976, Bimla Malhotra was promoted as Nursing Sister while Santosh Rani was promoted as such later on October 4, 1980.
3.
The method of appointment to the next post i.e. from Nursing Sister to Sister Tutor is provided for in Punjab Medical and Health Department, Nursing Superintendents, Matrons, Sister Tutors, Public Health Nurses (Teachings Nursing Sisters, Public Health Nurses, Staff Nurses and Male Nurses (State Service Class III), Rules, 1964 (hereinafter referred to as the 1964 Rules).
The relevant extract of rule 9 thereof, reads as under :-  "9.
The appointments to posts in the service shall be made as under :  (a) xx xx xx  (b) xx xx xx  (c) In case of Sister Tutors, by promotion from amongst the Nursing Sisters or by direct appointment.
Note :- When a post falls vacant or is about to fall vacant the Director shall, in cases where more than the one method of appointment is prescribed, determine by which of these methods of vacancy is to be filled."
4.
In the year 1980, five posts of Sister Tutors fell vacant and the Director Health Services, Haryana, in terms of the Note below Rule 9 of the 1964 Rules on March 10, 1980, decided that these five posts be filled up by direct recruitment.
A requisition was consequently sent to the Subordinate Services Selection Board on April 24, 1980 for the filling up of these five posts of Sister Tutors by direct recruitment after selection in pursuance of an advertisement being issued in the press.
Such an advertisement was issued on January 7, 1981.
Interviews were held on July 1, 1982 and eventually on August 4, 1982, vide Anenxure Rule 1, the Subordinate Service Selection Board recommended five candidates for appointment to these posts of Sister Tutors.
These candidates, in order of merit, being :  1.
Kumari Madhuri  2.
Smt. Santosh Rani,  3.
Kumari Kamlesh Harna  4.
Smt. Kesri Kaushal  5.
Smt. Pushpa Mehta.
5.
It appears that the Director Health Services had in the meanwhile requested the Subordinate Services Selection Board to relax the upper age limit for overage Nursing Sisters in the Directorate who were also candidates before the Board for these five posts of Sister Tutors.
This request was, however, declined by the Board and later by the State Government too when it was approached for relaxation of the service rules in this behalf.
As a consequence, some Nursing Sisters of the department were held to be ineligible for direct recruitment to the post of Sister Tutors.
6.
During this period, the number of vacancies in the posts of Sister Tutors rose to 14.
7.
In this situation, with the obvious intention of also adjusting the overage Nursing Sisters in the department, the Director of Health Services on September 13, 1982, appointed 14 Nursing Sisters as Sister Tutors by promotion in the order of their seniority in the department as Nursing Sisters.
Included in this list were four out of the five candidates selected for direct recruitment by the Subordinate Services Selection Board.
The one left out was Smt. Madhuri Devi who being junior to the appellant Santosh Rani as Nursing Sister was subsequently appointed as Sister Tutor by promotion on September 29, 1982.
8.
The picture thus emerges is that after having decided to fill up the five vacancies of Sister Tutors by direct recruitment, selections having been made for these posts by the Subordinate Services Selection Board and five names being recommended for such appointments and at the same time the reference by the Directorate both to the Board and to the State Government for relaxation of rules to render eligible, for such selection, overage candidates from the department having been declined the Directorate proceeded to give a go by to the selections made by the Subordinate Services Selection Board and went ahead instead to appoint Nursing Sisters to the posts of Sister Tutors by promotion.
9.
Before proceeding further, it would be pertinent to note that in terms of Rule 11 of 1964 Rules, persons recruited by direct recruitment are to rank senior to those appointed by promotion.
In other words, if appointments had been made in accordance with the recommendations made by the Subordinate Services Selection Board, the appellant Santosh Rani and the four other candidates recommended by the Board would have ranked senior to the remaining nine candidates appointed by promotion to the post of Sister Tutors.
10.
Here, reference also deserves to be made to the instructions mentioned in the order of Director Health Services of December 19, 1988, Annexure P13, to the effect that once a requisition has been sent to the Subordinate Services Selection Board for appointment by direct recruitment and the Board sends its recommendations, such posts cannot thereafter be taken out of the purview of the Board.
These instructions being letter No. 1212-G- 54/5973 of February 13, 1954, letter No. 7516-G-54 of December 17, 1954, letter No. 7918-3 GS-63/26112 of July 31, 1963, letter No. 1774-GII-58/2610 of March 31/April 9,1958, and letter No. 2812-GIII-58/49605 of June 27, 1958.
11.
Seen in this context the Directorate of Health Services clearly fell in error in disregarding the recommendations for appointment to the posts of Sister Tutors, as made by the Subordinate Services Selection Board, but yet when on November 4, 1982, the appellant Santosh Rani represented against the seniority assigned to her by order of September 13, 1982, whereby she and thirteen others were appointed by promotion to the posts of Sister Tutors, this representation was declined on June 12,1984, by the order Annexure R.8.
The reason mentioned therein being, "You have been promoted as per your seniority as Sister Tutor according to the method of appointment to the post of Sister Tutor contained in the Services Rules for the Nursing Personnel, and not as per the recommendations, made by the Board."
12.
Confronted with the rejection of her representation the appellant Santosh Rani submitted another appeal/representation against the promotions made by the order of September 13, 1982, Annexure R 4.
No decision was taken thereon despite reminders being issued by the appellant.
Even a notice under Section 80 of the Code of Civil Procedure sent on January 28, 1988 had no effect.
The appellant was consequently constrained to file a writ petition in this on September 16, 1988 (this being Civil Writ Petition 2809 of 1988) which was disposed of on September 9, 1988 with the direction to the State Government to decide the representation of the appellant Santosh Rani within three months.
13.
The matter was thereafter considered by the Director Health Services who after taking into account all the relevant facts and circumstances of the case and after giving due opportunity to all concerned of being heard by his order of December 10, 1988, Annexure Rule 13, directed that, "the appointments made by promotion in respect of Smt. Santosh Rani and four other candidates selected and recommended as Sister Tutors by the Board vide its said letter dated 4th August 1982, as the appointments done by "direct appointment" within the meaning of Rule 9(g) of the Service Rules from the same date from which Smt. Santosh Rani had been appointed by promotion vide this office letter dated 13-9-1992 due to a mistake as aforesaid so as to rectify the mistake from the same date in the interest of justice.
The order of seniority of all the five persons selected by the Board shall be the same as determined by the Board while recommending them for direct appointment as Sister Tutors vide its said letter dated 481992.
The orders of appointment by promotion issued vide this office letter No. 3/3-2 Nursing-82/5260, dated 13-9-1982, shall be deemed to have been amended accordingly from 13-9-1982."
It is this order that was sought to be challenged by Bimla Malhotra in this writ petition and by Mrs. Bachni Taneja and others in the connected writ petition 16745 of 1991.
Both these writ petitions eventually came to be accepted by the learned single Judge holding that though the Subordinate Services Selection Board had recommended candidates for appointment to the posts of Sister Tutors by direct recruitment, this recommendation had not been accepted and the department had instead chosen to promote departmental candidates, including the nominees of the Board.
Further, it was observed that the panel of the selected candidates as prepared by the Board enures for only six months and it could not, therefore, be given effect after a lapse of seven years and consequently, the decision of the Director treating the promotion of five candidates recommended by the Board as promotion by direct recruitment after such a long time was arbitrary and illegal.
14.
We cannot, with respect, agree with or endorse the view expressed by the learned single Judge.
The 1964 Rules give an option to the Director to choose the method of appointment to the post of Sister Tutors, namely, by direct recruitment or by promotion.
Having chosen the former and the process of selection having been completed and recommendations made and received as a consequence thereof, the mere fact that the Board and the State Government had rejected the plea of the Directorate to increase the age limit for direct recruitment or that there had been an increase in the number of vacancies in the meanwhile clearly provided no occasion for the Director to decide to change the method of appointment from direct recruitment to promotion.
Rather, it smacks of colourable exercise of power by him, besides being contrary to the Government instructions issued in this behalf, as set out in the order of the Director of December 19, 1988, Annexure R- 13.
15.
Faced with this situation, counsel for the respondents sought to press in aid a plea of laches on the part of the appellant Santosh Rani to deny her the relief claimed a plea that (sic) as one of desperation, as it will be seen, that it is for the first time in appeal here, that it has been raised.
It would be recalled that all that had been stated before the learned single Judge was that the recommendations of the Subordinate Services Selection Board cannot be given effect to after a lapse of seven years when the period of their validity was only six months.
Be that as it may in the facts and circumstances, as they reveal themselves, no inaction or acquiescence can be discerned on the part of Santosh Rani with regard to the manner in which her seniority as Sister Tutor had been fixed by the department.
As pointed out earlier, in November 1982 she promptly represented against it and when confronted with delay in the decision thereof, also sent reminders.
Later, when her representation was eventually rejected, she filed a further appeal/representation before the authorities concerned and again sent reminders to get the matter decided.
A notice under Section 80 of the Code of Civil Procedure was also sent and when that too evoked no response, she came to this Court in writ proceedings and it was in pursuance of the order of this Court that the Director by his order of December 19, 1988, eventually came to finally decide the matter in her favour.
Such being the circumstances, no bar of laches can possibly be sustained to deny her what she had for so many years been seeking and was entitled to.
16.
Keeping in view, therefore, the totality of the circumstances of the case in the light of material as has come on the record, we uphold the impugned order of the Director of Health Services of December 19, 1980 Annexure R-13, and as a consequence set aside the judgment of the learned Judge.
In the result, the appellant Santosh Rani and the others recommended by the Board shall not only be entitled to seniority as per this order of the Director but also all consequential benefits flowing from it.
This appeal is in these terms, hereby accepted with costs.
Counsel fee Rs. 1000/-.