VK Bali, J - Petitioner, the Kurukshetra Central Co-op.
Bank Ltd, Kurukshetra, through the present petition filed under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India calls in question the order, Annexure P-7 vide which the appeal preferred by respondent No. 2, Sher Singh, against the orders of his dismissal from service was allowed by the Additional Registrar, exercising the powers of the Registrar, Co-operative Societies, Haryana, and the punishment of dismissal was substituted by withholding his two increments with cumulative effect.
The brief facts that have constrained the petitioner-bank to challenge the order aforesaid need to be detailed first.
2.
Respondent No. 2 was appointed as Mini Bank Manager with the petitioner-bank and during the tenure of his service, he was alleged to have misappropriated and embezzled certain amounts of the petitioner-bank.
He was also found negligent in his duties and accordingly a charge-sheet was issued to him on August 13, 1979.
On receipt of the charge-sheet, an enquiry officer was appointed but on account of vicarious duties that one said enquiry officer had to discharge, he was changed during the currency of the enquiry and one Shri KN Kaushal, Development Officer of the bank, finalised the enquiry and submitted his report.
On receipt of the report submitted by the enquiry officer, a show-cause notice was issued to respondent No. 2 and along with the said show-cause notice a note of disagreement was also conveyed.
It requires to be mentioned here that the enquiry officer in ultimate analysis had returned a finding that respondent No. 2 had not embezzled any amount although he was negligent in the conduct of his duties, although the said negligence in the opinion of the enquiry officer was due to lack of knowledge.
When the aforesaid report was put before the Managing Director of the bank, he did not agree with the conclusions arrived at by the enquiry officer with regard to the embezzlement and it is in that context that a dissenting note was recorded by the Managing Director, which was sent to respondent No. 2 along with the showcause notice, as referred to above.
Respondent No. 2 was afforded an opportunity to state in writing and also personal hearing as to why he should not be dismissed from the service of the bank and he was asked to submit his reply within fifteen days from the receipt of the notice, failing which it was to be presumed that he had nothing to say in support of his case.
The petitioner-bank did not receive any reply to the show-cause notice within the stipulated period.
However, keeping in view the principle of natural justice and in order to afford another opportunity to respondent No. 2 to submit his reply, again a memo was issued to him on October 8, 1983, asking him to appear before the Board of Directors, the meeting of which was fixed for October 14, 1983 at 1100 am The case of the petitioner-bank is that simply with a view to delay completion of the proceedings, respondent No. 2 submitted an application, which was received at the end of the respondent-bank on October 13, 1983, wherein a prayer was made that respondent No. 2 should be allowed to inspect the file and also be granted leave upto October 26, 1983, so that he may be able to give reply to the show-cause notice.
It is also stated in the aforesaid application that the respondent could not appear on October 14, 1983, without inspection of the file.
Inasmuch as the petitioner was of the view that the aforesaid application had been written simply to delay the finalisation of the case, no further opportunity was granted to him and in the meeting of the Board of Directors that was fixed for October 14, 1983, as scheduled, a decision was taken to dismiss the respondent No. 2 from the services of the bank under Rule 27.3(vi) and Rule 35 of the Common Cadre Rules.
The decision of the Board of Directors was recorded by the Managing Director in a detailed order dated October 31, 1983.
Obviously, the order of dismissal was not to the liking of respondent No. 2 and, therefore, an appeal was carried by him before the Additional Registrar (Stores), Co-operative Societies, Haryana, Chandigarh, exercising the powers of the Registrar, which came up for final disposal on October 19, 1984, on which date the same was allowed and as referred to above, the order of dismissal from service of respondent No. 2 was substituted by withholding his two increments with cumulative effect.
It is this order, as indicated earlier, which is under challenge.
As per the case made out in the pleadings, the impugned order is sought to be quashed on the ground that a bare reading of the reply to the show-cause notice and charges against respondent No. 2 stood proved and read with the notice of dissent prepared by the Managing Director, there was no manner of doubt left that respondent No. 2 had in fact embezzled the various amounts subject-matter of the charge and was also negligent in performance of his duties.
It is further pleaded that the observations of the Appellate Authority that the petitioner-bank had failed to prove the embezzlement as no record concerning the embezzlement was produced, was factually wrong and infact the entire record was produced before the respondent No. 1.
Further, it is in the pleadings of the petitioner that respondent No. 2 had not denied the charges levelled against him in his reply except taking the plea that he was a new-comer and that the moment he realised that he did not deposit the amount, he did the needful himself.
It is further pleaded that besides the fact that respondent No. 2 had embezzled the various amounts, he was also found guilty of negligence in performance of his duties, which finding was not specifically dealt with the Appellate Authority while reversing the order passed by the petitioner-bank.
It is further pleaded that respondent No. 2 did not appear before the Board of Directors deliberately even though the meeting was postponed and was fixed for October 14, 1983, regarding which information was duly given to the said respondent.
The letter written by respondent No. 2 as well, wherein the had sought time to give reply to the show-cause notice is also styled to be an act of indulging in delaying tactics and it is further pleaded that the finding of the Appellate Authority that the case was not referred to the Board of Directors by the Managing Director when enquiry was not completed in one year was never the point raised by respondent No. 2 at any stage and in fact and in reality, the Registrar made entirely a new case for respondent No. 2 while setting aside the order of the petitioner-bank on the aforesaid ground.
3.
This petition has been opposed by respondent No. 2 and whereas it has been admitted that he was appointed as Mini Bank Manager and was served a charge-sheet with regard to embezzlement and negligence in duties, it is denied that he ever embezzled any amount.
The report of the enquiry officer is stated to be correct, which is detailed one, and the conclusions arrived at by him are pleaded to be the only right conclusions that could possibly be arrived at.
The dissenting note appended by the Managing Director is stated to be without jurisdiction as also against the facts and position that was obtainable from the records of the case.
It is further pleaded that there was no intention of respondent No. 2 to delay the finalisation of the enquiry and in the very nature of things when the enquiry had proceeded for a number of years, he required time to give reply to the show-cause notice as the records had necessarily to be inspected.
4.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that the present petition deserves to succeed although partially at this stage.
It shall be noticed that the Appellate Authority after noticing the contentions of the rival parties striaghtway arrived at the conclusions, which are not based upon any reasons whatsoever.
After noticing the contentions of the parties, the Appellate Authority proceeded by the observing as under :-  "I had heard both the parties and examined the record produced before me.
I come to the conclusion that proper opportunity to give more time for sending the reply in response to the show-cause notice has not been given to the appellant and without awaiting for reply in response to the show-cause notice, as prescribed in the Common Cadre Rules, 1975, he was removed from the service.
The Managing Director did not refer the case to the BOA as required under the Common Cadre Rules, 1975, because the enquiry thereon was not been completed within one year.
The bank also failed to prove the allegation of embezzlement as no record concerning the embezzlement was produced in this Court.
In view of the position explained above, I accept the appeal of the appellant and withhold two increments with cumulative effect."
The aforesaid conclusion arrived at by the Appellate Authority depicts complete non-application of mind and coming to the conclusions without any cogent reasons and also without discussing any evidence that was available on the record of the case.
Assuming that the records as were asked by the Appellate Authority to be produced by the bank were actually not produced, yet in so far as charge-sheet, reply to the charge-sheet, report of the enquiry officer, show-cause notice and the dissenting note of the Managing Director as also the correspondence that ensued between the bank and respondent No. 2 after submission of the report by the enquiry officer are concerned the same were admittedly available on the record of the case.
What more record was required to be perused is neither made out from the impugned order nor has been specified by the learned counsel for the respondent No. 2 during the course of arguments in this Court.
Further, as to why the appeal was required to be allowed simply for the reason that the enquiry had continued for more than a year, is wholly understandable.
Nothing from the Common Cadre Rules has been pointed out, which may show any provision that may result in completely washing out of the proceedings if the enquiry continues for more than a year.
At the most, suspension of respondent No. 2 could not continue for more than one year, but that does not mean necessarily that he had to be re-instated in service and the order of dismissal could not be passed if the enquiry had continued for more than a year.
With regard to the conclusions, arrived at by the Appellate Authority on the question of proper opportunity, it is again straightaway conclusion arrived at without noticing the contention of the petitioner-bank that in fact every thing was known to the respondent and the letter seeking more time to file reply was only with a view to delay the finalisation of the proceedings.
Even if the aforesaid conclusion was correct, the only course open to the Appellate Authority was to remand the case to the Board of Directors for deciding the matter afresh after giving due opportunity of hearing to respondent No. 2.
The matter has been dealt with by the Appellate Authority in a very cursory manner.
The impugned order lacks the very pre-requisites of a judicial or a quasi-judicial order.
5.
For the reasons, mentioned above, I have been left with no choice, but to quash the order, Annexure P-7 and, remit the case to the Appellate Authority for redeciding the appeal preferred by respondent No. 2.
The petition is, thus, allowed in the manner indicated above.
However, there shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.