KP Bhandari, J - This is a writ petition to challenge the order dated 331987 (Annexure P/12) passed by the Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Rohtak.
By this order, the Tribunal has decided issued No. 2 partly in favour of the management and partly in favour of the respondent.
The Tribunal has held that a valid and proper enquiry has been held.
However, the Tribunal recorded a finding that on the basis of the evidence on record the charges have not been proved and further the charges have no relation to the duties of the respondent in the petitioner-company.
2.
The petitioner-company is aggrieved against the finding recorded by the Tribunal vide order dated 331987, Annexure P/12.
3.
Notice was issued to the respondents.
No return has been filed in this case by respondent No. 1.
4.
Mr. RK Soni, respondent was serving as a store-clerk in the employment of the petitioner-company.
While in service, he took on loan several articles from the petitioner-company in connection with the marriage in the family.
He did not return the articles.
Rather it is alleged that he created false evidence that he has returned the same.
He was given a charge-sheet by the petitioner-company on 10101980, Annexure P/1.
The respondent filed a reply to the charge-sheet.
Thereupon enquiry officer was appointed.
The enquiry officer recorded the statement of Prabhu Singh MW1, Mahesh Kumar MW2, Ghasi Ram MW3, Fateh Singh MW4, Shiv Rattan MW5, Prithvi Singh MW6, Sher Singh MW7, Ram Kumar MW8, KC Bansal MW9, Jai Dev MW10, Madan Lal MW11, Hari Hari Chand MW12, Daulat Ram MW13, RC Gaur MW14.
Sh. RK Soni appeared as MW1.
He did not produce any other evidence.
The enquiry officer, after hearing the arguments and going through the evidence on record on 1731981 (Annexure P/3) came to the conclusion that once the goods were delivered to the respondents and he did not return the same, the charges have been proved.
On the basis of the evidence of the witnesses recorded by him, the defence version given by him was not found to be credible and as such the same was not accepted.
5.
Thereafter on 2941981, a show-cause notice was issued to the respondent.
Respondent filed a reply, a copy whereof is a Annexure P/5.
The petitioner-company moved the Industrial Tribunal for approval under Section 33(c)(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act.
The Industrial Tribunal, vide order dated 10.8.1992 while giving sanction observed as under :-  "Some cutting in the register and return entries were forged for some times, in the enquiry, 4 witnesses including store Superintendent were examined by the management whereas the workman examined himself as his own witness.
He was found guilty by the enquiry officer.
I have gone through the statements of witnesses and find that all the items were found against the workman.
As regards the compliance of proviso to Section 33(2)(b) of the Industrial Disputes Act, the management has placed on file money order coupon with a post scription 'refused'.
Letter of dismissal and present application were sent by registered post, on 28.5.1981 and the order Ex. M-15 was passed on the same date.
Therefore, there was sufficient compliance of the provision.
In this circumstance, I accept the application and grant approval to the management for action of dismissal taken the opposite party.
Parties to informed accordingly."
Thereafter, services of the respondents were terminated and on his request, the matter was referred to the Industrial Tribunal.
The industrial Tribunal formed the following issues :-  1.
Whether the reference is bad in Law ?
OPR  2.
Whether a valid and proper domestic enquiry was held by the respondent before terminating the services of the petitioner ?
OPR  3.
As per terms of reference ?
OPA"  Vide order dated 331987, Annexure P/12, the Tribunal has treated issue No. 2 a preliminary issue.
As indicated above, the Tribunal partly decided the issue in favour of the petitioner-company and partly against the respondent.
6.
I have heard Shri RS Mittal, Senior Advocate, at great length.
Mr. RS Mittal, Senior Advocate, vehemently contended that the adverse findings recorded by the Tribunal are beyond the purview of issue No. 2.
He submitted that once the Tribunal came to the conclusion that proper enquiry has been held, it was not within scope of the issue to record the adverse finding.
Further Mr. RS Mittal, Senior Advocate, has challenged the correctness of the finding recorded by the Tribunal.
He submitted that the Tribunal has completely ignored the evidence on record while recording adverse finding.
It is submitted that the evidence which was duly considered by the enquiry officer for holding the respondent guilty of the charges, this evidence has been wrongly brushed aside by the Tribunal.
He further submitted that articles were handed over to the respondent during the course of employment as a facility meant for the employees of the petitioner-company.
The Tribunal was wholly in error in coming to the conclusion that the charges have no relation to the duties of the respondent.
Mr. RS Mittal, Senior Advocate, also pointed out that the Tribunal has completely overlooked the approval granted by the Industrial Tribunal under Section 33 of the Industrial Disputes Act for taking action of dismissal.
7.
It is true that the Tribunal vide Annexure P/12 came to the conclusion that enquiry in the present case has been held according to the rules and the principles of natural justice.
On this finding, the Tribunal should have decided issue No. 2 in favour of the petitioner-company.
8.
However, the Tribunal recorded adverse finding.
The charges are not based on evidence and that the charges have no relation to the duties of the respondent towards the management.
This finding is not based on any evidence.
While arriving at this finding, the Tribunal did not discuss the evidence of the witnesses recorded by the enquiry officer.
In this case, the enquiry officer has discussed the evidence of the witnesses in detail.
On the basis of the evidence recorded by the enquiry officer it was found that the respondent was guilty of the charges levelled against him.
The Tribunal without discussing the evidence considered by the enquiry officer has, in general terms, held that charges are not based on evidence.
This finding of the Tribunal is highly arbitrary, unreasonable and capricious.
9.
I have gone through the evidence in this case in detail with the help of the learned counsel for the petitioner and find that no fault can be found with the finding of the enquiry officer in holding the respondent guilty of the charges.
The Tribunal was in error in criticising that the findings recorded by the enquiry officer were not based upon the evidence adduced before him.
Further, I do not find any substance in the finding of the Tribunal that the charges of misconduct have no relation to the duties of the respondent towards the Mill.
The Tribunal did not appreciate that the goods were given to the respondent because he was an employee of the mill and the mill provided this facility to its employees in connection with the social functions of the employees.
These goods are required to be returned to the mill after the function is over.
The respondent dishonestly retained the goods.
The conduct of the respondent in retaining the goods is dishonest and dishonourable.
The Tribunal was in error in holding that the charges have no relation to the duties of the respondent towards the mill.
The findings of the Tribunal cannot be sustained and are liable to be set aside.
In addition, in recording these findings the Tribunal travelled beyond the scope of the issue.
10.
Issue No. 2 was only limited to the extent whether a valid and proper domestic enquiry was held by the petitioner before terminating the services of the respondent.
Once the Tribunal came to the conclusion that a valid and proper domestic enquiry was held, he travelled beyond the issue in giving adverse finding against the company.
The Tribunal was not justified in recording adverse finding against the respondent.
11.
The entire proceedings conducted in the domestic enquiry were fair.
A regular chargesheet was given.
The enquiry officer gave full opportunity to the parties to lead evidence.
The Tribunal thereafter recorded the findings on the basis of the evidence and held that the respondent was guilty of the charge.
Thereafter the management gave a show-cause notice after consideration of the reply and the evidence and passed the order.
The Tribunal has committed a patent error in ignoring the order passed under Section 33(c) of the Industrial Disputes Act.
12.
The Supreme Court in Workmen of Firestonbe Tyre and Rubber Co v. Management of The Firestone and Rubber Co, AIR 1973 SC 1227, observed as under :-  "When a proper enquiry has been held by an employer and the finding of misconduct is plausible conclusion flowing from the evidence adduced at the enquiry, the Tribunal has, however, no jurisdiction to sit in judgment over the decision of the employer as an appellate body.
The interference with the decision of the employer will be justified only when the findings arrived at the enquiry are perverse or the management is guilty of victimisation, unfair labour practice or mala fides.
The Tribunal gets jurisdiction to consider the evidence placed before it for the "first time" in justification on the action taken only, if no enquiry has been held, or after the enquiry conducted by the employer is found to be defective."
In view of he above discussion, in my opinion, a very fair and proper procedure has been followed.
No fault can be found with the disciplinary proceedings conducted in this case.
In view of the above discussion, the finding recorded by the Tribunal while deciding Issue No. 2 so far as it relates to the fact that domestic enquiry was held according to the law and natural justice is upheld.
However, the finding, so far as it holds that the charges are not based on any evidence and charges have no relation to the duties of the respondent towards the petitioner company is set aside.
Issue No. 2 is entirely decided in favour of the petitioner-company.
After issue No. 2 has been decided, there is hardly anything which survives in this reference.
In this view of the matter, the writ petition is accepted with no order as to costs and the impugned award Annexure P/12 as regards adverse finding against the petitioner-company, referred to above is set aside.
Petition allowed.