AP Chowdhri, J - The petitioner applied for admission to B.Ed.
Course in the Government College for Education, Bhiwani, respondent No. 3 for the academic session 1991-92.
The petitioner passed MA securing 4766 per cent marks.
He was allowed admission by the Selection Committee and he deposited admission fee on November 18, 1991.
The petitioner's admission was cancelled by respondent No. 2 by order dated December 17, 1991 which in turn was communicated to the petitioner by the Principal of the College on December 18, 1991.
The petitioner has challenged by the order of cancellation through this writ petition.
2.
It response to notice of motion, written statement has been filed by the respondents 1 and 2.
It has been stated that the petitioner was given admission by inadvertence and when the mistake was discovered, the Selection Committee in its meeting dated December 12, 1991 decided to cancel the admission.
In pursuance of that decision, the petitioner was informed about the cancellation on December 18, 1991.
It was also stated in the written statement that the last candidate admitted in the category of Outside Haryana Arts had secured 567 per cent marks as against the petitioner who had secured merely 4766 per cent marks.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner made a two-fold submission.
He contended that while at least 50 per cent marks in the aggregate were required for graduates in Group 'II' no percentage of marks was prescribed in the case of candidates holding Master's Degree in Arts.
His second submission is that the petitioner was granted admission in November 1991.
He had appeared in the practical examination held in December 1991 and had covered a good part of the academic year 1991-92, and to avoid hardship his admission may be regularised.
4.
Mr. SC Kapoor, Senior Advocate, learned counsel appearing for the respondents, has controverted both these contentions.
He pointed out that whereas the qualifications referred to in Group 'II' lay down the condition of eligibility, in the nature of things there has to be a criterion for determining inter se merit.
He also pointed out that the said criterion is given in the Prospectus.
It is as under :-  i) Percentage of marks secured whichever may be higher in B.A./BSc/B.Com or MA/MSc/M.Com Examinations shall be taken into consideration at the time of admission.
For example, if a candidate desirous of seeking admission under the science category secured 50% marks in BSc and 59% marks in MSc.
his/her score of MSc would be taken into consideration while preparing the merit list.
Similarly, if a candidate secured 59% marks in BSc the merit would be drawn on the basis of his/her score in the BSc examination."
The provision, reproduced above, leaves no manner of doubt that inter se merit has to be determined and a candidate with higher percentage of marks, whether in graduation or post-graduation is placed higher compared to the other candidate.
Even independently of the above provision, there has to be some fair and reasonable criterion for determining inter se merit between candidates who fulfil the basis qualification of being either graduate or holding a Master's degree.
Applying that criterion, the marks secured by the petitioner were 4766 per cent as against the marks secured by the last candidate admitted to the said category being 567 per cent.
It may also be pointed out that one other candidate Miss Manju Sharma filed CWP No. 18161 of 1991.
Her merit was higher compared to that of the petitioner in the present petition.
The said writ petition was dismissed by a Division Bench of this court by order dated January 17, 1992 as it was stated before the Court that the admission of Sushil Kumar, who was arrayed as respondent No. 3 in the said writ petition, had been cancelled.
It would be anomoulous now to permit the petitioner to continue in the B.Ed.
Course.
5.
The second ground is equally untenable.
The petitioner while giving an extract from the prospectus in paragraph 3 of the writ petition stopped short and failed to reproduce the portion which has now been quoted in extenso above.
The petitioner was given admission on November 18, 1991 and the cancellation of his admission was intimated to him on December 19, 1991 ie within one month.
Thereafter the petitioner was allowed to continue in the course at his own risk and responsibility.
As the matter could not be heard earlier for various reasons, the petitioner cannot be given any undue advantage on that account.
For the foregoing reasons, we find no substance in the writ petition, which is accordingly dismissed.
Petition dismissed.