Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner who was promoted as an Assistant Engineer in the Haryana State Electricity Board (hereinafter to be referred to as the Board prays that he is entitled to be promoted with effect from July 28, 1982 when respondent No. 5, who was junior to him was promoted.
A prayer for restoration of seniority over and above respondent Nos. 2 to 5 has also been made.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner was recruited as Junior Engineer on July 4, 1988.
He passed the AMIE examination on March 6, 1982.
This fact was communicated by the petitioner to the authorities vide his representations dated March 31, 1982, July 5, 1982 and November 25, 1982.
In spite of that, respondent No. 5, who was appointed as Junior Engineer after the petitioner, was Promoted as Assistant Engineer on July 28, 1982.
So far as respondent Nos. 2 to 4 are concerned, they were admittedly promoted as Assistant Engineers on February 2, 1978, December 23, 1977 and November 29, 1979 respectively.
The petitioner was thereafter promoted vide order dated March 1, 1985.
Relying on the instructions issued by the Board vide its letter dated January 4, 1977, the petitioner representated that he was entitled to the restoration of his seniority above respondent Nos. 2 to 5 in the cadre of Asstt.
Engineers.
When the representations did not lead to any fruitful results, the petitioner filed Civil Writ Petition No. 7892 of 1989.
This petition was heard and disposed of by the Motion Bench on June 13, 1989 with a direction to the Board "to dispose of the representation within three months from the date of receipt of the order."
In pursuance to the directions of this Court, the Board passed an order dated October 17, 1989 by which the instructions dated January 4, 1977 were withdrawn retrospectively.
This decision (Annexure P-17) was conveyed to the petitioner vide letter dated October 17, 1989, a copy of which has been placed on record as Annexure P-16.
Aggrieved by these orders, the petitioner has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
3.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents.
A preliminary objection has been raised that the persons who had been recruited as Assistant Engineers by direct recruitment are necessary parties and the writ petition is not competent in their absence.
With regard to the promotion of respondent No. 5, it has been pointed out that he had passed the AMIE examination before December, 1981.
It is averred that his name was considered for promotion from the AMIE quota in December, 1981.
Due to procedural difficulties, the formal order could only be issued in July, 1982.
In the written statement it has been averred that the record, if required, shall be produced at the time of hearing.
It has been further pointed out that the concerned Chief Engineer had sent the particulars of respondent No. 5 vide his letter dated September 8, 1981.
In the case of the petitioner, the comments of the Chief Engineer are stated to have been received on August 10, 1982.
It is pointed out that since the case of respondent No. 5 had been processed much before the petitioner had passed the AMIE examination, the Board was justified in promoting respondent No. 5 on the basis of a list of AMIE qualified candidates that existed earlier.
As regards the instructions dated January 4, 1977 it has been averred that on account of the implementation of these instructions, the seniority of Assistant Engineers remained in a state of flux.
Consequently, the Board in its meeting held on October 16, 1989 decided to withdraw these instructions retrospectively.
On this premises, it is maintained that the relief claimed by petitioner cannot be granted to him.
The petitioner has filed a replication to reiterate the claim made in the petition.
4.
Even though the petitioner has challenged the validity of the Board's decision dated October 17, 1989, yet the learned counsel submits that the petitioner and various other persons had filed representations against this decision which are pending with the Board.
In view thereof, the challenge with regard to the validity of this order has not been pressed at this stage.
Consequently, the learned counsel has confined the claim to the grant of promotion with effect from July 28, 1982 when respondent No. 5 was promoted.
In a nut shell, the claim made by the learned counsel is that the petitioner had qualified the AMIE examination March 6, 1982.
Accordingly, he was entitled to be considered for promotion before any one junior to him could be promoted.
The counsel submits that he had admittedly not considered the petitioner's claim and consequently, the respondents should be directed to promote the petitioner as Assistant Engineer with effect from the date on which respondent No. 5 was promoted.
No one has appeared on behalf of the respondents.
5.
It is evident from the record that the petitioner had been appointed as Junior Engineer on July 4, 1968.
As against this, respondent No. 5 had been appointed as a Junior Engineer on January 5, 1970.
Apparently, the petitioner was senior to respondent No. 5.
It is further evident that on account of certain procedural delays, the claim of the petitioner was not considered before the orders regarding the promotion of respondent No. 5 were issued on July 28, 1982.
The only reason given for this is that some time was spent in processing the case of the petitioner.
It has been pointed out in the written statement that the comments of the Chief Engineer with regard to the petitioner's case had been received only on August 10, 1982.
Whatever be the factual position or the cause for delay, the fact remains that the petitioner was eligible and qualified for promotion to the post of Assistant Engineer against one of the posts falling to the quota of AMIE qualified candidates.
The case of respondent No. 5 may have been processed partially before the petitioner had passed the examination, but the final order was issued only on July 28, 1982.
The petitioner had admittedly become eligible on March 6, 1982.
His claim vis-a-vis respondent No. 5 was not considered.
This amounted to denial of opportunity to the petitioner.
An official has no concern with the procedures.
A senior person has a right to be considered and if he fulfils the qualifications and is otherwise found suitable for promotion, the employer is not entitled to supersede him merely because the processing of the case takes some time.
This is exactly what appears to have been ignored in the present case.
On account of some procedural delay, the claim of the petitioner vis-a-vis respondent No. 5 was ignored.
This resulted in denial of equality of opportunity to the petitioner.
Accordingly, the petitioner's grievance in this behalf has to be sustained.
He has a right to be considered for promotion with effect from July 28, 1982 when respondent No. 5 was promoted.
6.
Accordingly, this writ petition is accepted to the extent of directing the respondent-Board to consider the petitioner's claim for promotion as Assistant Engineer with effect from July 28, 1982.
If on consideration, the petitioner is found suitable, all consequential reliefs in the nature of fixation of seniority, pay and arrears of salary etc. shall ensue.
The respondents are directed to do the needful within three months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition accepted.