Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioners herein claim that while working as Staff Nurses they were permitted to join the B.Sc.
(Post Basic) Course at the College of Nursing, Post-gradaute Institute and Research, Chandigarh (hereinafter referred to as the College) on the express condition that they will be treated "on duty during the period of training and will be paid pay and allowances as per rules."
In spite of this condition, they are now being treated as on leave of the kind due.
Consequently, the petitioners have been put to a considerable financial loss.
Aggrieved by this action of the respondents which has been remedied in spite of various representations, the petitioners have approached this Court through the present petition.
A few facts may be noticed.
On December 21, 1985 the Principal of the Colleges issued a general notice inviting applications for admission to the B.Sc.
Nursing (Post Basic) Course (hereinafter referred to as Nursing Course).
A copy of this notice appears to have been received in the office of Director of Health Services, Haryana.
On February 26, 1986 the Director circulated the copy of the notice to all the Chief Medical Officers and the Senior Medical Officers and requested them to "obtain the applications of the desirous officials in the prescribed form and send the same to this Directorate by 20386 along with their recommendations."
The petitioners submitted their applications by the due date.
These applications were duly recommended by the Director vide his letter dated April 1, 1986 to the Principal of the College.
In this letter it was inter alia mentioned that "selection of the candidates may kindly be intimated to this office for making necessary arrangement for relieving them in time to join this course."
The petitioners aver that they appeared in the written test and having been found suitable were selected for the course.
Information regarding their selection was conveyed by the Principal to the Director vide letter dated June 3, 1986.
A copy of this letter has been placed at Annexure P 12.
Separate intimation was sent to the petitioners and they were also informed about the fees, etc. which they were required to deposit.
On June 23, 1986, the Director sent a communication to the Government informing it about the selection of the petitioners for the course.
The Govt was requested "to grant sanction for deputing the aforesaid employees to the P.G.I., Chandigarh for 2 years from July, 1986.
One of the conditions mentioned in this letter was "that the trainees will be treated on duty during the period of training and will be paid pay and allowances according to rules."
It was further mentioned that "no promotion or higher pay shall be granted for having undergone this training."
A copy of the above recommendations was endorsed to the Chief Medical Officers, Bhiwani and Sirsa where the two petitioners were posted with the direction that aforesaid employees may be relieved in time."
The respective Medical Superintendents in turn informed the petitioners by two separate letters of July 10, 1986 (Annexures P-14 and P-15) that they were to submit their joining report for the said course to the Principal, College of Nursing by July 10, 1986.
The petitioners were further informed that the Director had recommended the grant of sanction to the Govt on the condition that "the candidates will be treated on duty during the period of training and will be paid pay and allowances as per rules".
It was further stated that "the candidates will have to execute a Bond to serve the Haryana Government for five years."
In pursuance to the directions from the Director, Health Services, the Medical Superintendent, Sirsa, relieved petitioner No. 1 on July 10, 1986.
In this letter it was inter alia mentioned as under :-  "Your training will be undertaken under the following terms and conditions :  1.
She will be treated on duty during the period of training and will be entitled to pay and allowances under rules.
2.
She will not be entitled to any promotion and higher pay scale in lieu of training.
3.
She will have to execute a Bond to serve the Haryana Govt for five years.
4.
She will be entitled to TA/DA at the tour rates but will not be entitled to any DA for stay at Chandigarh."
Subsequently, vide letter dated July 10, 1986, the Director had conveyed instructions to the Chief Medical Officers, Bhiwani and Sirsa that the two selected candidates may be relieved on July 15, 1986 instead of July 10, 1986.
The fact remains that the petitioners were relieved on the express condition that they will be treated on duty during the period of training.
The petitioners on their part executed the necessary bonds.
It is averred that the petitioners had undertaken to serve the department for a period of 5 years failing which the learned counsel pointed out that the petitioners were liable to reimburse an amount of Rs. 70,000/-.
The bonds executed by the petitioners were forwarded by the respective Medical Officers to the Director.
After the petitioners had joined the course and had presumably studied for six months, the Director addressed a communication dated January 9, 1986 informing the petitioners that the State Govt vide its letters dated July 21, 1986 and October 30, 1986 had accorded permission "to you for doing the B.Sc.
(Post Basic) Nursing Training on leave of the kind due and has expressed inability for treating the training period as duty.
"A copy of this communication has been attached with the writ petition as Annexure P-20.
The petitioners were asked to inform as to whether or not they wanted to do the aforesaid training at their own expense on leave of the kind due.
The petitioners sent their reply promptly vide letter dated January 12, 1987.
This was followed by a detailed representation dated February 18, 1987.
Nothing was heard in reply for almost six months when by a letter dated August 11, 1987 the Director informed the petitioners that "if you want to do the said training on leave of the kind due then you should submit your leave application.
Otherwise, you should resume charge of your duties at the place of posting and then apply for leave of the kind due for the period of training that has passed, within 2 days.
The petitioners were called upon to submit their reply within two days.
Simultaneously, a communication was sent to the Principal of the College informing her that the petitioners be requested to send the information immediately for the settlement of their training.
In response to this, the petitioners were driven to state that in case the Govt disapproved their deputation, they would undergo the training at their own expense.
Simultaneously, they submitted representation claiming that they had a right to be treated on duty and that action in compelling them to join service was unfair.
A representation was submitted by the petitioners not only to the Govt or the Minister concerned, but even to the Governor.
The representation to the Director was also put up to the Chief Minister, who on February 18, 1988 directed that it be examined on merits.
As nothing was done and the arrears of salary were not paid to the petitioners, they were forced to approach this Court through the present petition.
The order directing that the petitioners shall be treated as on leave of the kind due and not on duty has been challenged on various grounds.
It has been averred that the action is barred by the equitable principle of estoppel and is vitiated as the respondents have discriminated against the petitioners.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents.
It is averred by way of preliminary objection that the writ petition does not disclose the violation of any fundamental or constitutional right and that the petitioners have no right to be treated on duty especially in view of the fact that vide their letters dated August 17, 1987 they had undertaken to apply for leave.
On merits, it has been admitted that a number of persons have been deputed for the course from the year 1978 to 1985 and the Govt has been sanctioning their deputation.
It has been admitted that all the persons were treated on duty.
It has, however, been averred that the Department had never committed that the period of training shall be treated as on duty.
The petitioners had undergone the training to better their own prospects and as such, they cannot be treated as on duty during the period of training.
It has also been averred that in case the petitioners were not willing to complete the training.
It has been further averred that there was no assurance from the competent authority to the petitioners that they will be treated on duty or that they will be paid pay and allowances for the period of training.
It has also been averred that Smt. Ganga Devi and Smt. Vedo Devi were permitted to join the course in the year 1989 at their own expenses and leave of the kind due.
On these premises, the claim made by them in the writ petition has been contested.
I have heard Mr. Amrit Paul learned counsel for the petitioners and Mr. Jaswant Singh for the respondents.
Mr. Amrit Paul has raised a two-fold contention.
He contends that from 1978 to 1985 20 persons have been deputed for undergoing the Nursing Course at the College.
On every occasion, the Govt had granted sanction.
Copies of these letters have been produced as Annexures P-1 to P-7 with the writ petition.
He contends that it was for the first time that the petitioners were not treated on duty for the period during which they undertook the training.
The learned counsel submits that the action is discriminatory and totally arbitrary.
There was no basis for distinguishing the case of the petitioners from that of the various persons who had been deputed in the earlier years.
He has further claimed that on the basis of representation made to the petitioners that they will be treated on duty and that they shall be paid full pay and allowances during the period of training, the petitioners had not only spent time but even money on the training.
The petitioners had acted to their disadvantage and now the respondents were estopped from withdrawing the benefit promised to the petitioners.
Mr. Jaswant Singh on the other hand has raised a preliminary objection that the petition suffers from the vice of laches.
He submits that the Govt had decided the matter vide its letter dated July 21, 1986 and the petition has been filed only in January, 1990.
He further contends that there was no policy decision to grant the benefit of pay and allowances to persons deputed for the nursing training course.
Consequently, the petitioners have no right.
In any case, the learned counsel contends that the Director was not competent to make any promise.
Furthermore, Mr. Jaswant Singh says that the petitioners had given an undertaking and, therefore, they are estopped from challenging the action of the respondents.
It may be appropriate to deal with the preliminary objection at the threshold.
A perusal of the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents shows that no objection regarding delay has been raised.
If such an objection had been raised, it could have been possible for the petitioners to bring on record full facts and they may have been able to explain the delay.
In any case, even on the basis of present record, I am unable to sustain the plea.
A reference to the decision of the Govt occurs in the letter dated January 9, 1987 sent by the Director to the petitioners.
Copy of that decision does not appear to have been supplied to the petitioners.
There is nothing on record to show that a copy of the letter dated July 21, 1986 or the memo dated October 30, 1986 was ever endorsed to the petitioners.
The first communication sent to the petitioners was only of January 9, 1987.
The petitioners had promptly represented against this letter vide their representations dated January 12, 1987 and February 18, 1987.
There is nothing on record to show that these representations were ever rejected.
Vide letter dated August 11, 1987, the petitioners were only asked to send their reply within two days.
The petitioners had represented even before that and or, February 18, 1988 the Chief Minister had directed that the matter be examined on merits.
No decision on the representation submitted by the petitioners was conveyed to them till they filed the present petition.
Mr. Jaswant Singh says that it may not be necessary to pass any fresh order.
Even if that be so, the petitioners at least deserved a reply from the Govt None was sent.
In this situation, it is clear that there is no merit in the preliminary objection raised on behalf of the respondents.
Coming to the merits of the controversy, it is indisputable that in the various communications referred to above, which were sent by the Director and the Medical Officers to the petitioners, it was clearly mentioned that they will be treated on duty and that they would be paid full pay and allowances during the period of training.
On this promise, the petitioners had not only competed for the selection but had joined the course after they were duly relieved by the authorities under whom they were working.
Thereafter, the petitioners paid the requisite amount of fees and joined the training course.
It was only after they had undergone the course for about six months that the first communication dated January 9, 1987 was sent.
At this stage, the petitioners were not in a position to give up the course half-way.
It would not have been even in public interest because no fresh admission could have been made against those seats.
The seats would have gone waste.
It would have resulted in wastage of public resources.
Even the petitioners would have been deprived of the right to continue attending the course, in spite of the fact that they had already paid the requisite fees for the full session.
Taking the totality of circumstances into consideration, I am of the view that the respondents were estopped from depriving the petitioners of full pay and allowances after they had joined the course.
Mr. Jaswant Singh stated that neither the Medical Officers nor the Director Health Services were competent to give any undertaking on behalf of the State Govt Admittedly, the Director of Health Services was the appointing authority.
No rule has been brought to my notice to show that the sanction had to be accorded by the Govt The appointing authority having forwarded the applications of the petitioners, it even allowed them to compete and thereafter directed the Medical Officers to relieve the petitioners, it is not open to the State to then turnabout and say that the action of one of its officers was illegal.
If at all the State Govt had any remedy, it was against the officers who permitted the petitioners to proceed to the training course.
No order to the prejudice of the petitioners could have been passed.
A perusal of the records further shows that the recommendations had been made by the Director on April 1, 1986.
This was more than three months prior to the date on which the petitioners were actually relieved of their duties.
If the Govt had actually wanted to prevent the petitioners from joining the training course or if it was not inclined to allow them full pay and allowances for the training period, it should have acted expeditiously and decided the matter finally before the petitioners were actually relieved of their duties.
Nothing prevented the Govt from disposing of the matter prior to July 15, 1986 when the petitioners were relieved of their duties.
That petitioners would have prevented the petitioners from joining the course.
It did not act in the manner it ought to have acted.
The silence on the part of the Govt may have led the petitioners to believe that the recommendation made by the Director would be accepted.
Keeping in view the past precedents, the view entertained by the petitioners was not an impossible one.
I am, therefore, of the view that once the petitioners had been deputed for the course on the specific understanding that they will be paid full pay and allowances for the period of training, it was not open to the respondents to deny the benefits at a subsequent stage.
Equally well merited is the claim of the petitioners that the action of the respondents suffers from the vice of discrimination.
In paragraph 3 of the petition, elaborate details have been given by the petitioners to show that a number of persons had been deputed for the same course from the year 1978 to 1985.
Every time the Govt had issued the requisite sanction.
By way of illustration, it may be mentioned that in the year 1978, four persons had been deputed for the course on July 17, 1978.
Sanction was accorded by the Govt vide its letter dated October 15, 1979 i.e. almost 1 year and 3 months later.
Similarly, on July 16, 1979, 5 persons had been deputed for the course, and the requisite sanction was issued by the Govt subsequently.
Such instances can be multiplied.
There is nothing on record to indicate as to how the case of the petitioners is in any way distinguishable from that of others who had been deputed during the period from 1978 to 1985.
It may be that after the year 1986, nobody had been deputed for the course on the terms and conditions on which persons had been deputed earlier.
The fact remains that right from 1978 to 1986, persons had been deputed for the course.
It was not a stray instance.
It was not a single case.
Repeated orders of the Govt show virtually a continuous practice.
No grounds for departure have been disclosed either in any of the communications or even in the written statement.
Mr. Jaswant Singh has not even produced any record to show as to how the case of the petitioners was different from the case of persons who had been deputed prior to the year 1986.
In this situation, I am inevitably led to the conclusion that the action of the respondents suffers from the vice of discrimination.
Even otherwise, I have not been able to find any rationale in the action taken in the present case.
Neither in the order nor in the written statement any justification has been given for the action.
It has only been suggested that there was no policy decision to grant the benefit.
That may be so.
In spite of that the Govt had followed a consistent practice and granted benefits similar to those as claimed by the petitioners.
It has been undoubtedly suggested that improvements of qualification is calculated to promote the self interest of the petitioners and does not help the Govt Factually this does not appear to be correct.
The petitioners were called upon to execute a bond each to serve the Govt for a period of 5 years.
I In default, they were liable to pay an amount of Rs. 70,000/- to the Govt As a result, the petitioners were bound to serve the Govt for a period of 5 years and the improvement in qualifications would have helped none other than the Govt itself.
The counsel points out that the Govt had subsequently rejected the bonds.
This was of no consequence.
Once the petitioners had been called upon to execute the bonds and they had executed the requisite bonds, subsequent rejection thereof by the Govt was only a unilateral act.
So far as the petitioners are concerned, they had carried out the obligations under the order by which they were relieved from duty.
Once that had happened and the petitioner had bound themselves to serve the Govt in any of its hospitals for a period of 5 years, the interest of the respondents, were not going to be hampered in any manner whatsoever.
This is all the more so because in the order dated June 23, 1986 it had been specifically stipulated that "no promotion or higher pay shall be granted for having undergone this training."
Possibly the respondents could have disclosed some reasons for the impugned action.
None having been disclosed, I am led to conclude that the action was absolutely arbitrary and unfair.
Mr. Jaswant Singh tried to make a mountain of a mole hill by suggesting that the petitioners had undertaken to forego their claim for pay and allowances.
He has drawn my attention to the letters dated August 18, 1987 (Annexures R-3 and R-4) to suggest that the petitioners are now estopped from claiming pay and allowances.
Firstly, these letters were written at a stage when the petitioners had already completed more than half of their training.
If the Govt had forced them to discontinue their training, they would have suffered a substantial monetary loss.
They had paid their fees.
They had spent time and even suffered the loneliness of their families.
At this stage, they had no option but to send a reply to the repeated communications from the Govt Secondly, it was not an unequivocal undertaking given by the petitioners.
A perusal of the writ petition shows that they had pointed out that others had been allowed to continue on Govt expenses.
It was only after the Govt rejected their claim that they had undertaken to apply for leave.
Having examined the matter I do not find any justification for the contention that the petitioners had given an undertaking and were bound by it.
The undertaking, if at all, was not voluntary but under highly compelling circumstances.
Even otherwise, there is no estoppel in a matter where the violation of a fundamental right involved.
By no process of law or logic can a citizen be presumed to waive a fundamental right like Article 14 or Article 16 of the Constitution of India.
In view of the above, the writ petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to pay the petitioners their full pay and allowances for the period during which they attended the course.
They will be treated on duty for all intents and purposes.
Keeping in view the fact that the petitioners have even personally improved their qualifications while in Govt Service, I decline the prayer for the grant of interest.
The petitioners shall be entitled to their costs which are assessed as Rs. 2000/-.
Petition allowed.