NC Jain, J - The facts giving rise to the filing of the present revision petition are that the petitioner having joined the service of State Bank of India as a Clerk initially was promoted to the post of Officer in 1979 and became permanent Accountant in 1982 at Bharampuri, Ludhiana Branch of the Bank.
After taking over the charge he noticed some procedural irregularities prevailing at the Branch and submitted a detailed report to the then Branch Manager on 27.1.1983.
He was transferred to Chandigarh in the Office Manager Section Regional Officer, Punjab and was provided with lease based accommodation w.e.f.
161984 as per bank rules.
He was asked to vacate the leased accommodation on or before 951985 on account of his suspension.
He was being paid subsistence allowance to the tune of Rs. 1191/- per month approximately.
The authorities deducted a sum of Rs. 756/- on account of rent for the tenanted premises from the subsistence allowance for the month of March, 1986 and he was only paid a sum of Rs. 49850 for the aforesaid month.
Prior thereto only 12-1/2% per month of the basic pay i.e. a sum of Rs. 150/- per month was being deducted and the balance amount of the rent was being paid by the bank to the landlord.
In March, 1986 deduction on account of rent from the subsistence allowance was raised to the tune of Rs. 756/- and this led to the filing of the suit for a declaration that the recovery of the lease money from the subsistence allowance is penal and cannot be recovered from him, that the suspension was illegal and that the bank authorities be restrained from deducting the excess of 12 -1/2% from the basic pay or the subsistence allowance.
2.
While defending the action, it was pleaded by the respondents that the appellant was suspended under Rule 50 -A(1)(a) of the State Bank of India (Supervising Staff) (Service) Rules and that the petitioner had no right to challenge the order of suspension.
According to the defence of the bank authorities, as per Rule 50(7)(ii) an employee under suspension could be allowed to use occupation of the official house for a period of four months only.
Ad interim injunction was declined by the Courts below primarily on the ground that the rent of the accommodation has not been deducted from the subsistence allowance of the petitioner.
It has been held that Bank is not obliged to make contributions of Rs. 756/- to the landlord since the appellant has not vacated the rented accommodation and, therefore, no case for the grant of injunction has been made out.
It has further been found by the Court below that if the petitioner cannot afford the retention of the tenanted accommodation, he can vacate the same.
3.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that the suit is yet to be decided and it has to be found whether the suspension order was illegal or not.
It has further been argued that as long as the petitioner continues to be in service of the Bank, the authorities are bound to make the payment of the rent to the landlord as he is only put under suspension.
The precise argument of the learned counsel is that if ultimately the petitioner is reinstated and suspension order is revoked and he is asked to vacate the tenanted premises on account of the action of the respondent authorities, he would be put to irreparable loss and injury particularly when in view of shortage of accommodation which is a well known fact, he may not get the accommodation again.
4.
Having given my thoughtful consideration to the arguments advanced at the Bar by the counsel for the parties, I am of the opinion that the revision petition permits acceptance.
It has yet to be found whether the suspension order is valid or not.
The Bank authorities have yet to decide whether the petitioner is to be retained in service or not.
A period of about 5 years has elapsed and nothing has been brought on the record of this case as to what is the progress as regards the retention of the petitioner in service.
Assuming that the petitioner is ultimately given a clean chit and his suspension is revoked at some stage or ultimately nothing is found against him, he cannot surely be made to suffer to the extent that he be asked to vacate the leased accommodation which is in the name of the Bank.
This Court is of the firm view that it is only on this ground that the petitioner is entitled to have interim injunction.
Considerations of balance of convenience and irreparable loss and injury do weigh in favour of the petitioner.
For the reasons recorded above, the revision petition is allowed and the orders of the authorities, below are quashed and the Bank authorities respondents are directed to maintain status quo regarding payment of rent to the landlord beyond 12-1/2% without affecting the payment of subsistence allowance of the petitioner.
No costs.
Petition allowed.