Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - This order will dispose of CWP Nos. 3359, 3361, 66194 and 6298 of 1991.
The facts, as stated in C.W.P.
No. 6298 of 1991 may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner was enrolled as a Constable on November 26, 1976.
He passed the Lower School Course in September 1981 and was promoted as Head Constable on July 4, 1986.
He was confirmed as such on March 31, 1988.
It is averred that respondent Nos. 5 to 8 are junior to the petitioner.
In spite of that the said respondents were deputed for the Intermediate School Course which commenced w.e.f.
November 15, 1990.
The petitioner claims that he had a right to be deputed for the course before the said respondents.
3.
By an interim order passed by the Motion Bench on June 18, 1991, the respondents were directed to depute the petitioner to the Intermediate School Course.
It is admitted before me that the petitioner has since completed the said course.
4.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 to 4, it has been inter alia averred that the petitioner is junior to 86 confirmed Head Constables according to the seniority list prepared in the office of the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Rohtak Range, Rohtak.
It has been further averred that in the session which commenced on July 1, 1991, the persons were deputed to undergo the course in strict order of seniority and in accordance with the decision of the Full bench in Sardul Singh v. I.G.P.
Punjab & others, 1970 SLR 505.
It has been further averred that respondent Nos. 5 to 8 had been deputed to the Course which commenced on November 15, 1990, which he never challenged promptly and as such the petition suffers from laches.
It has been pointed out that respondent Nos. 5 and 6 were withdrawn from the course on February 26, 1991 but they were allowed to complete the course in pursuance to the directions of this Court in L.P.A. No. 158 of 1991.
On merits it is averred that respondent No. 5 had been deputed for the course for "his commendable work in connection with anti-extremists activities."
Further respondent No. 6 is stated to have been deputed against a seat reserved for the CID quota.
So far as respondent Nos. 7 and 8 are concerned, it has been averred that they belong to the Lady Police Cadre and as such as petitioner cannot claim any seniority vis-a-vis that.
5.
Having heard the learned counsel for the parties, I find that according to the rules laid down by the Full Bench in Sardul Singh's case (supra), Head Constables have to be deputed for the course in strict order of seniority.
Admittedly, respondent Nos. 5 and 6 are junior to the petitioner.
It is also not disputed before me that the writ petition had been filed by the petitioner before the said respondents had completed the course.
In such a situation, the petitioner cannot be accused of any delay.
The action of the respondents was apparently in violation of the rule enunciated in Sardul Singh's case (supra).
The petitioner had a right to be deputed for the course before any one junior to him could have been sent.
Now since the petitioner has already completed the course, the respondents are bound to declare his result.
6.
As for the objection raised on behalf of the respondents that the petitioner is junior to 86 other confirmed Head Constables, it may be observed that they have not approached this Court.
As and when the claim is made by them, the case would be considered on merits.
That, however, cannot provide a ground to the respondents to withhold the result of the petitioner.
Accordingly, the writ petitions are allowed.
The respondents are directed to declare the result of the petitioners.
In the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petitions allowed.