Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - The petitioner while posted as Civil Surgeon, Primary Health Centre, Jandwala Bhimashah, Ferozepur was placed under suspension vide order dated 391990 passed by respondent No. 1 a copy of which is Annexure P-1 to the writ petition.
During the period of suspension, he was to get subsistence allowance admissible under Rule 72 of Punjab Civil Services Rule Vol. 1 part-I.
Though a period of more than one year and six months had elapsed, but the subsistence allowance was not increased by a suitable amount not exceeding 50% for the period subsequent to the period of first six months.
The petitioner made a representation to respondent No. 1 requested therein to raise his subsistence allowance to 75% w.e.f.
131991, but of no avail.
Left with no alternative, the petitioner has approached this Court by way of this writ petition seeking a direction to the respondents that he be given subsistence allowance @75% view of the provisions of Rule 72 of the Punjab Civil Service Rules, Vol.
I  2.
On notice, the respondents have put in appearance.
3.
After hearing the Learned Counsel for the parties, and on consideration of the matter, we have reached the conclusion that there is justification in the stand taken by the respondents for not increasing the subsistence allowance and the writ petition deserves to be allowed.
4.
Under the provisions of Rule 72 of the Punjab Civil Service Rules Vol. 1, where the period of suspension exceeds six months, the authority which made or is deemed to have made the order of suspension is required to vary the amount of subsistence allowance for any period subsequent to the period of the first months as follows :- The relevant extract of the rule ibdi reads :-  (i) The amount of subsistence allowance may be increased by a suitable amount not exceeding 50% of the subsistence allowance admissible during the period of first six months if in the opinion of the said authority, the period of suspension has been prolonged for reasons to be recorded in writing not directly attributable to the Govt.
employee."
In the light of clear provision of this rule, the respondents cannot deny the increase in the subsistence allowance for the period subsequent to the period of suspension of six months.
As per provisions, it can be denied only if the suspension is prolonged for reasons which are attributable to the concerned employee.
The claim of the petitioner has been denied by the respondents on the ground that a criminal case is pending against the petitioner in the Criminal Court.
There is no valid reason for not granting increase in the subsistence allowance.
Since the delay in disposal of proceedings initiated against the petitioners is not at all attributable to the petitioner in any manner, he is entitled to 50% increase in subsistence allowance as provided under the rule.
5.
In view of the foregoing discussion, the writ petition is allowed with the direction to the respondents to allow increase 50% of the subsistence allowance to the petitioner subsequent to the period of First Six months of suspension under the provision of Rule 72, of the Punjab Civil Service Vol.I Part-I and the arrears thereof be paid to him within two months from the receipt of copy of this order.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.