VB Bansal, J - VD Seth, a citizen of India is presently working as Joint Manager (G) in the Headquarters of the Food Corporation of India, respondent No. 1.
2.
Food Corporation of India, respondent No. 1 is a statutory Corporation established by an Act of Parliament.
The services of its employees are governed under the Food Corporation (Staff Regulations), 1971.
Respondent No. 2 is the Chairman while respondent No. 3 is the Managing Director of the Food Corporation of India, respondent No. 1.
Respondents 4 and 5 were working as Zonal Managers (North) of respondent No. 1 at the relevant time.
Respondent No. 6 was the Enquiry Officer who enquired into the charges framed against the petitioner while respondent No. 7 is the present Enquiry Officer appointed to go into the charge afresh after recording additional evidence in terms of the impugned order dated 17th January, 1989.
Respondent No. 6 is the Superintendent of Police (CBI) while respondent No. 9 Inspector, Central Bureau of Investigation, was the presenting officer against the petitioner in the departmental proceedings held earlier against him.
Respondent No. 10 is the Manager Personnel of Respondent No. 1.
3.
VD Seth, petitioner, originally joined the Government of India as Physical Verification Inspector on 7th Nov 1958.
His services were subsequently transferred to the respondent No. 1 with effect from 1st March, 1969 and since then he has been working with respondent No. 1 on different posts and at different places.
4.
The petitioner was promoted as Deputy Manager on 1st Oct 1977.
In the year 1982 he was working as a District Manager Ratangarh on a complaint by one Mumtaz Ali, contractor a raid was organized by Shri Nand Lal, Dy.
S.P.
and the petitioner was caught red handed in room No. 3 of Circuit House Bikaner accepting Rs. 500/- as bribe from said Mumtaz Ali for releasing the security amount of Rs. 6,000/- and also Rs. 1,500/- deducted from his bills as function charges.
On a reference made by Addl.
SP ACD (Crime) Rajasthan, Jaipur, Criminal No. 35 was registered by the Central Bureau of Investigation against the petitioner for the offence under Section 161, IPC and Section 5(1)(d) read with Section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947.
5.
After investigation CBI did not consider it expedient to file a challan against the petitioner in court but advised the Administrative Department for initiating disciplinary proceedings against the petitioner and forwarded necessary material to respondent No. 1 in this regard.
On 26th July, 1982, the petitioner was placed under suspension since disciplinary proceedings against him were contemplated.
The order of suspension was however revoked by the Managing Director, respondent No. 3 on 6th August, 1983.
The following article of charge was framed against VD Seth by the Managing Director :  "Shri VD Seth, while working as District Manager, Food Corporation of India, Ratangarh during the year 1982 failed to maintain absolute integrity and devotion to duty :- That Shri VD Seth while working as District Manager, FCI, Ratangarh, in pursuance of his earlier demands, accepted a sum of Rs. 800/- as bribe from Mumtaz Ali Contractor on 21.7.1982 in Room No. 3 of Circuit House, Bikaner for releasing his security amount of Rs. 6000/- and also Rs. 1,500/- deducted from his bill as fumigation charges.
He was caught red-handed at the spot by Shri Natwar Lal, Dy.
SP AGD Bikaner, and the retained amount was recovered from the person of Shri V.S.
Seth.
The aforesaid acts of Shri VD Seth constitute misconduct on his part as he contravened Regulations 31 and 32 of FCI (Staff) Regulation, 1971."
The memorandum, article of charge framed, statement and imputation of misconduct or misbehaviour, list of documents and list of witnesses along with letter dated 1st Dec 1983 were sent to the petitioner by registered post.
The petitioner gave a short reply to the charge-sheet stating "I deny the charge and I may be heard in person."
Mr. AA Faradi, respondent No. 6 was appointed as Enquiry Officer to enquire into the charges framed against the petitioner.
Inspector Davinder Singh of Central Bureau of Investigation was appointed as the Presenting Officer on behalf of the respondent, who was, however replaced by Inspector Javed Siraj of Central Bureau of Investigation, respondent No. 9.
6.
The departmental enquiry proceedings were started on 17th February, 1984 and were concluded on 25th May, 1984.
The Enquiry Officer, respondent No. 6, prepared his report and submitted it to the concerned authority on 3rd March, 1986.
The enquiry report was considered by Shri AP Sinha, Zonal Manager (North), respondent No. 3 and agreed with the finding of the Enquiry Officer exonerating VD Seth, holding that the charge has not been proved.
It was also observed that during the proceedings in the departmental enquiry :  `The deposition of Shri Mumtaz Ali, the main prosecution witness is full of contradictions and as such charge could not be proved by the prosecution.'
Respondent No. 4 being the disciplinary authority thus exonerated VD Seth, Dy.
Manager (General) in exercise of the powers conferred upon him vide Regulation 56 of Food Corporation of India (Staff) Regulation, 1971.
The entire period of suspension of the petitioner from 31st July, 1982 to 7th Sept, 1983 was ordered to be treated as a period spent on duty for all purposes by respondent No. 4 vide order dated 13th June, 1986.
7.
In its meeting held on 4th July, 1988, the Senior Promotion Board of the Food Corporation of India proposed a panel of the officers on the basis of grading assigned and taking into consideration the principles and merit-cum-seniority for promotion to the grade of Joint Manager (General) in the order of merit.
The petitioner was put at Sl.
No. 6.
The panel, aforesaid was approved by the Executive Committee of the Corporation, respondent No. 1 on 29th July, 1988.
The petitioner was thereafter promoted as Joint Manager (General) vide order dated 9th August, 1988 and since then he has been working on the said post and presently posted in the Headquarter.
8.
Vide order dated 17th January, 1989 and in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-regulation (4) of the Regulation No. 74 of the Food Corporation of India (Staff) Regulations, 1971, respondent No. 2, Chairman of the Food Corporation of India, the order dated 27th May, 1984 exonerating the petitioner was set aside and the case was remanded to the Managing Director, who was competed disciplinary authority for proceeding against the petitioner in accordance with the Food Corporation of India (Staff) Regulations, 1971 and for further enquiry and appropriate orders.
Respondent No. 3 appointed Mrs. KK Bawnani, Manager (Enquiry), respondent No. 7 to hold further enquiry against the petitioner vide letter dated 17th Feb, 1989.
Respondent No. 9 has been appointed as presenting Officer by respondent No. 3 vide order dated 17th Feb, 1989.
9.
Vide order dated 27th Feb, 1989, the petitioner has been transferred from Headquarters, New Delhi to the Zonal Office (East) Calcutta when the departmental enquiry has been ordered to be continued at New Delhi.
10.
By way of this writ petition, the petitioner has challenged the order dated 17th January, 1989 setting the order of his exoneration in the enquiry conducted by respondent No. 6 on the basis of which the petitioner was exonerated of the charge by the competent authority.
He has also challenged the order of his transfer to Calcutta.
11.
I have heard Shri Mukul Rohtagi, counsel for the petitioner and Shri B Dutta, Sr. Advocate for the respondents.
I have also gone through the records.
12.
It is the admitted case of the parties that the petitioner, on superannuation, would retire on 31st January, 1991.
Learned counsel for the respondents submitted that the respondents are not enforcing the order of transfer of the petitioner to Calcutta.
In view of this submission I do not feel it necessary to decide about the validity of the order transferring the petitioner to Calcutta.
13.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that the impugned order dated 17th January, 1989 vide which the order dated 27th May, 1986 by respondent No. 4 has been set aside is beyond limitation and on this account alone the said order is liable to be quashed.
This submission, has, however, been controverted by learned counsel to the respondents who has submitted that it is open to an employer to reopen any matter so long as the employee is in service and especially in the case of the employee of the Food Corporation of India which is commercial organisation.
14.
In order to appreciate the submissions made by learned counsel for the parties in this regard it would be necessary to note that in exercise of the powers conferred by Section 45 of the Food Corporations Act and with the previous sanction of the Central Government, the Food Corporation of India (Staff) Regulations, 1971 were framed by the Food Corporation of India and these regulations govern the employees of the respondent No. 1.
Including the petitioner.
It would, in my view, be necessarily to quoted relevent regulations :  70.
Period of limitation for appeals :  "No appeal referred under these regulations shall be entertained unless such appeal is preferred within a period of forty five days from the date on which a copy of the order appealed is delivered to the appellant : "Provided that the appellate authority may entertain the appeal after the expiry of the said period if it is satisfied that the appellant has sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal in time."
74. Review :  "(1) (Notwithstanding anything contained in these regulations, the Board may, at any time either on its own motion or otherwise, call for the records, any inquiry and review any order made under these regulations), and (a) confirm, modify or set aside the order; or (b) confirm, reduce, enhance or set aside the penalty imposed by the order, or impose any penalty where no penalty has been imposed, or (c) remit the case to the authority which made the order or to any other authority directing such authority to make such further inquiry as it may consider proper in the circumstances of the case.
(d) pass such other orders as it may deem fit; provided that no order imposing or enhancing any penalty shall be made by the reviewing authority unless the employee concerned has been given a reasonable opportunity of making a representation against the penalty proposed and where it is proposed to impose any of the penalties specific in clauses (v) to (ix) of Regulation 54 or to enhance the penalty imposed by the order sought to be viewed to any of the penalties specified in those clauses, no such penalty shall be imposed except after any inquiry in the manner laid down in Regulation 58.
(2) No proceeding for review shall be commenced until after : (i) the expiry of the period of limitation for an appeal, or (ii) the disposal of the appeal, where any such appeal has been preferred, (3) An application for review shall be dealt with in the same manner as if it were an appeal under these regulations.
(4) Powers similar to those specified in clause (1) above may be exercised by the (Chairman) Managing Director, Zonal Manager and 'Regional Manager (Additional/Joint Manager) in respect of orders passed by authorities subordinate to them."
A perusal of the aforesaid regulations makes it abundantly clear that an employee feeling aggrieved from any order can challenge, the same by way of an appeal within 45 days from the date of which the order appealed against delivered to him though a discretion has also been left with the appellate authority to condone the delay for sufficient cause.
No period of limitation, however, has been provided for review.
However, sub clause (2) of Regulation 74 makes it abundantly clear that the proceeding for review could be commenced only after the expiry of period of limitation for an appeal or from the disposal of the appeal where such an appeal his been preferred.
It would, thus, clearly indicate that the period of limitation provided for an appeal cannot be the period for review.
In these circumstances each case has to be considered on its own facts for coming to the conclusion as to whether the order of review has been passed within a reasonable period of limitation or not.
I find support for this view from the case Mahadeo Prasad Gautam v. Regional Manager, Food Corporation, (1986) 1 SLR 306 (Madh Pra).
Learned counsel for the parties have heavily placed reliance on this judgment which deals with the aforesaid regulations dealing with the employees of respondent No. 1.
15.
The most important question now to be considered is as to whether the impugned order dated 17th January, 1989 has been passed by the Chairman, Food Corporation of India, respondent No. 2 well within a reasonable period.
It may be noted that the petitioner was involved in a case of accepting illegal gratification on 21st July, 1982.
Charges framed against the petitioner on 10th Oct, 1983 were served upon on 1st Dec, 1983.
The inquiry proceedings were commenced on 17th Feb 1984 and report was submitted by the Inquiry Officer to the appropriate authorities on 3rd March, 1986.
The inquiry report was accepted by the Zonal Manager, respondent No. 4 and thus the petitioner was exonerated of the charges framed against him.
The petitioner was at that time working as a Deputy Manager.
On the basis of selection made by Promotion Committee headed by the Chairman of respondent No. 1, the petitioner was promoted as Joint Manager on 9th August, 1988.
It is only thereafter that the impugned order has been passed on 17th January, 1989.
The question now thus is as to whether this order has been passed within a reasonable period or not after giving my due thought to all these submissions in this regard I have no hesitation in coming to the conclusion that the order is not passed within a reasonable period and so it has to be held to be beyond limitation and thus cannot be sustained.
It is apparent from the records that the Zonal Manager (North) examined the enquiry report and other relevant records and found that there were numerous contradictions in the testimony of the main witness of the department namely Mumtaz Ali.
The finding of enquiry report was accepted.
Copies of this order were sent to many including Personnel Manager, FCI Headquarters, New Delhi, the Confidential Report Cell, FCI, New Delhi, the Establishment I Section, FCI, Headquarters for personal file and the club vigilance officer.
It is also to be noted that in its meeting dated 4th July, 1988, the Senior Promotion Board headed by the Chairman of the Corporation considered the numbers of merit/seniority and on the basis of grading assigned to them selected 16 persons for promotion to the post of Joint Manager (General) and the name of the petitioner appeared at Sl.No.
6.
This list of the officers was approved by the Executive Committee of the Corporation on 29th July, 1988.
It would, thus be clear the factum of the petitioner having been involved in a case of accepted illegal gratification, his suspension, his facing departmental inquiry and being exonerated of the charges' must have been before the said Promotion Committee headed by the Chairman of the Corporation, respondent No. 1.
It is thus clear that after the approval of the exoneration of the petitioner the order was even acted upon inasmuch as the petitioner was given his promotion due to him.
It is more than 5 months after this promotion that the impugned order reviewing the order dated 17th January 1989 exonerating the petitioner of the charges was passed.
This order, thus cannot be said to have been passed within a reasonable period.
I find support for this view from the case Mahadeo Prasad Gautam (1986 (1) Serv LR 306) (Madhya Pradesh) (supra).
In the said case the penalty of withholding one increment with cumulative effect was passed on 26th Nov., 1977 and the petitioner was simultaneously reinstated.
After he earned one increment, the petitioner was given promotion by order dated 30th Oct 1978.
This promotion was enjoyed by the petitioner for about 2-1/2 years and while working on higher post review proceedings were taken on 27th April, 1981.
It was held that the proceedings were not initiated within the reasonable time especially when the authorities had been given promotion to the petitioner.
Thus the order of initiating the review proceedings was held to be arbitrary and set aside.
Similar have been the facts of the present case and the authority passing the impugned order had an opportunity to go through the records and the petitioner was even given promotion.
The incident against the petitioner was of 1982 and the review order was passed more than 6 years after the date of the incident.
In this way I am clear of the view that the delay on the part of the appropriate authority to review the order of exoneration resulted in the breach of its implied obligation to pass such order within a reasonable time.
16.
The matter can also be examined from another angle.
The grievance of respondent Nos. 1 to 3 has been that the inquiry officer did not permit the presenting officer to lead evidence which the department wanted to produce to prove the charges against the petitioner and this was the reason for the reviewing authority to take decision that the proceedings should be started afresh and the Inquiry Officer should give a report after recording evidence of the five witnesses not allowed to be produced by the Inquiry Officer.
Claim of the petitioner has been that the Inquiry Officer vide order dated 18th May, 1985 closed the evidence of the department declining to give adjournment for producing the five witnesses in which detailed reasons have been given.
On an application moved by the Presenting Officer for adjournment to produce five witnesses another detailed order was passed by the Inquiry Officer on 21st May, 1985 vide which the prayer was declined.
Javed Siraj, the Presenting Officer was informed by MS Yadav, Manager Vigilance vide letter dated 21st May, 1985 that the Inquiry Officer being the quasi-judicial authority is the final authority to decide the issue raised before him and that it would be appropriate for him to approach the Inquiry Officer for the review of his order.
This letter was issued by the Manager Vigilance with the concurrence of the Managing Director.
It may also be noted that para 31 of the affidavit of PL Meena, Inspector CBI filed on behalf of respondents 8 and 9 contains categorical statement that :  "Respondent No. 8 had asked the Food Corporation of India to review the matter in the interest of justice.
It is also admitted that the Food Corporation of India did not agree for review in the matter."
17.
It is thus clear that there was no material being discovered by the Chairman to pass the impugned order of review when already a prayer in this regard made by the CBI was turned down by the Food Corporation of India.
On this account also it can safely be said that the order of review has been passed beyond reasonable time and on this account also it cannot be sustained.
17.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that the impugned order has been passed by the respondent No. 2 in violation of principles of natural justice inasmuch as no opportunity was given to the petitioner of being heard before setting aside the order of exoneration.
He has, thus, submitted that a vested right of the petitioner has been taken away to his prejudice and on this account also the impugned order is liable to be set aside.
Learned counsel for the respondents has, however, submitted that no punishment, in fact, has been awarded to the petitioner and vide impugned order the Inquiry Officer has only been asked to record the statements of the witnesses not allowed to be examined by the Inquiry Officer earlier.
He has also submitted that the Inquiry Officer would be given a fresh report and the petitioner would have the full opportunity to cross-examine the witnesses and making submissions and support his plea of innocence.
He has, thus, submitted that it is premature stage and no opportunity was required to be given of being heard to the petitioner at this stage.
I am afraid I cannot agree with this submission made by learned counsel for the respondents.
There is no doubt that the proviso to Clause of Regulation 74 provides that no order imposing or enhancing any penalty shall be made by the reviewing authority unless the employee concerned has been given a reasonable opportunity of making a representation against the penalty proposed.
Technically it can be said that no penalty in fact has been imposed upon the petitioner vide impugned order.
However, as already referred to after the order of exoneration the petitioner has been promoted and chapter about enquiry stood closed.
By setting aside the order of exoneration the impugned order has not required the petitioner to face further ordeal of inquiry in which the order holding him guilty of the charges could be passed.
It is thus, clear that the impugned order is prejudicial to the petitioner which has been passed without giving him an opportunity of being heard.
The question as to whether the requirement of natural justice is met by the procedure adopted in the cases must depend to a great extent on the facts and circumstances of a case keeping in view the relevant that provisions applicable.
The order of exoneration having been set aside the petitioner, in my view, is right in his claim that an order detrimental to his interest had been passed without giving him an opportunity of being heard.
Natural justice is fair play in action and it has to apply to both quasi-judicial and administrative functions.
Then can possibly be no dispute that if the duty to act fairly is equated with natural justice then the distinction between the judicial or quasi-judicial and administrative function loses its validity and no such order can be passed to the detriment of an individual without giving him an opportunity even in administrative functions.
In the instant case the chairman, respondent No. 2 has passed the impugned order in exercise of the quasi-judicial powers available to him under Article 74 of the Regulations.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has rightly submitted that if an opportunity had been given to him the petitioner could urge before the reviewing authority the grounds available to him against the exercise of the power of review in the instant case.
Learned counsel submitted that plea having already been raised and rejected by the Inquiry Officer, non-giving of any direction by the Managing Director and the confirming of the inquiry with reasons by the disciplinary authority, coupled with fact that earlier the request of the CBI to review the order of exoneration having already been declined by Food Corporation of India.
In these circumstances I am clearly of the view that the impugned order has been passed in violation of the principles of natural justice.
On this account also it cannot be sustained.
18.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that the petitioner, was working as Deputy Manager when faced the inquiry till he was exonerated.
He has further submitted that at the time of passing of the order of review dated 17th January, 1989, the petitioner was working as a Joint Manager (General) and at that time the appellate authority of the petitioner was the Chairman and so the impugned order could be passed by the Board only and not by the Chairman.
There is no dispute with regard to the legal proposition that an order of review has to be passed by an authority senior to the appellate authority.
The question, however, for consideration is as to whether in instant case the appellate authority was the Managing Director or the Chairman of the Food Corporation of India.
It is not disputed that on 27th May, 1986 the Disciplinary Authority of the petitioner was the Zonal/Manager and the appellate authority was the Managing Director.
In this way the authority competent to review the order of exoneration could be the Chairman.
Admittedly, the appointing authority for Category I Officer is the Managing Director and the appellate authority is the Chairman and thus the order of review can be passed by the Board.
In the instant case the order of exoneration dated 27th May, 1986 was under review and so the authority competent to review this order would be authority who was competent to do so at the relevant time.
Merely because the petitioner was promoted subsequently and was working on a higher post on 17th January, 1989, in view, cannot be material so as to debar the authority competent to pass an order of review.
In these circumstances I hold that Chairman of Food Corporation of India was competent to exercise the power of review.
19.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has also submitted that the impugned order dated 17th January, 1989 has been passed by the Chairman, respondent No. 2 on the basis of a direction by the Central Government and, thus he has not exercised the quasi-judicial powers vested in him, of his own and on this account also the impugned order liable to be quashed.
In support of this submission he referred to an order dated 291988 of the Minister of Food noticed by him at the time of the relevant file under court orders.
Learned counsel for the respondents has placed on record a copy of the notice along with the order dated 291988 of the Minister of Food.
A perusal of this document leaves no doubt that the main ground found against the Enquiry was the refusal by the Enquiry Officer to give adjournment to enable the Presenting Officer to produce the witnesses and a wrong approach the proof beyond reasonable doubt was necessary for proving charge in a departmental enquiry.
There has been a specific order of the Minister to reopen the case and the officer be proceeded against if the facts are substantiated by circumstantial and other evidence.
20.
As already discussed that power of review is quasi-judicial power and has to be exercised by the authority competent to do so under the rules.
Courts have never relished the idea of issuing administrative instruction to control the discretion or the quasi-judicial authorities in a particular case.
Where the rule of law prevails it is not open to the Government to control the functioning of a quasi-judicial authority and to direct to decide a particular matter before it in a particular manner.
There could be general instructions.
However, no specific directions could be given to decide a matter in a particular way.
I may at this stage refer to the case The Purtapur Co Ltd v. Cane Commr.
of Bihar, AIR 1970 SC 1896.
In this case the Cane Commissioner passed an order at the instance of the Chief Minister though he was required under the rules to pass an order of his own in exercise of the quasi-judicial powers vested in him.
This order was held to be bad.
Similarly in case Chandrika Jha v. State of Bihar, AIR 1984 SC 322, quasi-judicial powers vested in the Registrar was exercised by him at the instance of Chief Minister.
Holding that it amounted to usurping the quasi-judicial power of Registrar by the Chief Minister, order was held to the bad.
There is no doubt that the order of the Minister was to be (bad ? )
while the impugned order has been passed by the Chairman.
This, however, would not make any difference.
Once an order is given to the superior authority, the authority subordinate to it will have no option but to comply with it.
This order of the Minister can by no stretch of imagination be considered to be only a succour as submitted by learned counsel for the respondents.
In these circumstances the impugned order dated 17th January, 1989 is bad on account of having been passed by the Chairman, respondent No. 2 as a result of the order of the Food Minister and not of his own in exercise of the quasi-judicial powers.
21.
After the passing of the impugned order Enquiry Officer and Presenting Officer have been appointed by the competent authorities.
As the order of review dated 17th January, 1989 is set aside, the other orders appointing the Enquiry Officer and Presenting Officer would not survive.
22.
In view of my aforesaid discussions and conclusions the writ petition is allowed.
Rule is made absolute.
The impugned order dated 17th January, 1989 is set aside being invalid.
Consequently, orders dated 1721989, appointing respondent No. 7 as Enquiry Officer and Inspector Javed Siraj, respondent No. 9 as Presenting Officer are also set aside.
The order dated 2751986 by Zonal Manager (North) exonerating the petitioner of the charge remains operative.
The petitioner shall be entitled to costs from respondent No. 1 which I quantify as Rs. 2000/-.
Petition allowed.