GR Majithia, J - This regular second appeal is directed against the judgment and decree of the first appellate Court affirming on appeal those of the trial Judge, whereby the suit of the plaintiff-respondent for declaration that the order dated September 9, 1980, passed by the Senior Superintendent of Police, Hisar, dismissing him from service was illegal, was decreed.
2.
The facts -  The plaintiff-respondent (hereinafter the plaintiff) joined the police force as a Constable and in due course was promoted as a Head Constable; that on February 9, 1980, he was posted for VIP duty by ASI Parra Ram and on his refusal to do so, he was charge-sheeted and dealt with departmentally; that in the departmental enquiry conducted by Zile Singh, District Inspector, of Police, he was found guilty and the charge levelled against him was held to be proved and that he was dismissed from service by the Senior Superintendent of Police, Hisar vide order dated September 9, 1980 and that the said order was affirmed on appeal by the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Hisar and on revision by the Inspector General of Police, Haryana.
The order of dismissal was challenged on the ground that the procedure laid down in Rule 1624 of Punjab Police Rules, 1934 (for short, the Rules) was not followed.
3.
The trial Judge found that the order of dismissal from service was based upon defective enquiry and the provisions of Rule 162(i) of the Rules were not complied with.
Resultantly, the suit of the plaintiff was decreed and the order of dismissal from service was set aside.
4.
The first appellate Court, on appeal, upheld the judgment and decree of the trial Judge, holding that in the enquiry the evidence of the witnesses was recorded without oath and the evidence so recorded could not be termed as legal evidence.
It further found that the order of dismissal from service dated September 9, 1980 Ex. P-1 was not in conformity with the provisions of Rule 162(i) of the Rules.
Rule 162(i) of the Rules reads thus :  "Dismissal shall be awarded only for the gravest acts of misconduct, or as the cumulative effect of continued misconduct proving incorrigibility and complete unfitness for police service.
In making such an award regard shall be had to the length of service of the offender and his claim to pension."
The impugned order does not indicate that the punishing authority examined the claim of the plaintiff for pension having regard to the length of his service.
It is undisputed that the plaintiff had 7-1/2 years service to his credit on the date the order of dismissal was passed.
The rule enjoined upon the disciplinary authority while awarding the punishment of dismissal from service to take into consideration the length of service of the delinquent official and his claim to pension.
The impugned order does not indicate that the disciplinary authority took into consideration the length of service of the plaintiff and his claim to pension.
The order of dismissal being in violation of the statutory rule was rightly held to be invalid, The judgments of the Courts below suffer from no infirmity.
The same are upheld.'
For the reasons stated above, the appeal fails and is dismissed, but with no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.