BC Varma, C.J.
(Oral) - The writ petitioner, who is respondent before us in this appeal, was proceeded against departmentally on certain charges.
An enquiry was conducted and enquiry report was submitted to the Disciplinary Authority which vide order Annexure P-3 dated 9/1041980 while concurring with the finding in the enquiry report, upheld that report and found the writ petitioner guilty of the charges levelled against him.
Ultimately a penalty of removal from service was inflicted on the respondent vide Annexure P-3.
Respondent preferred an appeal against that order.
The Appellate Authority upheld the order Annexure P-3 and dismissed the appeal by its order dated 3091980 (Annexure P- 6).
The relevant text of that order is as follows : "Whereas, the Appellate Authority, after careful examination of the record of the case, enquiry report has come to the conclusion that the appellant has not beer able to substantiate any of the contentions on grounds of his appeal and appellate authority finds no reason to differ or modify the orders passed by the Disciplinary Authority."
Revision was preferred against this order which also met with similar fate vide Annexure P-8 dated 1561991.
The respondent then challenged all these orders before this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 3719 of 1981.
By judgment dated 2211991 that writ petition has been allowed.
All these orders i.e. Annexure P-3, P-6 and P-8 have been quashed solely on the ground that none of them is a speaking order.
The direction therefore is that the matter be now reconsidered by all authorities which may proceed to pass a reasoned and speaking order.
The Letters Patent Appeal has been filed against that judgment.
We have those three orders.
So far as order Annexure P-3 by the Disciplinary Authority is concerned, we see that the Disciplinary Authority has concurred with the finding recorded by the Enquiry Officer in his enquiry report.
From the perusal of that Order, it is clear that the Disciplinary Authority went through the enquiry report and has concurred with each and every finding of the Enquiry Officer.
That appears to be the precise reason why the facts in detail have not been mentioned in that order.
In our opinion, it cannot be said that the Disciplinary Authority did not apply its mind to the record before it proceeded to pass order Annexure P-3.
2.
What is true of Annexure P-3 is not true of Annexure P-6, i.e. the order passed by the Appellate Authority.
The text of that order we have quoted above it is manifest that the Appellate Authority never cared even to look into the record of the case much less the enquiry report and the order passed by the Disciplinary Authority.
Not a word has been recorded in that regard in the order Annexure P-6.
All that it stated therein is that the appellant (respondent herein) has not been able to substantiate any of the contentions raised in the grounds of his appeal.
That hardly can be said to be a finding on the issues raised.
That order certainly cannot be upheld.
Consequently, the order in revision i.e. Annexure P-8, cannot be maintained.
The result is that the appeal succeeds to this extent that we maintain setting aside of Annexure P-6 and P 8 but not the order Annexure P-3 which shall stand.
We direct the Appellate Authority to reconsider the appeal.
While so doing it shall afford full opportunity of hearing to the respondent and then return findings separately on all the issues raised before it by the respondent.
It shall then proceed to pass a reasoned and speaking order.
Since the matter has already suffered a long delay, we direct that the Appellate Authority shall proceed expeditiously with the appeal and shall pass final order in the matter within three months from the date of receipt of order from this Court.
There shall be no costs either of the writ petition or of this appeal.