VK Bali, J - The claim of the petitioner is to quash the decision of the respondent-authorities by which his name has not been placed on the approved list of Assistant/Commandants for appointment to the rank of Second-in-Command, as also to issue a direction commanding the respondents to place his name on the approved list of candidates for appointment as Second-in-Command in order of seniority, i.e. below Sh. RS Virk and above Sh. Thomas Kurian.
The relief claimed by the petitioner flows from the following facts :-  2.
The petitioner was selected as Deputy Superintendent of Police in the Central Reserve Police Force while he was a student of final year of Master of Arts (English).
After his selection he joined his duty with effect from 1st December, 1971.
He has to his credit a brilliant academic record inasmuch as he stood third in the DAV College, Chandigarh, in Graduation by securing 68% marks in History, which is stated to be a record till then.
He was an outstanding Table Tennis player and represented the Haryana State and Panjab University in the national games.
He was decorated with the State awards and University and college colours.
In his service career too the petitioner maintained ascending career graph.
He was promoted to the rank of Assistant Commandant in the year 1983 by superseding ten officers.
He did suffer a setback in his career when by virtue of decision rendered by Hon'ble Supreme Court of India, some Short Service Commissioned Officers released from the Army who had been absorbed in the CRPF were given seniority of their Army service by virtue of which they became en bloc senior to the batch of the petitioner.
The officers, who were released from the Army, were adjusted against the vacancies ahead of the batch of the petitioner, whereas the petitioner along with others was put through a review by a departmental promotion committee.
In the process, some of the officers, appearing at Sr. Nos. 422 and 423 of the gradation list, were included in the approved list of officers for appointment to the post of Second in Command.
3.
The conditions of service in the CRPF are governed by CRPF Act of 1949 and the rules made thereunder in the year 1955.
In pursuance of the powers conferred on the Central Government under Section 18 of the CRPF Act, Central Reserve Police Force Rules, 1955, were framed.
The composition of the posts and various ranks in the hierarchy are given in rule 5, relevant part of which runs thus :  "5.
Composition of the Force -  A - Battalion other than Signals Battalion.
(1) The Force shall be constituted as follows :  (a) Superior officers : Commandant Assistant Commandant (Second-in-Command) Assistant Commandant (Adjutant) Quarter Master Company Officers, One each for each Battalion, : One per service Company Plus one leave and training reserve for each Battalion.
(b) x x x x x (c) x x x x x 4.
Appointment and promotion to the post of Commandant is governed by rule 105 of the aforesaid Rules, relevant portion of which is as below :  105 : APPOINTMENT AND PROMOTION OF SUPERIOR OFFICERS :  (1) The post of Commandant of a Bn.
other than Signal Battalion or Principal, CTC, shall be filled -  i) by transfer on deputation from the rank of Lt.
Colonel from the Army or Indian Police Service (Senior Scale) Officers of State Police Officers holding posts of Supt.
of Police or equivalent posts, preferably with experience of Armed Police duties; or ii) by re-employment of retired or released Army Officers or Indian Police Service (Senior Scale) Officers or State Police Officers holding posts of Supt.
of Police or equivalent posts, preferably with experience of Armed Police duties or Commandants of the Central Reserve Police; or iii) by promotion from amongst Assistant Commandant (Second-in- Command/Adjutant/Junior Staff Officers/Vice Principal Central Training College) who have either served in the Force for a minimum period of two years or are otherwise eligible to be posted as Commandant under clause (i) ; or iv) in cases not falling under clause (iii), by promotion from amongst the locally promoted and substantive Assistant Commandants (Second-in-Command/Adjutant/Junior Staff Officer/Vice Principal Central Training College).
(2) to (5) x x x x  x x x x  5.
The Commandant and Assistant Commandant used to be in the same scale, i.e. 1200-1700, and the only difference between the aforesaid posts was that whereas the Commandant was authorised Rs. 100/- as special pay coupled with compensatory allowance, the Assistant Commandant was restricted with compensatory allowance only which too was less as compared to the Commandant.
Fourth Pay Commission revised the pay-scales of the Commandant and the Assistant Commandant, but the pay-scale for the latter was fixed in a lower scale.
However, the pay-scale for the Commandants and those Assistant Commandants working as Second-in-Command was to be the same.
The Assistant Commandant was, thus, placed in the scale of 3,000-4,000, whereas the Commandant and the Assistant Commandant (Second-in-Command) were given the grade of 4,100-5,300.
6.
It is maintained by the petitioner that even though Second-in-Command is neither a rank nor a promotional post as per rule 105 of the said Rules, yet the respondents started treating the same as a promotional post and, therefore, started considering the Assistant Commandants by the departmental promotion committee for appointment to the post of Second-in-Command.
It is averred that the first meeting of the departmental promotion committee in that behalf was held in the year 1987 and 57 Assistant Commandants were approved for appointment as Second-in-Command.
Yet in another meeting of the departmental promotion committee, 46 Assistant Commandants were approved for appointment as Second-in-Command, and officers junior to the petitioner were preferred.
The case of the petitioner is that even though he was senior and had an excellent service record, he was wrongly ignored to be brought on the select list.
With a view to substantiate that the petitioner had an excellent record, it has been pleaded that in the rank of Assistant Commandant, the petitioner was one of the eight Assistant Commandants from amongst 100 officers selected from Punjab-based battalions for attachment with Punjab Police during "Ghalughara Week" to work as SP (Operations).
It is further pleaded that the work of the petitioner as SP (Operation), Hoshiarpur, during the said period received personal appreciation from Sh. KPS Gill, Director General of Police, Punjab, then IG Police (Operations), Punjab.
It is further pleaded that since June/July, 1987, the petitioner has not only been holding charge of two or three Assistant Commandants, but is also functioning and performing the duties of Second-in-Command for considerable lengths intermittently and on one occasion from October, 1987 to November, 1988.
The work and conduct of the petitioner was appreciated vide letter dated 24th April, 1985, by Sh. JP Virdi, then S.S.P., Gurdaspur.
Further, the petitioner received appreciation from Shiv Mohan Singh, IG Police, vide DO Letter dated 8th March, 1986.
There is a mention of various other letters of appreciation as well, received by the petitioner.
It is further pleaded that in the years 1988 and 1989, the name of the petitioner was recommended for meritorious service.
In fact, the case of the petitioner is that continuously for three years, i.e. 1988, 1989 and 1990, his name was recommended for Police awards.
Even though such was the record of the petitioner, he was ignored from being brought on the select list on account of instructions, which came into being in the year 1989 which, in turn, required at least four "Very Good" reports out of the last five.
The policy or the instructions, as the case may be to bring the name of an officer on the select list to be approved by the departmental promotion committee came into being vide letter dated 10th March, 1989, and prior to that it was only the seniority and overall good record that conferred the right of promotion.
Perusal of relevant para of 231 of letter dated 10th March, 1989, would reflect the requirements for coming on the select list and the same are reproduced as under :  "(i) x x x x x (ii) In respect of all posts which are in the level of Rs. 3700-5000 and above, the bench mark grade should be 'Very Good'.
However, officers who are graded as 'Outstanding' would rank en bloc senior to those who are graded as 'Very Good' and placed in the select panel accordingly upto the number of -vacancies, officers with same grading maintaining their inter se seniority in the feeder post.
(iii) x x x x x (iv) x x x x x 7.
From resume of the facts, given above, it would, thus, transpire that whereas earlier Assistant Commandant and Second-in-Commandant or Assistant Commandant (Adjutant) was the same post although with some difference of special pay and the promotion from the said post to the post of Commandant was on the basis of seniority alone, as per changed criteria brought about vide Annexure R-1, dated October 29, 1987, an independent post known as Second-in-Command came into existence.
From Assistant Commandant the next promotional post was to be Second-in-Commandant and then from the post of Second-in- Command, a person could be promoted to the post of Commandant.
Vide Annexure R-1 the conditions of eligibility for promotion also came into being.
To be promoted to the post of Second-in-Command, an Assistant Commandant had to have a total period of 12 years Group-A service.
Also, vide letter dated March 10, 1989, the system of having bench mark grading was also introduced w.e.f.
April 1, 1989.
As indicated above in para 231(ii), one had to obtain the bench mark known as "Very Good".
During the pendency of the petition, Civil Misc. No. 7179 of 1991 was also filed by the petitioner, reply to which was invited from the respondents and which was actually filed.
The averments made in the aforesaid Civil Miscellaneous reveal that the Departmental Promotion Committee, which was to be constituted for considering the case of promotion, had power to modulate the reports, as made out from para 2.2.1(e) of the instructions dated March 10, 1989, and inasmuch as name of the petitioner was recommended for award of the Police medals in the years 1988, 1989 and 1990, the Departmental Promotion Committee was required to modulate the reports of the petitioner to "Very Good" or "Outstanding", particularly in view of the fact that earlier the process of recording bench mark as "Very Good" or "Outstanding" was not in vogue and was introduced for the first time in 1989.
It has further been pleaded that the Departmental Promotion Committee constituted in 1991 did modulate reports of others to bring them within the periphery of promotional criteria and while doing so did promote one Assistant Commandant SP Mehra, who had an adverse remark, communicated to him, and who did not fulfil the bench mark criteria.
Similarly, the officers, namely, B.D.S.
Chauhan and S.S.L.
Sharma were promoted and they also did not fulfil the bench mark criteria of "Very Good".
It has also been made out from the application aforesaid that one RS Virk also did not fulfil the criteria of "Very Good" bench mark and was promoted to the next higher post of Second-in-Command by superseding the petitioner.
In reply to averments that have been referred to above, no specific denial has been made.
All that is stated is that the Government had the right to decide the level of competence required in the officers to be promoted at all levels and that case of the petitioner and other officers, who were in the zone of consideration for promotion to the post of Second-in-Command were considered by the Departmental Promotion Committee from time to time based on the overall remarks in the Annual Confidential Reports of the officer and by keeping in view the Govt. of India instructions governing the promotion of the officers at the level of Rs. 3700-5000 prevailing at the relevant time.
8.
Mr. Randhawa, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner, firstly contends that the promotion and other conditions, pertaining to service of the petitioner, were governed by the Rules of 1955 and if at all there was to be a change in the criteria of promotion from the one that was specified in Rules of 1955, the same could not be done without amending the Rules.
Annexure R-1, by which post of Second-in-Command was created to be a promotional post from that of Assistant Commandant, could be created only by amendment of the Rules.
Likewise, the instructions that came into being in 1989, could not par take the character of the Rules, particularly when the respondents themselves while issuing the order Annexure R-1 said that necessary action in amending the Rules should be taken.
In alternative, Mr. Randhawa contends that if others equally situate had been promoted even though they did not fulfil the criteria as spelt out from the instructions of 1989, no exception could be made in the case of the petitioner to strictly adhere to the changed criteria of promotion, particularly when the service record of the petitioner was absolutely brilliant and there was powers with the respondents to modulate the remarks.
He also contends that in the facts and circumstances of the present case, the bench mark in the case of the petitioner ought to have been modulated, particularly when the reporting officers prior to the instructions of 1989 did not know that in future different remarks shall have to be contained in the confidential reports.
9.
Mr. AS Tewatia, however, contests the pleas raised by Mr. Randhawa, but only contends that the authorities were well within their rights to promote those, who had a better overall service record than that of the petitioner.
The Departmental Promotion Committee, which was constituted for the purpose of making promotion, had discretion to ignore a senior if his record was not that brilliant as compared to his junior even though the senior was also within the criteria fixed for promotion.
10.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the considered view that the cause of the petitioner is meritorious and, therefore, this petition must succeed.
It shall not be appropriate at this stage to go into the question of validity of the instructions (Annexure R-1) and the criteria of promotion spelt out from the instructions of the year 1989 for varieties of reasons, inclusive of that if in case such instructions are to be invalidated, interest of a number of persons would be adversely affected, who are not before this Court.
However, on the second contention of Mr. Randhawa this petition deserves to succeed.
As has been indicated above there is absolutely no specific denial with regard to the averments made by the petitioner in Civil Misc. No. 7179 of 1991 that the Departmental Promotion Committee had unfettered discretion to modulate the remarks and that in fact and reality some of those who came to be promoted to the post of Second-in-Command either prior to the petitioner or at the time when the petitioner was superseded or even thereafter did not answer the requisite promotional criteria, spelt out from the instructions issued in the year 1989.
The contention of Mr. AS Tewatia that as per instructions Annexure R-1 as also of 1989, it was in the absolute discretion of the Departmental Promotion Committee to ignore a senior even though he was within the zone of promotion, cannot be accepted for nothing like that is available from reading of the Annexure R-1 and instructions of 1989.
Also, it has not been shown even on facts that those, who were actually promoted by superseding the petitioner, had a better service record.
It is an admitted position between the parties that on account of even newly laid down criteria of promotion, the petitioner has since been promoted to the post of Second-in-Command during the pendency of this petition.
The limited relief that survives is for promoting the petitioner from the date, junior to him was promoted.
The respondents couId not possibly relax the promotional criteria with regard to others and in particular those, who were considered along with the petitioner for promotion and yet adopt different yardstick for the petitioner.
The action of the respondents in promoting others by relaxing the criteria or by modulating the bench mark in the case of one and without any differential criteria not doing the same for the petitioner amounts to discrimination and is violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
11.
For the reasons recorded above, this petition succeeds.
A direction shall be issued to the respondents to bring the name of the petitioner in the approved list of Assistant Commandants for appointment to the rank of Second- in-Command from a date, when person immediately junior to him was so promoted.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to all consequential reliefs that may accrue to him because of this judgment.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.