Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - The petitioners in the present writ petition have assailed the promotion of Respondents No. 2 and 4 made by the Government vide order dated 12101988 (Annexure P-1) to the writ petition) to the post of Assistant Town Planners.
They have assailed the 20% quota earmarked for promotion from amongst employees working in the department who possess Post Graduate Degree/Diploma in City and Regional Planning (MCRP) or equivalent.
They have also claimed promotion with effect from the dates Respondents 3 and 4 have been promoted as such.
2.
The case of the petitioners is that they are serving in the Respondent-department for the last so many years and are eligible for promotion to the post of Assistant Town Planner and that in 1972 Rules known as Punjab Town and Planning (State Services) Class-I, Rules, 1972, 80% of the posts were to be filled in through direct quota and 20% from promotees.
However, the department has proposed the amendment of Recruitment Rules whereby the quota of promotees has been increased to 30% and out of 80% quota meant for direct recruitment 20% has been earmarked for Departmental employees possessing MCRP qualification and the case of the petitioners is that the Respondent Nos. 3 and 4 are junior to them who have been promoted earlier to the petitioners, thus infringing their rights to seek promotion and that there cannot be preferential treatment to the Respondent Nos. 3 and 4 on the basis of MCRP qualification, in view of the decision, of the Supreme Court in Punjab State Electricity Board, Patiala v. Ravinder Kumar Sharma and others, AIR 1987 Supreme Court 367.
3.
The official and private respondents hotly contested the claim of the petitioners.
They have taken the stand that the petitioners belong to different cadres who are borne on separate seniority list and that the post of Assistant Town Planner has been taken out from the purview of 1972 Class-I Rules vide Notification dated 30101984 and the new Rules known as Punjab Town and Country Planners (State Service Class-II Technical) Rules, 1988 are likely to be finalised which have been approved by the Public Service Commission.
4.
It is also the stand of the Respondents that no prejudice has been caused to the petitioners whose quota has been increased.
Rather the quota of direct recruits has been decreased, hence petitioners cannot have any grievance in the matter.
Moreso, the petitioner No. 1 has already been promoted as Assistant Town Planner under the amended Draft Rules.
5.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and perused the paper book.
I have reached the conclusion that the writ petition is devoid of any merit and deserves to be dismissed.
6.
Admittedly under 1972 Rules, quota of direct recruits was 80% and for promotees it was 20% for the post of Assistant Town Planners.
However, the post of Assistant Town Planners has been taken out from the purview of 1972 Class-I Rules vide Notification dated 30101984 (copy Annexure R-1) and now the Draft Rules have been framed vide which the said post of Assistant Town Planner has been designated as Class-II post under the Draft Rules of 1988.
In the Draft Rules, the quota of direct recruits has been reduced from 80% to 50% whereby separate quota for appointment by promotion has been earmarked to the extent of 20% in respect of employees of the department who possess qualification of Post Graduate Degree/Diploma in City & Regional Planning (MCRP) or equivalent, making eligible for Associate Membership of the Institute of Town Planners (India) and no prejudice has been caused to the general line of promotion in whose case quota has also been increased by 10% i.e. it was increased from 20% to 30% and one of the petitioners, i.e. petitioner No. 1 has already got the benefit of the Draft Amended Rules.
Under the circumstances no prejudice has been caused to the category of promotees.
If the Department has given promotion avenue to the deserving candidates who acquire special qualification of MCRP without infringing the rights of the promotees, they cannot have any grievance in the matter.
7.
The facts of Ravinder Kumar's case (supra) relied upon by the petitioners are distinguishable as in that case sub-classification was made in one line by prescribing separate quota in the same cadre on the basis of Diploma, thus reducing the chances of promotion on the basis of seniority, that too through the executive instructions, whereas in the instant case the proposed amendment is beneficial to all the employees of the department irrespective of their seniority in one line.
Whosoever is eligible, he can avail of the same.
No cut has been imposed on the quota of the petitioners which rather has been increased.
For the aforementioned reasons, the writ petition is devoid of any merit and the same is dismissed as such.
There will, however, be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.