RS Mongia, J - Petitioner joined the respondent-Thapar Institute of Engineering and Technology, Patiala which is a deemed University u/s 3 of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956 for Master of Engineering Course (in short ME) in the session 1989-90.
The duration of the course is 1-1/2 years.
The course is further divided into two semesters of 6 months each and thereafter 6 months for seminar and thesis.
Every candidate under the Regulations of the deemed University has to offer 10 papers (exclusive of seminars/design projects) out of the list of subjects approved by the respondents Institute, provided that no candidate is to be allowed to study more than 5 papers in each semester.
Regulation 13 lays down the minimum requirement to pass the ME examination which is in the following terms :-  13. a) i) D or better grade in each paper/seminar design project;  ii) Cumulative Grade Point Average (CGPA) of 55 for the entire degree.
Letter grades and CGPA are defined in Clauses 14 and 16.  b) The candidate will be eligible to sit in examination for a paper only after having shown a `satisfactory' performance in the sessional in that paper.
The teacher concerned will intimate to the Head of the Department the names of the candidates whose performance is not satisfactory.
Letter grade is awarded to the candidate which indicates the level of performance in the course and has a grade point for purpose of computing the Cumulative Grade Point Average (CGPA) as given below :-  Letter Grade Performance Grade Point A Excellent 10 B Good 8 C Fair 6 D Poor 4 E Fail 2 In the first semester the petitioner had got the following Credits, Grades and Points :-  Subjects Credits Letter Grade Grade Point Solid Mechanics 4 D 4 Foundation Design 4 B 8 Theory and Design of Shells 4 C 6 Industrial Structures 4 D 4 Water Pertaining Structures 4 B 8 (Notes : These Credits mentioned are the lectures per week)  2.
The CGPA is found out by multiplying the Grade point with the credits in each subject and the sum total of all subjects is divided by total number of credits in all subjects.
In this case the petitioner secured CGPA of 600.
On the same formula in the second semester, including seminar, the petitioner got CGPA of 466 and consequently the combined CGPA of the first and second semesters, including seminar, came to 527 Petitioner was declared fail inasmuch as he failed to attain CGPA of 55 for the entire Course as required by Regulation 13(a)(ii) quoted above.
3.
The petitioner filed the present writ petition with a plea that the respondent should allow him to improve his CGPA so that he can be declared pass.
The Motion Bench while issuing notice of motion on 1531991 directed the respondent to register/admit the petitioner at his own risk subject to the result of the petitioner.
Ultimately the writ petition was admitted on 841991.
In pursuance of the interim order of the Motion Bench, the petitioner did appear in two papers in order to improve his CGPA.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that a candidate who gets a Grade lower than D i.e. E in a paper or papers is declared fail in that paper(s) because of Regulation 13(a)(i) and one who falls under Regulation 13(a)(ii) quoted above.
However, such a candidate under Regulation 7 of the Regulations is allowed to reappear in that paper(s) subject to his undergoing the Course afresh in that paper or papers as the case may be.
According to the learned counsel whether a candidate fails in one paper or more papers is declared fail under Regulation 13(a)(i) and another candidate who though passes in individual papers under Regulation 13(a)(i) by obtaining letter Grade D or above but is unable to make the CGP of 55 as required under Regulation 13(a)(i) is also declared fail.
The argument proceeded that there should not be any difference between these two types of failed candidates i.e. one who fails under Regulation 13(a)(i) and one who fails under Regulation 13(a)(1) because both are failing though for different reasons.
A candidate who fails in a paper or papers under Regulation 13(a)(i), according to the learned counsel, could not be kept at a higher pedestal than the candidate who though had passed in all the papers but only failed to made CGPA of 55.
If a candidate who fails in a paper or papers under Regulation 13(a)(i) is given a chance to appear in that paper or papers only [of course by undergoing the Course afresh in those paper(s)] there is no reason to deny the same benefit to a candidate who has failed because of the reason that he was unable to obtain CGPA of 55 under Regulation 13(a)(i).
According to the learned counsel, at the most the petitioner could be treated to have failed in a paper or papers and allow to re-appear in that paper to improve CGPA as required under Regulation 13(a)(ii).
5.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the Respondent submits that there is no specific regulation for allowing a candidate to be given a chance to re-appear in a paper or papers to improve the CGPA who has failed because of reason of Regulation 13(a)(ii).
6.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that Regulation 7 has to be read down in a manner that for whatever reason a candidate may fail, has to be given further chance(s) either to pass in a paper or to improve his CGPA.
Of course the outside limit either for passing a paper or for improving the CGPA would be three years from the start of the Course as envisaged by Clause 11(a) of the Regulations.
This interpretation by reading down Regulation 7 would also be in consonance with Article 14 of the Constitution inasmuch as a candidate who has failed because of the reason that he has not been able to make the grade of 55 but has passed in all the papers otherwise by getting letter grade `D' or above in each paper is not at a disadvantageous position than the person who has not been able to pass in a paper under Regulation 13(a)(i).
I may make it clear that once a candidate has made grade which is 55 or above as envisaged by 13(a)(ii), he cannot be allowed to further improve his grade inasmuch as he would not be a failed candidate.
7.
For the foregoing reasons this writ petition is allowed and the Respondent is directed to allow the petitioner to sit in a paper/papers to improve his CGPA so that to make a grade as required under Regulation 13(a)(ii).
Since the petitioner has already taken examination in pursuance of the interim order of this Court, respondent is directed to declare the result and if the petitioner is making a grade of 55 as required under Regulation 13(a)(ii), he may be declared pass.
8.
Before parting with the judgment, I may observe that it would be in the fitness of things if the Respondents take up necessary steps in clarifying the Regulations so that there is no confusion with the students who might be taking the examination in future.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.