HS Bedi, J - The petitioner passed his B.Sc.
Examination from the Kurukshetra University in April, 1987 and Diploma in Computer Application in August, 1988.
He thereafter joined the two years M.C.A.
Degree Course in the Department of Computer Applications, Kurukshetra University, and completed 3 semesters securing 70%, 62% and 60% marks in the 1st, 2nd and 3rd semester examinations respectively.
The 4th semester which the petitioner thereafter joined included project work and a viva-voce test.
It appears that the relations between the petitioner and Dr. PK Suri, who was the Chairman of the Department, were somewhat strained, and a result thereof, the petitioner on 14th January, 1991, addressed a letter to the Vice-Chancellor, which has been appended as Annexure P-2 to the petition, in which he expressed an apprehension that as Dr. Suri harboured a deep prejudice against him, he would cause his harm in the viva-voce test.
The viva-voce examination of the petitioner was thereafter held on 27th January, 1991, and the petitioner who was waiting for the declaration of his result was instead served with a letter dated 27th February, 1991, Annexure P-3 to the petition, whereby he was informed that his result had been withheld pending enquiry into the complaint made by the petitioner vide Annexure P-2.
The petitioner has impugned Annexure P-3 before me.
It has been averred that the Vice Chancellor thereafter set up a committee to go into the allegation made by the petitioner and accordingly directed to appear before that committee to substantiate the charges.
On the 20th March, 1991, the petitioner wrote a letter to the Vice-Chancellor informing him that he was no more interested in perusing the matter and, as such, it should be dropped.
The request of the petitioner was not acceded to and an enquiry was duly held and completed.
The report of the committee has been appended with the reply of the University as Annexure R-11 and the final recommendation was as given below :-  "In the considered opinion of the Committee it has been proved beyond doubt that the complaint lodged by Shri Amitabh Gupta, ex-student of MCA (1988-90) against Dr. PK Suri, Chairman, Department of Computer Applications is baseless, false and tendentious.
As such, the complaint be rejected.
The complainant has caused much harm, harassment and mental torture to Dr. PK Suri.
He must be given deterrent punishment for the mischief he has done."
2.
The action of the respondent-University in not declaring the result of the petitioner has been challenged, inter alia, on the ground that the Vice-Chancellor had no authority to withhold the result and that in any case, the petitioner having expressed his regret for what he had done, required to be forgiven so that his brilliant academic career was not marred.
3.
A reply has been fled on behalf of the respondents in which it has been stated that the writ petition was premature inasmuch as that the final decision with regard to the fate of the petitioner was to be taken by the academic counsel/executive council and only a show-cause notice Annexure P-8 has been issued to him as to why matter should not be referred to that body.
It has also been averred that the committee constituted by the Vice-Chancellor found on facts that the petitioner had made serious and false allegations against Dr. Suri and was a habitual complaintant.
On the question of jurisdiction, support has been sought from Statute 29 of the Kurukshetra University Calendar Volume-I 1989.
The respondents have also put Annexure R-14 which is a note dated 7121991 recorded by the Vice-Chancellor in which an additional stand has been taken that the action was justified in terms of Clause 41 of the Central Rules for Examination of the Kurukshetra University Vol.II 1991.
4.
After hearing counsel for the parties, I find merit in the petition.
As would be apparent the basic question raised in the writ petition would turn on the interpretation that is to be put on the provisions relied on the respondents for justifying their action.
Statute 29 and Clause 41 of General Rules for Examination are reproduced hereunder :  "Statute 29 - A degree, diploma certificate or other academic distinctions may be withdrawn by the University -  (a) if the candidature of the person concerned has been cancelled or result quashed in accordance with the manner laid down by the ordinance; or (b) If the candidate has misbehaved at a convocation of the University, provided that the question whether a person has misbehaved in terms of this Statute shall be finally decided by the Vice-Chancellor; or (6) When sufficient evidence is laid before the Academic Council showing that any person on whom a degree or diploma etc. was conferred by the University has been convicted of what is in their opinion a serious offence, the Academic Council may recommend to the Executive Council that such a degree or Diploma be cancelled."
"41 If a candidate after admission to an examination -  (a) commits an immoral act; OR (b) is discovered to have committed an immoral act which in the opinion of the Academic Council is such that had it come to their knowledge in time, they would have excluded him from the examination.
The Academic Council may (i) cancel his candidature for that examination and order that his result be not declared; and/or (ii) disqualify him permanently or for a specified period."
A reading of Statute 29 clearly shows that clauses (a) and (b) are not at all applicable to the facts of the present case and Mr. Batra, learned counsel for the University, has sought to bring the case within clause (c).
It will be seen from a reading thereof, that the sine qua non for the exercise of power under Statute 29(c) is that the person against whom it is to be exercised must have been conferred a degree or a Diploma which is required to be withdrawn, and that the person concerned must stand convicted of what is in the opinion of the academic council a serious offence.
Admittedly, both these requirements are not satisfied in the present case, as the petitioner had neither been conferred a degree for the course in question nor had there been any conviction recorded against him.
Rule 41 also would not cover the case as the said rule would apply only after the person concerned has been admitted to an examination and has thereafter committed an immoral act.
The petitioner had not so far been admitted to an examination and I am of the view that a complaint of the kind that had been made by the petitioner though highly objectionable and undesirable, did not fall in the category of an immoral act.
The word "immoral" had been described in the Chambers Dictionary as "inconsistent with or disregardful of morality."
The allegations in the complaint do not offend the principles of morality.
In view of what has been held above, I am of the view that the action taken by the Vice-Chancellor is not authorised by the rules.
5.
I am told by the counsel for the respondents that as a matter of fact the result of the petitioner that had been withheld vide Annexure P-3 has since been declared under the orders of this Court and on being declared pass the petitioner has in fact completed the course in question.
For this additional reason also, I am of the view that interference in this petition is called for.
In view of what has been stated above, the other arguments raised by the respondents need not be gone into.
The proceedings against the petitioner being without jurisdiction cannot be allowed to continue.
The writ petition is accordingly allowed and the impugned order Annexure P-3 and the proceedings initiated against the petitioner are quashed.
There will however be no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.