VK Bali, J - The petitioner started his basic training on 12th August, 1981 and after completing the same he was posted to 19 Sikh Unit in the Army as a Sepoy on 4th September, 1982.
He was discharged from service after putting in 6 years, 3 months and 9 days on medical grounds.
2.
The case of the petitioner, as projected in this petition, is that he was discharged from service on the ground that he had become mentally upset, which discharge is on account of disability incurred during his stay in the army and inasmuch as the disability that he suffered is directly attributable to the army service, he is entitled is disability pension under the army rules.
Even though he applied for such pension on 23rd November, 1987, the respondents illegally rejected the same on 12th January, 1988.
He carried an appeal against the orders referred to above as well but the appellate authority dismissed it vide orders dated 25th July, 1989.
3.
The respondents have hotly contested the claim of the petitioner and in the written statement filed by them it is mentioned that the medical history of the petitioner makes it crystal clear that he had two disabilities, i.e., temporal lobe pillory (TLE) and neurosis isolation from the very beginning of his service career in the army which is not connected towards the employability of service.
The fact that the petitioner was suffering from the aforesaid problem even prior to joining the army is stated to have been established by the medical authority while discharging the petitioner from service which was validated by the competent authority.
The petitioner is stated to have suffered third disability when in an attempt to commit suicide he fired a gun shot in his abdomen.
The petitioner is further stated to have remained in the hospital from 2nd October, 1983 to 9th May, 1984; from 14th November, 1984 to 20th November, 1984; from 24th April, 1985 to 29th April, 1985 and deemed to have arisen in service if no note of it again from 29th December, 1985 to 28th February, 1986, as also from 31st July, 1986 to 24th September, 1986.
The case of the petitioner was referred to CCDA (P) Allahabad which in turn, forwarded the same to the Record Office where it was rejected.
However, a sum of Rs. 11,760/- on account of invalid gratuity was sanctioned by the CDA (P) Allahabad which was paid to the petitioner.
The case of the respondents, thus, is that inasmuch as the disability suffered by the petitioner was not attributable to military service nor was it aggravated on account of military service, he was not entitled to any disability person whatsoever.
4.
Mr. Arun Chandra, learned counsel for the petitioner, vehemently contends that inasmuch as no note was made at the time of petitioner's acceptance for military service that he was suffering from a disease like the one on account of which he had been discharged from service, the matter being covered under regulation 173 of the Pension Regulations for the Army, 1961 (Part 1), the disability pension cannot possibly be denied to the petitioner.
The learned counsel relies upon judgment rendered in CWP 10956/90 (EX. Hav.
Sinder Pal Singh v. Union of India) decided by JL Gupta, J, on 10th July, 1991.
In order to appreciate the contention of the learned counsel, it will be useful to reproduce regulation 173 and paras 7(a) and (b) of Appendix II of the Pension Regulations for the Army, 1961 (Part I) :-  "173.
Unless otherwise specifically provided, a disability pension may be granted to an individual who is invalidated from service on account of a disability which is attributable to or aggravated by military service and is assessed at 20 per cent or over.
The question whether a disability is attributable to or aggravated by military service shall be determined under the rules in Appendix II."
Appendix II.
"7(a).
Cases in which it is established that conditions of military service did not determine or contribute to the onset of the disease but influenced the subsequent course of the disease, will fall for acceptance on the basis of aggravation.
7(b) A disease which has led to an individual's discharge or death will ordinarily be deemed to have arisen in service if no note of it was made at the time of the individual's acceptance for military service.
However, if medical opinion holds for reasons to be stated that the disease could not have been detected on medical examination prior to acceptance for service the disease will not be deemed to have arisen during service."
5.
A perusal of regulation 173 and Appendix II would show that a disease which has led to an individual discharge or death would ordinarily be deemed to have arisen in service if no note of it was made at the time of individual's acceptance for military service provided the medical opinion holds that such a disease could not have been detected on medical examination prior to acceptance for service.
There is no denying the fact that at the time of initial entry into service, an individual is put to thorough medical examination.
However, the medical test that an individual has to undergo is not enough to detect all kinds of diseases and epilepsy with which the petitioner is stated to be suffering from even prior to joining the army was certainly one which may not have been detected at the time of recruitment of the petitioner in the army.
The only question, thus, which has to be determined is as to whether the respondents have been able to bring sufficient material on record in support of their contention that the petitioner was suffering from epilepsy even prior to joining the army.
On the records of this case, the respondents have produced a summary of opinion of Major CS Sharma, AMC, Psychiatrist, Military Hospital, Danapur Cantt., dated 30th July, 1987, which opinion obviously came into being prior to the discharge of the petitioner from the army.
The opinion clearly records that the petitioner is an old case of temporal lobe epilepsy GSW (abdomen) and neurosis.
Further, while giving the history of illness, it is stated that the petitioner was a symptomatic till March, 1983, when he started getting fainting attacks.
He did not report to the M 1 room for his illness.
On 2nd October, 1983 when he was doing duty in the Quarter Guard he shot himself in the abdomen.
While recovering he showed episodic abnormal behaviour in the form of trembling of whole body, crying spells, fainting attacks and amnesia of these events.
After healing of wound, he was transferred to MH Meerut for psychiatric evaluation.
He was found to be showing similar abnormal behaviour on frequent intervals.
6.
When the petitioner had shot himself in the abdomen, a court of enquiry was held against him.
The respondents have brought record of the aforesaid court of enquiry which reveals that while giving his own statement, the petitioner stated that he was mentally not fit and even earlier at home although once he had suffered the kind of fit that he was getting during his service in the army.
He further admitted that he was under regular treatment at his town with the local priest.
7.
On the material that has been placed on record of this case, it is, thus proved by overwhelming evidence that the ailment from which the petitioner was suffering, i.e., epilepsy, could not have been detected at the time he was recruited in the army.
The mere fact that no note was made at the time of the petitioner's acceptance for military service that he was suffering from a disease like the one on account of which he was discharged from service would, thus, not make any difference.
The medical opinion that has been relied upon by the respondents proves that the petitioner was suffering from epilepsy prior to joining the army.
Besides, the third disability that the petitioner suffered was on account of his attempt to commit suicide when he shot himself in the abdomen.
With regard to this injury as well, the opinion of Major AN Ganga Prasad, AMC Surgical Specialist, Military Hospital, Danapur, shows that at present also, the petitioner is getting occasional pain in the abdomen in the operated scar and, therefore he was considered not fit to be retained in the army.
This injury in any case cannot be attributed to military service or aggravated on account of military service.
The facts of the case, as have been fully reproduced above, would show that after joining the army on 4th September, 1982, the petitioner attended to his duties for a period of about a year whereafter he had by and large remained in the hospital up to 24 September, 1986.
8.
The facts of the present case are, thus, such that the petitioner can neither take support of regulation 173 and Appendix II, nor can be bank upon the ratio of the judgment rendered in CWP 10956/90 (Sinder Pal Singh v. Union of India) (supra).
The discharge of the petitioner from the army was not on account of any disability that might have been on account of military service or aggravated because of military service.
Finding no merit in this petition, I dismiss the same.
The parties are, however, left to bear their own costs.
Appeal dismissed.