SS Sodhi, J - Consequent upon the Punjab State Electricity Board (hereinafter referred to as `the Board') coming into being and the Punjab P.W.D.
(Electricity Branch) ceasing to exist as a Department of Government, permanent absorption in the service of the Board was offered to the former employees of the Punjab Electricity Department with the assurance that their conditions of service would not be altered by the Board their disadvantage.
Has this assurance been violated ?
Herein lies the controversy raised.
2.
We are concerned here with the clerical staff of the erstwhile Electricity Department of the State of Punjab.
The conditions of service of this cadre were governed by the Punjab P.W.D.
(Electricity Branch) Provincial Service Class-III (Subordinate Posts) Rules, 1952 (in abbreviation, "the Rules").
A new rule 3-A came to be incorporated in these rules, in terms of which the clerical cadre was bifurcated into two separate cadres, namely; Secretariat Cadre and the Combined Circle Cadre.
It was also provided therein that the promotion henceforth would be from within the Cadre except to the post of the Superintendent in the Secretariat Cadre, for which the Circle Superintendent of the Combined Circle Cadre and the Head Assistant in the Secretariat Cadre would be eligible for consideration, if they were in the identical pay scale of Rs. 225-330/-.
The two Cadres, namely, the Secretariat Cadre and the Combined Circle Cadre were thus to have separate seniority lists except in the case of the Combined Circle Cadre and the Head Assistant of the Secretarial Cadre.
3.
In June 28, 1956, the Chief Engineer issued a letter (Annexure P-1/A) upgrading the Head Office of the Electricity Branch from Class-B to Class-A while all the subordinate offices of the Chief Engineer, Electricity Branch were classified as Class-C.
It was mentioned therein that as a consequence of the change in the status of the Head Office and the Subordinate Offices, it had become necessary to segregate the staff into the two cadres, namely; the Secretariat Cadre and the Combined Circle Cadre, which were to be entirely two separate cadres.
Options were consequently invited from the Clerical Staff, whether to join the Secretarial Cadre or the Combined Circle Cadre.
4.
Formal offers for permanent appointment by the Board were thereafter made to the members of Clerical Cadre.
One such letter being of November 1, 1962, Annexure P/2.
It was specifically mentioned therein that they would be governed by the regulations applicable to erstwhile permanent government servants of the Electricity Department of the Punjab Government, a copy of which was attached.
The important point to note here is the assurance contained therein, to the effect that they would continue to be governed by these regulations which would not, at any stage, be altered by the Board to their disadvantage.
With this assurance, the options were again invited for being absorbed in the service of the Board.
5.
Later, on the formation of the State of Haryana, the Haryana State Electricity Board was constituted which, by its letter of May 10, 1967 Annexure P/4, held out a similar assurance with regard to the conditions of service of the members of the Clerical Staff, who had accepted their offer to take up service with the Board.
6.
It was several years later that the letter of the Chief Engineer of June 28, 1956, Annexure P-1/A, came to be challenged in this Court in Civil Writ Petition 5220 of 1981.
The grievance being that as a result of this letter, not only was it that the office of the Chief Engineer had been upgraded to an `A' Class Office while the subordinate offices were classified as Class `C' but the Secretariat Cadre had been expanded to provide for greater promotional avenues to the Clerical Staff than those available to the Combined Circle Cadre.
The plea raised in this behalf being that the Haryana State Electricity Board had been treating the Clerical Staff of the Office of the Chief Engineer and other specified offices as part of the Secretariat Cadre, when in fact, they should have been taken to be part of the Combined Circle Cadre.
7.
During the pendency of this writ petition, the Haryana State Electricity Board issued an order on September 7, 1984 to the effect that "the post of Administrative Officers; Superintendents; Deputy Superintendents and all other lower staff in PTPP Panipat Thermal Project, Faridabad, WYC Hydel, Yamunanagar and Workshop Organization, Dhulkote will be manned by Field Cadre Staff (i.e., the Combined Circle Cadre) and that "the above decision will be implemented in stages."
8.
It was thereafter that on October 11, 1989, Civil Writ Petition 5220 of 1991 came up for hearing and was dismissed by the Division Bench of this Court inter alia on the ground of laches, inasmuch as, the segregation of the staff of the two cadres, namely, Secretariat Cadre and the Combined Circle Cadre took place as far back as June 28, 1956 by the letter, Annexure P-1/A when all the staff was invited to give their options as to the cadre to which they wanted to go to and it was therefore too late in the day for them to rake up this issue after a lapse of almost a quarter of a century.
It was also observed that no grievance could be made on the ground of diminution of chances of promotion.
9.
What now provides the petitioners, who belong to the Secretariat Cadre, the occasion to come up in writ proceedings here, is the order of the Haryana State Electricity Board of September 7, 1984 referred to earlier whereby the posts of Administrative Officers; Superintendents; Deputy Superintendents and all other lower staff in the PTPP Panipat Thermal Project, Faridabad; WPC Hydel, Yamunanagar and Workshop Organisation, Dhulkote, were directed to be filled by the Clerical Staff of the Combined Circle Cadre.
The contention raised being that all these posts clearly fell in the Secretariat Cadre and the Board be consequently stopped from transferring them to the Combined Circle Cadre.
Keeping in view the provisions of Rule 3-A and the assurance held out to employees at the time on their absorption in the Board.
It was argued, in this behalf, that Rule 3-A defined the offices which fell in the Secretariat Cadre and those which were to be part of the Combined Circle Cadre, as it was said there that all the Subordinate Office posts would go to the Combined Circle Cadre.
This is indeed a contention which cannot stand scrutiny, as a reference to the relevant rules would show that the term "Subordinate Officers" has not been defined therein.
To overcome this, counsel for the appellant sought to refer to a manual of the Haryana State Electricity Board with a view to suggest that what has been put there under the expression "Subordinate Offices" is to be taken to be the meaning of this expression for the purposes of Rule 3-A too.
There is clearly no warrant for accepting such a course.
No such manual can be looked at for defining this expression as used in the Rule.
10.
Further, it is also well settled that mere chances of promotion do not constitute conditions of service and any diminution thereof, on account of any subsequent events cannot, therefore, be construed as a change in the conditions of service to the detriment of the employees concerned.
In other words, merely because on account of the subsequent administrative changes, the chances of promotion of those either belonging to the Secretariat Cadre or the Combined Circle Cadre are diminished on reduced, it cannot be said that the assurance held out to them to the effect that their conditions of service would not be altered to their disadvantage has, in any manner, been violated.
It is also pertinent to note here that Rule 3-A does not specify which offences were to form part of the Secretariat Cadre and which would be in the Combined Circle Cadre.
This omission was thus well within the domain of the Chief Engineer to fill up by the issuance of executive instructions as contained in his letter of September 7, 1984 Annexure P/6.
11.
It will thus be seen that there is no variation in the conditions of service of the petitioners to their disadvantage.
The judgment of the learned single Judge is consequently hereby upheld and affirmed and this appeal is accordingly dismissed.
There will, however, be no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.