RS Mongia, J (Oral) - Respondent No. 3, Balbir Singh, was employed with the petitioner-society, which is a co-operative society registered under the Punjab Co-operative Societies Act, 1961.
According to the petitioner, the services of the respondent were terminated by the Society on 9.10.1985 and before removing him from service, a notice dated 27th of August, 1985 was issued which was duly replied by him on 9.9.1985.
However, the case of the respondent on the other hand is that in fact he had been removed from service of the Society on 1081985 and it was thereafter that on 27th of August, 1985, a notice was issued to him that he should reply to certain allegations levelled against him in that notice within 15 days of the receipt of the same.
It is further the case of the respondent that no other order was passed after he had sent the reply to the Society.
Respondent No. 3 filed an appeal before the Assistant Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Fazilka under the Model Bye laws of the Co-operative Agricultural Service Societies for setting aside order dated 1081985 removing him from service of which intimation was sent vide notice dated 27th of August, 1985.
An application for condonation of delay in filing the appeal was also preferred before the said Assistant Registrar, Co-operative Societies.
2.
The Assistant Registrar Co-operative Societies after hearing both sides accepted the appeal of respondent No. 3 vide order dated 1171986 (copy Annexure P-3).
The penultimate para of the order reads as under :  "After hearing both the parties, I have come to the conclusion that no notice was given to the appellant before removing him from the service of the Society, nor he has been heard for filing a reply.
It has been stated in the notice, dated 1081985, that he had already been removed.
Therefore, I set aside the order dated 1081985, vide which the appellant was removed and reinstated him after accepting his appeal because be had been removed without giving any notice.
The appellant will be entitled to back wages also.
Pronounced in the open Court."
Aggrieved by the said order, the Society filed a revision petition under Section 69 of the Punjab Cooperative Societies Act, 1961 (hereinafter called 'the Act') before the State Government but the same was dismissed as not maintainable vide order dated 27th April, 1988 (copy Annexure P-5).
This led the Society to file the present writ petition.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the Commissioner (Appeals), Jalandhar Division, Jalandhar, went wrong in dismissing the petitioner as not maintainable as according to him there is no bar to entertainment of revision under Section 69 of the Act.
According to him, even if an order becomes final under the Bye-laws a revision would still be maintainable under Section 69 of the Act.
4.
I am afraid I cannot agree with the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
Under Section 69 of the Act, a revision is maintainable at the instance of a party to a reference who might have referred the matter for arbitration under Section 55 of the Act.
Admittedly in the present case, no reference was made under Section 55 of the Act and in fact reference under Section 55 is not maintainable so far as service matters are concerned.
A Division Bench of this Court had an occasion to consider Rule 36 of the Punjab Cooperative Societies Service Rules which empowered the Registrar to interfere in appeal against the order of punishment imposed by the Managing Committee.
It was held that such a provision was ultra vires of the Act and no revision was held to be maintainable under section 69 of the Act.
This being the position in law, I do not find any infirmity in the order of the Commissioner (Appeals), Jalandhar Division (Annexure P-5) by which it was held that the revision was not maintainable.
For the foregoing reasons, I find no merit in this writ petition which is dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.