VK Bali, J - The Punjab State Electronics Development and Production Corporation Ltd., defendant No. 1 (hereinafter to be referred as petitioner) is in revision against the order dated 19th August, 1991, passed by the Additional District Judge, Chandigarh, vide which the plaintiffs (hereinafter be referred as respondents) were granted injunction restraining the petitioner from terminating their services till final decision of their suit.
The aforesaid order was passed by the Additional District Judge by setting aside the order of the Trial Court dated 9th February, 1991, vide which the application filed by the respondents under Order 39, Rules 1 and 2 read with Section 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure during the pendency of the suit, was dismissed.
2.
It is an admitted position that the respondents were initially appointed by the Punjab State Bio-Medical Equipment Ltd which is a subsidiary company of the petitioner.
All the respondents came into employment of the Punjab State Bio-Medical Equipment Ltd from 1977 onwards.
It is also not denied that the petitioner company did consider to absorb the employees of the Punjab State Bio-Medical Equipment Ltd and in pursuance of the said consideration, the employees transferred to it were directed to sign undertaking duly attested by a Magistrate, Ist Class.
This undertaking was to be given by 13th February, 1988.
This is also not disputed that all the respondents did file the undertaking, para 5 of which runs thus :-  "That I fully understood that upon my joining I shall be a fresh appointee in the said Corporation and shall not agitate for any previous seniority in the PBEL and that my seniority in the Corporation shall be fixed in the manner and as per norms laid down for the governance of such seniority in corporation By-Laws."
It is also not disputed that when the suit was instituted in the trial Court, respondents were actually working with the petitioners.
3.
On the aforesaid admitted facts, the respondents certainly have a prima facie case and balance of convenience is also in their favour.
If injunction would have not been granted to them, they would have suffered irreparable loss and injury.
The order passed by the Additional District Judge could not be faulted on any ground whatsoever, but for a clerical mistake, which has crept in the order, where it has been said that the defendants have not refuted the genuineness of the record of proceedings of the meeting of the Board of Directors held on 20th December, 1990, wherein it was decided to amalgamate the subsidiary with the holding company, i.e. defendant No. 1 because of its turning sick.
That, however, would not be enough to detract from the orders passed by the Additional District Judge.
Mr. Narang, appearing for the petitioner, however, vehemently contends that inasmuch as all the respondents during the pendency of the suit and prior to the appeal of the respondents having been allowed by the Additional District Judge, had in fact joined the service of the Punjab State Bio-Medical Equipment, Ltd, the Additional District Judge was not justified then to pass injunction restraining the petitioner from terminating the services of the respondents.
The contention of the learned counsel deserves to be accepted only half way through.
The respondents cannot be thrown out from service when they have a prima facie case in their favour and inasmuch as Punjab State Bio-Medical Equipment Ltd is also a subsidiary company of the petitioner, the restrain order could be passed and has been rightly passed.
However, by virtue of the aforesaid restrain order, the respondents cannot ask for their retransfer from Punjab State Bio-Medical Equipment Ltd to the petitioner.
It is an admitted position that before appeal filed by the respondents was allowed by the Additional District Judge, they had already been transferred to the Punjab State Bio-Medical Equipment Ltd, and for the last six months they are working there only.
4.
In the facts and circumstances of this case, a direction is, thus, required to be issued to both the defendants, i.e. the Punjab State Electronics Development & Production Corporation Ltd and the Punjab State Bio-Medical Equipment Ltd, not to terminate the services of the respondents and to keep on paying them the monthly emoluments that they were drawing before they were transferred to the Punjab State Bio-Medical Equipment Ltd Mr. Narang, appearing for the petitioner, has undertaken on behalf of his client that if the respondents do not insist upon to join the petitioner, they would be paid all their emoluments by way of arrears that may have accrued to them within fifteen days from today and also their current wages for this month as also till such time the suit is finally determined.
5.
In view of what has been said above, there would be a direction to the petitioner not to terminate the service of the respondents during the pendency of the suit.
The respondents in turn would not insist upon to join the Punjab State Electronics Development & Production Corporation Ltd, i.e. the petitioner, in consequence of the orders passed by the Additional District Judge, Chandigarh, in their favour, but the petitioner as well as the Punjab State Bio-Medical Equipment Ltd would be bound to pay the emoluments of the respondents, as has been undertaken by the counsel for the petitioner.
This petition is, thus, disposed of in the manner fully indicated above.
Order accordingly.
Order accordingly.