MR Agnihotri, J - This judgment shall dispose of seven Civil Writ Petitions Nos 6096, 2304 and 2536 of 1987, 1077 and 1078 of 1988, 14333 of 1989 and 4362 of 1991, as common questions of fact and law are involved.
2.
The petitioners are Shift Engineers/Junior Engineers/Draftsmen working in Haryana State Minor Irrigation (Tubewells) Corporation Limited (hereinafter referred to as `the Corporation'), for the last several years.
They have been working against the posts of Sub Divisional Officers/Assistant Engineers, but have not been promoted on regular basis due to imposition of the ban by the State Government on making of regular promotions by the Corporation, vide memorandum dated 19th March, 1986, Annexure P2.
On the other hand, a number of employees of the Haryana Irrigation Department have been brought during the last many years and are even now being brought on deputation by the Corporation for being promoted on higher posts without considering the claim of the petitioners.
Thus, the petitioners have been deprived of regularisation of their services and regular promotions in the higher rank even though they are required to discharge the duties of higher post without any emoluments.
Aggrieved against this unfair and arbitrary treatment meted out to them by the Corporation, the petitioners have invoked the writ jurisdiction of this Court.
3.
In the written statement, the Corporation has pleaded that no doubt the petitioners are fully qualified and eligible for being promoted as Sub Divisional Officers and they have also qualified the Departmental Professional Examination and the Junior Engineers/Head Draftsmen are required to pass before promotion as Sub-Divisional Officers, yet they have been appointed as Shift Engineers, only as a stop-gap arrangement in their own pay scale without any extra financial remuneration.
It has further been pleaded that since the petitioners did not raise any objection at the time of their posting and joining as Shift Engineers, they are now estopped from raising any objection at this stage, nor can they be permitted to claim the salary of Sub Divisional Officers.
It has also been admitted that a number of officers of the Haryana Irrigation Department are working on deputation with the Corporation even after the expiry of their period of deputation because their repatriation to the parent department has not been ordered by the State Government, and they are still working as Sub-Divisional Officers because of the stoppage of promotion and direct recruitment as Sub-Divisional Officers by the State of Haryana.
4.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and having gone through their pleadings, I am of the considered view that the action of the respondent-Corporation is wholly arbitrary and unfair towards its employees.
The Haryana State Minor Irrigation (Tubewells) Corporation Limited is a company, and the Governor Haryana, Secretary to Government, Haryana, Irrigation Department, Secretary to Government, Haryana, Agriculture Department, Chairman, Haryana State Electricity Board, and Chief Engineer (Canals), Irrigation Works, Haryana, were the exclusive shareholders at the time of formation of the Corporation in the year 1970.
According to the Articles of Association of the Corporation, the Board of Directors also consisted of all the official of the State Government.
According to Article 81(v) of the aforesaid Articles of Association of the Corporation, the Directors shall have the power to appoint at their discretion, remove or suspend such managers, secretaries, officers, clerks, agents and servants for permanent, temporary or special services, as they may from time to time think fit, and to determine their powers and duties and fix their salaries or emoluments and to require security of such amount as they think fit in such instances.
The only rider imposed on this power of the Board of Directors is, "in the first instance, officers and other staff shall be taken on deputation from the Irrigation Department, Haryana, subject to availability".
This shows that the power to make appointments of the staff vests with the Board of Directors even though the overall supervisory and administrative powers along with pervasive control may remain vested in the State Government.
In the present case, during the last twenty years, hundreds of employees of the Corporation have been taken by it on deputation, even though specific provisions exist in the Service Bye-Laws of the employees of the Corporation framed in 1978.
Bye-Law 3.2(ii) of the aforesaid Bye-Laws dealing with recruitment promotion of the Sub-Divisional Officers reads as under :-  "3.2(ii) Appointment by promotion to the rank of Assistant Engineer/Sub Divisional Officers will be made in accordance with the provisions set out hereinafter.
(1) Notwithstanding anything provided otherwise the promotion to the rank of Sub Divisional Officer shall be made from amongst the Junior Engineers, A.M.I.E., Circle Head Draftsmen in the service of the Corporation.
(2) The promotion to the rank of Sub Divisional Officer shall be made to the extent of 50% of the total vacancies fallen vacant as on the date of approval of panel from amongst the categories set out in Clause (1) above, as below :- (a) Promotion from the Junior Engineers already in the service of the Corporation who have passed D.P.E.
35% (b) Promotion from the Junior Engineers, eligible Circle Head Draftsmen already in the service of the Corporation possessing AMIIE/Degree qualification 5% (c) Promotion from the category of Circle Head Draftsmen who have passed D.P.E.
10% Total 50% Reserving 50% of the vacancies for direct recruitment of Assistant Engineers, the remaining vacancies will be filled by promotion from different categories referred to in clauses (a), (b) and (c) of sub-rule (2) of Rule 3.2(ii) of these Bye-Laws.
Allocation of each source in a lot of 50 vacancies to be filled by promotion will be as below :-  1, 2, 3, 4, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13, 14, 17, 18, 19, 21, 22, 23, 24, 27, 28, 29, 31, 32, 33, 34, 37, 38, 39, 41, 42, 43, 44, 47, 48, 49,  In respect of (b) above : 6, 16, 26, 36, 46.
In respect of (c) above :  5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, 35, 40, 45, 50.
(3) In case suitable candidates are not available from source (b), the vacancies shall be filled from source (a) and any shortfall in respect of source (c) shall be met from source (a) provisionally till an eligible candidate from the allotted source becomes available.
In such an eventuality, the provisionally promoted persons(s) shall be liable to be reverted on the availability of the eligible employees from source (b) or (c) as the case may be.
32(2)(i) Qualifications for Promotion.
(a) To become eligible for promotion against quota mentioned at 32(2)(a), the candidate must possess Engineering Diploma from an Institution recognised by Haryana Government and must have put in continous service for a period of 10 years in the capacity of Junior Engineer in the Corporation and shall have passed D.P.E.
(b) To become eligible for promotion against quota mentioned at 3.2(2), the candidate must have put in 2 years service in case he is a Degree-holder/AMIE.
He will have to pass the D.P.E.
within 3 years of such promotion, otherwise he will be reverted to his original post and his seniority wil be determined from the date of his passing the examination.
(c) To be eligible for promotion against quota mentioned at 32(2)(c) the candidate must possess Diploma in Draftsmanship from an Institution recognised by government of Haryana and must have put in continuous service for a period of 3 years in the capacity of Circle Head Draftsman in the Corporation.
The candidate must have passed the DPE Examination conducted by the Corporation from time to time."
5.
Admittedly, the total strength of the Sub Divisional Officers/Assistant Engineers in the Corporation is 172, out of which 115 employees working as Sub Divisional Officers have been drawn on deputation from the Haryana Irrigation Department.
About three dozen employees have been directly recruited or promoted as Sub-Divisional Officers on regular basis, and only a few posts are left, against which the Junior Engineers/Head Draftsmen working with the Corporation could be accomodated by promotion as Sub Divisional Officers.
However, even this has not been done and against these remaining posts, the petitionerss and some other Junior Engineers, who are in the employment of the Corporation for the last many years and are eligible and have also duty qualified the necessary Departmental Professional Examination and the Departmental Revenue Examination, have been designated as "Shift Engineers" to look after the work of Sub Divisional Officers without any financial benefit/right to seniority etc.
Though the appointment of petitoners as Shift Engineers was made long ago, yet they have not been promoted as Sub Divisional Officers on regular basis due to the permanent ban imposed on promotions/appointments by the State Government vide its memorandum dated 19th March, 1986.
By this communication, the Corporation was apprised of the decision of the State Government that "for the time being no promotion to the rank of Sub Divisional Officer may be made and these posts may be filled up only by re-employment from the Irrigation Departments officers".
6.
Mr. Kulbhushan Bhandari, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioners, has vehemently contended that the imposition of the ban by the State Government is wholly arbitrary and against the very spirit of the corporate status with which the Corporation has been clothed and the very purpose for which it was established.
7.
No doubt, in the matter of making appointments and promotions, the Corporation has been required to take the employees of the State Irrigation Department on deputation, but even this provision is "subject to the availability" of the officers.
Obviously, it means that if a few posts of Sub Divisional Officers have fallen vacant in the Corporation and the State Government does not want the Junior Engineers/Draftsmen of the Corporation itself to be promoted to man these posts, it can depute its own Sub Divisional Officers to go and work on these posts with the Corporation.
But certainly the intention of the Bye-Laws could not be to deprive the eligible and qualified Junior Engineers of the Corporation and to kill their initiative and aspiration for promotion as Sub Divisional Officers and instead to promote the Junior Engineers of the Haryana Irrigation Department and to appoint them as Sub Divisional Officers with the Corporation under the garb of deputation or "redeployment".
Such an action is colourable exercise of jurisdiction and fraud on power which cannot be countenanced in the rule of law.
Surely, the State Government cannot reduce the Corporation to the status of a department or a circle of Irrigation Wing of Haryana Public Works Department.
Therefore, the ban imposed by the memorandum dated 19th March, 1986 (Annexure P2), is wholly arbitrary and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India, hence, the same is hereby struck down by issuing a writ of certiorari.
8.
So far as the claim of the petitioners who have been working against the posts of Sub Divisional Officers and have been discharging the duties of these posts without any extra remuneration or the pay attached to the higher post is concerned, there is no difficulty in allowing their claim as the matter is squarely covered by the judgment of this Court reported as Sewa Singh v. Punjab State Minor Irrigation (Tubewells) Corporation, etc., 1987(1) SLR 691.
Obviously, when an employee has been entrusted with the duties of a higher post and is required to shoulder the responsibilities thereof as if he is a regular incumbent of the post, he is also entitled to the salary and other emoluments attached to the higher post which his other counterparts are drawing only by virtue of being regular incumbents of the post.
This is the precise mandate of the principle of `equal pay for equal work'.
9.
Accordingly, I allow this writ petition, and the impugned communication dated 19th March, 1986 (Annexure P2) having been quashed, direct the respondents to fill the posts of Sub-Divisional Officers lying vacant with the Corporation in the first instance by bringing the Sub Divisional Officers of the Haryana Irrigation Department on deputation failing which, by making promotions out of the Junior Engineers/Head Draftsmen who are qualified and eligible for promotion and are at present in the employment of the Corporation, by observing the principle of seniority-cum-merit.
This process shall be completed within a period of three months.
It is further directed that the petitioners who have been working on the posts of Sub Divisional Officers in their own pay scale under the designation of Shift Engineers, shall also be disbursed the arrears of their salary and other allowances right from the date of their appointment as Shift Engineers, to which emoluments they would have been entitled had they been promoted as regular Sub Divisional Officers instead of being appointed as Shift Engineers.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.