DV Sehgal, J - The petitioner has approached this Court through this writ petition with a grievance that he was eased out of the service because of his honesty and fearlessness and later when he was taken back in service he has not been given all the consequential benefits which were originally intended by the reinstating authority.
He, therefore, seeks necessary relief from this Court.
2.
The petitioner joined the Police Department Punjab, as a Constable on 8.5.1952.
He passed the Lower School Course in March, 1959 and was promoted as a Head Constable on 1121962.
He claimed that he performed his duties with utmost efficiency and diligence.
In the Lower School Examination, he was placed third in merit out of 155 candidates.
During the years 1964-66, he was posted at Police Station Gharinda, Amritsar.
This area was infested with smugglers and anti-sociaelements.
The petitioner was confronted with no torious smugglers during the course of his duties.
He suffered grievous injury as a result of encounters between the police and the smugglers.
3.
In the year 1967, the petitioner led a party which was successful in apprehending a number of smugglers and recovered smuggled goods worth lacs of rupees.
He states that the counterparts of these smugglers in India were very influential persons and they started harassing him.
Ultimately he was compelled to resign his post by his superiors.
He contends that this was done to protect a number of influential persons against whom he had collected a lot of evidence.
With the change of the Government, in the State of Punjab, he made an application (Annexure P-1) to the Chief Minister of Punjab, stating all these facts and bringing out how he was forced to resign from service.
The matter was enquired into by the Vigilance Department and the Director, Vigilance Bureau, Punjab, in his report (Annexure P-2) inter alia stated thus :-  "That on 25/26111967, he had an encounter with Shri Paramvir Singh son of Shri Ajit Singh, Chairman, Block Samiti, resident of village Burj, Police Station Gharinda and other smugglers.
In this connection, case F.I.R. No. dated 26111967 under section 307, Indian Penal Code, 25 Arms Act and 9 Opium Act, Police Station Gharinda was registered.
Shri Ajit Singh, Chairman is very influential person.
He politically-influenced Shri Bakhtawar Singh, the then S.S.P., Amritsar and he forcibly obtained resignation from him (Head-Constable) on 6.12.67.
By accepting that resignation, he was relieved from the police force.
A great injustice has been done to him because instead of giving him certificate for doing good work, due to political influence, he was forced to resign.
He be reinstated and given due promotions.
An enquiry has been got done through Shri Joginder Singh, Inspector Vigilance Bureau, Amritsar.
It has been found that resignation was obtained from the applicant forcibly because it was written in the resignation letter by the applicant that he has been relieved of his load on his mind and that telling lie is prevalent in the police department and the persons speaking truth are not needed.
The enquiry officer has perused the service record of the applicant.
He was enrolled as Constable on 8552.
He worked under various police officers who had reported that he is a good, brave and hardworking police employee.
The enquiry officer has also drawn attention to the fact that Shri Sabdal Singh, the then Inspector CIA, Amritsar had also written that he was a good police officer and he had tackled a notorious group of smugglers."
4.
Since it was established as a result of the above inquiry that his resignation had been obtained forcibly, the Chief Secretary to Government, Punjab, decided that the petitioner should be taken back in service.
The decision regarding the intervening period of leaving service and joining back service was decided to be taken according to law.
In order to remove injustice to the petitioner, it was decided that if relaxation of rule was necessary that also should be done.
This order was issued by the Chief Secretary to Government, Punjab, on 21.5.1976 and is Annexure P-3.
The Senior Superintendent of Police, Amritsar, passed order (Annexure P3/A) implementing the order (Annexure P-3).
5.
The submission of the petitioner is that in spite of these orders, no subsequent decision has been taken to treat the period from the date of his resignation till his rejoining the service as a consequence of the orders, Annexures P-3 and P-3/A, as the period spent on duty and the consequential benefits like salary, increments and further promotions have not been given to him in spite of various representations made by him and the letters sent by his superior officers, to the higher authorities.
6.
The petition has been opposed by the respondents and a written statement on their behalf has been filed by the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Jullundur Range.
He has virtually admitted all the facts stated in the petition.
It has, however, been contended that the petitioner has been given whatever benefit he was entitled to as a result of his reinstatement in service and he has been promoted to the rank of Assistant Sub-Inspector w.e.f.
2161978 in order of his seniority in List 'D'.
It is stated that the Assistant Sub-Inspectors junior to him were not promoted to the rank of Sub- Inspectors of Police and as such no prejudice has been caused to him.
7.
It needs be added here that in the petition, the petitioner had specifically averred that one Shri Vidya Sagar who was working as Head Constable at Amritsar during the period the petitioner was posted at Gharinda Police Station was junior to him in service and that he had since been promoted to the post of Inspector.
So, he is entitled to be promoted to the post of Inspector from the date Shri Vidya Sagar, the person junior to him, was so promoted.
This averment has been denied in the written statement.
It is stated that the lien of Sub-Inspector Shri Vidya Sagar neither stands with Amritsar District nor with Jullundur Range.
By this it is implied that it cannot be said that Shri Vidya Sagar was junior to the petitioner, when he was made to resign from service.
8.
As regards the salary for the period 16.12.67 to 16676, it has been averred that the matter stands referred to the State Government and the efforts are afoot to expedite it.
9.
The petitioner filed a replication in which he stated that Shri Vidya Sagar was posted at Amritsar and was junior to him.
He has appended a copy of the Muster Roll (Annexure P-15) showing that Shri Vidya Sagar, Head-Constable No. 1058, Amritsar, was working in Amritsar and had his lien there during the period 1.10.76 to 1.10.1969.
It has further been averred that Sh. Vidya Sagar was enlisted as Constable from Amritsar District on 271957, i.e. nearly five years after the recruitment of the petitioner.
He was promoted as Head Constable in the year 1964, while the petitioner was so promoted on 1121962.
It is further stated by the petitioner that in fact he was relieved as Moharrir Head Constable, Police Station Gharinda, Amritsar, by Shri Vidya Sagar in the year 1964.
Later Civil Misc. No. 1047 of 1985 was filed by the petitioner under Order 1, rule 10, read with section 151, Civil Procedure Code, for impleading Shri Vidya Sagar, Inspector, Detective Staff, Dasuya, District Hoshiarpur as respondent No. 5 to the petition being a necessary or proper party as the petitioner was claiming seniority above him.
This prayer was allowed and Shri Vidya Sagar was impleaded as respondent No. 5 to the petition.
He has been duly served but he has not put in appearance or put forward any defence on his behalf.
10.
As regards the averments made in the replication by the petitioner no additional affidavit has been filed on behalf of the respondents 1 to 4, to counter the specific averments made therein as regards the position of the petitioner in seniority vis-a-vis Shri Vidya Sagar, respondent No. 5.
Thus the position stated therein stands unrebutted.
11.
Having heard the learned counsel, I am of the considered view that this petition must succeed.
In view of the report of the Director, Vigilance (Annexure P-2), it is clear that the petitioner was illegally prevented from performing his duties for the period from 16.12.67 to 1661976.
In fact he was forced to resign from service in the circumstances which are highly deplorable.
When the finding (Annexure P-2) was returned by the Director, Vigilance, Punjab, it was incumbent on the respondents not only to reinstate the petitioner in service but to allow him all the benefits including salary increments and further promotions which he would have earned had he not been forced to resign service.
In fact the period of more than 11 years has elapsed since then, but necessary relief has not been afforded to him.
All that has been stated in the written statement is that the matter stands referred to the State Government for granting salary to the petitioner.
Much need not be said about the inordinate and inexplicable delay in providing succour to the petitioner, who suffered at the hands of the unscrupulous elements.
12.
It stands unrebutted on the record before me that Shri Vidya Sagar, respondent No. 5 was junior to the petitioner as Constable, and also as Head Constable.
No doubt, had the petitioner been allowed to continue in service, he would have passed the high er examination well in time to merit further promotions because, as his record speaks, he was quite brilliant and competent.
He earned the third position amongst 155 candidates, while passing the Lower School Course.
That is why in the order, Annexure P-3, it was specifically mentioned that he shall be given the consequential benefits, if necessary, by relaxation of the rules.
Therefore, irrespective of the fact that he has passed the higher examination later, on his reinstatement or even if he did not have the opportunity to pass the higher examination he is entitled to be promoted to the posts of Assistant Sub-Inspector, Sub-Inspector and Inspector from the dates Shri Vidya Sagar, the officer junior to him, was so promoted.
13.
In view of the above discussion, I allow this writ petition and direct respondents 1 to 4 to grant seniority to the petitioner above Shri Vidya Sagar, respondent No. 5, pay him the salary for the period 16121967 to 1661976 along with increments which accrued due to him from time to time besides the salary of the higher post to which he ought to have been promoted from the date Shri Vidya Sagar was so promoted.
This order should be implemented within three months from today.
The petitioner should be given promotion to the post of Inspector within this period and he should be paid the entire amount of salary along with the interest at the rate of 12% per annum from the dates the amount accrued to him within the time so stipulated.
The petitioner shall also get costs of this petition which are fixed at Rs. 1,000/-.
Petition allowed.