Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner, a Soldier's widow is aggrieved by the order dated December 21, 1989 by which her claim for family pension was denied.
The order assigns two reasons.
Firstly, it has been observed that Pension cannot be granted to you because your husband had married you after retirement."
Secondly, it has been observed that family pension cannot be granted to you "as your husband has married you as a second wife ....." It has been averred that Sepoy Mandar Singh was married to Malkit Devi on March 16, 1936, who died on June 20, 1943.
Thereafter the petitioner was married to Mandar Singh in June, 1951.
Mandar Singh was discharged from the Army on March 14, 1946.
It has been further averred that the petitioner has two sons and two daughters from her marriage with Mandar Singh.
2.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents that the petitioner "being the second wife of the deceased and her marriage with No. 5703 Late Sep. Mandar Singh solemnized after the retirement, she is not eligible for ordinary family pension under the provision of Government letter mentioned above and her case has been rejected by this office.
However, case of Smt. Maqbal Devi is under consideration with Government for the grant of Ordinary Family Pension."
3.
A considerable time has elapsed since the filing of this written statement.
No action seems to have been taken by the respondents.
At least nothing has been placed on record.
4.
In my view the matter stands concluded by the judgment of the Apex Court in Smt. Bhagwanti v. Union of India, 1989(4) SLR 247, which runs as under :-  "Pension is payable, as pointed out in several judgments of this Court on the consideration of past service rendered by the Government servant.
Payability of the family pension is basically on the self-same consideration.
Since pension is linked with past service and the avowed purpose of the Pension Rules is to provide sustenance in old age, distinction between marriage during service and marriage after retirement appears to be indeed arbitrary.
There are instances where a Government servant contracts his first marriage after retirement.
In these two cases before us, retirement had been at an early age.
In the Subedar's case, he had retired after putting in 18 years of service and the Railway employee had retired prematurely at the age of 44.
Premature or early retirement has indeed no relevance for deciding the point at issue.
It is not the case of the Union of India and, perhaps there would have been no force in such contention if raised that family pension is admissible on account of the fact that the spouse contributed to the efficiency of the Government servant during his service career.
In most cases, marriage after retirement is done to provide protection, secure companionship and to secure support in old age.
The consideration upon which pension proper is admissible or the benefit of the family pension has been extended do not justify the distinction envisaged in the definition of 'family' by keeping the post-retiral spouse out of it."
5.
In view of the above dictum of law, I think it was totally arbitrary and unfair to have denied the benefit claimed by the petitioner.
6.
The writ petition is accordingly allowed.
The impugned order is set aside and the respondents are directed to release family pension to the petitioner with effect from the date of the death of her husband, i.e. January 1, 1973.
She would also be entitled to interest at the rate of 12%.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to her costs, which are assessed at Rs. 2,000/-.
Necessary payment shall be made to the petitioner within three months from the date of the receipt of the copy of this judgment.
Petition allowed.