Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner who was placed at serial No. 1 in the merit list prepared by the Subordinate Services Selection Board for the post of Hindi Teacher for district Amritsar is aggrieved by the action of the respondents in not giving her an order of appointment.
A few relevant facts may be noticed.
2.
The Subordinate Services Selection Board, Punjab, (hereinafter referred to as 'the Board') advertised posts of Hindi Teachers in November, 1981.
The petitioner applied for the post.
She appeared in the written test held on September 29, 1984.
Having qualified the test, she was called for interview.
She appeared and was placed at No. 1 in the merit list prepared by the Board.
The Director of Public Instructions (School) forwarded her name to the District Education Officer, Amritsar for issue of a letter of appointment.
She was called to the office by the-District Education Officer on May 20, 1985.
However, the letter of appointment was refused to her on the ground that the OT examination passed by the petitioner from the Gandhi Hindi Vidyapeeth, Prayag (UP) has not been recognised by the State of Punjab.
Aggrieved by this action, she filed various representations.
Having failed to get the necessary relief, she has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
Vide its order of April 28, 1986 the Motion Bench had dismissed the writ petition.
Thereafter, the petitioner moved a review application No. 56 of 1986.
Notice of the review application was given to the respondents.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties the Bench, inter alia, observed as under :-  "The averments made in the review application are that a number of other teachers who possess OT certificate from Gandhi Hindi Vidyapeeth, Prayag (UP) are employed as teachers under the respondents, so the qualification is a recognised one.
We are of the considered view that the matter requires examination.
Consequently, we allow this application and recall the order of the Division Bench dated 24th April, 1986.
The writ petition is admitted.
(The original order passed by the Motion Bench is dated April 28, 1986 and not April 24, 1986).
3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been inter alia, averred that the petitioner does not possess the requisite qualification viz. OT certificate from a recognised institution/board and the qualification possessed by her has not been recognised by the State Govt.
It has also been averred that a writ petition No. 1859 of 1981 in which the petitioner was at serial No. 17 had been dismissed by this court on August 13, 1981.
Consequently, it is claimed that even the present writ petition is not competent.
It has also been pointed out that the State Govt. after consultation with the University Grants Commission had taken the decision in petitioner's case.
The petitioner has filed a replication.
It has been, inter alia, stated that various persons who had passed the OT examination from the institute from which the petitioner had qualified are working as teachers in the various schools in Punjab.
Their particulars have been specifically given in paragraph 6.
A perusal of the list shows that the persons mentioned at serial Nos. 1, 2, 6 and 7 are working as Hindi Teachers.
This factual position has not controverted.
4.
After considering the matter, I am of the view that there is no merit in the preliminary objections which have been raised in the written statement.
The basic objection relates to the fact that the petitioner was a party in C.W.P.
No. 1859 of 1981.
This writ petition had been filed even prior to the issue of the advertisement in November, 1981.
It could not have related to the dispute which is involved in the present case.
The cause of action in the two cases would not have been the same.
The respondents have not produced a copy of the writ petition or the order passed therein to show that it was even remotely connected with the dispute raised by the petitioner in the instant case.
As such, I find no merit in the preliminary objection.
5.
On merits, I find that the petitioner has categorically averred that persons who had qualified the OT examination from the Gandhi Hindi Vidyapeeth Prayag (UP) are working as language teachers in various schools in the State of Punjab.
This fact has not been denied.
In this situation the respondents cannot be permitted to say that the petitioner does not possess the qualification of OT from a recognised institution.
No rule or law has been brought to my notice to show that a certain specified procedure has to be followed for recognising an institution.
No particular form for recognition has been laid down.
The factum of recognition of a qualification or an institution can be inferred from a variety of circumstances.
If persons possessing a particular qualification from a given institution have been employed by the State, it can be reasonably inferred that the qualification as well as the institution have been recognised.
In the present case, the averment of the petitioner clearly shows that a number of persons who have passed the OT Examination or some other examination from the same institution are continuing to work in the educational institutions run by the State of Punjab.
This averment having not been denied.
It can be reasonably inferred that the qualification, as well as the institution have been recognised.
6.
I cannot also lose sight of the fact that the petitioner had appeared in the written test.
She had qualified.
She had also appeared in the interview.
She claims to have produced her certificates etc. to prove her eligibility.
The experts must have examined these documents.
The body entrusted with the job of selection had placed the petitioner at Serial No. 1 in order of merit.
Educational qualifications from recognised institutions are only prescribed to determine the comparative merit.
Once the petitioner has proved her merit in a competitive selection, the action of the respondents in declaring her ineligible appears to be wholly arbitrary and unfair.
It is no doubt true that the selection had been made by the Board while appointment had to be given by the Government.
The fact still remains that the Board had rejected the petitioner's claim at the threshold, she would have been in a position to apply elsewhere.
The applications were submitted in the year 1981.
Written test was held in the year 1984.
After the interview, the final result was declared in the year 1985.
During the four years, the petitioner may have rested her hope of getting the job for which she had applied.
After her selection, the respondents declared her to be ineligible.
Such a course of action was very unfair.
The petitioner may not have applied else where in the pay of getting the job for which she had already competed.
If the respondents wanted to reject her claim on the ground of eligibility it should have done in the year 1981 when she had applied for the post or within a reasonable time thereafter.
7.
In view of the above, I find that the action of the respondents in not giving the appointment to the petitioner on the ground of her eligibility is absolutely arbitrary and unfair.
It violates Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
8.
The writ petition is accordingly allowed.
The respondents are directed to appoint the petitioner as Hindi teacher.
This would, of course, be subject to her physical fitness and her antecedents being found to be good.
The petitioner is also entitled to her costs which are assessed to Rs. 3000/-.
Petition allowed.