RS Mongia, J (Oral) - This is the third bout of litigation which the petitioner is fighting in this Court by filing third writ petition, as in spite of the directions of this Court in his earlier two writ petitions No. 1894 of 1989 decided on 2321989, and C.W.P.
No. 7914 of 1989 decided on 1461989, the grievance of the petitioner still remains to be redressed by the respondents.
2.
De hors of detailed facts, suffice it to mention that the petitioner was working as an Assistant in the Haryana Roadways and claims his promotion as Superintendent w.e.f.
29.3.1967 (whereas actually he was promoted on 621978), as Traffic Manager w.e.f.
15.11.1973 instead of 921989 and as General Manager w.e.f.
1521989/3131989.
It is not disputed before me that when the post of Superintendent was created in the Haryana Roadways, there were no specific Rules governing the promotion to the said post.
Petitioner who claims that he was the seniormost Assistant staked his claim for promotion as Superintendent on that basis.
The grievance of the petitioner was that the Haryana Roadways filled in the posts of Superintendents by calling persons on deputation from other departments.
In absence of any specific statutory rules, I do not find anything wrong if the posts were filled in by deputationists.
There was no right conferred on the Assistants in the Haryana Roadways that they would be positively considered for promotion to the rank of Superintendent In this view of the matter, I do not find anything wrong in the petitioner being promoted as Superintendent w.e.f.
621978 instead of 29.3.1967 as claimed by the petitioner.
3.
The further grievance of the petitioner that in fact he should have been considered for promotion as Traffic Manager after three years of his promotion as Superintendent under rule 6(1)(h) of the Punjab Transport Department (State Service Class III) Rules, 1963, and after being promoted as Traffic Manager he should have been considered for promotion to the rank of General Manager after seven years of his promotion as Traffic Manager under rule 6(1)(a) of the Rules.
While rejecting the representation of the petitioner vide order dated 1881989, Annexure P-1 to the writ petition, it has been observed by the authorities concerned that in fact the petitioner had no right to be promoted as Superintendent what to talk of Traffic Manager/General Manager inasmuch as the petitioner was a member of Haryana Transport Department Class III and his seniority has to be considered in that service.
The petitioner should have sought his promotion in that service.
The petitioner could not be considered as a member of Haryana Roadways Cadre and his promotion as Superintendent in the Haryana Roadways was void.
4.
Petitioner was never considered for promotion in the Haryana Transport Department as in fact he was working as an Assistant in the Roadways and was also promoted as Superintendent w.e.f.
621978 in the Roadways and thereafter as a Traffic Manager w.e.f.
921989.
It is too late in the day now to say that the petitioner was not a member of the Roadways and in spite of the facts mentioned above he still remains a member of the Haryana Transport Department.
While rejecting the earlier representation of the petitioner on 3031989 (Annexure P-2) it was never the case of the respondents that the petitioner was not a member of the Haryana Roadways.
As I have already held that the petitioner was rightly promoted as Superintendent in the Roadways on 621978, the petitioner had a right to be considered for promotion as Traffic Manager against the first post that became available after 3 years of the petitioner's promotion as Superintendent.
Consequently, a direction is issued to the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner to the rank of Traffic Manager in the Roadways w.e.f.
the date when the vacancy to that rank became available after 3 years of 621978.
If for any reason the petitioner is not found fit for promotion then his case would be considered for promotion to that rank in the subsequent vacancy or vacancies of Traffic Manager that may have arisen thereafter.
5.
On the same parity of reasoning as mentioned above, the petitioner would have the right to be considered for promotion as General Manager after 7 years of his promotion as Traffic Manager A direction is issued to the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner as General Manager against the post which may have fallen vacant after 7 years of the petitioner's deemed promotion as Traffic Manager.
To make it clear that if the petitioner is found suitable for promotion as Traffic Manager against the post in the year 1981 he would be considered for promotion to the rank of General Manager against a post which may have occurred in the year 1988 or thereafter.
Needless to mention that if the petitioner is found suitable for promotion as Traffic Manager/General Manager from retrospective dates, he would be entitled to all consequential benefits following therefrom.
The writ petition is allowed with the directions as indicated above.
The directions be carried out within three months from the date of receipt of this order.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.