RS Mongia, J - The petitioner in the present writ petition is challenging the action of the respondents in denying him the benefit of Military Service under Punjab Government National Emergency (Concession) Rules, 1965 as applicable to the State of Haryana and amended from time to time by the State of Haryana (hereinafter called the Rules).
Briefly, the facts of the case are that petitioner was recruited, in the Indian Navy on 28.4.1955 and while serving as a Petty Officer (Electrician - (Radio and Radar) was released from there on 2771966 consequent upon the expiry of engagement.
The National Emergency was declared in the wake of Chinese aggression with effect from 26101962 which lasted upto 1011968.
The petitioner had obviously served even during the emergency also from 27.10.1962 upto the date of his release i.e. 2771966.
2.
To give some concessions to Ex-Servicemen who are released from the Army and join Government Service, Punjab Government framed rules in the year 1965 quoted above.
These rules were later adopted by the State of Haryana and have amended the same from time to time to which reference would be made hereinafter.
By these rules, apart from other benefits, Military Service rendered during the period of Emergency is to be counted towards seniority.
in the Government Service.
When the rules were initially framed, the definition of Military Service as given in Rule 2 of the Rules was as follows :-  "2.
Definition.
- For the purposes of these rules, the expression 'military service' means enrolled or commissioned service in any of the three wings of the Indian Armed Forces (including Service as a Warrant Officer) rendered by a person during the period of operation of the proclamation of emergency made by the President under Article 352 of the Constitution of India on October 26, 1962, or such other service as may hereafter be declared as military service for the purposes of these rules.
Any period of military training followed by military service shall also be reckoned as military service."
By an amendment by the State of Haryana dated 981976, the definition of the expression military service was substituted.
The amended definition of military service reads as under :-  "2.
Definition.
- For the purpose of these rules the expression 'military service' means the service rendered by a person, who had been enrolled or commissioned during the period of operation of the proclamation of emergency made by the President under Article 352 of the Constitution of India on October 26, 1962 in any of the three wings of the Indian Armed Forces (including the service as a Warrant Officer) during the period of the said emergency or such other service as may hereafter be declared as military service for the purpose of these rules.
Any period of military training followed by military service shall also be reckoned as military service."
This amendment was brought retrospectively with effect from 1111966.
3.
Coming back to the facts again, petitioner after release from the Navy joined Government Service as Social Studies Master in the Education Department on 4.11.1970 in the Ex-Servicemen category.
In response to an advertisement for the post of Assistant Employment Officer, petitioner applied for the said post in the reserved category of Ex-servicemen and was appointed as such in the Employment Department with effect from 2011977.
Petitioner is claiming the benefit of military service rendered during the period of emergency towards his seniority etc. under the Rules.
The case of the petitioner is that irrespective of the fact whether he had joined the Army during the period of emergency or prior to that he is entitled to the benefit of military service rendered during the emergency.
For this proposition he relied upon judgment of the learned Single Judge in Inderaj Singh v. State of Haryana, 1979(3) S.L.R.
441.
On the other hand, the learned counsel for the respondents submitted that after the judgment (supra) the definition of military service was substituted on 981976 and it was specifically laid down that military service benefit would be given only to those who had joined the Army or any other Wing of the Services during the period of emergency.
Learned counsel submitted that in Ex-Captain AS Parmar v. State of Haryana, 1986 (Supp) SCC.
283, the Supreme Court had only struck down the retrospective operation of the definition of military service and consequently any employee who was appointed after the definition of military service was changed i.e. 981976 would only be entitled to the benefit of military service if he had joined the services during the period of emergency.
To substantiate this submission, he relied upon Supreme Court judgment in Dhan Singh v. State of Haryana, 1990(4) J T( SC) 735 : 1991(1) SCT.
137.
4.
The learned counsel for the petitioner, however, submitted that the benefit of military service had been granted to the petitioner by the Education Department vide order dated 2581986 and there was no reason why the benefit should not be extended by the Employment Department as well.
According to the learned counsel, if any one joins Government service and even if he changes his department, it would be admissible for the ex-serviceman to claim benefit of military service.
5.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that there is no force in the submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
As has been laid down in Dhan Singh's case (supra) to get benefit of military service, the Ex-serviceman must have joined any of the Wings of the military service during the period of emergency.
However, if an Ex-serviceman had joined Government service on his release from the Army prior to the date of amendment of the definition of military service (981976) then irrespective of the fact whether the Ex-serviceman had joined military service during the emergency or prior to emergency would be entitled to the benefit of military service.
Admittedly, in the present case, the petitioner joined the Employment Department on 2011977 i.e. after 981976.
Consequently, he would not be entitled to the military service benefit.
Petitioner had not been appointed in the Employment Department by way of transfer from the Education Department.
It was a direct appointment and his service rendered in the Education Department was not to be counted towards his seniority in the Employment Department.
Had it been otherwise, then the petitioner would have been entitled to the military service benefit.
The Education Department had to give the benefit of military service to the petitioner inasmuch as he had joined the Education Department prior to 981976.
However, simply because the Education Department was required to give the benefit of military service and had given the same retrospectively on 2581986 would not entitle the petitioner to claim the benefit of military service in the Employment Department where he was a fresh appointee.
For the foregoing reasons, this writ petition fails and is dismissed.
However, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.