Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - This order will dispose of CWP Nos. 771 of 1988, 8284 of 1988 and 9461 of 1989.
The petitioners in all the three cases suffered epilepsy fits and were discharged from the Army on account of low medical category.
Their claim' for disability pension having been declined, they have approached this Court through the above mentioned three writ petitions.
2.
For facility of reference, the facts as stated in C.W.P.
No. 771 of 1988 may be noticed.
The admitted position is that the petitioner was appointed as Lance Naik on September 1, 1963.
He was promoted to the rank of Naik on August 1, 1965 and Havildar on December 3, 1967.
The petitioner remained in medical category 'AYE' upto April, 1970.
While posted at Pachmari (MP) the petitioner was admitted to Military Hospital on May 1, 1970.
He was transferred to Military Hospital, Jabalpur on May 2, 1970 for investigation of epileptic fits.
He was found to have developed clonic convulsive seizures.
He was recommended to be invalidated out from service in medical category 'EEE' by the Board held at Military Hospital, Jabalpur on June 22, 1970.
The proceedings of the Board were approved by the competent authority on June 25, 1970.
The petitioner was invalidated out from service on September 12, 1970 after having been found medically unfit for further military service.
His claim for disability pension was initiated but was finally declined on the ground that the disability was not attributable to military service.
The decision of the Controller Defence Accounts was conveyed to the petitioner vide letter dated October 12, 1970, a copy of which has been produced on record as Annexure P-1.
His subsequent representations to the various authorities having borne no fruit, and the claim having been finally declined vide orders dated October 17, 1987 and November 26, 1987 (Annexures P-14 and P-15), the petitioner has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
3.
Mr. BS Sehgal, counsel for the petitioner has contended that para 423 of the Regulations for the Medical Services of Armed Forces, 1962, inter alia, provides for the manner in which the question of attributability to service has to be determined.
Relying on clause (c) thereof, the learned counsel submits that the disability is deemed to have arisen in service if no note of it was made at the time when the petitioner joined the military service.
Maj. SK Aggarwal, who has appeared for the respondents controverts the above stand of the petitioner.
4.
The relevant clause of para 423 of the Regulations reads as under :  "(c) The cause of disability or death resulting from disease is attributable to service when it is established that the disease arose during service on the conditions and circumstances of the disease.
Cases in which it is established that service conditions did not determine or contribute to the onset of the disease but influenced the subsequent cause of the disease will be regarded as aggravated by service.
A disease which led to an individual's discharge or death will ordinarily be deemed to have arisen in service if no note of it was made at the time of the individual's acceptance for service in the Armed Forces.
However, if medical opinion holds, for the reasons to be stated, that the disease could not have been detected on medical examination prior to acceptance for service, the disease will not be deemed to have arisen during service."
5.
A perusal of the above clause shows that a disease which leads to an individual's discharge is ordinarily deemed to have arisen in service if no note of it was made at the time of the individual's acceptance for service in the Armed Forces.
The only exception can be made in a case where it is held "for reasons to be stated" that the disease could not have been detected on medical examination at the time of the individual's acceptance in service.
Admittedly, the petitioner was placed in category 'AYE' at the time of his enrolment in the Armed Forces.
He continued to be medically fit till April, 1970.
It is thus reasonable to infer that the petitioner was medically fit when he entered the Armed Forces on October 20, 1962 and continued to be so till April, 1970.
In this situation, the legal fiction as contemplated under clause (c) would arise and disease shall be deemed to have arisen in service.
It would accordingly be attributable to the service.
There is nothing on record to indicate and nothing has been even pointed out in the written statement to show that the existence of the said disease could not have been detected on medical examination prior to acceptance in service.
In this situation, I have no alternative but to hold that the disease/disability was attributable to Military service.
6.
In this view of the matter, the petitioner was clearly entitled to the grant of disability pension.
His claim was thus wrongly decided by the respondents.
The impugned orders are accordingly quashed.
The respondents are directed to determine and pay the disability pension to the petitioner.
In the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Order accordingly.