Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner herein was appointed as a contingent paid peon vide order dated June 11, 1982 (Annexure P.1).
In the order dated April 6, 1987 (Annexure P.2) it was observed that "the services of contingent paid Peon should not be continued beyond 30487."
Apprehending termination, the petitioner has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
The Motion Bench vide orders dated April 27, 1987 directed that the services of the petitioner shall not be terminated tiff further orders.
The interim order was confirmed on July 24, 1987, when the writ petition was admitted.
2.
The petitioner claims that he worked for more than nine years and has now become overage for recruitment to any post in the State.
3.
Mr. Jaswant Singh, learned counsel for the respondents states that the petitioner had been appointed on a purely temporary basis and was being paid his salary out of the contingent funds.
There is no regular post against which the petitioner can be allowed to continue in service.
4.
Whether the petitioner was recruited against the contingent fund or against a regular post, the fact remains that the necessity for the post existed.
The source from which the salary is paid is not material.
The fact is that the department required his service and he was paid his salary.
If the post was required from 1982 to 1987 and has even continued thereafter on account of the interim order passed by this Court, it appears to be unjust and unfair to now throw out the petitioner from service.
Having served the State for nine long years, the petitioner would obviously be over-age for recruitment to any post in the State.
It would be extremely hard and unjust to render him unemployed at this stage.
5.
Keeping in view the totality of circumstances, it is directed that the petitioner be allowed to continue in his present position till such time as a regular post of peon or equivalent thereto becomes available.
Thereafter the claim of the petitioner for regular appointment to that post shall be considered.
In the circumstances of the case, there shall be no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.