Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner, who was a candidate for the post of Clerk in the Punjab Civil Secretariat and was placed at No. 11 in the list of successful candidates, is aggrieved by the action of the respondents in not appointing her.
Her representations having borne no fruit, she has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
2.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondent it has been inter alia averred that a requisition for 12 posts of Clerks was placed with the Punjab Subordinate Services Selection Board.
On the abolition of the Board, Departmental Selection Committee was constituted.
A written test was held.
The petitioner was placed at Sr. No. 11 in the merit list of candidates belonging to general category.
According to the written statement, the number of posts have been changed from time to time.
It has, however, been stated that out of seven posts, which fell to the share of general category, six have already been filled up.
Sh. Balbir Singh, who has been offered appointment against the post "has yet to join".
3.
This written statement was filed on September 7, 1990.
Mr. KK Jagia, learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the said Balbir Singh has not still joined the post.
He further submits that the petitioner would be overage for post which may be advertised henceforth.
Accordingly, he prays that claim of the petitioner should be considered for appointment to the post of clerk.
4.
Mr. TS Dhindsa, on the other hand, submits that a selected candidate has no right to claim appointment.
He accordingly submits that the writ petition deserves to be dismissed.
He also points out that the waiting list remains in force only for a period of six months and it lapses thereafter.
Reference in this behalf has been made to the instructions of the Government issued vide letter dated July 27, 1989.
5.
A perusal of the written statement filed on behalf of the State shows that the department has been vacillating with regard to the number of posts.
Further, nothing has been pointed out to show that the department had laid down a minimum standard which the petitioner did not fulfil.
The only material averment is in paragraph 5, wherein it has been mentioned that Sh. Balbir Singh, who has been offered appointment has yet to join.
Obviously, a candidate, who has been offered an appointment, has to accept the offer and join within such time as may have been prescribed.
In any case, the department cannot wait till eternity.
If the candidate does not join within the stipulated period or within a reasonable time, who is next in order of merit has to be offered the appointment.
This has not been done.
There is no explanation whatsoever for not offering the post to the other eligible candidate.
In my view, Mr. Balbir Singh having not joined the post, the department is bound to offer it to the candidates in order of merit.
6.
It is no doubt correct that a selected candidate has no indefeasible right to appointment which may be enforced by the issue of a writ of mandamus.
However, even the department does not have any right to arbitrarily deny appointment to the selected candidates.
The action of the department is liable to be struck down as arbitrary and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
The number of posts is normally not very large.
The restrictions regarding age etc. limit the chances for the eligible candidates to compete.
In such a situation, the successful candidates cannot be arbitrarily and without any basis declined appointment.
In the present case, no basis whatsoever for the failure to make an offer to the other selected candidates has been disclosed.
In fact, the vacancy seems to have been diverted to the candidates from various other categories.
This has resulted in gross injustice to the selected candidates.
7.
Mr. Dhindsa, however, submits that the waiting list has already lapsed in view of the instructions appended with the written statement.
I regret my inability to accept this contention.
Firstly, these instructions have no application to the selection, which had been completed prior to the issue of the instructions.
Secondly, the instructions only relate to the waiting list.
It is nowhere suggested that the petitioner was on the waiting list.
8.
Since the candidate immediately above the petitioner at Sr. No. 10 of the merit list, has not chosen to approach this Court in spite of the fact that the selection was made more than three years back, I am of the opinion that the post should be offered to the petitioner.
The writ petition is accordingly allowed and the respondent is directed to offer the post to the petitioner.
This would, of course, be subject to her fulfilling the necessary conditions regarding medical fitness etc.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to her costs, which are assessed at Rs. 1,000/-.
Petition allowed.