Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioners, who were working as Assistants in Punjab State Agricultural Marketing Board, Chandigarh (hereinafter referred to as 'the Board') have made a three-fold grievance.
Firstly, they claim that all vacancies in the cadre of Secretary, Market Committees, which occurred prior to the promulgation of statutory rules called the Punjab State Agricultural Marketing Board (Class-II) Service Rules, 1988 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Rules') has to be filled up in accordance with the criteria prevalent at the time of the occurrence of the vacancies and not on the basis of the Rules.
Secondly, it is claimed on their behalf that the Rules making them totally ineligible for promotion are violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
The petitioners are also aggrieved by the order dated April 4, 1988, by which the various Superintendents etc. working in the Board were given an option for promotion to the posts of Secretaries after being reverted to the posts of Assistants.
On behalf of the respondents it is claimed that the vacancies in the cadre of Secretaries have been filled up in accordance with the rules in force at the time of filling up of the posts and as such petitioners who were not eligible for promotion could not have been considered and promoted.
It has been further pointed out that petitioner No. 1 has already been promoted as Superintendent Grade-II and petitioner No. 2 has been provisionally appointed as Secretary in his own scale of pay till he acquires the requisite experience of 12 years as Assistant.
Petitioner No. 3 is stated to have been promoted as Superintendent Grade-III and petitioner No. 4, it has been averred, will be considered for promotion in his turn.
It has been further averred that petitioner No. 5 is a matriculate and will be considered for promotion to the post of Superintendent in his turn.
2.
A few facts relevant for resolving the controversy may be noticed.
The Board is constituted under the provisions of the Punjab Agriculture Produce Markets Act, 1961 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Act').
Under the Act the State Government nominates the members of the Board, appoint the Secretary and exercises superintendence and control over its affairs.
It has also the power to frame rules including service Rules etc. for carrying out the purposes of the Act.
In the year 1969, a Pay Revision Committee (hereinafter referred as 'the committee') consisting of two officers of the Government and the Secretary of the Board was constituted to go into the question of revision of the grades of the employees of the Board as also the various Market Committees.
It submitted its report to the Government in April, 1970.
The recommendations of the committee were approved by the Government and a direction was issued to the Board to adopt the recommendations.
This direction was issued by the Government vide its letter dated June 3, 1970 (Annexure P.1).
The Board accepted the recommendations of the Committee in its meeting held on November 14, 1972.
The recommendation in respect of the post of Secretary, Market Committee, was contained in paragraph 38.
It reads as under :-  "38 Field Staff of the Board  (a) Secretary to the Market Committee (Rs. 80-330)/(Rs 120-400 with D.P.)
The basic post in the field staff of the Board is that of a Secretary to the Market Committee.
It is borne on a State-wide cadre and is directly controlled by the State Marketing Board.
All Secretaries to the Market Committees are in an identical scale, regardless of the fact whether a Committee is in A, B or C class.
The qualifications envisaged for recruitment to this post as follows :-  "For a direct recruit, he should be a Graduate, for a promotee, he should be a Matriculate with seven years experience in a Market Committee or under the Marketing Board in a post not below the rank of a clerk.
In the interest of smooth working, it is desirable that 2/3rd of the posts should be filled alternatively by promotion from amongst Head Clerks-cum-Accountants of the Committees and Assistants in the Marketing Board/Office, who are graduates with 10 years experience.
33-1/3% posts should be filled by direct recruitment of persons who are at least B.Sc.
(Agri.).
An unsatisfactory feature of the existing pay scales of this post is that it starts from Rs. 80/- which is lower than the minimum of the Head Clerk even who works under him.
Taking all relevant factors into consideration, we would, therefore, recommend that they should be put in the pay scale of Rs.
250-550."
This recommendation was accepted and implemented by the Board w.e.f.
November 14, 1972.
Vide orders dated August 8, 1984 (Annexure P.3), the State Government issued an order to the Board, which inter alia provided as under :-  "2.
Some Assistants of the Marketing Board represented to the Government on 28582 that their due share to the post of Secretary, Market Committee has not been given to them according to the existing policy of giving 33% share in the recruitment.
It transpired from the comments received with your letter No. Estt.
1/16791 dated 10883 that the Assistants of the Marketing Board have not been given their due share in promotion to the post of Secretary, Market Committee which may be given to them immediately under intimation of this Deptt.
3.
On the receipt of a proposal from the Chairman, Marketing Board regarding the change in existing policy of filling up of the post of Secretary, Market Committee the matter was examined in detail.
After taking into consideration all pros and cons it has been decided that the post of Secretary, Market Committee will be filled in accordance with the following new criteria :-  i) Director recruitment 33% ii) Promotion 67% iii) Out of Head Clerks and Accountants of Market Committees, who completed 10 years experience.
33% iv) From amongst Assistants Secretary Market Committees having 5 years experience.
17% v) From amongst Assistants of the Marketing Board having ten years of experience.
17% The new promotion criteria for the post of Secretary, Market Committee will come into force from the date of issue of this order and posts vacant prior to this date are to be filled in accordance with the policy referred to in para 1 above."
A perusal of the above would show that according to the directions of the Government 17% of vacancies in the cadre of Secretary, Market Committees had to be filled up from amongst the Assistants working in the Board who had an experience of ten years.
Furthermore, the order was to be effective from August 8, 1984 and all vacancies which had occurred prior to this date had to be filled up in accordance with the earlier criteria.
4.
The petitioners aver that they have been working in the Board for a long time and had acquired the necessary experience for promotion to the posts of Secretaries, Market Committees in the years 1983, 1984 and 1985.
It has also been averred that a number of vacancies existed against which they could be promoted.
However, the needful was not done.
On the contrary when the statutory rules were about to be published, an option was given to respondent Nos. 3 to 7 who were already working as Superintendents to give their willingness for reversion to the posts of Assistants so that they could be considered for promotion to the posts of Secretaries.
A copy of this letter giving the option to the Superintendents has been appended as Annexure P.6.
Thereafter, the rules were promulgated on May 2, 1988, whereunder the petitioners were rendered ineligible either on account of the lack of academic qualification or the inadequacy of experience.
The action of the Board in not filling up the vacancies which occurred prior to the promulgation of the statutory rules in accordance with the existent criterion, in giving option to respondent Nos. 3 to 7, who were already working as Superintendents and, who according to the petitioners, were to be deemed to have been confirmed in that capacity, as also the provisions of certain rules have been chanllenged through the present petition.
It has been inter alia prayed that the provisions of Rules 9, 19 and item 26 of Appendix 'B' be declared as ultra vires of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution, the order dated April 4, 1988 giving option to respondent Nos. 3 to 7 and a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to consider and promote the petitioners, to the posts of Secretary, Market Committee be issued.
5.
Two separate written statements have been filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2.
Respondent Nos. 3 to 7 have not filed any reply.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondent No. 2 by the Administrative Officer, it has been inter alia averred that the "petitioners did not qualify for promotion as per rules in force at the time of filling up the posts after 2nd May, 1988, when the Punjab State Agricultural Marketing Board (Class-II) Service Rules, 1988 came into force.
The petitioners were not eligible for promotion on account of their lower qualifications."
It has been further averred that "there were in all 43 vacancies upto May 2, 1988, out of which the quota for the eligible Assistants comes to 7 only.
Those seven vacancies have been filled from amongst eligible Assistants as per 1988 Rules on 161988.
Earlier six posts of Secretaries were also filled from amongst the then eligible Assistants in the year 1986."
The averment on behalf of the petitioners that in fact 53 vacancies existed upto March 31, 1988 and that 32 of these vacancies had occurred after August 5, 1984 has not been specifically denied.
6.
I have heard Mr. SS Nijjar, learned counsel for the petitioners and Mr. KS Gill, learned counsel for the respondent No. 2.
Mr. Nijjar has inter alia argued that the vacancies had to be filled up in accordance with the criterion applicable at the time of the occurrence of the vacancy.
He has further contended that respondent Nos. 3 to 7 have been working as superintendents since the year 1982 to 1986 and in accordance with the decision of the Board taken as far back as in the year 1961 by which it is provided that "the employee should normally be confirmed by the competent authority after completion of the year probationary period from the date of joining the post," respondent Nos. 3 to 7 shall be deemed to have been confirmed.
Thereafter, they had lost their lien on the post of Assistants and could not be given the option to seek reversion.
He has also contended that the provisions of Rules 9 and 19 as also the qualification prescribed for appointment to the post of Secretary, were ultra vires of Articles 14 and 16 of the Contitution.
Learned counsel for the respondents have contended that the vacancies had to be filled up according to the rules, which were in force at the time of the filling up of all the vacancies and accordingly there was no infirmity in the action of the respondents.
It has also been contended that respondent Nos. 3 to 7 were senior to the petitioners as Assistants and the action of the Board in giving them an option was perfectly just and fair.
Mr. Gill also produced before me a statement prepared on the basis of the office record to show that all the petitioners had since been promoted to the post of Superintendent or Secretaries, Market Committees according the their eligibility.
A copy of the statement supplied by Mr. Gill is placed on record as "Mark A".
7.
The Government of Punjab had issued instructions vide its letter dated April 27, 1982 (Annexure 7), in which it was inter alia provided as under :-  "The matter has been given careful consideration by Government and it has been decided that in future the date of occurrence of vacancy shall be taken as the relevant date of determining eligibility of promotion to higher post(s)."
This instruction embodies a salutary principle.
This principle has been judicially recognised by Courts in a slightly different form and it has been held that a vacancy should be filled in accordance with the rules prevalent at the time it occurs and it shall not be governed by the rules promulgated thereafter.
In YV Rangaiah v. J Sreenivasa Rao, (1983)3 SCC 284, it was observed as under :-  "The vacancies which occurred prior to the amended rules would be governed by the old rules and not by the amended rules.
It is admitted by counsel for both the parties that henceforth promotion to the post of Sub-Registrar Grade II will be according to the new rules on the zonal basis and not on the State-wide basis and, therefore, there was no question of challenging the new rules.
But the question is of filling the vacancies that occurred prior to the amended rules.
We have not the slightest doubt that the posts which fell vacant prior to the amended rules would be governed by the old rules and not by the new rules."
(Emphasis supplied).
Following the above dictum of law, it was held by this Court in Rajinder Gandhi v. Union of India, 1983(3) SLR 260, as under :-  "In the light of the discussion above and following the dictum of the Supreme Court in YV Rangaiah's case (supra) I allow this petition and direct the respondent authorities to fill up the vacancies occurring or available with them prior to the 1st July, 1983 in accordance with the rules applicable to the service prior to the enforcement of 1983 Rules.
The result is that the petitioners' claim for promotion to the posts of Assistant Accountants-General, Class I, would be considered in the light of 1988 Rules and the instructions referred to above.
Since the matter i.e., filling of these vacancies has apparently been delayed for too long, I further direct the respondent authorities to complete the process of selection and appointment to the said vacancies within a period of six months from today.
I pass no order as to costs."
8.
Respectfully following the above dictum of law, I am of the view that the promotion to the post of Secretary had to be made in accordance with the criterion which existed at the time of the occurrence of the vacancy.
The action of the Board in filling up the vacancies which occurred prior to the promulgation of the rules on May 2, 1988 in accordance with the rules and not in following the criterion which existed at the time of occurrence of the vacancy, was wholly illegal.
Eligible persons like the petitioners, were rendered ineligible and thus excluded from consideration.
The proper course for the Board was to work out the year-wise vacancies and to consider the claim for promotion in accordance with the criteria which existed at the time of the occurrence of the vacancy and to promote the eligible person in accordance with the criteria and quota prevalent at that time.
In the circumstances of the case, it is necessary for the Board to work out the vacancies which occurred from the year 1984-85 till May 1, 1988.
The eligibility of the candidates including the petitioners should be determined with reference to the date of occurrence of each vacancy and the persons considered suitable for manning the post(s) may be considered and promoted with effect from that date.
The rules shall apply only in respect of the vacancies which occurred on or after May 2, 1988.
9.
It was stated by Mr. Nijjar that some of the petitioners may not be keen to press their claim on account of the promotions, which are stated to have been granted to them during the pendency of the petition.
Be that as it may, the board shall consider the claims of all eligible persons, including the petitioners, in accordance with the above directions and promote the persons found eligible and suitable.
Such of the petitioners do not wish to avail of the order of promotion would be at liberty to decline the promotion.
The post, which may thus become available shall be offered to the next candidate.
10.
In view of my above conclusion, it does not appear to be necessary to consider the remaining two submissions made on behalf of the petitioners.
11.
I accordingly allow the petition in the above terms.
On promotion, the petitioners shall be entitled to the consequential reliefs in the nature of refixation of their pay, seniority and arrears of salary etc.
They will also be entitled to interest @ 12 per cent on the arrears of salary from the date of promotion till the date of actual payment.
The Motion Bench vide orders dated May 25, 1988 was inter alia pleased to order that "promotion, if any, in the meantime shall be subject to the result of this writ petition."
Accordingly, if it becomes necessary, the Board shall be at liberty to revert a person who may have been promoted after the filing of the writ petition.
The petitioners shall also be entitled to their costs, which are assessed at Rs. 3,000/-.
Petition allowed.