GS Singhvi, J - Whether the petitioner whose name was included in the waiting list prepared by the Haryana Public Service Commission (hereinafter referred to as `the Commission') for recruitment of Headmistresses has acquired a legal right to be appointed to the service is the only issue which arises for adjudication in this petition.
2.
The facts on which there is no dispute between the parties are that in response to the advertisement issued by the Commission is September, 1993 for selection of 50 Headmistress to the H.E.S.
Class-II (Gazetted) School Cadre, the petitioner who is a Backward Class of Haryana applied in the prescribed form.
She was interviewed by the Commission in February 1995 along with other eligible candidates.
In the select list notified by the Commission on December 13, 1995, two candidates belonging to the Backward Classes were placed in the main list and two other including the petitioner were placed in the waiting list.
On the basis of the recommendations made by the Commission, the Government appointed the candidates whose names were included in the main select list.
However, it did not act upon the waiting list.
Instead, it decided to initiate fresh recruitment against the available vacant posts of Headmistresses.
3.
Having come to know of the steps taken by the Commission for fresh recruitment of the Headmistresses, the petitioner filed this petition on 2721997 and prayed for directing the respondents to appoint her before making appointments pursuant to the advertisement dated 3091996.
4.
The respondents have contested the claim of the petitioner to be appointed against the posts reserved for Backward Classes on the ground that out of 50 posts advertised in September, 1993, only two were reserved for Backward Classes and those who were found more meritorious in the category of Backward Classes have already been appointed and as the name of the petitioner has been included in the waiting list she is not entitled to be appointed against the reserved posts which became available after the issuance of advertisement in September, 1993.
The respondents have also pleaded that the select list prepared by the Commission has lapsed and, therefore, no direction should be given for appointing the petitioner against the posts reserved for backward Classes.
5.
The first contention urged by Shri AS Gulia, learned counsel for the petitioner is that the action of the respondents No. 1, 2 and 5 in advertising only two posts of Backward Classes is per se illegal because as per the reservation policy atleast 10% of the advertised posts should have been reserved for Backward Classes and if the policy of reservation was correctly implemented, the Commission was bound to advertise atleast five posts for backward Classes.
Learned counsel submitted that the petitioner whose name appeared at S.No.
4 in the merit list of Backward Classes candidates is entitled to be appointed against one of the three remaining posts which ought to have been reserved for Backward Classes.
The learned Deputy Advocate General submitted that while sending requisition to the Commission, the Government had kept in view the back-log of vacancies meant to be filled from amongst Scheduled Castes and Ex-Servicemen and out of the remaining vacancies only two posts falling on roster points 70 and 76 could be reserved for Backward Classes.
Shri Goyal further argued that after having taken part in the selection on the basis of the advertisement issued by the Commission, the petitioner is not entitled to question the legality of the advertisement.
The learned State Counsel pointed out that in the absence of any prayer in the writ petition to quash the advertisement, the petitioner is not entitled to any relief.
6.
Having considered the rival contentions, we are of the opinion that the respondents No. 1, 2 and 5 have not committed any illegality in reserving only two posts for Backward Classes.
A look at the extract of the advertisement, which has been placed on the record as Annexure P.1, shows that out of the total 50 posts, eleven were meant for general category, nineteen for Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes, two for backward Classes of Haryana and eighteen for Ex-Servicemen.
As on the date of issuance of the advertisement the reservation prescribed for Scheduled Castes and Ex-servicemen was 22% and 17% respectively.
If this percentage was implemented even without taking into consideration the back-log of vacancies meant for Scheduled Castes and Ex- Servicemen, atleast eleven posts would have been reserved for Scheduled Castes.
Likewise for Ex-Servicemen, nine posts would have been reserved.
However, keeping in view the back-log of vacancies, the Commission reserved 19 posts for Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes of Haryana and 18 posts for Ex- Servicemen of Haryana.
If the roster point is applied against the remaining vacancies, then only two posts fall to the share of Backward Classes and the petitioner is not entitled to make a grievance that she has been deprived of her right to be considered for appointment against the posts reserved for Backward Classes on account of reservation of only two posts.
7.
We also find substance in the argument of Shri Goyal that after having taken part in the process of selection, the petitioner cannot challenge, directly or indirectly, the advertisement issued by the Commission.
In our opinion, the petitioner will be deemed to have waived her right to challenge the advertisement issued by the Commission because she took part in the process of selection fully knowing that only two posts were earmarked for Backward Classes and her right to be considered against the reserved vacancies meant for Backward Classes was limited to the two posts.
8.
Above all the acceptance of the plea of the petitioner would amount to upsetting the selection made by the Commission as well as the appointment made by the Government.
That we cannot do because the persons who have been appointed on the recommendations of the Commission are not parties to the petition and any order by the Court affecting the appointment of those persons who are not parties to the writ petition will be contrary to the rule of audi alteram partem.
9.
The second contention argued by Shri Gulia is that the petitioner has acquired a legal right to be appointment as Headmistress because her name was included in the waiting list.
The learned counsel invited our attention to the instructions issued by the Government of Haryana vide circular dated 28101993 and argued that in view of the administrative instructions issued by the Government for preparation of the waiting list the petitioner should have been appointed against one of the posts of Head Mistresses which fell vacant after issuance of the advertisement in September, 1993.
This contention of the learned counsel cannot be accepted due to the following reasons:-  (1) A candidate whose name is included in the waiting list does not acquire a legal right to be appointed on the posts/vacancies which become available after initiation of the process of recruitment.
The principle of law which emerges from the decisions of the Supreme Court in State of Haryana v. Subhash Chander Marwaha, AIR 1973 SC 2216; Shankarsan Dash v. Union of India, JT 1992(2) SC 380 : 1991(2) SCT 555 (SC) and State of Bihar v. Mohd.
Kalimuddin and others, AIR 1996 SC 1145 : 1996(2) SCT 515 (SC), is that a candidate whose name is included in the select list does not acquire an indefeasible right to be appointed to the service and the appointing authority can for good and sufficient reasons, refuse to appoint the selected candidate.
If that is the fate of a candidate whose name is included in the main select list, there is no justification for accepting the plea of the petitioner for issuance of a mandamus to the official respondents to appoint her because her name has been included only in the waiting list.
A candidate whose name is included in the waiting list cannot acquire a right better than the right of one whose name is included in the main select list.
(2) The purpose for which a waiting list is prepared by the Commission and other recruiting agencies has been spelt out by the Supreme Court in Hoshiar Singh v. State Haryana, JT 1993(5) SC 63 : 1993(4) SCT 291 (SC); Madan Lal v. State of Jammu and Kashmir, AIR 1995 SC 1088 : 1995(2) SCT 880 (SC) and N Mohanan v. State of Kerala and others, JT 1997(1) SC 475 : 1997(1) SCT 790 (SC).
In these decisions, the Supreme Court has held that the waiting list can be used only for making appointment against the unfilled posts/vacancies and the posts/vacancies which become available after initiation of the process of selection cannot be utilised for the purpose of making appointment from the waiting list.
10.
In Dr. Chander Bhan v. State of Haryana and others, C.W.P.
No. 3538 of 1997 decided on 1431997 along with four other writ petitions, this Court after an indepth examination of the issue relating to the status of a candidate whose name is included in the waiting list and his/her right to be appointed against the available posts held as under :-  ``In view of the above referred decisions of the Supreme Court, it must be treated as well settled that mere selection does not confer an indefeasible right upon the selected candidate to be appointed against the vacant post and it is open to the competent authority not to make appointment from the select list provided that the decision of the appointing authority is not vitiated by arbitrariness or mala fides or violation of the provisions of law.
A person whose name is included in the waiting list cannot claim better right than the one whose name is included in the main select list.
The appointing authority may utilise the waiting list for making appointment against advertised posts/vacancies which may remain unfilled due to non-joining of the selected candidates.
In an extraordinary situation, the appointing authority may also utilise the anticipated vacancies for making appointment for the waiting list provided a clear indication to this effect is given in the requisition sent to the selecting agency and the selection is made by taking into consideration the anticipated vacancies.
However, the candidate who is placed in the waiting list has no right to seek a mandamus from the Court directing the competent authority to appoint him/her against the vacancies becoming available after the commencement of selection process.''
In view of the above stated legal position, the petitioner has no right to be appointed against the posts of Headmistresses reserved for Backward Classes which became available after September, 1993.
11.
There is one more reason why the petitioner cannot be appointed against the vacancies which occurred after September, 1993.
All such vacancies were to be notified/published with a view to give opportunity of consideration to those who may not have been eligible as on the last date fixed for the receipt of applications with reference to the advertisement of September, 1993 but who may have become eligible later on.
If the Court was to direct the respondents to appoint the petitioner against the vacancies occurring subsequently then the rights of a large number of unknown persons will be adversely affected.
This would also amount to denial of fundamental right to equality in the matter of employment which is guaranteed by Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
For taking this view, we can safely draw support from the observations made by the Supreme Court in Ashok Kumar and others v. The Chairman, Banking Service Recruitment Board and others, JT 1995(8) SC 276 : 1996(1) SCT 660 (SC), wherein the Supreme Court rejected the claim of the candidates whose names were placed in the waiting list and held :-  ``Article 14 read with Article 16(1) of the Constitution enshrine fundamental right to every citizen to claim consideration for appointment to a post under the State.
Therefore, vacant posts arising or expected should be notified inviting applications from all eligible candidates to be considered for their selection in accordance with their merit.
The recruitment of the candidates in excess of the notified vacancies is a denial and deprivation of the constitutional right under Article 14 read with Article 16(1) of the Constitution.
The procedure adopted, therefore, in appointing the persons kept in the waiting list by the respective Board, though the vacancies had arisen subsequently without being notified for recruitment, is unconstitutional.
However, since the appointments have already been made and none was impleaded, we are not inclined to interfere with these matters adversely affecting their appointments.
However, hereafter the respective Boards should notify the existing and expected vacancies and the Recruitment Board should get advertisement published and recruitment should strictly be made by the respective Boards in accordance with the procedure to the notified vacancies but not to any vacancies that may arise during the process of selection.''
(emphasis supplied).
12.
The argument of Shri Gulia which is based on the instructions issued by the Government vide circular dated 28101993 is wholly untenable because the true import of those instructions has been completely misunderstood.
These instructions merely empower the appointing authority to utilise the waiting list for making appointments.
This power, in our opinion, can be exercised only for making appointment against the unfilled vacancies in view of the pronouncement of the Supreme Court.
In any case, these instructions cannot be read as conferring a right upon the selected candidate to seek the issuance of a mandamus for his appointment.
The right of the appointing authority not to act upon the select list is very well recognised.
Therefore, the circular issued on 28101993 cannot be made basis for directing the respondents to appoint the petitioner against the future vacancies.
13.
There is yet another reason why no relief can be given to the petitioner.
As per the petitioner's own showing, the life of the select list prepared by the Commission is one year.
Admittedly, the Commission had notified the list on 13121995.
Therefore the tenure of the list ended on 12121996.
The petitioner did not move this Court till the expiry of one year and two months calculated with reference to the date on which the select list was notified.
Therefore, the Court cannot, in exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution, issue mandamus to the infuse life in the dead select list.
This view of ours finds support from the decisions of the Supreme Court in State of Bihar v. Mohd.
Kalimuddin, AIR 1996 SC 1145 : 1996(2) SCT 515 (SC) and State of UP v. Harish Chandra and others, AIR 1996 SC 2173 : 1996(2) SCT 712 (SC).
In the latter case, the Apex Court has observed as under :-  ``Notwithstanding the aforesaid Statutory Rule and without applying the mind to the aforesaid Rule the High Court relying upon some earlier decisions of the Court came to hold that the list does not expire after a period of one year which on the face of it is erroneous.
Further question that arises in this context is whether the High Court was justified in issuing the mandamus to the appellant to make recruitment of the writ petitioners.
Under the Constitution a mandamus can be issued by the Court when the applicant establishes that he has a legal right to the performance of legal duty by the party against whom the mandamus is sought and said right was subsisting on the date of the petition.
The duty that may be enjoined by mandamus may be one imposed by the Constitution or a Statute or by Rules or orders having the force of law.
But no mandamus can be issued to direct the Government to refrain from enforcing the provisions of law or to do something which is contrary to law.
This being the position and in view of the Statutory Rules contained in Rule 26 of the Recruitment Rules we really fail to understand how the High Court could issue the impugned direction to recruit the respondents who were included in the select list prepared on 4487 and the list no longer survived after one year and the rights, if any, of persons included in the list did not subsist.
In the course of hearing the learned counsel for the respondents, no doubt, have pointed out some materials which indicate that the Administrative Authorities have made the appointment from a list beyond the period of one year from its preparation.
The learned counsel appearing for the appellants submitted that in some cases pursuance to the direction of the Court some appointments have been made but in some other cases it might have been done by the Appointing Authority.
Even though we are persuaded to accept the submission of the learned counsel for the respondents that on some occasion appointments have been made by the Appointing Authority from a select list even after the expiry of one year from the date of selection but such illegal action of the Appointing Authority does not confer a right on an applicant to be enforced by a Court under Article 226 of the Constitution.
We have no hesitation in coming to the conclusion that such appointments by the Appointing Authority have been made contrary to the provisions of the Statutory Rules for some unknown reason and we deprecate the practice adopted by the appointing Authority in making such appointments contrary to the Statutory Rules.
But at the same time it is difficult for us to sustain the direction given by the High Court since, admittedly, the life of the select list prepared on 4487 had expired long since and the respondents who claim their rights to be appointed on the basis of such list did not have a subsisting right on the date they approached the High Court.
We may not be understood to imply that the High Court must issue such direction, if the writ petition was filed before the expirty of the period of one year and the same was disposed of after the expiry of the statutory period......'' We, therefore hold that the petitioner is not entitled to any relief.
Hence, the petition is dismissed.