GR Majithia, J - In this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner has sought a mandate from this Court to the respondents to regularise his services as a Hindi Teacher pursuant to the Chief Secretary to Government, Punjab's Letter No. 6/2334/78-3PP/11961, dated October 28, 1980.
2.
Reference to the relevant facts be made to resolve the dispute raised in this petition :-  The petitioner, after obtaining qualification of Higher Secondary (Part I), Shastri and OT, joined the service of Education Department, Punjab as a Hindi Teacher on ad hoc basis on October 29, 1976 and continued in service without break.
On October 28, 1980, the Chief Secretary to Government, Punjab, issued instructions in supersession of all previous instructions that the services of all ad hoc employees who had completed three years service with or without break will be regularised by the respective Departments forthwith.
The petitioner's services were not regularized in accordance with the instructions on the ground that he did not fulfil the requisite qualification of appointment as Hindi Teacher.
Through a Gazette Notification dated August 5, 1980, it was provided that for appointment as a Hindi Teacher the incumbent must possess the following basic qualifications :-  "Matric, Prabhakar (Honours in Hindi)" 3.
In exercise of the power conferred by the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India, the Governor of Punjab framed rules called "Punjab Education Service, Class III, School Cadre Rules, 1955 (for short, the Rules) for regulating recruitment and conditions of service of persons appointed to the Punjab Educational State Service Class III (School Cadre).
Rule 2 of the Rules deals with the definition.
In clause (c) of Rule 2, 'Service ' means the Punjab Education Service, Class III School Cadre.
Rule 4 of the rules deals with the requisite qualification for appointment to the Service.
Rule 4(d) says that an incumbent will be entitled for appointment to a post specified in column 2 of appointment to a post specified in column 2 of appendix 'B' if he/she possesses the qualification specified in column 3 against each post.
The qualification prescribed therein for appointment as Hindi Teacher was "Shastri/Prabhakar, S.T.C.
or with OT Certificate".
The appointment of the petitioner as a Hindi Teacher was made in accordance with the Rules.
On the date when he was appointed, the possessed the requisite qualification for appointment as a Hindi Teacher.
The qualification for appointment as a Hindi Teacher could not be unilaterally amended to the prejudice of the petitioner.
Under the Rules, discretion has been given to the appointing authority to waive the condition of possessing minimum qualification for appointment to service in given case.
Even if Prabhakar was the necessary qualification for appointment as a Hindi Teacher, it would be deemed to have been waived in the petitioner's case when he was appointed as such.
The petitioner is working as a Hindi Teacher since November 29, 1976.
The writ petition came up for motion hearing on November 24, 1982 and the State counsel was directed to seek instructions for regularising the petitioner's services.
The Department could not take final decision till February 22, 1984, on which date the writ petition was admitted to hearing and the respondents were restrained from terminating the services of the petitioner.
The writ petition has been pending in this Court for more than eight years.
The petitioner has been in service for the last more than 14 years.
It will be very hard on him if his services are now terminated merely on the ground that he did not possess the requisite qualification as prescribed vide notification dated August 5, 1980.
The requirement of possession of Prabhakar qualification by amendment in the Rules subsequently will not disentitle the petitioner from claiming the benefit of the policy decision contained in Chief Secretary's letter dated October 28, 1980.
4.
For the reasons aforesaid, the writ petition succeeds.
The respondents are directed to regularize the services of the petitioner as a Hindi Teacher in accordance with the Chief Secretary's letter dated October 28, 1980 within one month from the date of receipt of copy of this judgment.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.