Harphul Singh, J - The petitioner who was appointed as a J.B.T.
Teacher on ad hoc basis seeks regularisation of his services through this Writ Petition.
2.
The facts, in brief, stated in the petition are that the petitioner who is a physically handicapped person, got his name registered in the Employment Exchange for the physically handicapped persons at Chandigarh.
The Special Employment Exchange meant for the Physically Handicapped person forwarded the name of the petitioner to the District Education Officer, Ludhiana, for appointment as a J.B.T.
teacher.
He was appointed as such by District Education Officer, Ludhiana on November 13, 1973.
The petitioner joined the said post on November 14, 1973 and is continuing on that post.
It is further stated that the petitioner had completed about seven years regular service without any break in the Punjab Education Department.
During the period of seven years, the petitioner had worked most efficiently and meritoriously to the full satisfaction of his superiors.
The President of India with a view to eliminate the discrimination to the ad hoc employees and ameliorate their lot, issued an order, dated May 3, 1977 deciding to regularise the appointment of each ad hoc employee who had put in one year's service on March 31, 1977.
It is laid down in this order that notional break including the break on account of summer vacation etc. of such employees be also condoned.
3.
It is averred in the petition that the petitioner fulfils all the conditions laid down in the order, dated May 3, 1977 (Copy Annexure P4).
Not only that leaving aside the question of physically handicappedness, he is fully entitled for the regularisation of his services in view of the policy decision of the State Government as circulated on May 3, 1977, having completed a period of more than one year's regular service on March 31, 1977.
4.
The petitioner states that though at the time of his appointment, his date of birth was December 24, 1942 and his age was 30 years and about 11 months, yet the age limit for appointment to the post of J.B.T.
Teacher was raised to 32 years by the State Government, vide letter, dated August 16, 1974 (Copy Annexure P6), and he was less than 32 years of age on that date.
Hence, the petitioner was within age limit when the age for appointment to the post of JBT Teachers was relaxed by the State Government.
5.
It is alleged by the petitioner that he has been representing to the respondents that his services as J.B.T.
Teacher may be regularised as had been done in the case of other similarly situated employees and who were junior to him, because he had completed the period of more than one year's service on May 31, 1977, and fulfilled all the conditions laid down in the order, dated May 3, 1977, issued by the President of India.
6.
Written statement has been filed by Shri Manohar Singh, Deputy District Education Officer (Primary), Ludhiana respondent No. 3 on behalf of all the respondents.
The claim of the petitioner has been refuted.
It is stated therein that his services could to be regularised in view of Para 3(2) of the order, dated May 3, 1977, because he was overage at the time of his first appointment.
It has also been mentioned in the written statement that the case of the petitioner is not covered even by the letter, dated April 18, 1973, because he was overage and also did not produce medical certificate of being 'disabled handicapped' but otherwise fit for Civil service from the Chief Medical Officer/Civil Surgeon.
The sum total of the reply is that the services of the petitioner could to be regularised, he being overage at the time of his first appointment and also due to lack of proof of being 'disabled handicapped' but otherwise fit for civil employment from the competent authority.
7.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has produced in Court a copy of order, dated October 28, 1980, in which it has been started that the cases of such ad hoc employees who had completed three years service on September 30, 1980 and had satisfactory record of service but who did not fulfil the prescribed conditions with regard to qualifications, age or mode of their initial recruitment would also be considered for regularisation in relaxation of those conditions if the Departmental Service Rules applicable to those employees provided for relaxation of those conditions of recruitment.
8.
The learned counsel for the petitioner argues that in view of the abovesaid order, the services of the petitioner should have been regularised.
A copy of this order is placed on the file which will be read as Annexure P8 to the petition.
9.
In support of his contention, the learned counsel has also cited a Division Bench judgment of this Court in Jagdish Singh P.T.I.
v. The State of Punjab, 1987(4) S.L.R.
688.
10.
The learned counsel for the respondents did not dispute the existence of the order, dated October 28, 1980, of the Punjab Government, but reiterated the objections taken up in the written statement.
The respondents have also not denied that the petitioner had a good record of service.
11.
In Jagdish Singh's case (supra) the petitioners were employees of the Punjab Government in various schools as Teachers and Physical Training Instructors.
While deciding, the learned Bench took into account the order, dated October 28, 1980 issued by the Punjab Government and it was held that the petitioners were entitled to be considered for regularisation of their services to the posts to which they had been recruited in terms of Paragraph 2 thereof.
Also it is not disputed that the Departmental Service Rules applicable to the service provided for relaxation of those conditions of recruitment.
The case of the petitioner in the present case is in no way a different one.
Admittedly, the petitioner had completed more than three years of service as J.B.T.
Teacher on ad hoc basis on September 30, 1980 and is still serving as J.B.T.
Teacher.
I do not find any reason as to why the petitioner should not get the benefit of the order of the Punjab Government, dated October 28, 1980.
12.
In view of the above discussion, this writ petition succeeds and is allowed, with no order as to costs.
13.
The respondents are directed to consider the case of the petitioner for regularisation of his services in accordance with the order of the Punjab Government, dated October 28, 1980, within three months from the date of receipt of a copy of this judgment.
Petition allowed.