Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - There were five posts of Octroi Clerks and two posts of Safai Sewaks, which fell vacant in the Municipal Committee, Sunam, respondent No. 3 on account of retirement or death of some of its employees.
Respondent No. 3, with a view of filling up these vacancies approached the Director, Local Government Punjab, Chandigarh for seeking necessary permission.
While conveying the said permission, the Director vide letter darted 2431988, copy Annexure P-2 to the writ petition, directed the Executive Officer, Municipal Committee, respondent No. 3 to take further action in accordance with the instructions contained in Memo No. DIG-GB-88/8229-8435, dated 2.3.1988 addressed to all the Executive Officers in the State of Punjab.
These instructions envisage that the vacancies which may be caused by the retirement or death of an employee including leave vacancies not less than sixty days provided the vacancy which may occur, be filled up as per the prescribed procedure after notifying the vacancy to the Employment Exchange as well as Director, Sainik Board, Punjab etc.  2.
These posts were advertised by respondent No. 3 through an advertisement which appeared in the Punjabi Tribune dated 14.4.1988 and in Daily Kaumi Din published from Sangrur.
The said posts were also notified to Secretary, Sainik Board, Sangrur, Deputy Director, Local Govt. Patiala, Deputy Commissioner, Sangrur, Director, Saninik Board, Chandigarh, District Welfare Officer, Sangrur and also to Chairman, Central Placement Committee, Chandigarh.
The Deputy Director, Local Government, Punjab, Patiala was also informed in the matter vide communication dated 841988, copy Annexure P-5 to the writ petition, whereupon the said Deputy Director put the following queries to respondent No. 3 :-  "(i) From which date these posts are vacant.
(ii) Whether Municipality had got the sanction from Government to fill up the vacancies.
If not then, under which directions recruitment is being made.
If yes, then one copy may be sent to this office.
(iii) What is the position of vacant posts of Municipality according to new instructions of Govt. dated 2.3.1988.
A detailed report may be sent to this regard."
Respondent No. 3, vide his communication dated 2141988, copy Annexure P-6 to the writ petition, supplied the requisite information, the details of which are given in para 5 of the writ petition.
Later on, the Administrator vide his order dated 2641988, copy Annexure P-7 to the writ petition, constituted a Selection Sub Committee consisting of Executive Officer, Municipality, Sunam as Chairman and one member each from district Welfare Officer, Sangrur, Secretary, District Sainik Board, Sangrur and the criterion for selection was prescribed, as given in para 6 of the writ petition, as per order dated 4.3.1988, copy Annexure P-8 to the writ petition.
The petitioners were interviewed on 5.5.1958 by the Selection Sub-Committee and the petitioners names were recommended for appointment vide its report, copy Annexure P-9.
After accepting the recommendations of the Selection Sub Committee by the Administrator vide his order No. 148 dated 2551988, the Executive Officer, Municipality, Sunam issued appointment letter to the petitioner vide order Nos. 62 and 63 dated 161988, copies Annexure P-11 and P-12 to the writ petition.
They accordingly joined their respective duties.
The services of petitioner Nos. 5 and 6 namely Dara and Shammi, who were already working in the Municipality, Sunam, as Safai Sewaks, were subsequently regularised.
3.
To the petitioners' great dismay, respondent No. 2, vide his order darted 1371988, copy Annexure P-13 to the writ petition suspended order No. 148 dated 2551988 whereby the recommendations of Selection Sub-Committee were accepted, on the plea that he was not associated with the interview and the criterion laid down for selection was not correct.
Further the selection was not made according to the merit.
Complying with the aforesaid order, the petitioners were relieved from their duties on 1571988 as per Annexures P-14 and P-15 to the writ petition.
4.
The petitioners have challenged the orders dated 1571988, copies Annexures P-14 and P-15 vide which they were relieved from their duties, on the plea that their appointments were made in accordance with the rules and regulations after following the prescribed procedure.
It was contended for the petitioners that order dated 1371988, Annexure P-13 suspending the appointment orders and subsequent relieving orders dated 1571988, Annexures P-14 and P-15 were passed illegally and suffer from the vice of arbitrariness being violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
The impugned order has been assailed on the ground that the Deputy Director, Local Govt., Punjab, Patiala has no power to suspend the resolution which had already been executed.
The power to appoint an employee vests in the Municipal Committee and it is competent to fill in all posts which are under its administrative control by making appointments in exercise of the powers conferred under Section 39 of the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911.
5.
It was further pleaded that the vacancies were filled up in accordance with the guidelines as contained in Annexure P-3 after observing all the formalities.
One of the reasons, as mentioned in the impugned order suspending order dt. 2551988 vide which the recommendations of the Selection Sub Committee for appointment of the petitioners were accepted, is that the vacancies were not notified and the Director Local Govt. Patiala was not associated with the interview for these appointments.
Respondent No. 3 notified the vacancies to all the concerned quarters including respondent No. 2 and thereafter a Selection Sub Committee was instituted by the Administrator, Municipal Committee, Sunam vide his order dated 2641988, copy Annexure P-7 to the writ petition.
In view of this fact, the plea of respondent No. 2 that he had no knowledge of the criterion laid down for appointment is totally without any base.
6.
The learned counsel for the petitioners has also argued with full vehemence that the order of Director, Local Government, Punjab, respondent No. 2 is contradictory in terms.
The main ground for suspending the Resolution No. 143 dated 2551988 of the Administrator, MC Sunam, appointing the petitioners, is that their selection was not in accordance with the guidelines as laid down in Annexure P-3.
If that be so, then the selection made as a whole should have been struck down and the petitioners in the matter of appointment have been discriminated as appointment of one Amar Partap Singh, who was also appointed with the petitioner vide same resolution, should also have been rejected.
7.
The official respondents have filed their detailed respective written statements.
8.
The categoric stand of respondent No. 2 is that resolution No. 143 dated 2551988 passed by the Administrator, Municipal Committee, Sunam appointing the petitioners, was rightly suspended by the Deputy Director, Local Govt., Patiala, respondent No. 2 in exercise of the powers conferred upon him by virtue of section 232 of the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911 as the selection of the candidates was made in an arbitrary manner and in utter disregard of the Government instructions.
9.
I have considered the respective submissions of the learned counsel for the parties and perused the paper-book.
10.
The first contention raised by the petitioners' counsel is that power to make appointment vests in the Municipal Committee and once the approval is accorded by the Government to fill up the vacancies and in pursuance of that approval appointments are made by the Committee after it has passed a resolution, the resolution of the Committee cannot be annulled by the Govt. unless there are valid reasons for doing so.
11.
In Administrator, Lahore Municipality v. Lala Jagan Nath, A.I.R. 1939 Lahore 531, it was held that where an order of the Committee in pursuance of a resolution passed by it has been carried out, it is not within the competence of the Deputy Commissioner or Commissioner to suspend its execution after it has been carried out and orders passed by them to that effect are ultra vires.
This view further finds support from the law laid down by this Court in Satish Kumar v. State of Punjab, 1987(2) Punjab Legal Reports and Statutes 630, wherein MR Agnihotri, J while following the ratio of the decision rendered in CWP No. 858 of 1978 (Ishwar Dial Mathur v. State of Punjab), decided on 14121973, observed that Section 236 of the Act entitles the Government to exercise control over the Municipal Committees and to set aside the resolution passed by them if they are against the provisions of any law.
Applying the enunciation of law, the Court came to the conclusion that -  (1) A Municipal Committee is competent to fill in all the posts which are in its administrative control by making appointment by direct recruitment or by promotion in exercise of the powers conferred under Section 39 of the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911.
(2) XXX XXX XXX (3) Once the approval to the proposal of a Municipal Committee for the conversion of posts carrying lower pay scale to those of higher pay scale is granted by the State Government or the Director, Local Self Government, Punjab, as the case may be, the State Government and Director Local Self Government, become functus officio and are then estopped from annulling the orders of the Municipal Committee with regard to the filling up of those posts by promotion of its own employees, and (4) Powers under Section 236 of the Act cannot be exercised by the State Government or the Director, Local Self Government, for annulling the resolution or order of the Municipal Committee, unless a clear and specific finding is arrived at after proper consideration of the material available on the record that the action of the Municipal Committee concerned was not in conformity with law.
12.
In the present case, the approval to fill in the posts was accorded by the Director, Local Government, Punjab, Chandigarh vide his order dated 2431988, copy Annexure P-2 and after observing all the formalities required under the rules and guidelines all the petitioners were selected by a duly constituted selection Sub-Committee and appointed vide resolution No. 143 dated 2551988 passed by the Administrator, Municipal Committee, Sunam after having accepted the recommendations made by the aforesaid Selection Committees.
Mere mention in the impugned order dated 1371988 suspending the resolution dated 2551988 appointing the petitioners, that the criterion laid down by the Municipality to assess the capability was not correct and that many candidates who were having higher merits were ignored, was not sufficient to annul the resolution dated 2551988 passed by the Administrator.
In the impugned order neither any particular candidate was named who was having higher merit than the petitioner nor there was a specific reference of the rules the provisions of which have been violated by the Administrator or Municipal Committee while filling up the vacancies.
Since the impugned order does not disclose any clear and specific finding that the action of Municipal Committee was not in conformity with law, therefore, the same cannot be legally sustained and is liable to be set aside.
I also find considerable force in the other contention raised by the Counsel for the petitioner that if the selection of the petitioners was not made in accordance with the guidelines, the entire selection should have been struck down.
The action of respondent No. 2 upholding the appointment of Amar Partap Singh clearly suffers from the vice of arbitrariness.
13.
In view of the foregoing discussion, the impugned order of annulment dated 1371988, Annexure P-13 as well as all other orders passed as a consequence thereof i.e. Annexures P-14 to P-16 are quashed.
The respondents are directed to take back the petitioners on their respective posts on which they were appointed and they shall be entitled to all the consequential benefits including pay and allowances.
this order shall be implemented within two months from the date of its receipt.
No order as to costs.
Order accordingly.