Sunanda Bhandare, J (Oral) - This writ petition under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India has been filed by Shri TR Goswami (since deceased) challenging the memorandum dated 771975 issued by the respondents and the subsequent order dated 24101975.
By the memorandum dated 771975 Shri T.R.
Goswamy who was an employee of respondent No. 1 was required to show cause why the penalty of stoppage of two annual increments with cumulative effect and recovery of Rs. 16,000/- should not be imposed on him.
Shri T.R.
Goswamy submitted his reply to the said Show Cause Notice vide Annexure A-16 dated 20.8.1975.
Respondent No. 1 by its order dated 24101975 rejected the representation and passed the order directing stoppage of two annual increments with cumulative effect and also ordered recovery of Rs. 16,000/- from Shri T.R.
Goswamy towards loss caused to the Undertaking.
Shri T.R.
Goswamy died on 2981983 and his legal heirs were brought on record on 1871984.
2.
The main contention of the petitioner is that the respondent could not take a decision of stoppage of two annual increments with cumulative effect without giving a proper opportunity to the petitioner to refute the claim of the respondent.
It is submitted that it was incumbent upon the respondent to hold a regular inquiry by permitting the petitioner to adduce evidence in support, of his contention.
However, the respondent having failed to do so, the memorandum dated 771975 and the order dated 24101975 cannot be sustained.
3.
We find great force in the contention raised by the petitioner.
The stoppage of annual increments giving cumulative effect amounts to major penalty and an action in that regard cannot be taken without giving proper opportunity to an employee without holding ding inquiry in that regard.
This question came up for consideration before the Supreme Court in Kulwant Singh Gill v. The State of Punjab, JT 1990(4) SC 70 wherein under similar circumstances and on similar facts the Supreme Court held that such an order amounts to major penalty for which purpose it is necessary to hold a regular inquiry and observed as follows :-  "Withholding of increments of pay simpliciter is a minor penalty within the meaning of Rule 5(iv).
But sub-rule (v) postulates reduction of a lower stage in the time scale of pay for a specified period with further directions as to whether or not the Government employee shall earn increments of pay during the period of such reductions and whether on the expiry of such period the reduction will or will not have the effect of postponing the future increments of his pay.
It is an independent head of penalty and it could be imposed as punishment in an appropriate case.
It is one of the major penalties .............." "If it is considered, as stated earlier, that it would be only a minor penalty, the procedure followed cetainly meets the test of the principles of natural justice and it would be a sufficient compliance with the procedure.
In view of the finding that the impugned order is a major penalty certainly then a regular enquiry has got to be conducted and so the impugned order is clearly illegal."
4.
It is submitted by the learned counsel for the petitioner that Delhi Electric Supply Undertaking is likely to recover the amounts from the legal heirs of the deceased petitioner and, therefore, cause of action still survives.
5.
In the circumstances, the writ petition is allowed.
The impugned order dated 24101975 is set aside.
Rule is made absolute.
However, parties are left to bear their own costs.