JL Gupta, J - The petitioner herein, who is a foreign scholar, was a candidate for admission to the MBBS Course of Dayanand Medical College, Ludhiana.
She having been denied admission primarily on the ground that the Panjab University did not issue an eligibility certificate has approached this Court through the present petition.
2.
Briefly, the facts may be noticed :  The petitioner passed Grade-12 (Senior Secondary School Examination) from Sir Charles Tuper Secondary School, Vancouver, British Colombia, Canada, in June 1987, This course, besides others related to the subjects of Biology, Chemistry and English.
The petitioner claims to have secured 79 per cent marks in Biology, 58 per cent marks in Chemistry and 65 per cent marks in English.
Since subject of Physics was not a part of this course, she took the Grade 12 Examination in the subject of Physics at the Community College, Vancouver in the spring term of the 1989 and was awarded Grade C On the successful completion of the Examination, she was given a certificate which has been produced as Annexure P-2.
The candidates who secure 60 to 66 per cent marks are placed in Grade C  3.
Dayanand Medical College, Ludhiana, is affiliated to the Panjab University.
It has reserved 13 seats "for candidates passing Pre-Medical + 2 of 10 + 2 + 3 system examination equivalent from any Foreign University/Board, recognized by the Panjab University, Chandigarh."
The petitioner applied for admission against one of these 13 seats on the basis of examination passed by her in Canada.
She further applied to the Panjab University along with various other candidates for the issuance of an eligibility certificate which was required under one of the terms in the prospectus.
This condition was as under :-  "Candidates having passed their qualifying examination from a Foreign University/Board are required to produce eligibility certificate, for admission to this course from the Registrar, Panjab University, Chandigarh, and a clearance certificate from the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government of India, Nirman Bhawan, New Delhi, whenever demanded."
Before issuing the certificate of eligibility as required by the above condition in the Prospectus, the petitioner was asked to show that the Physics examination taken by her which was "equivalent to the Physics paper of Grade 12 Examination for this purpose."
The petitioner claims to have sought a clarification from the Ministry of Education, British Colombia.
This clarification is stated to have been received through a letter dated 21st August, 1990.
A copy of this letter has been produced by the petitioner as Annexure P-3 with the petition.
In this letter it was stated as under :-  "In response to your recent request for confirmation that you have completed a course credit which is the equivalent of the British Columbia Secondary School course of Physics 12, please be advised of the following points :-  * You successfully completed British Columbia Grade 12 graduation, including the credit of Physics 11 in June, 1987 at Sir Charles Tupper Secondary School, Vancouver, British Columbia.
* You successfully completed Physics 115 in the Spring of 1989 at Vancouver Community College, Vancouver, British Columbia, Physics 115 is, in the view of this office, an acceptable equivalent of the British Columbia Secondary School Course of Physics 12.
* For overseas Post-Secondary Admission purposes, this letter may be presented as formal proof of your having completed a course equivalent to British Columbia Physics 12."
4.
The petitioner submits that in spite of the above letter having been given to the officers of the Panjab University, she was not given the eligibility certificate.
On the contrary, vide letter dated 18th September, 1990, the petitioner was informed that the University was not willing to accept the calculation of percentage and, therefore, she should sit in a special test.
A copy of this letter has been produced by the petitioner as Annexure P-4.
Aggrieved by this order, the petitioner has approached this Court through the present petition.
She has claimed that she was eligible for the issuance of the eligibility certificate and that the action of the University in insisting upon her taking a special test was wholly arbitrary and unfair.
The petitioner has also alleged discrimination on the ground that a candidate by the name of Avtar Sekhon who had secured lesser marks than her was given eligibility certificate by the Panjab University on an earlier occasion.
5.
In response to the notice of writ petition, a written statement has been filed on behalf of the University.
The basic plea raised by the University is contained in paragraph 5 which reads as under :-  "The pass marks in the answering respondent-University are 35% and minimum marks required for eligibility to MBBS classes is 50% of the maximum marks whereas the minimum pass marks at the examination passed by the petitioner is 50%.
In order to compare the eligibility of the petitioner, the petitioner was required to obtain 71% marks in the aggregate which is equivalent to C + as per Annexure P-2.
Therefore, the petitioner is not eligible for seeking admission to the MBBS course."
It has further been stated in the written statement that the petitioner is not entitled to the grant of eligibility certificate as she was failed to secure a grade point average of 25.
As for the claim of the petitioner, that she has been treated differently from Avtar Sekhon, it has been stated that the said candidate had secured 77 per cent marks while the petitioner had secured less than 71 per cent marks.
Consequently, it is contended by the respondents that the writ petition has no merit and deserves to be dismissed.
6.
After filing of the written statement, the petitioner had fired a further affidavit to say that the Registrar of the Dayanand Medical College, Ludhiana, had sent her a telegram stating that she had been selected and that the College had declined to give her a seat only on account of the fact that the Panjab University had not issued the eligibility certificate.
7.
Mr Sarwan Singh, learned counsel for the petitioner has primarily contended that any candidate securing, 50 per cent or more marks is eligible for admission to the MBBS course and that the action of the University in not issuing the said certificate was wholly arbitrary.
He has further contended that the action of the University in calling upon the petitioner to take a special test was wholly without jusdiction, inasmuch as there was no provision in the University Calendar providing for such a test.
On the other hand, the claim of Mr. Ashok Aggarwal, learned counsel for the University was that in case of a foreign student the University was following a uniform policy of issuing eligibility certificate to only such students as ad secured a grade point average of 25.
Since the petitioner had not secured the requisite average, she was called upon to take a special test.
If she had qualified the said test, the counsel claims, the University would have issued the required certificate.
8.
I have heard the learned counsel of for the parties.
On a perusal of the certificates at Annexures P-1 and P-2, the petitioner appears to have secured the following percentage of marks in the subjects of Biology, Chemistry, English and Physics :-  Biology - 79 Chemistry - 58 English - 65 Physics - 60 (She has secured Grade C which means a score of 60 to 66%.
The minimum marks viz. 60% have been taken into consideration).
A perusal of the above score would show that the petitioner had, in fact, secured 262 marks out of a total of 400.
This gives a percentage of 655.
She thus fulfilled the requirement of securing 50 per cent or more marks in the qualifying examination.
In fact, written statement filed by the University indicates that the petitioner is stated to have secured "less than 71 per cent marks."
In view of this factual position, I see no reason for the action of the University in holding that the petitioner was not eligible for admission to the MBBS course at Dayanand Medical College, Ludhiana.
The fact that in the Panjab University the minimum marks required for passing the qualifying examination are 35 per cent and the marks required for eligibility for admission to MBBS course are 50 per cent, while the minimum marks required for passing the examination in the school from which the petitioner had qualified the examination were 50 per cent, does not mean that the petitioner was required to obtain at least 71 per cent marks to be eligible.
Different Universities can prescribe different percentage for passing an examination.
So long as the minimum condition of eligibility for admission to a course is fulfilled, the candidate cannot be denied the right to be considered for admission nor can issue of eligibility certificate be refused.
The action of the University is based on a totally imaginary criteria which is not supported by any regulation or rule promulgated by the University.
The contention of Mr. Ashok Aggarwal in this behalf was to the following effect.
He contended that in the Panjab University a candidate had to secure 35 per cent marks to pass.
The minimum condition of eligibility for admission in the MBBS course was 50 per cent.
In a case where the minimum pass marks were 50 per cent, the minimum condition of eligibility had to be proportionately raised.
He submitted that if the marks were so calculated, it will be found that a student had to secure 71 per cent marks for become eligible for the issue of an eligibility certificate.
This criteria to my mind is wholly fallacious.
While a student who has qualified an examination from the Panjab University or any other recognized university in India, would be eligible with a score of 50 per cent marks for admission to the MBBS course, the University is insisting upon a foreign student to secure 71 per cent marks only because such a student is required to secure at least 50 per cent for passing the equivalent examination.
This would be wholly unfair.
Once a candidate had secured the requisite percentage of marks, viz. 50 per cent, as prescribed by the University in the present case, he or she should be eligible for admission to the MBBS course.
I am of the view that it was unfair on the part of the University to require the petitioner to secure 71 per cent marks in the examination before becoming eligible for admission to the MBBS course.
Equally untenable is the plea that since the petitioner had failed to secure GPA of 25, she was not eligible for admission.
This GPA has been calculated on the assumption that score should be 71 per cent.
Since I have come to the conclusion that the decision of the University in insisting upon a score of 71 per cent marks was not legal, I cannot persuade myself to uphold the contention that the candidate had to secure a GPA of 25.
9.
I am also of the opinion that the University Rules and Regulations do not provide for the holding of a special test to determine the issuance of eligibility certificate.
The action of the University in calling upon the petitioner to appear in a special test was totally beyond the rules and cannot as such be sustained.
In my view the University has to consider the question of issue of eligibility certificate only on the basis of the course content of the examination passed by the candidate.
If the course content is the same and the candidate had secured 50 per cent marks, the eligibility certificate should have been issued.
A perusal of the documents Annexures P-1 and P-2 shows that besides the four subjects of Biology, Chemistry, English and Physics, the petitioner had also passed in the subjects of Algebra, Consumer Education, French, Accounting, Law, Personal Typewriting, Social Studies and Psychology.
etc. By all standards, this was more than the course content prescribed by the Panjab University or a Board in India.
Further this candidate had also secured more than 50 per cent marks.
She was consequently entitled to the issue of eligibility certificate.
She could not be called upon to appear in any test for the purpose of considering her claim for the issue of eligibility certificate.
I should not be understood to have held that the University can never ask a candidate to take a test.
In a case where there is clear doubt regarding the equivalence of the course content, such an action may be justified.
This is not so in the present case.
10.
During the course of hearing, I had asked the counsel to find out if a seat was available for admission during this year.
I was informed that out of 13 seats reserved for the category of foreign students, only 8 had been filled up.
Against the remaining five seats, candidates from the general category had been admitted.
This has to be kept in view while giving relief in this case.
11.
In view of my above finding and factual position, I quash the order at Annexure P-4 and direct the University to issue the eligibility certificate to the petitioner.
However, in view of the fact that a considerable part of the course is already over, I direct that the petitioner shall be admitted to the MBBS course at Dayanand Medical College, Ludhiana, against one of the seats for foreign students in the course to which admission shall be made during the year 1991-92.
The parties are, however, left to bear their own costs.