VK Bali, J - The claim of the petitioners is to consider them for promotion to the posts of Assistant Sub-Inspectors as also to quash the order Annexure P-2 in so far as the same relates to the promotions of respondents No. 4 to 31.
Brief facts may first be enumerated.
2.
Petitioners were selected and recruited as Constables in Haryana Wireless Police on dates duly reflected in paragraph 2 of the Writ Petition.
All the petitioners were promoted as officiating Head Constables on various dates i.e. with effect from February 1, 1976 to December 1, 1976.
As per their seniority, the petitioners were detailed for the course known as "Carrier Wave" course it is a qualifying course for promotion to the rank of Assistant Sub-Inspector in the Wireless Wing of Police.
It is made out by the petitioners and not denied by the respondents that the petitioners successfully completed the qualifying course.
The instructions which are applicable for promotion to the rank of Head Constable and that of Assistant Sub-Inspector Wireless Police go to show that after successfully completing the qualifying course, the officials would be considered for promotion to the rank of Assistant Sub-Inspectors and those who did not join the qualifying course had to be placed below other officials in seniority.
Their seniority has to be determined on completion of qualifying course alone.
The positive case of the petitioners is that even though they had qualified the course and were entitled to be considered for promotion, respondent No. 3 passed the order for promotion of respondent Nos. 4 to 31 in an illegal and arbitrary manner.
This action of respondent No. 3 is also styled by the petitioners to be against the rules and instructions.
Further, it is also sought to be made out that the petitioners have been discriminated and the persons who are juniors to them and had become eligible on account of their having passed the qualifying course later have been promoted to the posts of Assistant Sub-Inspectors.
Respondent No. 3 has promoted respondents No. 4 to 31, even though they had passed the qualifying course after the petitioners, on the basis of an interview test which is said to have been arbitrarily introduced by the said respondent.
It is on the facts stated above that the petitioners have come up in this Court under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India and have prayed for quashing the order by which respondents No. 4 to 31 have been promoted and further for a direction to be issued to respondent No. 3 to consider them for promotion and accordingly promote them a day prior to the day when the aforesaid respondents were promoted to the posts of Assistant Sub-Inspectors.
3.
In the written statement that has been filed on behalf of respondents No. 1 to 3 although it has not been denied that the qualifying course is essential for any Head Constable to be considered for promotion to the rank of Assistant Sub-Inspector and that respondents No. 4 to 31 had passed the said qualifying course after the petitioners, the relief sought for by the petitioners is yet resisted on the ground that the said qualifying course only confers a right on the Head Constable for considering the case of promotion of said Head Constable to the post of Assistant Sub-Inspector and that the same is not conclusive.
It is made out from the contents of written statement which are also pressed into service at the time of arguments that promotion from the rank of Head Constable (Operator) to the rank of Assistant Sub-Inspector (Operators) has never been made merely on the basis of seniority and passing of the Continuous Wave Course.
All promotion cases have to be considered by the Departmental Promotion Committees from time to time in accordance with Punjab Police Rule 131(1) and inasmuch as the petitioners were considered and not found suitable, they could not legitimately claim their promotion to the posts of Assistant Sub-Inspectors, prior in point.
of time, to respondents No. 4 to 31 who were considered alongwith the petitioners.
It is, thus, made out that the petitioners could not qualify the test whereas respondents No. 4 to 31 had passed the test and test being one of the modes of selection, the petitioners would not be justified to stake their claim to the posts of Assistant Sub-Inspectors.
4.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and am of the considered view that the Writ Petition lacks merit and, thus, deserves to be dismissed.
However, before I give the reasons for my aforesaid conclusion, it shall be useful to reproduce Rule 13.1(1) of the Punjab Police Rules and the same runs as follows :-  "13.1(1) Promotion from one rank to another and from one grade to another in the same rank, shall be made by selection tempered by seniority.
Efficiency and honesty shall be the main factors governing selection.
Specific qualifications, whether in the nature of training courses passed or practical experience, shall be carefully considered in each case.
When the qualifications of two officers are otherwise equal, the senior shall be promoted.
This rule does not affect increment within a time-scale."
5.
A perusal of Rule 13.1(1) reproduced above would go to show that promotion from one rank to another, inclusive of from the post of Head Constable to that of Assistant Sub-Inspector had to be made by selection tempered by seniority.
The emphasis is upon selection.
It is true that the selection is tempered with seniority but all that it means is that in the process of selection, seniority would also play its due role.
If seniority alone was the criteria there was no need to mention selection in the Rule.
Seniority alone is not the sole determining factor is also made out from the last three lines of the Rule which go to show that when qualifications of two officers are otherwise equal, the senior shall be promoted.
It necessarily follows that when junior has better qualifications, he can score over his senior.
Correct reading of Rule 13.1(1) of the Punjab Police Rules, in my opinion, cannot be interpreted to say that whatever be the circumstances, whatever be the qualifications of Head Constables and whatever be their merit, only senior Head Constables who have passed the qualifying course first have to be promoted before the one who have done the said course later.
It is the positive case of the respondents that a test was conducted.
Whereas respondents No. 4 to 31 had qualified the said test, the petitioners failed.
The Departmental Promotion Committee had gone through the process of selection by holding a test and the said test with a view to find out merit is certainly one of the modes to make selection.
Passing of Carrier Wave Course, in the present case, in my considered view would not form part of process of promotion of a Head Constable to the rank of Assistant Sub-Inspector of Police.
Such a process would start only from the stage when the names are considered for promotion after passing the qualifying course.
The reliance of learned counsel for the petitioners on the observations made by Full Bench of this Court in case "Sardul Singh, Head Constable v. Inspector General of Police, Punjab, 1970 S.L.R.
505 far from helping the petitioners, in fact, go against them.
The learned counsel for the petitioners also relies upon judgment delivered in Civil Writ Petition No. 4092 of 1986 decided on August 25, 1987.
The facts of the aforesaid case were totally different.
In the said case persons from other districts were brought and promoted in the district of petitioners and even ad hoc promotions were made in the same district without even considering the case of the petitioners for promotion.
The only direction given in the said case was to consider the case of the petitioners for promotion.
The facts of the present case would go to show that the petitioners were considered for promotion to the post of Assistant Sub-Inspectors alongwith respondents No. 4 to 31.
Departmental Promotion Committee was constituted and even a test for selection was also held.
Petitioners failed in the said test whereas respondents No. 4 to 31 had passed the said test.
The ratio of decision renders in C.W.P.
No. 4892 of 1986 (supra) would, thus, not come to the rescue of the petitioners.
6.
For the reasons aforesaid, I find no force in this petition and dismissed the same.
In the circumstances of the case, however, parties are left to bear their own costs.