RS Mongia, J (Oral) - Shri Gurbachan Singh was working as an Executive Officer in Municipal Committee, Dasuya.
Unfortunately, he met with an accident and died on 24th February, 1986.
A sum of Rs. 1,14,809/- was received by the widow of Shri Gurbachan Singh towards the dues of her late husband.
The widow had made a request to Director, Local Government, Punjab, Chandigarh (Respondent No. 2) vide her application dated 3rd August, 1986 for fixation of pay of her late husband, who had not been granted any increments after 1st June, 1982.
In spite of repeated reminders no action was taken on her application dated 3rd August, 1986.
The Director, Local Government, informed the son of the deceased.
Shri Gurbachan Singh vide letter dated 21st April, 1988 that the pay of deceased Shri Gurbachan Singh would be fixed only after receipt of information from the concerned Committees where he remained posted.
It was further mentioned that the service book of Shri Gurbachan Singh had been sent to the Executive Officer of the Municipality, Rajpura for necessary action since more than three years had passed after the receipt of letter dated 21st April, 1988, no action had been taken.
Son of late Shri Gurbachan Singh, namely Inderjit Singh filed the present writ petition, with a prayer to direct the respondents to decide the case of his father regarding the grant of increments after 1st June, 1982 and then pay the arrears to the heirs of the deceased.
2.
When notice of motion was issued by a Division Bench of this Court, no one appeared on behalf of the respondents in spite of service and, thereafter, the case was admitted on 4th September, 1989.
No written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents.
3.
It is unfortunate that the case is pending with the respondents since 1986 and even vide letter dated 21st, April 1988, the Director, Local Government had informed the petitioner that the service book of late Shri Gurbachan Singh had been sent to the Executive Officer, Municipality, Raipura, for necessary action, but no final decision in the matter has been taken till date.
Even the respondents have not cared to put in appearance in this court despite service of notice of the case and no written statement has been filed.
4.
Consequently, this writ petition is allowed with costs and the respondents are directed to finalise the case of the petitioner's father regarding the grant of increments after 1st June, 1982 within two months of the receipt of this order.
The arrears, if any, shall be paid to the petitioner and his mother within one month of the finalisation of the case of the petitioner's father, which would carry 12% interest with effect from the date of increment till the date of payment.
The costs are quantified at Rs. 500/-.
Petition allowed.