Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner, who is an ex-serviceman and was employed as a Driver in GREF, is aggrieved by the action of the respondents in not giving him pension and gratuity.
2.
The petitioner was actually a member of Indian Armed Forces till the year 1955 when he was transferred to the Pension Establishment.
In the year 1962 he was employed as Motor Transport Driver in the General Reserve Engineering Force (hereinafter referred to as "GREF").
The petitioner avers that at the time of his employment with GREF his date of birth was checked from the Discharge Book issued by the army authorities, which was not returned to him at any time during his service.
He claims to have served the GREF as a Driver from March 20, 1962 to January 5, 1978 ie for more than 15 years.
He further avers that vide order dated August 27, 1976 the petitioner was confirmed as MT Driver.
w.e.f.
May 24, 1974.
His grievance is that under the provisions of Rule 49 of the Central Civil Service Pension Rules, 1972 he was entitled to the payment of pension and gratuity.
He claims to have made a number of representations and on having been failed to get a satisfactory order he has approached this Court through the present petitioner with a prayer for the issue of a mandamus directing the respondents to fix and release his pension as well as gratuity.
3.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents.
It has been averred that the discharge book and other papers were never produced or given by the petitioner to the Recruiting Officer.
A certificate, dated March 10, 1975 has been produced to show that the petitioner had not produced the Army Discharge Certificate.
It has been further pointed out that the petitioner was born on March 11, 1916 and as such should have retired on March 31, 1974.
His retention in service beyond March 31, 1974 upto January 5, 1978 was wholly illegal and on account of the petitioner's default in not producing the Army Discharge Certificate at the time of his entry into service.
It has been further averred that the petitioner had not been confirmed on the correct date of his retirement and as such was not entitled to pension and gratuity.
Other averments in the petition have also been controverted and it has been stated in paragraph 12 of the written statement that terminal gratuity benefits amounting to Rs. 5,790/- had since been paid to the petitioner vide Bank Draft dated July 3, 1985.
As such, no other amount is due to the petitioner.
4.
Mr. BS Sehgal, learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that the petitioner had actually served GREF for more than 15 years.
He had been confirmed w.e.f.
May 24, 1974.
The counsel submits that in view of the admitted position the petitioner was entitled to the payment of pension and gratuity.
As against this, Mr. Sodhi, learned counsel for the respondents, has contended that the petitioner made a fraud on the department inasmuch as he did not disclose his correct date of birth by producing the Army discharge Certificate.
This fraud enabled the petitioner to continue in service beyond March 31, 1974, when he should have actually retired on superannuation.
According to the learned counsel, the petitioner was not entitled to any relief under the rules.
5.
After having heard the learned counsel for the parties, it is undeniable that the petitioner had served GREF for a period of more than 15 years from March 20, 1962 to January 5, 1978.
It is equally clear that the petitioner had been confirmed as driver w.e.f.
May 24, 1974.
If his correct date of birth had been known, the petitioner would have superannuated on March 31, 1974, when he attained the age of 58 years.
The issue for consideration is as to whether or not the petitioner is entitled to the payment of pension and gratuity.
The petitioner is governed by the provisions of Rule 49 of the Central Civil Service Pension Rules, 1972.
The relevant provision is contained in Clause (2) of Rule 49, which reads as under :-  "In the case of a Government servant retiring in accordance with the provisions of these rules after completing qualifying service of not less than 10 years (ten years) the amount of pension shall be the appropriate amount as set out below, namely."
There is a table provided under the rules laying down the rate of pension.
The petitioner had admittedly completed more than 10 years of service in GREF.
Even if he is deemed to have superannuated/retired on March 31, 1974, he had completed more than 12 years of service on that date.
The provision of Rule 49(2), as reproduced above, shows that a person must complete 10 years of service before becoming entitled to the payment of pension.
The petitioner had completed more than 12 years of service even on the date of his superannuation viz. March 31, 1974.
He is consequently entitled to the payment of pension on the hypothesis that he had superannuated on March 30, 1974.
The action of the authorities in denying the petitioner the payment of pension was wholly illegal and cannot be sustained.
6.
Equally valid is the claim of the petitioner for the payment of gratuity.
The benefits of pension and gratuity have been denied to the petitioner only on account of the fact that he had not been confirmed before his superannuation.
The fact remains that the petitioner had been confirmed as Driver w.e.f.
May 24, 1974.
A copy of this order has been produced on the record as Annexure P4.
This order has not been set aside by the authorities to date.
In the face of this order it is not possible to hold that the petitioner had not been confirmed or that he is not entitled to the payment of pension and gratuity.
I, therefore, hold that the petitioner is entitled to the payment of pension and gratuity.
7.
Since the petitioner's continuance in service beyond the age of superannuation was on account of some mistake and it is beyond the scope of this Court to fix the responsibility for the mistake, I think just and fair to hold that the petitioner's entitlement to pension and gratuity shall be determined on the hypothesis that he retired on March 31, 1974.
For the period from April 1, 1974 to January 5, 1978 the petitioner actually earned his salary.
This period of service has been regularised by the respondents vide order dated December 12, 1984 (a copy of which is at Annexure R.2 of the written statement).
Since the petitioner had actually discharged the duties of the post and had drawn his salary, which was in any case more than the pension for the period, no pension shall be due to him for this period.
It would also not be fair to take this period into consideration for the purpose of computing his gratuity.
8.
Taking the totality of facts into consideration, I hold that the petitioner shall be paid his pension and gratuity on the hypothesis that he retired on March 31, 1974.
The payment of pension would commence from January 6, 1978.
The gratuity shall be computed for the period of service rendered, i.e. from March 20, 1962 to, March 31, 1974.
The arrears of pension and gratuity shall be paid along with interest @ 12 per cent per annum.
Needful shall be done within a period of three months from the date of the receipt of this order by the respondents.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to his costs, which are assessed as Rs. 2,000/-.