Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - This judgment will dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 7510 of 1987 and 8419 of 1988.
2.
For the purpose of this judgment, facts have been taken from C.W.P.
No. 7510 of 1987 (Gurmel Singh v. State of Punjab and others).
3.
The petitioners who are Ex-servicemen, served the Indian Air Force for periods ranging from 15 to 21 years in the trade of Electric Fitter Group-I which has been recognised as diploma in 'Electrical Engineering' in the Civil Service for the recruitment to the Subordinate posts under the Central and Punjab Government as well and adopted by the Undertakings/Corporations/Boards.
As such the petitioners claim that they possess the qualification of Diploma in Electrical Engineering.
4.
Respondent No. 2, i.e. the Punjab State Electricity Board (hereinafter referred to as 'the Board') advertised 50 posts of Junior Engineer) firstly vide CRA-125 in August, 1983 and further 50 posts vide CRA-133 on 3rd May, 1984 and out of these 15% posts were reserved for Ex-servicemen as per the Recruitment Rules.
The Board conducted combined written test for both the advertisements in the month of September, 1984 in which 15/20 ex-servicemen including petitioner No. 1 had appeared for the test conducted for the posts of Junior Engineers reserved for ex-servicemen.
The Board declared the result of 181 General Category candidates in December, 1984 and later prepare a panel of 29 apprentices and further granted 57 seats to the Scheduled Caste candidates but no separate merit list was prepared of Ex-serviceman nor any Ex-serviceman was appointed by the Board.
Out of the panel of 267, the quota of reservation for ex-servicemen @ 15% comes to 40 vacancies.
But no ex-serviceman was appointed by the Board.
Petitioner No. 1 and some other ex-servicemen approached the authorities and pleaded that the posts reserved for ex-servicemen be filled up by ex-servicemen candidates as per Rule 4 of the Punjab Recruitment of Ex-servicemen Rules, 1982 but no decision in the matter was taken.
According to the petitioners an assurance was given that the reserved vacancies would be carried forward to subsequent recruitments.
5.
Thereafter, the Board advertised in the Tribune dated March 16, 1987, 40 posts of Junior Engineers.
The details of reservation of the posts were as under :-  a) 25% for Scheduled Caste b) 5% for Backward Class c) 15% for Ex-servicemen/Dependent Children of Ex-servicemen as per instructions.
d) 2% for children/Grand Children of freedom fighters.
However, in the advertisement there was no mention that 40 posts of ex- servicemen from the previous selection were to be carried forward.
6.
It is also the case of the petitioners that they being fully eligible applied for the said posts along with all the relevant documents whereupon they were issued roll numbers the details of which have been incorporated in para 8 of the writ petition.
The petitioners appeared in test and interview conducted by the Board.
Besides the petitioners there were 100 dependents of ex-servicemen who had appeared in the test.
The grievance of the petitioners is that criteria of selection as well as the percentage of pass marks was not disclosed to the petitioners.
Respondent No. 3 declared the result of the test held on 691987 at Patiala which appeared in the Tribune dated 12.9.1982.
7.
A copy of the panel prepared by respondent No. 3 is Annexure P-1 to the writ petition.
The further grievance of the petitioners is that joint merit list for Ex-servicemen and dependants of Ex-servicemen has been prepared against the rules as the Ex-servicemen and their dependants could not be treated at par.
The petitioners who were eligible for being considered against the posts reserved for Ex-servicemen have been ignored and the dependants could be considered only if the eligible/suitable Ex-servicemen were not available.
8.
The grievance of the petitioners further is that the candidates selected are not in fact dependents of Ex-servicemen as most of them were already employed as Linemen in the Punjab State Electricity Board and some of them in the other departments and consequently the selection is void.
9.
Further grievance of the petitioners is that the respondents did not carry forward the 40 unfilled reserved posts from the previous selection for the post of Junior Engineer to the present selection i.e. C.R.A.
151 contrary to the rules and empanelling of the dependants in the present selection for CRA-151 ignoring the claim of the petitioners and other ex-servicemen available is again contrary to the rules and regulations.
It was incumbent upon the respondents to have carried forward the unfilled reserved vacancies for Ex-servicemen.
10.
The petitioners are seeking directions to the respondents to give effect to 15% reservation for Ex-servicemen in accordance with the Recruitment Rules by carrying forward 40 unfilled vacancies from the previous selection to the present selection, to prepare a separate panel/select list exclusively for Ex-servicemen candidates and to quash the selection of dependants of Ex- servicemen against the quota of reservation for Ex-servicemen.
11.
The respondents on the other hand have taken the plea that in the selection of Junior Engineers made in 1984 on the basis of competitive test, due representation was given to each and every reserved category on the basis of percentage of pass marks fixed for taking the candidates on selection panel.
The percentage of pass marks in the case of candidates belonging to Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribes and Backward Class was lowered down to the extent of their quota irrespective of the marks obtained by them in the comparative test provided the candidate possessed the minimum essential qualification prescribed for the post.
As there were no instructions from the Government in case of Ex-servicemen/dependants of Ex-serviceman, the candidates of this category who got higher pass marks in the competitive test were taken on the panel.
So far as the question of carrying forward of the shortfall of 1984 to the next selection, the same could not be done because the next selection was made after 3 years ie in 1987 and according to rule 4(2) of the Punjab Recruitment of Ex-servicemen Rules, 1982, where a reserved vacancy remains unfilled for non-availability of a person eligible for recruitment under these Rules, such vacancy may be filled in, temporarily from any other sources in accordance with the rules regulating the recruitment and the conditions of service of persons appointed to such posts as if the vacancy was not reserved.
Provided that the reserved vacancy so filled in shall be carried forward for the subsequent occasions (arising during at least two years) in each of which such occasion arose for recruitment whereafter the vacancy in question shall be treated as unreserved.
12.
In para 10 of the reply it has been admitted that a list of 170 candidates taken on the panel was declared.
This list was prepared on the basis of performance of the candidates and has been prepared separately for general and reserved categories, keeping in view the number of posts falling to their share.
It was further stated in the reply that the Ex-servicemen and their dependants have been empanelled jointly in the list on the basis of their performance in the competitive test.
It was further stated in the written statement that proviso to Rule 4 applies to those cases where the selection is made on the basis of interview only and where no competitive examination is held.
13.
I have considered the respective submissions made at the Bar and perused the paper book.
14.
Admittedly, the case of the petitioners falls within the ambit of Rule 4 of the Punjab Recruitment of Ex-Servicemen Rules, 1982 and the Rule as amended on 3041984 further provided certain benefits of reservation to the dependants of Ex-servicemen in case Ex-servicemen were not available.
Rule 4 of the aforesaid Rule reads as under :-  "Rule 4 : RESERVATION OF VACANCIES.
1) Subject to the provisions of rule 3, fifteen per cent of the vacancies to be filled in by direct appointment in all the State Civil Services and posts connected with the affairs of the State of Punjab shall be reserved for being filled in by the recruitment of Ex-servicemen;  Provided that where an Ex-servicemen is not available for recruitment against a reserved vacancy such a vacancy shall be reserved to be filled in by the recruitment of the wife or one dependant child of an Ex-serviceman, who has neither been recruitment against a reserved vacancy nor is eligible to be recruited against such vacancy under these rules;  Provided further that the total number of reserved vacancies including those reserved for the candidates belonging to the Scheduled Caste, Scheduled Tribes and Backward Classes shall not exceed fifty per cent of the posts to be filled in a particular year.
2) Where a reserved vacancy remains unfilled for non-availability of a person eligible for recruitment under these Rules, such vacancy may be filled in, temporarily, from any other sources in accordance with the rules regulating the recruitment and the conditions of service of persons appointed to such posts as if the vacancy was not reserved.
Provided that the reserved vacancy so filled in shall be carried forward for the subsequent occasions (arising during at least two years) in each of which such occasion arose for recruitment whereafter the vacancy in question shall be treated as unreserved."
15.
It has not been dispute that out of selection and appointments made in response to CRA 125 in August, 1983 and CRA 133 on 351984, for the post of Junior Engineer, quota of Ex-servicemen/dependants of Ex-servicemen was undersubscribed.
It is also not in dispute that the selection including the appointment letters was completed by the Board against both the aforesaid advertisements upto December, 1984 and there was no recruitment to the posts of Junior Engineers during the years 1985 and 1986 and it was on 1631987 when vacancies of Junior Engineers were advertised to be filled in through CRA-151.
It is also admitted that no vacancy falling to the share of Ex-servicemen out of advertisements CRA-125 and CRA-133 was carried forward to the next recruitment advertised through advertisement No. 151 dated 1631987.
The respondents have also not disputed the fact that they have maintained a joint merit list of Ex-servicemen/dependants of Ex-servicemen for the purpose of filling in the vacancies earmarked for the Ex-servicemen.
16.
The point for consideration before this court is whether the time gap of two years can result into dereservation of vacancies reserved for Ex- servicemen, even if there was no actual recruitment during the said period of two years.
Secondly whether the dependants of Ex-servicemen can be combined in the merit list with the Ex-servicemen for the purpose of reservation.
17.
As regards the first point, a bare perusal of Rule 4 of the Rules (supra) shows that the carried forward of the reserved vacancies is to be observed upto two years in which such occasion arises for recruitments whereafter the vacancies in question have to be treated as un-reserved.
Since there was shortfall of candidates vis-a-vis reserved vacancies of Ex- serviceman in a combined selection against the advertisement No. CRA-125 and CRA-133 upto December, 1984 and there was no recruitment in the years 1985 and 1986, it was for the first time after 1984, on 1631987 vide advertisement No. CRA-151 that process of recruitment was initiated, so the principle of carried forward was to be applied against the un-filled vacancies of Ex- servicemen for Ex-servicemen (which are stated to be filled in through other categories) out of advertisement Nos. CRA-125 and CRA-133 which has not been done by the Board.
So I am of the view that a great prejudice has been caused to the petitioners, category by not carrying forward the aforementioned reserved vacancies.
18.
Now turning to the second point, the language of Rule 4 is unambiguous to the effect that the dependents of the Ex-servicemen have to be considered only if the eligible and suitable Ex-servicemen are not available for filling in the reserved vacancies.
Meaning thereby that separate merit lists have to be prepared both for Ex-servicemen and the dependent of Ex-servicemen and reasonable criteria has to be followed for filling in the vacancies.
In case the vacancies reserved for Ex-servicemen are left over and no eligible and suitable Ex-servicemen are available only then the claim of dependants of Ex-servicemen has to be considered.
But the respondents by clubbing the Ex-servicemen with their dependants, have followed a wrong procedure which is not the intention of Rule 4.
Hence, in my view, from this angle also, the action of respondent-Board is not justified.
19.
I would have insisted for impleading of selected/appointed persons to the extent of quota of Ex-servicemen by the other categories and would have also quashed the same for the reasons recorded above, but keeping in view the fact that a Division Bench of this Court vide order dated 27101987 had directed that four vacancies out of vacancies which have been given to the alleged dependants of Ex-servicemen be kept reserved for the petitioners till further orders, and I am also informed that the said four vacancies have actually been kept reserved and that petitioners Gurmail Singh and Avtar Singh have been appointed as Junior Engineers during the pendency of the writ petition (vide CM 2378 of 1991), I am not inclined to do that.
20.
Keeping in view all the facts and circumstances of the case the following directions are given to the respondents that the petitioners' legitimate claim be considered with effect from the due date against reserved vacancies including the vacancies which remained unfilled falling to the share of Ex-servicemen (filled in through other categories) against advertisement Nos. CRA-125 and CRA-133 to be carried forward and merged with the vacancies reserved for Ex-servicemen advertised through Advertisement No. 151 dated 1631987 and consider the merit of the petitioners and other such Ex- servicemen who are above the petitioners in merit and to grant them consequential benefits including seniority, pay and allowances with effect from the due date per their suitability in view of the observations made above and if necessary to create supernumerary posts to adjust other category candidates who have been accommodated against the reserved vacancies of Ex-servicemen.
The abovesaid directions are to be complied with within a period of two months.
Consequently, writ petition Nos. 7510 of 1987 and 8419 of 1988 are allowed in the terms indicated above.
There will, however, be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.