Ashok Bhan, J - Petitioner belongs to Scheduled Caste and was appointed as Works Manager on regular basis w.e.f.
691976 in the department of Transport, Punjab.
Since certain enquiries were pending against the petitioner, persons junior to petitioner were promoted as General Manager.
Petitioner approached the concerned authorities with a request that his name be also considered against the reserved category as well as candidate of general category as persons junior to him in the reserved category as well as general category have been promoted as General Managers.
Consequent upon this representation, petitioner was promoted to the post of General Manager on 1431987 on ad hoc basis and without prejudice to the pending enquiry.
It is claimed by the petitioner that he has already been exonerated from the departmental enquiry vide Punjab Government orders dated 2761986 and 1891987 Annexures P/6 and P/7 respectively to the writ petition.
Vide order dated 10.10.1988 Annexure P/9 to the writ petition, petitioner was reverted as Works Manager.
Petitioner approached this Court against the order Annexure P/9 inter alia on the ground that he being a scheduled caste employer was promoted as General Manager on ad hoc basis and since then he has been working as such and petitioner has been reverted to the post of Works Manager vide order Annexure P/9 which does not contain any reason for such an action.
It is further stated that persons junior to the petitioner have been retained as General Manager whereas the petitioner has been reverted to the post of Works Manager.
It is stated that there are still vacancies of General Managers, and earlier two scheduled caste employees had retired and their vacancies are still to be filled up and that petitioner should be considered against the vacancies available for scheduled caste as well as against the general category on the basis of seniority.
2.
Stand taken in the return filed by the State of Punjab was that the petitioner was appointed on ad hoc basis with the terms and conditions that his services could be terminated at any time.
It has further been stated that certain record of the petitioner was bad and that is why he has been reverted to his original post of Works Manager.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that services of the petitioner could not be terminated simply on the ground that he was appointed on ad hoc basis when persons junior to him have been retained in service.
It has further been argued by the learned counsel for the petitioner and that act and conduct of the petitioner as General Manager has not been found to be bad, bad record which is being referred to by the State in the written statement pertains to the period prior to the promotion of the petitioner as General Manager and was in the knowledge of the State Government at the time when the petitioner was promoted as General Manager.
4.
It is admitted case of the parties that persons junior to the petitioner had been retained as General Managers while the petitioner has been reverted to the post of Works Manager because in the promotion order itself it is stated that the promotion is subject to the result of enquiry.
Learned counsel in order to buttress his argument relied upon Appar Apar Singh v. The State of Punjab, 1971 SLR 71, State of Uttar Pradesh v. Sughar Singh, 1974(1) S.L.R.
485, Jarnail Singh v. State of Punjab, 1986(2) SLR 279 and Mohinder Singh v. Deputy Commissioner, Mohindergarh at Narnaul, 1988(3) S.L.R.
534.
5.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length.
Admitted case of the parties is that persons junior to the petitioner from amongst the scheduled caste as well as general category have been retained in service whereas petitioner has been reverted from the post of General Manager to that of Works Manager.
Petitioner's case is fully covered by Sughar Singh's case and Jarnail Singh's case (supra).
In Sughar Singh's case (supra) a permanent Head Constable in the UP Police Force was appointed as officiating Platoon Commander in the combined cadre of Sub-Inspector, Armed Police and Platoon Commander.
He was subsequently reverted to the Substantive post of Head Constable in 1968 while persons junior to him were retained in service.
Two questions arose namely; whether the order of reversion is attendant with any stigma and secondly whether there has been any discrimination violating Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
It was held that so far as reversion is concerned, the order of reversion did not cast any stigma, nor it has any evil consequences as the respondent neither lost his seniority in the substantive rank nor there has been any forfeiture of his pay or allowances.
On the second ground, it was held that the order was liable to be quashed on the ground of contravention of Articles 14 and 16 inasmuch as while the respondent had been reverted, his juniors were allowed to retain their present status as Sub-Inspectors and they have not been reverted to the substantive post of Head Constable.
If was also held that there was no administrative reason for this reversion, so the order or reversion was held to be bad.
Similarly in Jarnail Singh's case (supra) it was observed as under :-  "In the instant case, ad hoc services of the appellants have been arbitrarily terminated as no longer required while the respondents have retained other Surveyors who are juniors to the appellants.
Therefore, on this ground also, the impugned order of termination of the service of the appellants are illegal and bad being in contravention of the fundamental rights guaranteed under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India."
Though according to the reply filed by the respondents, the petitioner's reversion has been shown as a consequence to the involvement in embezzlement case, but nothing has been substantiated beyond supplying a charge-sheet and indicating nothing of the sort in the orders of reversion Annexure P/9 to this effect.
6.
In view of the above authoritative pronouncements order of reversion Annexure P/9 is liable to be quashed on the ground of contravention of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution inasmuch as while the petitioner has been reverted, his juniors were allowed to retain their status as General Managers.
At the time of admission, this Court stayed the reversion of the petitioner from the post of General Manager to that of Works Manager.
It is further admitted case of the parties that posts of General Managers are still vacant both in the quota of scheduled caste as well as general category.
Respondents are directed to consider the petitioner's case against the vacancies available under the category of scheduled caste and general category and further to consider his case for regularisation of his services from the day his juniors were promoted on regular basis.
The writ petition stands allowed with no order as to costs.