RS Mongia, J - The petitioner was appointed as Draftsman-cum-Artist in the Food Corporation of India (in short FCI) in the scale of Rs. 225-550 on 23rd of January, 1969.
He joined on 25th of January, 1969.
In exercise of the powers conferred by sub-Rule(1) of Rule 10 of the Food Corporation Rules, 1965, an order was issued by the FCI on 19th September, 1975, (copy annexure P2) conveying the sanction to the conversion of existing post of Draftsman-cum-Artist to that of Commercial Artist in the Punjab region of the FCI It was further mentioned in this order that this sanction was personal to the post held by the petitioner and would be effective from the date the incumbent joined the Food Corporation of India at Regional Office Chandigarh.
This meant that the petitioner was deemed to have been appointed as Commercial Artist with effect from the day he had joined (25.1.1969) the FCI as Draftsman-cum-Artist.
Both Draftsman-cum-Artist and Commercial Artist were isolated posts.
2.
It is not disputed that the post of Commercial Artist was one of the posts equivalent in rank to the post of Assistant Grade-I (Ministerial) and the pay scale was also the same.
From this it follows that the petitioner was holding one of the posts of Assistant Grade-I (Min.)
right from the first appointment.
The petitioner was promoted as Assistant Manager (General) along with other Assistant Grade-I (Min.)
officers on 9111976.
Some other categories like Stenographers, Telephone Operators and Receptionists had also been promoted as Assistant Manager (General) (in short AMG) Seniority list of AMGS was issued on 3rd of March, 1986 in which the names of some of the Stenographers, Telephone Operators and Receptionists who were also promoted as AMGs and had lesser length of service as Stenographers etc. as compared to the petitioner's service as Commercial Artist, were placed above him in the said integrated seniority list prepared on All India basis.
The petitioner represented against this seniority list and ultimately the respondents considered the case of the petitioner for granging him appropriate seniority first in the zonal seniority list and then on All India basis.
The seniority of the petitioner was fixed at serial No. 75A in the zonal seniority list of A.M.Gs (General) as on 31101984.
The Regional office of the FCI, New Delhi intimated to the Assistant Manager (Intg), Food Corporation of India, Headquarters, New Delhi vide letter dated 2941988/361988 (annexure P7) that the petitioner's seniority in the zonal list in the rank of Assistant Manager (General) had been reviewed and his seniority had been fixed at serial No. 75A by shifting his name from Serial No. 251.
It was further requested to refix the petitioner's seniority on the above basis in the integrated All India seniority list of Assistant Manager (General).
On the above said basis, another order was issued on 10/1521989 whereby the promotion of the petitioner as Assistant Manager (General) was ordered to be reckoned w.e.f.
28th April, 1972 instead of 9111976.
He was also given the seniority with effect from 2841972 and his name was ordered to be placed below the name of one Sh. S Razi Hussain who was at serial No. 39 and above the name of Shri MC Bisth at serial No. 41.
Consequently, the petitioner was allotted S. No. 40 in the zonal seniority list, as it existed on 31121987.
3.
It seems that in the All India Seniority list the petitioner's correct place was not reflected on the basis of his corrected seniority in the zonal list.
Respondent Nos. 4 and 5 were promoted on the basis of All India Seniority List from the post of Assistant Manager (General) to Deputy Manager (General) on 8.7.1988.
Since according to the petitioner these respondents were junior to the petitioner as Assistant Manager (General) if the correction had been carried out in the All India Seniority List, he made representation to the respondents that juniors were being promoted to the post of Deputy General Manager without considering his claim.
It is the case of the petitioner that without deciding his representation ten more persons, were promoted as Deputy Manager (General) in December, 1988.
Since the representation of the petitioner was not being decided and in the meantime a panel had been prepared of Assistant Managers (General) for promotion as Deputy Managers (General), the petitioner filed the present writ petition in this Court alleging that his representation had not been decided and more than 400 persons junior to the petitioner had been included in the panel ignoring the claim of the petitioner for promotion to the rank of Deputy Manager (General).
After issuance of notice of motion by this Court, respondent No. 2 vide order dated 3/4101989 intimated the petitioner that his seniority had been fixed at his original place at serial No. 205-A in the Zonal Seniority List of Assistant Manager (General) as on 31121987.
It was further mentioned in the letter that the name of the petitioner at serial No. 75-A in the Zonal Seniority List of Assistant Manager (General) as on 31101984 and from serial No. 40 in the Zonal Seniority List of Assistant Manager (General) as on 31121987 was being deleted.
Copy of this letter has been attached as annexure P 15 by amending the writ petition.
It is this order that has been challenged in the amended writ petition.
4.
One of the grounds of attack by the counsel for the writ petitioner was that the impugned order annexure P 15 had been passed without hearing the writ petitioner.
It was not disputed that no opportunity of hearing had been given to the petitioner before passing the impugned order.
When I observed that on this short score the matter could be sent back, the learned counsel for the petitioner opted that I should decide the case on merits rather than sending it back, for affording opportunity to the petitioner.
5.
The other submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner was that once his post of Commercial Artist is held to be equivalent to any post of the rank of Assistant Grade-I then he was entitled to be promoted to the rank of Assistant Manager (General) from the date any of his juniors holding the posts in the cadre of Assistant Grade-I had been promoted.
Since, according to the petitioner, he was deemingly holding the post of Commercial Artist with effect from 1511969, he had been rightly given the deemed date of promotion as Assistant Manager (General) with effect from 2841972 the date when his juniors in the equivalent rank of Assistant Grade-I had been promoted.
This date according to the learned counsel for the petitioner could not be changed.
The case of the respondents on the other side is that the post of Commercial Artist was an isolated post and had no avenues of promotion.
It was only on 741975 that it was decided by the FCI that isolated post of Commercial Artist, Assistant Editor (Hindi) Chemist, Library Assistant, Receptionist etc. may be integrated in the General Administration so that these incumbents could hope for promotion to higher posts.
According to the learned counsel for the respondents, it was from this date that Commercial Artist had become eligible for consideration for promotion to the post of Assistant Manager (General) since thereafter the first promotion took place on 9111976 petitioner could not be given a deemed date of promotion in the year 1972 when the Commercial Artist was not eligible for promotion to the post of Assistant Manager (General).
6.
There is a merit in the submission of the learned counsel for the respondents.
To illustrate the submission, it may be observed that supposing posts 'A' and 'B' are eligible for promotion to post X 'C' is an equivalent post to post 'A' and 'B' but is not eligible for promotion to post 'X'.
'A' and 'B' who have lesser length of service than 'C' are promoted to post 'X'.
After their promotions 'C' is also made eligible for promotion to post 'X'.
Can under these circumstances 'C' claim that since he was senior to 'A' and 'B' having longer length of service, should be promoted to post 'X' from the dates 'A' and 'B' were promoted?
The answer to this would be in the negative.
'C' cannot claim promotion with effect from a date prior to the date when the said post was made eligible for promotion to post 'X'.
Consequently, in the present case, since the post of Commercial Artist was made eligible for promotion to the post of Assistant Manager General) with effect from 741975 and promotions to this rank thereafter was ordered only on 971976, no prior date could be given to the petitioner.
7.
Another submission made by the learned counsel for the petitioner is that to some other categories who were also not eligible earlier for promotion to the post of Assistant Manager (General) to them earlier dates of promotion had been given.
It may be observed here that according to the Rules, Stenographers, Assistant Grade I (General Administration) were eligible for promotion to the rank of AMG even prior to 741975.
So naturally they could be promoted prior to the petitioner even if they had lesser length of service, than the petitioner.
So far as the post of Receptionist is concerned, it may be observed that there was one post of Receptionist held by one Smt. Gauri Guhia who had also been made eligible for promotion to Assistant Manager (General) along with the petitioner but she had been given the date when she had joined as Receptionist.
The respondents have fairly stated that there seems to be some manipulation in the record.
But that should not detain us inasmuch as it has been stated that Smt. Gauri Guhia had left the job in the FCI and she is no more in the service of the FCI Otherwise also Receptionist's pay scale was equivalent to the pay scale of Assistant Manager (General) and strictly speaking it was not promotion of a receptionist to the rank of Assistant Manager (General) but only by becoming an Assistant Manager (General), the receptionist could hope to be considered to promotion to the next rank of Deputy General Manager.
Consequently, I do not find any merit in this submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
For the foregoing reasons, this writ petition fails and is dismissed.
Parties will bear their own costs.