AL Bahri, J - The dispute in this appeal relates to seniority of Lecturers working in the Government Polytechnic for Women, Chandigarh - Gurcharan Singh appellant filed a suit challenging the seniority and promotion of Mrs. Avtansh Singh.
The suit was dismissed by the trial Court on January 4, 1984 and the appeal filed by Gurcharan Singh failed before the Senior Sub Judge, Chandigarh on August 18, 1984.
Thus, Gurcharan Singh is in second appeal in the Court.
2.
Gurcharan Singh was initially appointed as Instructor in 1966.
He was confirmed on the said post with effect from April, 22, 1974 vide order dated February 17, 1975 (Exhibit P.1).
Thereafter, on July 19, 1976 he was promoted as Lecturer (non-gazetted) ad hoc in the pay scale of Rs. 300-600 vide order, Exhibit P.8.
On that post, he was made regular vide order dated March 17, 1977, Exhibit P7.
On May 30, 1979, the posts of Lecturers (Non-gazetted) ad hoc were abolished.
New posts of Junior Lecturers were created against which he was adjusted.
The order of adjustment is dated May 22, 1980 (Exhibit P4).
3.
Mrs. Avtansh Singh, defendant No. 4, was appointed Lecturer on July 5, 1978 vide order, Exhibit D2.
She was to remain on probation for a period of two years.
Subsequently, she was confirmed and further promoted on April 17, 1980 as Head of the Department.
Copy of the order is Exhibit P5.
4.
The claim of Gurcharan Singh plaintiff was that since he was adjusted against the post of Lecturer on May 22, 1980, his prior period of service on the post of Lecturer ad hoc has to be taken into consideration, while fixing seniority.
It is in this respect that support is sought from instructions of the Government contained in Letter Exhibit P.3.
5.
After hearing counsel for the parties, I find that the claim of the appellant was rightly rejected by the Courts below.
There are no service rules on the subject.
In the absence of any service rules, the general principle of length of service would be taken into consideration for determining seniority on the post.
It is not disputed that the pay scale of the post of Lecturer (gazetted) is higher than that of the post of Lecturer (non-gazetted) and Instructor.
Mrs. Avtansh Singh was directly appointed on the post of Lecturer on July 5, 1978.
At that time, Gurcharan Singh plaintiff was not working as Lecturer but he was working as Lecturer ad hoc in the pay scale of Rs. 300-600 as is shown from the orders, Exhibits P.7 and P.8.
It was only on May 22, 1980 that Gurcharan Singh for the first time was appointed/adjusted against the post of Lecturer (non-gazetted) vide order, Exhibit P4.
That was much after the appointment of Mrs Avtansh Singh.
Since the seniority on the post of Lecturer (gazetted) is to be determined, the person appointed earlier would obviously be senior to the person appointed later.
6.
The contention of counsel for the appellants is that Gurcharan Singh was adjusted against the post of Lecturer vide order, Exhibit P4, and his previous service is to be taken into consideration for purposes of fixing seniority.
This contention cannot be accepted as per condition contained in order, Exhibit P4, which is reproduced as under :-  "The above adjustments will be purely on ad hoc basis, subject to the formal approval of the Departmental Promotion Committee and also subject to the following conditions :-  (i) that it will not bestow on the person a claim for regular appointment and that ad hoc service rendered by him/her would not count for the purpose of seniority in that grade and for eligibility for promotion, confirmation etc. ; and (ii) xxx xxx xxx" The aforesaid condition contemplates that adjustment of the persons mentioned therein including Gurcharan Singh appellant will not bestow any right on them to claim seniority on the basis of previous ad hoc service on the lower post.
That being the position, the contention of counsel for the appellant in this respect cannot be accepted.
7.
Learned counsel for the appellant further sought support from the letter of the Home Secretary, Chandigarh Administration, which is Exhibit P.3, that for all intents and purposes on the new post, the plaintiff was to be deemed to be treated as permanent.
The extract of Exhibit P.3 is reproduced below :-  "It is clarified that the incumbents now holding higher posts but are permanent on the lower abolished posts in the Govt. Polytechnic for Women, Chandigarh would be treated as permanent till they are made permanent of the higher posts."
The matter of fixing seniority could not be determined on the basis of letter, Exhibit P.3.
There is no indication that any guidelines were provided in this letter on the subject of fixation of seniority.
8.
On the facts stated above, since Smt. Avtansh Singh joined as Lecturer prior to the posting of Gurcharan Singh appellant, she was rightly treated as senior to him.
Findings of the Courts below in this respect are affirmed.
9.
For the reasons recorded above, this appeal fails and is dismissed with costs.
Appeal dismissed.