RS Mongia, J - Shri RL Mittal, husband of Smt. Sarla Mittal, was working as Chief Librarian in the Punjabi University, Patiala (hereinafter referred to as the 'University').
While in service, he unfortunately expired on 26th June, 1988.
Smt. Sarla Mittal, applied to the Vice-Chancellor of the University for the appointment of her son as Lecturer on compassionate grounds, who holds the qualifications of Master of Business Administration.
At the time she applied to the University, her son was working as a Deputy Manager with Road Master Industries Private Ltd Rajpura and was drawing about Rs. 7100/- per month as his total emoluments.
This request of the widow of Shri RL Mittal was declined by the University, vide order dated 27th February, 1989 (Annexure PI) on the ground that her son Shri Krishan Mittal could not be appointed as a lecturer as he did not possess the requisite qualifications for the appointment, and the Syndicate was of the opinion that appointment by relaxation of qualifications of teachers is not justified keeping the academic point of view into consideration.
It is the case of the petitioner that her son fulfilled the requisite qualifications for being appointed as lecturer, as had been laid down by the University Grants Commission prior to the decision (Annexure P.2).
The petitioner made another representation to the University for giving appointment to her son, but since it was not being considered, she filed a writ petition in this Court.
2.
The learned Single Judge thought it appropriate to examine Shri Tirath Singh, Registrar of the University as a Court witness.
It was not denied that the University had been giving appointment on compassionate grounds to the sons, daughters, wives of the deceased employees.
As far as the question of qualifications was concerned the learned Judge has observed that the son of the petitioner fulfilled the requisite qualifications as laid down by the University Grants Commission and was thus eligible for appointment as Lecturer.
On the basis of this, the learned Judge allowed the writ petition and gave the following directions:  i) The University should make appointment of the petitioner's son in the University against a suitable post of lecturer in Business Management in the same manner as they have made appointments in such cases on earlier occasions.
The University was directed to offer the appointment on compassionate grounds to the petitioner's son, within one month from the date of the judgment i.e. 22nd December, 1989. ii) On the appointment of the petitioner's son, his pay should be fixed and protected taking into consideration the pay which the petitioner's son was drawing in other organization; and iii) Since the widow of the deceased-employee of the University was in occupation of University accommodation, on appointment of her son as a Lecturer, she should be allowed to retain the accommodation and the same should be allotted in the name of her son.
Aggrieved by the judgment of the learned Single Judge, the University has come up in appeal.
3.
The learned counsel for the appellant-University has submitted that even though it may be held that the son of the writ petitioner was qualified for the post of Lecturer, no direction could be given that he should be appointed to the suitable post on compassionate grounds.
The directions, which the learned Judge could have given, should have confined only to consider the case of the son of the petitioner for appointment on compassionate grounds.
He further submitted that the question of protecting the pay which the petitioner's son might have been getting in a private organisation did not arise as that has nothing to do with his appointment as Lecturer in the University.
Further, the question of the petitioner retaining the same house which had given to her husband by the University as Chief Librarian could not be retained by the petitioner even on the appointment of her son as a Lecturer.
Her son could only be provided accommodation according to his status.
4.
The learned counsel for the writ petitioner (respondent), on the other hand, submitted that once it is held that the petitioner's son was qualified, he should have been given appointment and the petitioner was entitled to retain the accommodation as well as the protection of the pay to the petitioner's son.
5.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, we find force in the submissions of the learned counsel for the appellant.
The learned Single Judge has held that the petitioner's son was qualified for the post of Lecturer.
The only direction which could have been given under the circumstances, was that the petitioner's son's case be considered for appointment as a Lecturer on compassionate grounds.
We may make it clear that even if it is held that the petitioner's son was not qualified the University would consider the case for relaxation of qualification keeping in view the previous precedents on the point.
With respect to the learned Single Judge, we arc of the view that he was in error when he gave directions that the pay of the petitioner's son would be protected.
As indicated above, the petitioner was getting approximately Rs. 7100/- per month from a private organisation.
If the petitioner's son is wanting appointing on compassionate grounds in the University, he has to be paid the pay-scale of Lecturer and the question of protecting the pay which he might have been getting in a private organistation does not arise.
Similarly, the widow of the deceased would not have any right to retain the accommodation which was allotted to her husband as Chief Librarian.
If her son is appointed, then he would be entitled to accommodation according to his status.
The petitioner has no right to retain the accommodation which was given according to the status of her husband.
6.
For the foregoing reasons, this appeal is allowed and the judgment of the learned Single Judge is quashed, but without any order as to costs.
It is hereby directed that the case of the son of the writ petitioner would be considered for appointment to a suitable post of Lecturer within one month of the receipt this is judgment, considering him to be qualified.
In case, for some reason it is held that he is not qualified, then the University shall consider his case sympathetically for relaxation of the qualification keeping in view the previous precedents on the point.
The petitioner's son, if appointed, would be given accommodation by the University according to his status.
7.
Before parting with the judgment, we may make it clear that when this Letters Patent Appeal was admitted the Motion Bench had allowed the petitioner to continue in the accommodation allotted to her husband.
The University would charge the rent from the writ petitioner which was being paid by her husband at the time of his death.
Appeal allowed.