Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner was admitted to the First year of the Five Year Course leading to the degree of Ayurvedacharya (BAMS) on August 4, 1990.
He deposited a total of Rs. 19,080/- towards his admission fee and other charges.
On March 20, 1991 the Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar (hereinafter referred to as "the University") directed the Principal of the Daya Nand Ayurvedic College, Jalandhar (hereinafter referred to as "the College") to strike off his name from the rolls of the College.
Vide letter dated March 22, 1991, the Principal informed the petitioner that as per the instructions of the University his name had been struck off from the rolls of the College and that his admission stood cancelled.
The petitioner's admission was cancelled as he had secured less than 50 per cent marks in the 10+2 Examination.
Aggrieved by the cancellation of the admission, the petitioner has approached this Court through the present petition under Articles 226 of the Constitution of India.
2.
A few facts deserve to be noticed.
The petitioner has tabulated his academic record in the petition as under :-  S.No.& Class Year of Passing Marks obtained Percentage/Division 1.
Matric 1986 481/785 601 1st Divn.
2.
+1 1987 492/800 61.5 Ist Divn.
3.
+2 1988 200/450 444.
3rd Divn.
4.
B.Sc.l.
1989 516/800 644.
/ 1st Divn.
5.
B.Sc.
ILI.
1990 561/800 70 / 1st Divn.
The College issued a prospectus for admission to the B.A.M.S Course for the year 1990.
For admission to the First Year of Five Years Course in Ayurvedacharya (BAMS) the minimum qualification of the candidate as mentioned in the prospectus was that he should have passed the "10+2 Course held by Punjab School Education Board or an equivalent qualification from any recognised Board or University and he should have appeared in the PMT Examination conducted by the Punjab University."
Punjabi University, Patiala had laid down the following conditions of eligibility which a candidate was required to possess before becoming eligible for sitting in the Competitive Entrance Examination :  "2.
ELIGIBILITY FOR EXAMINATION : 23. : All Punjab Domicile candidates who have secured atleast 50% (45% in the case of candidates belonging to Scheduled Caste/Tribes) of the aggregate marks in the four compulsory subjects i.e. Chemistry, Physics, Biology and English taken together of 10 + 2 pattern or equivalent examination shall be eligible to sit for the Competitive Entrance Examination provided that a candidate who has appeared for the qualifying examination but whose result has not been declared may be provisionally admitted to the Competitive Entrance Examination but his/her result will be declared only after he/she has produced the evidence of having satisfied the above conditions.
3.
A perusal of the chart given above would show that the petitioner had secured only 444 per cent marks in the + 2 Examination held in the year 1988.
However, the petitioner had thereafter passed the B.Sc.
Part-I Examination securing 644. percent marks and the B.Sc.
Part-II Examination securing 70 per cent marks.
He had consequently applied for permission to sit in the PMT Examination.
His application having been entertained, he had actually appeared in the examination.
On the basis of his position in the Merit List, he was, however, able to secure admission in the college at Jalandhar only and had deposited of a fee Rs. 19,080/-.
This amount included the admission fee for five years, a refundable security of Rs. 500/- and the rest of the amount was charged from the petitioner on account of tuition fee for the 1st year of the BAMS Course.
The petitioner attended the classes and when he was due to appear in the examination to be conducted by the University, the letters dated March 20, 1991 (Annexure P.7) and March 22, 1991 (Annexure P.8) were received by him.
In pursuance to the directions contained in Annexure P.7, the College had struck off the name of the petitioner from its rolls.
The reason assigned for the cancellation of the admission is that the petitioner had not secured 50 per cent marks in the 10+2 Examination.
Aggrieved by the orders at Annexure P.7 and P.8, the petitioner has approached this Court through, the present petition.
4.
The respondents have filed two separate written statements.
It is maintained on behalf of the respondents that the petitioner was not eligible to sit in the PMT Examination or to be admitted to the BAMS Course as he had secured only 444 per cent marks in the 10+2 Examination.
It is further maintained that the requirement of 50 per cent marks in the 10 + 2 Examination is an essential requirement and no weightage is given for higher qualifications.
In the written statement filed by the College, it has further been mentioned that out of the amount of Rs. 19,080/- paid by the petitioner, the amount of security viz. Rs. 500/- only is refundable.
The obvious implication is that besides losing one precious year of his career, the petitioner also loses an amount of Rs. 18,500/- paid by him towards admission and tuition fee.
5.
Mr. GS Bal, learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that the candidate has had a consistently good academic record and that he had secured poor marks in the + 2 Examination only on account of this reason that the petitioner had joined the B.Sc.
Course and had secured First Division in both the examination.
On this factual premises it was contended that the petitioner, having passed an examination higher than the + 2 Examination in the First Division, was fully the eligible to sit in the PMT Examination as also for admission to the BAMS Course.
It was further contended by the learned counsel that the only condition prescribed in the prospectus issued by the College was that the candidate should have passed the 10 + 2 Examination and should have appeared in the Competitive Entrance Examination called PMT According to the learned counsel, the petitioner fulfilled both the qualifications.
It was also contended by the learned counsel that even if the prescribed qualification is literally construed, marks secured by the petitioner in the 10th, 11th and 12th Class Examination had to be taken into consideration for determining his eligibility.
According to the learned counsel, if this course is adopted, it would be found that the petitioner had secured more than 55 per cent marks and was thus fully eligible for admission to the Course.
The learned counsel also raised a contention that the impugned action was violative of the principles of natural justice inasmuch as no opportunity was afforded to the petitioner before cancelling his admission.
6.
On behalf of the respondents Messers PS Patwalia and RS Murti have submitted that Clause 13 of the Ordinance relating to the BAMS Course had been amended by the University in the year 1990.
Preliminary approval was granted on June 22, 1990.
The amendment was finally approved by the Syndicate of the University on October 23, 1990.
The amended clause inter alia provided that a candidate shall be eligible to appear in the First Professional Examination, if he had passed the 10+2 Examination with Medical subjects viz. Physics, Chemistry and Biology with 50 per cent marks or any other equivalent examination and had appeared in the PMT of the University.
Since the petitioner did not possess this qualification, he was totally eligible for admission.
It was further submitted that the marks secured by the petitioner in the B.Sc.
Part-I and Part-II examinations could not be taken into consideration.
It was also their contention that while determining eligibility, only the marks secured by the candidate in the 12th Class Examination had to be taken into consideration and the University was not required to work out the average of the marks secured by the candidates in the three examinations viz. - 10th, 11th and 12th classes.
It was also submitted that there was no violation of the principles of natural justice as in the representation, a copy of which is at Annexure R/1/2, the petitioner had not disputed the fact that he had secured 444 per cent marks in the +2 Examination.
This representation, according to the learned counsel had been taken into consideration while deciding the case.
7.
The University has issued Ordinances relating to the Ayurvedic Faculty.
These were published in the University Calendar 1986 (Volume II).
Clause 13 at page 363 of the said Calendar reads as under  "FIRST PROFESSIONAL EXAMINATION.
The examination shall be open to a candidate who :  (i) has passed the Pre-Ayarvedic examination from this University; or (ii) has been enrolled in any of the Ayurvedic colleges affiliated to this university during the one academic year preceding the examination; (iii) has his name submitted to the Registrar by the Principal of the Ayurvedic College concerned, with the following certificates signed by the Principal; (a) of having good character; (b) of having attended not less than three quarters of the full course of lectures delivered and Practical held separately in each of the subjects of the examination.
Provided that the Principal of the college shall be empowered to condone shortage upto 10 per cent of the total lectures delivered in each subject in theory and practicals.
(c) of having undergone not less than one academic year, the course of study prescribed by the University."
This clause was proposed to be amended in the year 1990 as under :  "First Professional Examination.
(i) has passed the 10+2 with medical subjects (Physics, Chemistry and Biology) with 50% marks or any other equivalent examination and has appeared in PMT of the University; (ii) has his name submitted to the Registrar by the Principal of the Ayurvedic College concerned with the following certificates signed by the Principal.
(a) of having good character; (b) of having attended not less than three quarters of the full course of lectures delivered and Practicals held separately in each of the subjects of the examination.
Provided that the Principal of the College shall be empowered to condone shortage upto 10% of the total lectures delivered in each subject in theory and Practicals separately.
The candidates shall not be permitted to appear in the examination in the subjects in which falls short of required attendance percentage but he will be permitted to appear in the remaining subjects; (c) of having undergone not less than one academic year, the course of study prescribed by the University."
Preliminary approval for this amendment was given on June 22, 1990.
However, the Syndicate, which, has the power to amend the Ordinances, had granted the approval on October 23, 1990.
The petitioner, was actually admitted to the Course on August 4, 1990.
In my view the amended provision was not in force on that date as the approval had been given by the component authority on October 23, 1990 only.
Even otherwise, the process of selection for admission in the very nature of things had commenced much prior to August, 1990.
It is not clear from the record as to whether or not even preliminary approval to the amendment had been given prior to the issue of prospectus by the College.
In the prospectus the condition of 50 per cent marks in the + 2 Examination had not been laid down.
As such, it cannot be said that the petitioner did not fulfil the conditions laid down by the college in its prospectus.
Factually, he had passed the 10 + 2 Examination and had also appeared in the PMT He thus fulfilled both the conditions as laid down in the prospectus.
In such a situation, the cancellation of his admission on the ground that he did not fulfil the requirement of 50 per cent marks in the 10 + 2 Examination was illegal.
The Ordinance amended by the University could operate on October 23, 1990 vis-a-vis the admissions which were to be made after October 23, 1990.
These admissions would obviously be for the year 1991.
The amended Ordinance could not thus be applied by the University to the admissions made for the year 1990.
8.
There in another aspect of the matter.
The petitioner had admittedly secured 644 per cent marks in B.Sc.
Part-I and 70 per cent marks in B.Sc.
Part-II.
A candidate, who has passed the higher examination in the First Division cannot be placed at a disadvantageous position vis-a-vis another candidate who has passed the 10 + 2 Examination with merely 50 per cent marks.
Even if, it be assumed that the amended Ordinance was to be applied, a person who had secured 50 per cent in 10 + 2 or any other equivalent examination, would be eligible.
If a candidate who has passed the examination equivalent to 10 + 2 Examination with 50 per cent marks is eligible, another candidate who has passed a much higher examination in the First Division cannot in my view is held to be ineligible.
Consequently, there was no illegality or regularity in the action of the Punjabi University in permitting the petitioner to appear in the PMT or that of the College in admitting him to the B.A.M.S Course.
The stand taken on behalf of the University that no weightage is to be allowed for the higher examination in my view was totally arbitrary.
9.
There is yet another aspect of the matter.
The requirement even under the amended Ordinance of the University is that a candidate should have secured 50 per cent marks in the 10 + 2 Examination in the subjects of Physics, Chemistry and Biology.
This provision, even if literally construed, cannot mean only the 12th Class Examination.
In my view, it must be the average of the marks secured by the petitioner in the 10th, 11th and 12th Classes Examinations.
If the intention of the Faculty had been to consider the marks only in the 12th Class Examination, the expression "10+2" would not have been used.
The obvious implication of 10 + 2 is that the marks secured in the 10th, 11th and 12th Classes Examinations have to be taken into consideration.
If the prevision is construed in this manner, the petitioner, who had secured 601 per cent marks in the 10th Class, 615 per cent in the 11th Class and 444 per cent marks in the 12th Class would be eligible as the average would come to more than 55 per cent.
10.
In view of my above findings, it is not necessary to go into the question as to whether or not the action was violative of the principles of natural justice.
It is thus held that the petitioner was eligible for admission to the BAMS Course.
The action of the University in ordering the cancellation of his admission and the action of the College in proceeding to cancel the admission by orders at Annexure P-7 and P-8 respectively was illegal.
These orders are consequently quashed.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to his costs, which shall be equally shared by the respondents.
The costs are assessed at Rs. 3,000/-.
By an interim order, the Motion Bench had permitted the petitioner to take the First Professional Examination at his own risk and responsibility.
The University shall declare his result.