GR Majithia, J - The petitioner has sought a mandate to the respondent to grant him the deputation allowance in the Writ Petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
The facts :-  The petitioner joined the service of Haryana Irrigation Department as Assistant Engineer in February, 1977; that he was selected for foreign assignment with the State Organization for Soil and Land Reclamation, Iraq, in public interest; that he joined the assignment in Iraq on August 7, 1981 and remained there for two years; that on expiry of the foreign assignment, he returned to India and reported his arrival to respondent No. 2 on August 25, 1983 but no posting order was given to him; that after a lapse of six months, respondent No. 1 vide its office order dated February 10, 1984 posted him with Haryana State Minor Irrigation Tubewells Corporation (for short MITC) but he was not allowed to join there; that he informed respondent No. 2 about the non-acceptance of his joining report by MITC; that respondent No. 2 posted the petitioner with Haryana State Cooperative Labour and Construction Federation (for short Federation) vide order dated February 22; that he joined the service of the Federation at Shahbad to look after the civil works of Sugar Mills; that respondent No. 3 on the basis of the posting order issued by respondent No. 1 posted the petitioner in the Design Wing of the Corporation at its Head Office at Chandigarh; that the Federation relieved the petitioner and he joined the Design Wing of respondent No. 3 at Chandigarh on April 3, 1984 on deputation; that the petitioner has been earning good and better than good confidential report each year; that while on foreign assignment in Iraq, he was permitted to cross efficiency bar with effect from April 1, 1983; that respondent No. 3 is a corporate body substantially owned by respondent No. 1; that service rendered by a government employee on transfer to the corporation is a 'foreign service' as defined in Rule 221 of the Punjab Civil Service Rules Volume I Part I (for short C.S.R.
Vol I Part I), Rule 221 reads thus :  "221.
Foreign service means service in which a Government employee receives his pay with the sanction of Government from any source other than the Consolidated Fund of India or the Consolidated Fund of State."
Rule 102 of C.S.R Vol I Part I envisages that no government employee can be transferred on foreign service against his will.
However, a proviso has been added to the said rule which empowers the State Government to send an employee on deputation to a body incorporate which is wholly and substantially owned and controlled by the Government without the consent of the Government employee concerned.
Rule 102 ibid reads thus :-  "102(a) No Government employee may be transferred to foreign service against his will : Provided that thus, sub-rule shall not apply to the transfer of a Government employee to the service of a body, incorporated or not, which is wholly or substantially owned or controlled by the Government."
2.
The petitioner contends that the reading of the aforesaid statutory provision indicates that transfer of a government employee to MITC is a transfer on foreign service and, therefore, he is entitled to draw the usual deputation allowance as per Government decision.
The petitioner had joined the service of the Corporation on deputation on April 3, 1984 yet respondent Nos. 1 and 2 neither sent the Last Pay Certificate to respondent No. 3 nor communicated the usual terms and conditions of the deputation, Resplendent No. 3 paid salary to him at the initial start of the pay scale viz Rs. 940/- per month without deputation allowance although his pay in the department was Rs. 1150/- per month.
However, later on respondent No. 2 supplied a copy of Last Pay Certificate to respondent No. 3 vide letter dated June 28, 1984 and respondent No. 3, started paying salary to the petitioner at the rate Rs. 1150/- per mensem.
But the difference of emoluments for the months of April and May 1984 remained unpaid.
It is further submitted that the petitioner was attached with the Executive Engineer of the Irrigation Department, Chandigarh for administrative purposes during the period of deputation.
The Executive Engineer sanctioned one special increment to the petitioner under the Family Welfare Scheme in accordance with the Haryana Government Finance Department Letter No. 6/1(8)79-IFR(1) dated 28.8.1981 and number 6(1)(8)/79-IFR(1) dated 24111981 vide his office order dated January 411985.
Respondent No. 3 neither paid the difference of salary for the months of April and May, 1984 nor the special increment aforesaid despite reminders.
The petitioner was threatened by the Financial Adviser of respondent No. 3 that if he did not arrange for his Last Pay Certificate his salary would be stopped from May, 1985 onwards.
On receipt of the letter from the Financial Adviser, the petitioner made a detailed representation that obtaining of the Last Pay Certificate was an official function and the Corporation should obtain it from respondent No. 1.
Despite this representation, the Financial Adviser did not release him the salary for the month of May, 1985.
The petitioner submitted a representation to the Financial Secretary with a copy of the same to the Executive Engineer Designs, his immediate incharge on whose intervention, the said officer released the salary.
It was on persistent pursuance that respondent No. 3 paid the difference of salaries for April and May, 1984 and the arrears of special increment commencing from September 1, 1984 onwards in the month of January, 1986.
Respondent No. 3, illegally withheld payments and the petitioner claimed interest on the delayed payments.
The petitioner was not paid deputation allowance as enjoined by the rules.
Respondent No. 1 communicated the terms and conditions of deputation of the petitioner with respondent No. 2 vide letter dated May 23, 1986 but declined to give deputation allowance.
The petitioner has impugned the order of respondent No. 1 laying down the terms and conditions of deputation of the petitioner to the extent to which deputation allowance has been declined to him.
3.
In a nutshell, the petitioner has sought two reliefs in this petition, namely, (i) to grant him interest on the delayed payment of his salary by respondent No. 3 for the month of May, 1985 for want of Last Pay Certificate from respondent No. 1, (ii) to grant him deputation allowance denied vide letter dated May 23, 1986 of respondent No. 1 under which the terms of deputation were laid down.
4.
Written statement has been filed only, on behalf of respondent No. 1 and 2.
They justified the action on the ground that before joining the Corporation on deputation, the petitioner had been working with the Government of Iraq on contract basis and subsequently with Haryana State Co-operative Labour and Construction Federation Limited.
In terms of Finance Department letter dated May 11, 1977, the petitioner was required to serve in the parent department for two years and was required to observe 2 years cooling off period which was not observed in his case owing to tight vacancy position of S.D.Os in the department at that time.
The petitioner was sent to serve in Corporation and no deputation allowance was required to be paid.
In terms of proviso to rule 102(a) of C.S.R.
Volume I, Part 1, no willingness was to be obtained from the petitioner for posting him in MITC.
The defence as unfolded in the written statement is in accordance with rule 1028(1) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules Volume I, Part I.
The same reads thus :  "1028(1) A Government employee who has served on deputation or on foreign service should not be allowed to proceed on deputation or on foreign service again unless he has worked for a minimum period of two years on a post in his parent Department on reversion from deputation or foreign service from the first assignment so that Government may be able to make the best use of his service."
The rule only lays down the guidelines and it does not prescribe any bar to a Government employee being sent on deputation again before serving the parent department for two years.
I draw support from the following observations of a Division Bench judgment of this Court reported as SS Mongia and another v. The State of Punjab and others, 1987(5) S.L.R.
465, where it was held thus :-  "Neither of these contentions can, however, stand scrutiny, what rule 1028 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume-I, lays down is only a guideline, but it does not prescribe any bar to a Government employee being sent on deputation again before serving two years in his parent department on reversion from deputation."
The defence that there was a bar for sending the petitioner on deputation at least for a period of two years neither flows from the Rule nor from any binding judicial precedent.
To the contrary, it has been authoritatively held by this Court that there is no bar to a Government employee being sent on deputation again before serving two years in his parent department on return from deputation.
5.
Reading of Rules 221 and 1028 of C.S.R.
Volume I, Part 1, in unmistakable terms suggests that the transfer of the petitioner to respondent No. 3 is a transfer on foreign service.
He is in service with respondent No. 3 on deputation.
He is not receiving his pay from the consolidated fund of India or the consolidated fund of the State and he will be deemed to be in foreign service.
Respondent No. 1 in his letter dated June 28, 1974 took the following decision :-  "In order to rationalize the present policy, the following decisions have, therefore, been taken in the matter :-  i) Haryana Government employees proceeding on deputation to State Government undertakings, Local Bodies, Autonomous Bodies, Construction companies substantially owned or controlled by the State Government will be entitled to a deputation allowance at the rate of 10% of their basis pay subject to a maximum of Rs. 100/- per month and further subject to the condition that their pay plus deputation allowance shall not exceed the maximum of the pay scale of the post he held on deputation."
6.
The petitioner through CM No. 9334 of 1989 wants to place on record copy of letter No. 13/5(3)87-5FR-I dated 791987 from the Financial Commissioner and Secretary to Government of Haryana, Finance Department addressed to all heads of Departments.
Notice of this application was issued to the respondent who did not oppose the prayer made in this application.
The letter is allowed to be placed on record of the Civil Writ Petition.
Otherwise too this letter has a strong bearing for determination of the question involved in the petition.
In this letter resplendent No. 1 has partially modified its earlier decision.
The earlier decision provided that a Government servant who has served on deputation in a State or Central Government Organisation should not be allowed to proceed on deputation to some other foreign organisation unless he had worked for a minimum period of two years on a post in his parent department subsequent to his reversion.
This decision was modified and it was decided in the letter dated 791987 Annexure P.18, that if an employee who is sent on a subsequent deputation strictly in the public interest and not on his own request or on the request of the foreign employer before the expiry of the calling period of two years deputation allowance to him should not be withheld.
In the light of this decision contained in this letter, the petitioner was entitled to the deputation allowance as mentioned in Para No. 3 of the policy decision incorporated in letter dated 2861974.
7.
For the reasons stated above, the writ petition succeeds.
The petitioner will be entitled to deputation allowance in terms of the policy decision contained in Para No. 3 of the Government letter dated June 28, 1974.
Respondent No. 1 will send necessary directions to respondent No. 3 in this behalf that the petitioner is entitled to deputation allowance as mentioned in the Government instructions contained in letter dated June 28, 1974 within one month from the date of receipt of the copy of this judgment.
Respondent No. 3 is directed to pay the petitioner the difference in the salary paid and to be paid after including the deputation allowance in the pay within two months from the date of receipt of government instructions.
The said difference will be paid with interest @ 9% to be calculated from the date when the amount became due.
The petitioner, however, is not allowed interest for delayed payment of his salary for the month of May, 1985.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.