NK Sodhi, J - The petitioners in this writ petition are all employees of the Notified Area Committee, Mullanpur Dakha, District Ludhiana (hereinafter called the Committee) and are working there since long.
The State of Punjab vide executive instructions contained in letter dated March 15, 1973 decided that all the government employees whose place of duty was within five miles (8 kms.)
from the qualifying limits of the cities eligible for house rent allowance be given the benefit of house rent allowance without any reference to their place of residence.
Ludhiana was admittedly an eligible city for the purpose of these instructions which seem to have been adopted by the Committee on the basis of which the Committee started paying to its employees (the petitioners) house rent allowance in terms of the said instructions since the place of their position was stated to be within five miles (8 kms.)
from the qualifying limits of Ludhiana.
The learned counsel for the parties are agreed that the administrative instructions issued by the State Government stood withdrawn by the Government as per its notification/order dated 3081983 and the petitioners have made no grievance in regard to this withdrawal.
As a result of this order dated 3081983, house rent allowance within the distance of five miles (8 kms.)
from the qualifying limits of the cities eligible for house rent allowance was withdrawn throughout the State and the Committee is not paying this allowance to its employees any more.
2.
While the instructions dated 1531973 were still in force, the Executive Officer of the Committee by his letter dated 791981 addressed to the President, Employees Union Notified Area Committee, Mullanpur Dakha (Regd), informed the petitioners that the house rent allowance to all the employees of the Committee had been stopped w.e.f.
August, 1981 in compliance with the instructions from the Deputy Director, Local Bodies, Ludhiana on the ground that he had been intimated by the Deputy Commissioner, Ludhiana that Mullanpur Dakha did not fall within a distance 8 kms, from the periphery of the Municipal Corporation, Ludhiana.
The payment of house rent allowance to the petitioners was, thus discontinued.
The petitioners have challenged this communication and the consequent stoppage of payment of house rent allowance to them in the present writ petition.
The letter addressed to the petitioners through their Union reads as under :-  "Kindly refer to your letter No. Nil dated 4.9.81.
You are hereby informed that the House Rent Allowance of the employees of Notified Area Committee of Mullanpur Dakha has been stopped with effect from August, 1981 in compliance with the instructions from Deputy Director, Local Bodies, Ludhiana vide his memo.
No. 3259 dated 161981.
He has been intimated by Deputy Commissioner, Ludhiana vide his letter No. 312-65 dated 20.5.81 that Mullanpur Dakha does not fall within distance of 8 KM from periphery of Municipal Corporation, Ludhiana.
Therefore, payment of House Rent Allowance should be discontinued."
The petitioners have placed some documents on the record to show that the distance between the periphery limits of Ludhiana Municipal Corporation and Mullanpur Dakha, where the petitioners were working, was 8 Kms, and rather less.
This fact is now being disputed though para 4 of the writ petition which reads as under has been admitted by respondent No. 3 in his written statement :-  "That the petitioners applied for grant of house rent allowance to them because they were covered by the Government instructions contained in Annexure P- 1".
3.
The only contentions advanced by the learned counsel for the petitioners is that the respondents could not withdraw the grant of house rent allowance by an ex parte decision conveyed to the petitioners as per letter dated 791981.
It is urged that the instructions issued by the State Government were in force throughout the State of Punjab till August 30, 1988 and the least that was required of the respondents under the rules of natural justice was to have afforded an opportunity of hearing before any unilateral decision withdrawing the benefit of house rent allowance could be taken.
I find force in this contention.
4.
The petitioners had been in receipt of house rent allowance for several years in accordance with the instructions issued by the State Government.
Obviously, the house rent allowance was being paid because it was believed by all concerned that the place of duty where the petitioners were employed fell within a distance of five miles (8 kms.)
from the periphery limits of Ludhiana.
Apart from the admission of respondent No. 3 in its written statement, there is on record a letter from the Deputy Commissioner to the Executive Engineer of the Committee certifying that the distance was 8 kms.
between Mullanpur Dakha and the periphery limits of Ludhiana.
Again, there is another letter from the Executive Engineer addressed to the Deputy Commissioner, Ludhiana, intimating that the distance from Ludhiana Municipal Corporation limits upto village Dakha was 75 kms.
Now if the respondents wanted to withdraw the payment of house rent allowance on the ground that the distance between the periphery limits of Ludhiana and the place of posting of the petitioners was more than 8 kms.
which fact is disputed on their behalf, it was essentially required on the part of the respondents to afford an opportunity of hearing to the petitioners through their Union to enable them to prove, if they could, that they were covered by the instructions inasmuch as the relevant distance was not more than five miles (8 kms.).
It is common ground that no such opportunity was afforded to them and it is well settled law that no order to their detriment could be passed without complying with the rules of natural justice.
5.
The learned counsel for the respondents has drawn my attention to a Division Bench judgment of this Court in CWP No. 5834 of 1988 to contend that the grant of house rent allowance to the petitioners was only by way of a concession and the same could be withdrawn at any time without notice and the employees had no right to claim the said allowances.
I am afraid, the judgment of the Division Bench is distinguishable on facts and does not cover the case of the petitioner.
It is true that Chief Justice JV Gupta, while delivering the judgment of the Division Bench observed that the house rent allowance was being paid to the employees under executive instructions and not under any statute and that as such any change made therein or the withdrawal thereof by the State Government, could not be challenged by way of a writ petition in this court.
The State Government had in that case by executive instructions been paying house rent allowance to its employees, whose place of duty was within 5 miles (8 kms.)
from the qualifying limits of eligible cites but later by another order these instructions and consequently the concessions thereunder were withdrawn as a result of which payment of house rent allowance had to be stopped.
In the instant case, however, the instructions were continuing to operate till 3081988, but the respondents made the petitioners ineligible w.e.f.
August, 1981, on the sole ground that the distance between the periphery limits of Ludhiana and the place of their posting at Mullanpur Dakha was more than 8 kms, when they had, at one point of time, found that the distance was less and the petitioners were covered by the executive instructions.
The fact regarding the distance between the place of posting and the periphery limits of Ludhiana is being disputed by the petitioner and such a factual dispute could not be resolved unilaterally without affording an opportunity of hearing to them.
6.
For the reasons recorded above, I allow the writ petition, set aside the communication dated 791981, whereby the petitioners were informed about the withdrawal of house rent allowance to them and its payment was thereafter discontinued and direct the respondents to decide afresh as to whether the petitioners were entitled to the house rent allowance on the basis of the executive in structions dated 1531973 till 3081988 when the instructions were withdrawn.
The respondents shall decide the matter after affording an opportunity of hearing to the petitioners through the President of their Union as desired by the petitioners.
No costs.
Petition allowed.