Ashok Bhan, J - Petitioner belongs to Chamar community which is one of the castes declared as Scheduled Caste.
After doing his MBBS in the year 1986, petitioner joined two years' Post-Graduation Course of MD in the speciality of Forensic Medicine.
On 2341987, petitioner was appointed as Demonstrator in the speciality of Forensic Medicine, the post on which he is still continuing.
Petitioner had become a member of HCMS Cadre on 2131987.
Final examination of Post-Graduation Course of MD was held in May, 1988.
Result was declared on 461988 and the petitioner was declared successful.
2.
On 741989, an advertisement (Annexure P/4) was issued vide which applications were invited for the posts of Teachers (Lecturers) in the Medical College and Hospital, Rohtak, on the prescribed form.
Applications complete in all respects were required to reach the office of Director, Medical College and Hospital, Rohtak, by 1551989.
By this advertisement, 34 posts of Lecturers were advertised out of which 13 were reserved for Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe and other backward categories.
The reservation in this advertisement was on break-up-wise roster in each speciality.
Petitioner's speciality was Forensic Medicine in which there was only one post and the same was kept for the open/general category.
The interviews were to be held on 26.7.1989.
3.
The requisite qualifications for the post of Teachers (Lecturers) in various specialities, as given in the advertisement were as under :  "(i) M.S./M.R.C.P/F.R.C.S/M.Ch.
or equivalent qualification in the speciality concerned as laid down by the Council from time to time.
(ii) Candidate should have worked as Demonstrator/Registrar or an equivalent post in the speciality concerned for two years in a Medical College of which one year should be after post-graduate qualification."
4.
Petitioner fulfilled the academic qualifications but did not have one year's teaching experience as Demonstrator/Registrar after post-graduation qualifications.
Result for the examination of MD was declared on 4.5.1988 whereas the last date of receipt of applications complete in all respects was 1551989.
If teaching experience of one year as Demonstrator/Registrar after post-graduation is accounted from 4.5.1988 then the petitioner did not have the requisite qualification of one year's teaching expenses after post- graduation on 1551989.
In other words, he fell short of one year's teaching experience after post-graduation by 19 days.
Since the petitioner did not fulfil the qualification of one year's teaching experience after post-graduation, he was not called for interview for the post of lecturers in the speciality of Forensic Medicine.
5.
Petitioner aggrieved against the said decision of the respondents, filed the present writ petition on 2271989 wherein he has prayed that he should be issued the interview letter for appearing in the interview to be held on 26.7.1989 for the appointment of Teachers (Lecturers) by treating the vacancy to be filled in the speciality of Forensic Medicine exclusively meant for the members of Scheduled Caste and to change the roster followed in the advertisement Annexure P/4, on the ground that prior to the issuance of advertisement Annexure P/4, seats for Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribes were reserved on total number of seats advertised and it is for the first time that break-up-wise roster of posts by earmarking as general or reserved category in the particular speciality has been done without notice.
It is argued that this change in the method of recruitment by reserving the posts in the particular speciality has resulted in arbitrary results.
Learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has invited my attention to Advertisement No. 2 of 1984 Annexure P/3 wherein 20% seats are shown to have been reserved for Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribes categories out of the total number of seats advertised.
The reservation was not on the basis of break-up-wise roster of each speciality.
Learned counsel argued that this policy was followed by the respondents till the year 1989 when Advertisement No. 2 of 1989 Annexure P/4 was issued and for the first time, the reservation was made for Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe according to break-up-wise roster in each speciality.
6.
Mr. SC Mohunta, Advocate General, Haryana, appearing for the State has argued that there was no policy of reservation of 20% posts for Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribes out of the total number of seats.
As per the policy dated 921979 (Annexure R/1) the quantum of reservation for Scheduled Caste was 20% in Class I, II, III and IV posts and in a block of 100 seats in each category, the posts were reserved according to the roster points and break-up-wise roster method was followed for each speciality.
In each speciality 4th, 8th, 14th, 24th, 28th, 34th, 38th, 42nd, 50th, 54th, 58th, 64th, 74th, 78th, 84th, 88th, 92nd and 100th seats was kept reserved for Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribes.
The relevant clauses of policy Annexure R/1 are reproduced below :-  "(1) (i) The quantum of reservation will be as under :-  By Direct Recruitment :  (a) For Scheduled Castes : 20% (in Class I, II, III and IV posts) (b) For Backward Classes : 5% (in Class, I, II, III and IV posts) (c) For Ex-Servicemen : (i) 5% (in Class I and II posts) (ii) 25% (in Class III and IV posts) By Promotion : (a) For Scheduled Castes : 20% (in Class III and IV posts on the basis of seniority-cum-merit.
There will be no reservation in Class I and II posts).
(b) For Backward Classes : 5% -do-  (c) For Ex-servicemen : Nil (ii) Henceforth, in a block of 100 posts in each cadre, the following posts should be reserved for persons belonging to Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes and for Ex-Servicemen :-  (a) For persons belonging to Scheduled Castes  (for direct recruitment to all Classes of posts i.e. Class I, II, III and IV and for promotion to Class III and Class IV posts on the basis of selection from a slab of 3 officials)  4-8-14-8-24-28-34-38-42-50-54-58-64-68-74-78-84-88-92 and 100.
(b) xxx xxx xxx xxx  1 to 6 xxx xxx xxx  He has further argued that even if it is assumed for the sake of argument that there was some practice (not policy) of making reservation for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes out of roster as a whole and a change has been brought about by the advertisement under attack in this case (Annexure P/4), then the petitioner has failed to show any special injustice or arbitrariness in fixing the break-up-wise roster.
The fixation of roster points for reserved category in each speciality is of the known processes for accommodating the reserved class among the open category students.
He further argued that if the course, as suggested by the petitioner, is adopted then it would result in 100% reservation in some of the specialities and in a given situation 100% seats may be filled only from general/open category candidates which would lead to unjust and arbitrary results.
It was argued that this Court in exercise of its writ jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution should not interfere in the process or methodology of reservation unless it is perverse or erroneous in law and in this particular case, there should be no interference because the policy of making reservation for Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe candidates in each speciality is just and the process and methodology adopted by the State are fair.
7.
I find force in the submissions made by Mr. SC Mohunta, Advocate General, Haryana.
Learned counsel appearing for the petitioner was unable to show that the State of Haryana had framed any policy for reservation of posts of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes taking the vacancies as a whole and not category-wise that is, if there were 100 vacancies in all then 20 posts were reserved for members of Scheduled Castes without their being allocated to different specialities.
No doubt in advertisement Annexure P/4 it is mentioned that 20% posts have been reserved for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and there is no break-up-wise roster in the year 1984 but this does not mean that this advertisement had been given under some policy framed by the State.
Learned counsel appearing for the petitioner was unable to refer to any policy decision of the State to this effect.
Even if, for the sake of argument, it is taken that the State has varied its practice for the first time in the year 1989, even then the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner was unable to show that this variation in practice could not be made by the respondents or the same has resulted in substantial injustice or arbitrariness.
The authorities have clearly worked out the reservation points according to the instructions (Annexure R/1 to the writ petition) issued in the year 1979.
The submission made by the learned counsel for the petitioner is bereft of any reason.
If the course, as suggested by the petitioner, is adopted then it would result in 100% reservation in some of the specialities and in a given situation 100% seats may be filled in a particular speciality only from general/open category.
I do not find any arbitrariness in the process or methodology in fixing up the break-up-wise roster for each speciality which has been adopted by the respondents in making recruitment vide recruitment letters issued in the year 1989 (Annexure P/4).
8.
The second point urged by the learned counsel for the petitioner is that even if it is accepted that the respondents could fill up the vacancies according to the break-up-wise roster in each speciality then the present post is the 4th post in the roster point and the same should have been given to a Scheduled Caste candidate.
It was further argued that the respondents have wrongly shown this post to be in the open/general category.
This submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner has been refuted by the Advocate General appearing for the State.
It was submitted that two posts of lecturers were created in the Forensic Medicine in the year 1975.
Dr. Yadav was appointed as Lecturer on deputation in the year 1977.
The instructions contained in letter No. 38/20/78-2GSI dated 921979 (Annexure R/1) were issued on 921979.
According to these instructions, 4th vacancy was to be kept reserved for a scheduled caste candidate.
Dr. Yadav was working on one of the post of Lecturer prior to the issuance of these instructions.
He was promoted as Professor in Forensic Medicine in 1981 and as a result of which the seat fell vacant.
In the year 1984, one post of Lecturer being first vacancy (as it was being filled for the first time after the issuance of instructions dated 921979 (Annexure R/1) was filled up by (sic) very post was again advertised and was filled up from open category by appointing Dr. PL Paliwal thus exhausting the first vacancy.
9.
In the alternative, he argued, that even if it is taken that Dr. Yadav occupied the first post of Lecturer from amongst open category candidates then for the second vacancy for open category candidates Dr. Jagpal Singh Dalal was selected but he did not join the same and this very post was re-advertised for which Dr. PL Paliwal was selected and appointed later on.
According to him, Dr. PL Paliwal exhausted the second post which belonged to the open category candidates and the present post of Lecturer is the third post for the open category candidates and the same had been rightly advertised for open category candidates.
As against this, the submission of learned counsel for the petitioner is that Dr. Jagpal Singh Dalal exhausted the second vacancy for the open category candidates and Dr. PL Paliwal was selected against the third post meant for open category candidates and the present post is the 4th post which should have been kept reserved for the candidates belonging to Scheduled Caste.
I find force in the submission of Advocate General, Haryana.
If it is taken that Dr. Yadav occupied the first post which belonged to the open category candidates then Dr. Jagpal Singh Dalal who was selected for the second post in the open category did not join the post and that very post was again advertised which was filled up from amongst open category candidates by appointing Dr. PL Paliwal which was the second vacancy.
The submission of learned counsel for the petitioner that the second post against which Dr. Jagpal Singh Dalal was selected but did not join would exhaust one seat of the open category candidates cannot be accepted because this very post was again advertised.
Had Dr. Jagpal Singh Dalal joined the post and later resigned then there could be some merit in the submission of learned counsel for the petitioner.
Since Dr. Jagpal Singh Dalal, although selected, did not join, it cannot be said that seat at roster point two stood exhausted for an open category candidate.
As has been stated above, this very post was again advertised which was later on filled up by Dr. PK Paliwal from open category.
So, the Advocate General, Haryana, was right in making the submission that the present post of Lecturer is a third post and the same has been rightly advertised for open category candidates.
10.
Lastly, the Advocate General, Haryana, has stated that there is no change in the percentage of reserved seats for the Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes.
In fact out of 34 posts, 13 seats are reserved for Scheduled Castes, two for Backward Classes and one for Ex-Servicemen, which shows that the reservation has been worked out within the framework of the instruction Annexure R/1 and no injustice has been meted out to the candidates for the reserved category.
There was no arbitrariness in fixing the break-up-wise roster point as by this method, a candidate from reserved category would get a chance to serve in all the specialities and filling up 100% posts in a particular speciality be either the open category candidates or reserved category candidates would be avoided.
It is argued that for the foregoing reasons, this Court should be reluctant in interfering with the processes or methodology of reservation until the same is perverse or erroneous.
I find force in this submission as well.
The method adopted by the respondents-State is not arbitrary but the same is just and reasonable method by which reservation is made for each SC/open category candidates in each speciality according to the break-up-wise roster.
No other point was urged.
For the foregoing discussion, this writ petition fails and is dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.