Nikhil Nath Bhattacharjee, J - This writ application is directed against an order dated 11th March 1986 passed by the Presiding Officer, Central Govt. Industrial Tribunal in reference No. 4 of 1981.
By the said order the learned Judge overruled all the four preliminary objections as raised before him prior to the hearing of the actual dispute referred to the said Tribunal.
2.
On the factual aspects it appears that in the year 1973 to fill up some vacancies in the post of Assistants Gr.
III (Ministerial) and Assistants Gr.
III (Typist) in the office of the Joint Manager (Port Operation), Food Corporation of India, Calcutta, the Regional Employment Officer, Calcutta was requested through two requisition letters dated 3rd April, 1973 to sponsor the names of candidates having the requisite qualification.
In response to the same, the Regional Employment Officer sponsored 234 candidates for AG.
III (M) and 434 candidates for AG.
(T).
In order to make the selection out of a large number of candidates sponsored by the Employment Exchange, a selection committee was constituted with Sri PK Sengupta, Sr. Deputy Manager as Chairman and Sri AK Das, Sr. Deputy Manager and Sri MK Nag, Deputy Manager (Accounts) as members.
In the case of Ministerial candidates selection was made on the basis of oral interview.
With regard to typists the candidates were first put to typing test for 5 minutes duration to test speed and accuracy and thereafter the candidates who were considered to be qualified were called for oral interview and final selection was made accordingly.
The marks were recorded on the interview list by Sri PK Sengupta, Chairman and in his absence by Sri AK Das, Sr. Deputy Manager acting as Chairman of the selection committee.
The typing tests were entrusted to who Sri R.C. Dutta, Sr. Asst.
Manager assisted by Sri B Dhar and Sri PK Banerjee, Asstt.
Gr.
l. Typing tests were conducted from 25th to 30th April, 1973 in two separate cabins in batches each day.
After such typing tests selection list were drawn up by the selection committee for each day.
The minutes of the selection committee were drawn up for AG.
III(M) on 30th April, 1973 and on 22nd May, 1973.
The final selection list for AG.
III(M) consisted of 66 names.
Of these the first 42 were to be appointed against immediate vacancies, the balance 24 were to be kept in the waiting list.
Actually 39 out of 42 candidates were appointed.
3 Candidates were not appointed because they chose not to take up the appointment even though selection memos were sent to them.
Out of the 39 candidates one candidate was a departmental candidate and two others were sports/player quota candidates.
The remaining 36 candidates were Employment Exchange nominees.
Out of the 36 empanelled typist candidates 34 were appointed as typists and no appointment was given to two candidates.
3.
Complainants of irregularities in the selection of AG.
III(M) and AG.
III(T) candidates were received by the Head Officer of the Food Corporation of India and the Zonal Manager, Calcutta was directed to review the entire selection process and the appointments made in April/May, 1973 by the Joint Manager (Port Operation), Calcutta.
The matter of irregular appointments was investigated by Sri KS Bhhasin, Deputy Manager (Flying Squad) of FCI Head Office.
It transpired from the investigation report that the selection and appointment of the candidates were done in irregular and fishy manner.
Two list of 134 candidates and 92 candidates for AG.
Ill(M) were forwarded by the Employment Exchange on 19th and 21st April, 1973 respectively.
A list of 31 candidates, 16 for AG.
III(M) and 15 for AG.
III(T) was sent by the Employment Exchange on 28th April, 1973 at 330 pm by hand.
This list of 31 candidates omitted two names which were later sent by the Employment Exchange on 30th April, 1973.
The candidates were interviewed between 24th and 30th April, 1973 of which 22nd and 29th April, 1973 were Sundays.
Since the list for bulk of the candidates was sent to the Joint Manager (PO) Office on 21st and 28th April, 1973, there was hardly any time between the issue of notices for interview and the dates on which the interviews were held before the selection board and obviously sufficient time was not there for the candidates to appear at the interview on 28th April, 1973.
The Employment Exchange forwarded the list of 31 candidates which was received at 330 pm The next day, i.e. 29th April, 1973 was a Sunday and there was no time for issue of the notices calling the candidates for interview.
Two names out of the said list of 31 candidates were received on 30th April, 1973.
The selection of AG.
Ill(M) candidates from this list sent on 28th April, 1973 reveals that 11 candidates appeared for interview out of 17 candidates sponsored, 11 candidates were selected including the one sponsored on the 30th April, 1973.
Similarly in respect of the vacancies of AG.
III(T), 15 candidates were sponsored by the Employment Exchange on 28th April, 1973 including one name omitted and sent on 30th April, 1973.
The typing test was taken on Sunday on 29th Morning and the interviews were held in the afternoon of the same day.
Out of the 15 candidates, 11 candidates appeared for the typing test and 9 qualified.
In the interview 8 of these candidates were selected including one who was sponsored on 30th April, 1973.
Though interviews for typists were held on 30th April, 1973, there was no typing test on this date.
The person who had no scope to sit for typing test on 29th April, 1973 was selected.
Thus there were collusion and fraud in getting some candidates employed in the Food Corporation of India.
4.
The case was referred to the Central Bureau of Investigation.
The Central Bureau of Investigation advised the Corporation to get the person selected to be tested for typing.
Accordingly, the Secretary, Public Service Commission, West Bengal was approached for testing the typists.
The PSC, WB suggested that the typists be tested by the Goenka College of Commerce, Calcutta.
Accordingly, the typists were tested and 7 candidates out of 30 were found qualified and they were retained in service.
As regards testing of AG.
III (M), PSC, WB was requested to conduct the re-test of the selected candidates.
But the PSC, WB could not conduct the case and eventually a Board comprising of Jt.
Manager (Legal) who was a member of West Bengal Higher Judicial Service on deputation, Jt.
Manager (Port Operations) and the Assistant Financial Advisor, FCI was constituted and 25 out of 39 candidates were found unfit/disqualified and as a result 53 disqualified persons were dismissed from their services w.e.f.
1st April, 1973.
It is the Corporation's case that the whole action was taken with bona fide intention and in the public interest and its fairness is self-evident from the fact that typing tests were conducted by an outside agency and the selection was made by a body composed of persons having independent entity.
Subsequently the Corporation proceeded against the officers and employees through whom fraud was practised upon the Corporation in getting the collusive appointments and such employees were punished.
The penalty of removal from service was imposed on Sri B Dhar, AG.
I. Sri PK Sengupta was awarded a penalty of censure.
Sri SN Biswas, Asstt.
Manager was given the punishment of stoppage of increment for a period of 2 years without cumulative effect.
Sri AK Das, Sr. Deputy Manager was proposed to be given a penalty of compulsory retirement from service and accordingly a second show cause notice was served upon Sri Das.
But Sri Das obtained an ad interim injunction and subsequently expired on 8th of July, 1979.
Varying punishments were given taking into account the extent of involvement in the collusive acts of giving appointments as well as the gravity of the misconduct committed.
5.
The respondent No. 3, Secretary (Policy), Regional Director (Food) Employees' Association, Eastern Zone sought to raise a purported industrial dispute regarding termination of service of the concerned workmen whereupon the appropriate Government by a letter dated 1st August, 1980 refused to refer the alleged dispute on the ground that the dismissal in question did not attract Section 25F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
Thereafter although there was no fresh material before the appropriate Government nor any further conciliation having taken place over the said matter, the appropriate Govt. without giving any chance of hearing to the petitioner Corporation made a suo motu reference six years after the refusal, vide Ministry of Labour, Govt. of India, order No. L-42011(44)/79-D. II(D) dated 27th December, 1980 whereby the following issue was referred to the Central Govt. Industrial Tribunal at Calcutta for adjudication.
THE SCHEDULE  "Whether the action of Joint Manager (Port Operations), Food Corporation of India, Calcutta, in dismissing Shri Niranjan Dasgupta and forty-nine other workmen from service as per office order dated 28-3-74 is legal, proper and justified ?
If not, to what relief, are the workmen entitled ?"
Both parties filed their respective written statement, rejoinder and additional written statement.
In the written statement filed by the Corporation, it was specifically stated that the reference is not maintainable on a number of grounds.
Both parties filed documents and examined witnesses.
The documentary and oral evidences were received insofar as the preliminary points relating to maintainability of the reference were concerned.
As I have already mentioned, the learned Tribunal Judge negatived all the preliminary objections raised.
6.
Being aggrieved and dissatisfied by the said order of the learned Tribunal Judge, the Food Corporation of India has preferred the instant writ application.
7.
It appears that the following preliminary points were raised.
(i) The second reference is bad in law because the Food Corporation of India was not given any opportunity to be heard before making the order of reference ;  (ii) The Association in question which is espousing the cause of the concerned 50 workmen has no locus standi and no representative character and hence it should be held no industrial dispute exists;  (iii) No dispute having been raised by the Association with the management, the reference should be held to be illegal; and  (iv) The present reference being a delayed reference having been made in 1981 in respect of the dispute of' concerned workmen in 1974 should be held to be invalid.
8.
Before the aforesaid points are taken up seriatim for consideration, it may be kept on record that Mr. Partha Sarathi Sengupta with Mr. DK Ghosh, learned Advocate for the petitioner and Mr. BR Ghosal, learned Advocate for the respondent were unanimous in their submissions that as this writ application is hinged on pure questions of law, affidavits were not necessary and that the learned Advocates would like to argue the case of their respective clients on points of law as applicable on the averments in the writ petition.
Accordingly arguments were heard and it now falls for determination how far the preliminary points raised before the learned Tribunal Judge sustain in law on the facts as stated by the writ petition.
POINT NO. (i) above :  9.
It appears from the imugned order of the learned Tribunal Judge that the argument that was made before him under this head embraced two branches, namely FCI was not heard before making the second reference; and the reference made on the second thought suffers from the infirmity of non- application of mind.
The learned Judge noted that the said points were based on the admitted position that appropriate Govt. by letter dated 1/8-7-1980 refused to refer the dispute on the ground that the dismissal in question did not attract Section 25F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
That being so, the observation of the learned Judge, "we do not know the reasons for which the appropriate Govt. initially refused to make the reference to the Tribunal" falls to the ground.
The learned Judge also noted "when the reference was made subsequently, the conclusion is inescapable that the appropriate Govt. applied its mind and that if the FCI felt aggrieved that rules of natural justice were violated as they were not given an opportunity of being heard, they could have immediately invoked the jurisdiction of the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution."
This is a queer approach.
It is the settled position of law that the Industrial Tribunal is competent to decide whether it has jurisdiction to adjudicate the dispute and if any objection is raised as to its lack of jurisdiction that has also to be decided by the Tribunal.
Whether the aggrieved party could have invoked the jurisdiction of the High Court is not for the Tribunal to advise.
In my view the Tribunal's finding that the Tribunal has no jurisdiction to hold that the reference is improper or unjustified, is itself an approach which on the face of it appears improper and unjustified.
9A.
Both parties have cited decisions on this point.
In M/s. Avon Services Production Agencies (P.) Ltd. v. Industrial Tribunal, Haryana, AIR 1979 SC 170 the Supreme Court held that the Govt. does not lack the power to make the reference in respect of the same industrial dispute which it once declined to refer, nor it is necessary that the Govt. must have some fresh material made available to it subsequent to its refusal to make a reference.
In this decision it was further held that the only requirement for taking action under Section 10(1) is that there must be some material before the Govt. which will enable the Govt. to form an opinion that an Industrial dispute exists or is apprehended.
In the instant case there is no indication that the reference when made was based on some material as against no material.
However a Full Bench of the Madras High Court in G Muthukrishnan v. Administrative Manager, New Horizons Sugar Mills Pvt Ltd., 1980(1) Lab LJ 215 while holding that the principle of natural justice is invocable even in cases where an administrative decision is taken by a statutory functionary and failure to adhere to such principle would result in the decision being a nullity observed that it was not the intendment of the Supreme Court in the said decision that when the Govt. made the second reference after their first refusal, they need not give notice to the other party that they could straightway act on the memorandum presented to them by one of the two parties who could request them for such an administrative action.
The said Full Bench decision also quoted with approval the decision in American Express International Banking Corporation v. Union of India, 1979(2) Lab 22 in which a single Judge Bench of this Court held that ordinarily, reference of a dispute under Section 10 being an administrative act is not justiciable, yet in certain special circumstances it becomes justiciable as civil consequences may arise and that when on a previous occasion reference was declined, it is necessary to hear the employer before a reference is made under Section 10 of the Act (sic) on reconsideration by the authority concerned as otherwise there will be a violation of natural justice.
10.
Again a single Judge Bench of this Court in M/s. Cadbury Fry (India) P Ltd v. State of West Bengal, 1980(2) Cal.LJ 197 held that an order under Section 10 cannot be set aside merely on the ground that the Govt. had previously decided not to make a reference, though, however, before making such a reference, the Govt. must apply its mind to relevant consideration e.g. the continued existence of the dispute and the wisdom of referring it in the interest of industrial peace and harmony.
Where such reference is made by the Govt. without proper application of mind, the order is liable to be set aside.
11.
In the instant case, the concerned workmen were dismissed from service immediately after appointment on the ground of collusion and fraud of some other employees of the petitioner with the workmen who failed to prove their competence and tried to enter into the service through deceitful means.
After such dismissal, the industrial dispute that was sought to be raised before the Govt. was not referred to the Tribunal categorically on the ground that the dismissal in question did not attract Section 25F of the Industrial Disputes Act.
But long 6 years after the said refusal, the Govt. made the reference without hearing the management and it does not appear that there was any application of mind in making the reference.
The trend of judicial pronouncements unmistakably point out that natural justice in the special circumstances as in the present one demands that the employer ought to have been heard before the actual reference is made and that having not been done the impugned reference on the said ground alone is liable to be struck down.
That there was also no application of mind on the part of the Govt. is evident from the fact that when earlier the reference was refused on a definite ground, no reason is disclosed why after lapse of six years the reference was made.
True, the Govt. is not bound to disclose what materials, if at all were considered when the reference is made.
But failure to give a chance of hearing or an opportunity to the management to submit their case before the decision to refer the dispute was made only shows lack of application of mind which must vitiate the reference.
12.
On behalf of the respondents besides the Supreme Court decision in M/s. Avon Services, the decision of a Single Judge of Allahabad High Court reported in (1995) 2 Lab LJ 469 has been referred to where it was held that the Govt. has power to make the second reference having declined on an earlier occasion and that the employer had no right to be heard at the stage of making the reference, is not a good law and of little avail to the respondent in view of the two Single Bench decisions of this Court and the Full Bench decision of the Madras High Court.
13.
In my view when the industrial dispute was earlier refused on the ground, the dismissal in question not attracting the provision of Section 25F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, the second reference which does not indicate any application of mind, particularly in absence of the management being heard before the reference was made, cannot be said to be in accordance with law and is liable to be struck down.
13A.
Clearly the finding of the learned Tribunal Judge in respect of this objection is perverse and suffers from an error of law on the face of it.
POINT NO. (ii) above:  14.
There is no denying that an industrial dispute can be raised by an individual workman personally in case of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment and termination of service and that any industrial dispute can also be raised by any recognised Union to which the concerned workman belongs.
In this instant case, the cause of the workman concerned has been espoused by the Regional Director (Food) Employees' Association, Eastern Zone.
It was argued on behalf of the writ petitioner employer before the Tribunal that the said Union had no locus standi or representative character.
The witness for the management in his oral evidence stated before the Tribunal that the said Union is not recognised by the FCI, that there are 5 recognised unions in the FCI and that the extent of the following of the Regional Director (Food) Employees' Association is less than 5 per cent.
On the other hand, W W 1 Sri Ashru Bose, General Secretary of the said union stated in his evidence that the union is recognised by the FCI but that they had not produced any document regarding recognition as they did not feel it necessary to do so, that they did not feel it necessary to produce any document showing the number of members of the said union, that they did not feel it necessary to produce the minutes book of the union to show whether the concerned workmen requested this Association to take up their cause or the members of the Association by a resolution decided to sponsor their cause.
Therefore what stands out is that there is no cogent evidence to establish locus standi of the Respondent union and its representative character to espouse the cause of the concerned workmen.
In Dipak Industries Ltd v. State of West Bengal, 1975(1) Lab LJ 293 a Division Bench of this Court held, when the authority of the union is challenged by the employer it must be proved by production of material evidence before the Tribunal to which such a dispute has been referred, that the union has been duly authorised either by a resolution of its members or otherwise, that it has the authority to represent the workmen whose cause it is opposing.
Mere fact that the said union is registered under the Indian Trade Unions Act is not conclusive proof of its real existence or the authority to represent the workmen in the reference before the Tribunal.
In the instant case the management took the stand that the union was not recognised and had no authority given either by the concerned workmen or by its own members by adopting a resolution.
It was, therefore, incumbent upon the union to produce material and documentary evidence to show that it had the requisite authority to represent the dismissed workmen, that the said workmen were members of this union or that the said dismissed employees had raised any dispute before the union.
But the burden has not been discharged.
It follows therefore that from the points of view of locus standi and representative character, it was necessarily to be held by the learned Tribunal Judge that there was no industrial dispute existing between the parties.
In my view the finding of the learned Tribunal Judge in this respect also suffers from perversity and error of law on the face of it.
POINT NO. (iii) above:  15.
There is no evidence worth the name on record to show that the union raised any dispute with the management and the matter underwent any conciliation by the appropriate authority.
But the learned Judge held that from the materials before him he would infer that the dispute that was referred to the Tribunal had been raised by the Association with the management.
In fact, the management has categorically refuted that such a dispute was raised by the union with it and the union chose not to adduce any evidence on this point.
Hence there was no scope for any inference and obviously the finding of the learned Tribunal Judge is baseless and perverse.
POINT NO. (iv) above:  16.
There is no denying that whereas the dismissals in question were effected in March, 1974 the instant reference was made in December, 1980.
It was argued before Tribunal that on account of delay the reference should be held to be invalid.
The learned Judge held that the argument had no force.
In Guest Keen Williams Pvt. Ltd. v. PJ Sterling, AIR 1959 SC 1279, the Supreme Court held that where the standing order sought to introduce the system of forced retirement, delay in raising the dispute with reference to the standing order could not invalidate the reference because the cause of action is continuing as the term of employment is changed to the disadvantage of the workmen.
The single Judge Bench of the Allahabad High Court in UP State Electricity Board (supra) held that where there is no time limit prescribed for making the reference, no period of limitation should be contemplated, though, however, stale and old dispute cannot be referred to.
In the instant case the concerned workmen were dismissed on the ground of collusion and fraud.
A dispute was sought to be raised but was refused as it was held by the Govt. that the procedure laid down in Section 25F was not attracted.
Six years thereafter, without apparently any fresh dispute having been raised before the Govt. and without hearing the employer, the second reference was made.
In my view the dispute had become stale and although strictly speaking, no limitation applies in making the reference, yet in the special circumstances as in the present one, the second reference is not warranted because of expiration of several years by which time the dispute had become non-existent.
The word "at any time" in Section 10(1) of the Act must mean within a reasonable time and lapse of six years in the circumstances of the present case should be treated as beyond the reasonable time.
The findings of the learned Tribunal Judge in my view also suffers from perversity and error of law.
17.
Thus all the four preliminary objections raised before the Tribunal are sustained.
The preliminary objections touching the very merit of the reference in facts and law ought to have been sustained by the learned Tribunal Judge also and that having not been done, the findings and order of the learned Tribunal Judge must be set aside and quashed.
When the reference is not sustained in law, it is no use asking the learned Tribunal Judge to pronounce his verdict on merits.
In my view the reference being bad in law must be declared to be improper, unjustified and illegal and hence set aside and quashed.
18.
In the result the writ application succeeds.
The impugned order of the learned Tribunal Judge is set aside and quashed.
The reference is declared to be illegal, inoperative, null and void and hence set aside and quashed.
19.
There shall be no order as to cost.
Application allowed.