SS Sodhi, J - The challenge here in this bunch of writ petitions is to the impugned ex parte orders of October 10, 1985, under the payment of Wages Act, 1936, directing the petitioners to pay sums of money mentioned therein to the respondent-workmen in respect of their claim for wages.
2.
It would be apparent from a reference to the material on record that the petitioner was constrained to suffer ex parte proceedings on account of the misconduct of the respondent-workmen and their supporters.
3.
September 10, 1985 was the date fixed before the competent authority, when both parties appeared.
It appears that there was some misconduct on the part of the respondent workmen as Mr. JS Saroha, Advocate, counsel for the petitioner made a report on that day to the Incharge, Police Post Badkhal, Faridabad, Annexure P-2, wherein, he complained that when he was going to attend the case of the petitioner before the competent authority, the workmen placed an obstacle on the road and forcibly stopped him and then manhandled him and threatened him to dire consequences if he appeared against them.
Some passers by rescued him but the workmen snatched his scooter and damaged it.
He also mentioned the names of some of the offending workmen.
He further stated that he apprehended that they may attack him again.
4.
What next deserves note in this behalf is the application filed on behalf of the petitioners before the competent authority on September 18, 1985, wherein it was mentioned that when the General Manager and the Legal Advisor were appearing before it, some of the respondents-workmen damaged and punctured his car in front of the office of the authority and this was also brought to its notice on that day.
Later, when Shri Salim and Chakravarty of the petitioner-firm were leaving court, they were assaulted by the respondents-workmen with dandas and brick-bats and this too was brought to its notice and seen by it.
The respondents-workmen also threatened them of dire consequences if they dared to attend the court again.
It was stated, therefore, that the management personnel were not in a position to appear on September 20, 1985 under these circumstances and it was prayed that assurance of protection be obtained from the respondents-workmen and till then proceedings be kept in abeyance.
5.
It was on September 20, 1985 when no one appeared on behalf of the petitioners then they were ordered to be proceeded against ex parte.
Ex parte evidence was thereafter recorded on September 24, 1985 culminating in the passing of the impugned order on October 10, 1985.
6.
With this being the background, the competent authority clearly fell in error in dismissing the application of the petitioners of October 18, 1985 seeking the setting aside of the ex parte orders passed against them.
These applications were dismissed with orders which reads as under :-  "Arguments on the application for setting advise the ex parte decree and ex parte orders heard.
I am convinced that the respondents have no case for setting aside the ex parte orders and ex parte decree.
Hence, the application in question is dismissed."
7.
It will be seen that no reasons have been set out by the competent authority for declining to set aside the ex parte orders.
These are indeed untenable orders considering the circumstances which had impelled the petitioners to refrain from attending these proceedings and that too to the knowledge of the competent authority.
8.
Ample justification for the absence of the representatives of the petitioners' firm is provided by the application made to the police on September 10, 1985, Annexure P-2 and that to the competent authority on September 18, 1985, Annexure P-3.
In the circumstances, the impugned ex parte orders clearly cannot be sustained and are accordingly hereby set aside.
The matter is now remitted to the competent authority for fresh decision in accordance with law.
9.
Parties are directed to appear before the competent authority on October 22, 1990.
Order accordingly.