Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - The petitioner who has retired as Superintending Engineer P.W.D.
(B&R) on 3171988, has come to this Court under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for the quashing of charge-sheet issued against the petitioner vide letter dated 22121988 a copy of which is Annexure P-8 to the writ petition for the alleged irregularities committed by him in construction of Industrial Sheds at Rajpura during 1973-74 and for excessive payment to the contractor in execution of the sub-standard work.
The petitioner has also prayed for issuance of direction to the department to release all the retiring benefits as they have been withheld illegally and without any justification.
2.
The case of the petitioner is that he joined the P.W.D.
(B&R) department as Sectional Officer and was promoted from Sectional Officer to Sub-Divisional Officer, and from Sub Divisional Officer to Executive Engineer and from Executive Engineer to Superintending Engineer on the basis of his good service record throughout his service career.
It has been alleged that in the year 1974 petitioner's explanation was called by Superintending Engineer vide letter dated 8.10.1974 for excessive payment to the contractor and execution of sub-standard work.
According to the petitioner, he submitted his reply copy of which is Annexure P-2 to the writ petition, but no action was taken against the petitioner in respect of these charges and he earned his due promotion from the post of Executive Engineer to that of Superintending Engineer.
Consequently, the petitioner presumed that the charge-sheet has been dropped.
The petitioner retired on 3181988 but to his dismay a notice was published in The Tribune dated 3101988 regarding some charge-sheet after superannuation of the petitioner.
Thought the petitioner remained present in the office on 2981988, 3081988 and 3181988, no charge-sheet was served upon him.
The petition replied the charge-sheet which appeared in The Tribune in a section of the press vide his letter dated 5101988 and denied the correctness the charges levelled against him.
It was alleged that though the petitioner retired on 3181988(AN) he had been denied the retirement benefits, like leave encashment, group insurance scheme, and even his request for communication of pension had not been considered at all.
The petitioner submitted representation dated 31121988 copy of which is Annexure P-6.
3.
Mr. MK Tiwari, learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that though the petitioner had retired on 3181988, the proceedings against him were initiated or the alleged irregularities relating to the year 1973-74 and the same is contrary to Rule 2.2(b)(2) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules Volume II (hereinafter referred to as the Rules).
According to the counsel no disciplinary proceedings can be initiated in respect of any event which took place more than four years before such institution.
4.
On the other hand, the State have filed a detailed written statement and pleaded that the petitioner was asked many times to submit his reply to the charge-sheet but he did not do so and delay for initiation of proceedings occurred on that account.
It was further contended therein that draft charge-sheet had been taken in custody by the Vigilance Bureau, Chandigarh, thereafter the department could not proceed in the matter in view of the instructions of the Punjab Govt. issued vide letter No. 19(9)-79-v(3)6862 dated 2581980 (R-13) that no administrable department should hold an inquiry into the matter which is being probed by the Vigilance Department.
The finding of the enquiry was received in the year 1985 and thereafter action against the petitioner was again resumed.
In brief the stand of the respondents is that it is not correct to say that no action in the matter was taken for 14 years.
5.
I have pursued the entire paper-book and have heard the learned counsel.
6.
It is not in dispute that the charge-sheet relates to the irregularities which are alleged to have been committed in the year 1973-74 for which the explanation of the petitioner was called on 8.10.1974 to which the petitioner had submmited his reply.
From the perusal of the record it is observed that the respondent-department itself did not initiate departmental proceedings in the matter while he was in service.
The stand of the respondents that the file relating to the case remained with Vigilance Department is not convincing.
Had the respondent been vigilant, they could have taken active steps to get the matter expedited from the concerned quarters.
Even assuming that in the year 1985 the Vigilance Department had advised the respondent-department to take action against the concerned officer for the alleged irregularities, it is not clear why the department slept over the matter and did not take any action against the petitioner till his retirement.
If the petitioner was not cooperating with the department, it was open to the department to have initiated the proceedings and should have proceeded ex parte against him but the case file does not show that such action was ever proposed.
7.
I am of the view that the respondents had doubt about the involvement of the petitioner in the alleged irregularities.
Had there been his involvement, the department should have been prompt in taking action and petitioner's promotions should have been withheld.
There is no satisfactory explanation for the inordinate delay in issuing the charge-sheet after the lapse of more than a decade.
The date of retirement of a Government employee is not a secret affair.
The date of superannuation of the petitioner was well within the knowledge of the department and there is nothing to suggest on the record that any prompt action to issue charge-sheet was taken.
In the written statement, the respondents have taken flimsy ground that the petitioner was not available on 2981988, 3081988 and 3181988 and as such the charge-sheet could not be served upon him.
It is well known that on the date of retirement, charge is relinquished and no objection certificate is issued when the charge-sheet could have been served.
The Supreme Court in The State of Madhya Pradesh v. Bani Singh and Anr., JT 1990(2) SC 54, upheld the judgment of the Central Administrative Tribunal, Madhya Pradesh Bench which had quashed the charge-sheet dated 2241987 issued after the lapse of about 12 years, on the ground of delay and laches.
Identically, in Dr. RS Sandhu v. Punjab State, 1989(1) NR 213, it was held that there was no justification with the authorities to take up the above noted issue of embezzlement after about 14 years of the petitioner's serving in the department during which period he concededly earned a number of promotions and held positions of considerable authority.
8.
It is well established principle that under Rule 2.2(b)(ii) of the Rules no departmental proceedings can be initiated in respect of any event which took place more than four years before such institution.
9.
In view of the foregoing reasons, the charge-sheet Annexure P-8 is quashed on the ground of delay and laches, more so, the same having been issued after the retirement of the petitioner.
The petitioner will be entitled to all the consequential retiral benefits.
Since the payments of the petitioner have been withheld due to fault of the department, so these will be released along with interest @ 12% per annum from the dates the amounts became due till actual payment.
The payment of the amounts shall be made by the department within two months.
The petition is allowed with costs which are quantified at Rs. 1000/-.
Petition allowed.