MR Agnihotri, J - This judgement shall dispose of two Civil Writ Petition Nos. 8989 and 8991 of 1988 as common questions of fact and law are involved in these petitions.
However, for decision of these cases, facts have been taken from C.W.P.
No. 8989 of 1988 (Balwan Singh Nahar's case).
2.
The petitioner is a member of Scheduled Caste Chamar by caste.
He is a Matriculate and has also passed the typing test with one year's diploma course in Stenography.
On 27th January, 1983, the petitioner was appointed as Clerk by the Haryana Khadi and Village Industries Board (hereinafter referred to as 'the Board'), at the consolidated salary of Rs. 600/- per mensem, and has been continuing in service of the Board till today.
This appointment was on probation for a period of two years which could be extended by another year.
The grievance of the petitioner is that though his recruitment was made through the agency of Employment Exchange by the Board, yet he is not being paid the regular running grade of Rs. 400-600 (Pre-revised) available to the other clerks of the Board, nor has his name been included in the seniority list, on the basis whereof he could claim promotion to the higher post against the quota reserved for members of the Scheduled Castes.
The representation made by the petitioner in this regard did not bring the desired result even though person joining service later than the petitioner have since been regularised.
Further, services of a number of other clerks of the Board have also been regularised but the benefit has not been extended to the petitioner.
At the time of pay revision, also, instead of giving him the regular grade of pay, he was allowed fixed salary of Rs. 750/- per mensem with effect from 1st April, 1987.
Aggrieved against this, invoking the doctrine of equal pay for equal work, the petitioner has approached this Court for the issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to treat the petitioner at par with his other colleagues who are employed as Clerks by the Board, and to release to him the scale of pay in which the other clerks of the Board have been placed, from the date of his appointment.
3.
In the written statement, though the factual position has been admitted, yet the petitioner is sought to be non-suited on the ground that the petitioner's claim was belated and having joined service, he stood estopped from seeking the relief by his own conduct.
On merits, it has been pleaded that since the petitioner was employed on a fixed salary of Rs. 600/- per mensem (consolidated), he was not an employee enrolled the regular cadre of the Board and should be treated to have been retained against an ex-cadre post.
Justifying the action of the Board in the cases of other persons who were appointed later than the petitioner and whose services have been regularised, it has been pleaded that was done by relaxation of the rules by the State Government.
4.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I find that the stand taken by the respondent is wholly untenable in law.
The petitioner was recruited as a Clerk by the Board through the agency of Employment Exchange without any relaxation of any academic qualifications or technical experience as he is a Matriculate with knowledge of typing and stenography.
Instead of extending to him any better rights being a member of the Scheduled Caste, he was at least entitled to the same treatment in the matter of pay and allowances, etc. to which his other colleagues serving as Clerks in the Board are entitled.
It has been settled by now by Hon'ble the Supreme Court, that if the incumbents of two posts have the same functional equivalence and co-equal responsibilities, then there cannot be disparity or differentiation in the emoluments attached to those posts and applying the doctrine of equal pay for equal work, the incumbent of one post can claim the same salary which is being paid to the incumbent of the other post.
In the present case, the petitioner is a clerk and he is only claiming the same salary and allowances, with same service prospects, which are being extended by the Board to its other Clerks.
To say the least, the hypertechnical, artificial and non-existent distinctions sought to be drawn by the Board for treating the petitioner as having been appointed on an ex-cadre post or under some scheme or plan, etc. do not bring any credit to the respondents.
5.
Consequently, I allow these writ petitions and direct the respondent Haryana State Khadi and Village Industries Board to release to the petitioners the same benefits with regard to salary and allowances, and the grade attached to the post held by each of them, along with other service benefits by way of regularisation, seniority, chances of promotion etc. to which they would have been entitled, had they been treated by the Board as having been appointed in the running grade of their posts as was available to their other colleagues in the Board, right from the date of their recruitment in service.
The benefits accruing to the petitioners shall be released to them within a period of three months.
The petitioners shall also be entitled to the costs of these petitions which are qualified at Rs. 500/- in each case.
Petition allowed.