RS Mongia, J - The present Letters Patent Appeal has arisen in the following facts and circumstances.
Vide Judgment dated November 7, 1996, in C.W.P.
No. 1009 of 1966, which had been earlier filed by the writ petitioner Sh. RP Sharma (now respondent in the present L.P.A.), PD Sharma, J had directed the respondent-Authorities to give effect to their own decision contained in Annexure E to that writ petition, meaning thereby that the petitioner had to be given the benefit of the 'war service'.
In pursuance of that judgment, an order implementing the same was passed on August 13, 1968.
Subsequently, some of the colleagues of Shri RP Sharma, (namely, Sarvshri SS Lamba, Joginder Nath, SS Sahi and BS Bhalla) who were likely to be affected by the judgment in C.W.P.
No. 1009 of 1966 in the matter of seniority, challenged the same by filing C.W.P.
No. 2395 of 1968.
The learned Singh Judge (HR Sodhi, J) of this Court vide judgment dated January 28, 1970, accepted the writ petition and held that the earlier judgment in C.W.P.
No. 1009 of 1966 was not binding upon the petitioners in C.W.P.
No. 2395 of 1968.
Against this judgment in C.W.P.
No. 2395 of 1968, Letters Patent Appeal No. 199 of 1970 was preferred by Sh. RP Sharma.
While dismissing the Letters Patent Appeal on November 11, 1970, the Division Bench observed as under in the penultimate paras :-  "So far as respondents 1 to 4 are concerned, no exception can be taken to the decision of Sodhi, J It is fundamental that no order vis-a-vis seniority can be passed to the prejudice of persons affected thereby unless those persons have been heard.
If any authority is needed, reference may be mate to T Devadarashan v Union of India and another, A.I.R. 1964 S.C. 79.
Their Lordships observed that no relief could be given to the petitioner because the persons who may be affected by the order passed in favour of the petitioner had not been joined as respondent in the petition.
Therefore, the order Annexure 'F' could in no circumstances affect the inter se rights between respondents 1 to 4 and the petitioner RP Sharma.
This position was not seriously controverted by Mr. Awasthy, learned counsel for the appellant.
It must be made clear that the order of Sodhi, J does not affect the finality of the order of Sharma, J was between RP Sharma and the Government, excepting with regard to the matter of the seniority.
Whatever benefit RP Sharma is entitled by reason of that order vis-a-vis the Government, he is certainly entitled to, but only to the extent that the rights which he may acquire under that order do not adversely affect respondents 1 to 4.
Mr. Awasthy then contended that whatever we may say while disposing of this appeal should not adversely affect the appellant in the matter of representation against the decision of the Government in the matter of fixing seniority in pursuance of the order of Sodhi, J Actually we have said nothing on this matter.
Whatever remedy or relief is open to the appellant, qua the fresh determination of seniority inter se him and respondents 1 to 4, is a matter which he can agitate if and when so advised."
2.
During the pendency of L.P.A. No. 199 of 1970 and in pursuance of the judgment of Sodhi, J in C.W.P.
No. 2395 of 1968, the State Government passed another order on September 18, 1970 (Annexure P-6), whereby it was held that Shri RP Sharma was not entitled to the war service which he had rendered on account of his having been appointed in the Government service as temporary Engineer, which post did not fall in the category of "War reserved vacancies".
Against this order of the Government, the writ-petitioner Shri RP Sharma had submitted a memorial to the Governor pointing out the implications of the judgment in Letters Patent Appeal No. 199 of 1970, decided on November 11, 1970, and brought to the notice of the authorities that his rights as determined by the judgment of PD Sharma, J in C.W.P.
No. 1009 of 1966 had been kept intact by the Letters Patent Bench.
However, the State Government rejected his memorial vide order Annexure P-8.
This led to the filing of writ petition No. 1201 of 1973 by Shri RP Sharma, J  3.
The learned Single Judge, who heard the writ petition, after noticing the above mentioned facts, held that there was no option with the respondent authorities except to give full effect to the Letters Patent Judgment dated November 11, 1970 (The relevant part of which has already been quoted above).
The learned Singh Judge further noticed the fact that on the date the writ petition was heard by him (i.e. 17th August, 1982) the private parties to the litigation had retired and nobody was likely to be adversely affected in the matter of determining seniority of writ-petitioner Shri RP Sharma by implementing the judgment in Letters Patent Appeal No. 199 of 1970.
In the result, orders Annexures P-6 and P-8 were quashed and the authorities were directed to implement the judgment in C.W.P.
No. 1009 of 1966 as upheld by the Letters Patent Bench in L.P.A. No. 199 of 1970.
Dissatisfied with the judgment of the learned Single Judge, the State Government has come up in the present appeal.
4.
The learned counsel for the State has submitted that PD Sharma, J in C.W.P.
No. 1009 of 1966 had never held that the writ-petitioner RD Sharma (now respondent) was entitled to the war service benefit and the only direction was that his case should be considered in the light of Annexure E to that writ petition.
It was further contended that it had been clarified in the Letters Patent Judgment in L.P.A. No. 199 of 1970 that the grant of Military benefit towards seniority to Shri RP Sharma should not affect respondent Nos. 1 to 4 (i.e. petitioners in C.W.P.
No. 2395 of 1968 whose names have already been mentioned above) and if the benefit of war service was given to Shri RP Sharma, seniority of these four respondents was bound to be affected.
Last of all, the learned counsel for the appellant submitted that in the penultimate paras of Letters Patent Judgment in L.P.A. No. 199 of 1970 (which have been quoted above) nothing barred the State Government from determining the inter se seniority, between Shri RP Sharma and other respondents, whose names have already been mentioned above and if the petitioner was not satisfied with that determination of seniority, it was open to him to agitate that matter, and, therefore, according to the learned counsel for the appellant, there was nothing wrong in determining the factum whether Shri RP Sharma was entitled to the war service benefit or not.
The learned counsel for the respondent refuted all these submissions by contending that in fact it had already been determined between his client and the State Government that he was entitled to the war service benefit as is clear from the judgment of PD Sharma, J, and the only rider was that this should not affect respondent Nos. 1 to 4.
5.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, we are of the view that there is no force in the submission of the learned counsel for the appellant.
The judgment of PD Sharma, J has been interpreted to mean that it had already been determined that writ-petitioner Sh. RP Sharma was entitled to the war service benefit for the purpose of seniority.
The only rider was that respondents 1 to 4 in L.P.A. No 199 of 1970 were not to be affected.
So while implementing the judgment, these respondents had to be kept senior to the writ-petitioner Shri RP Sharma by giving them the deemed date of appointment.
Since, the said respondents had retired by the time the learned Single Judge decided the present case.
He rightly held that by implementing the judgment of PD Sharma, J nobody was likely to be affected.
Otherwise also, by now even writ-petitioner has also retired and only deemed date of appointment has to be given which may lead to mere monetary benefit towards pension etc. As far as the last submission of the learned counsil for the State is concerned, the petitioner had agitated the matter of determination of his seniority vide Annexure P-6 by filing writ petition No. 1201 of 1973, against which present Letters Patent Appeal has been filed.
6.
For the reasons recorded above, the Letters Patent Appeal fails and is hereby dismissed, but without any order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.