MR Agnihotri, J - The petitioner, who is a Diploma-holder in Mechanical Engineering, joined service on 1st February, 1974, as Sectional Officer (Mechanical) : (Overseer), in Beas Construction Board, under the Superintending Engineer, Beas Dam Circle, Talwara Township, Punjab.
He had completed ten years' service as a regular employee when he was declared surplus on 31st May, 1984.
Since a number of employees of the Beas Construction Board had been declared surplus earlier also and the matter had been taken up to the Hon'ble Supreme Court, the Government of India, after examining the various implications and ramifications of the problem, issued a statutory directive under Section 79(6) of the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966, to the Bhakra Beas Management Board, to the effect that "50 per cent of the posts created/likely to be created for the administration, operation and maintenance of the completed works of the Beas Project transferred to BBMB, should be filled from out of the surplus Central Government employees of the Beas Construction Board, on the terms and conditions to be determined by BBMB At that time, a number of posts of various categories were lying vacant in the BBMB and in the category of Sectional Officers/Junior Engineers, the number of vacant posts was 118.
Accordingly, the Superintending Engineer of Talwara Circle, BBMB, vide his letter dated 21st September, 1984 (Annexure R-4 with the written statement), issued the appointment order to the petitioner for the post of Junior Engineer on the basis of the petitioner's "willingness for appointment in the Bhakra Beas Management Board received through the Beas Construction Board authorities".
In this letter of appointment, the terms and conditions were incorporated and the petitioner was intimated that his appointment in the BBMB would be fresh appointment and no liability whatsoever for the past service rendered by him in Beas Construction Board will devolve upon the BBMB The petitioner was required to report for duty to the Superintending Engineer, Talwara Circle, by 25th September, 1984, in case the offer was acceptable to him; otherwise, it was to be presumed that he was not interested in joining the BBMB The receipt of the said letter was acknowledged by the petitioner on 21st September, 1984, itself, vide Annexure R-5, and he reported for duty on 25th September, 1984 (fore-noon).
Copy of this joining report, which has been annexed as Annexure P-12 with the replication is reproduced hereunder :-  "(Through proper Channel) To  The Superintending Engineer,  Talwara Circle, BBMB, Talwara Township (Pb.)
Sub : Appointment for the post of JE Respected Sir, In compliance with your office orders No. 824/TC/BBMB/65/15E, dated 21984 received through letter No. 736/18E/Sub, dated 21984 further office of SE Beas Dam Circle, Talwara Township (Pb.)
for which I have acknowledged this letter on 2191984 to the Senior Design Engineer, BBMB Talwara.
I beg to submit my joining report for the post of Junior Engineer, today the 25.9.84 FN please.
This is for your kind information and further action.
Yours faithfully, Sd- (Manohar Lal) JE (Mech.)
Talwara Township (Pb.)"
Dated : 25.9.84.
Though the joining report was submitted by the petitioner in time to the competent authority, that is, the Superintending Engineer, Talwara Circle BBMB, yet the petitioner was not issued any posting order for quite some time, whereas a number of other persons were issued the requisite posting orders.
In the meantime, the Government of India, to whom the list of employees of the Beas Construction Board who has been rendered surplus had been circulated, also issued an offer of appointment on 23rd Dec, 1985, under the Engineering Branch of the Southern Command, Ministry of Defence, but the petitioner did not accept the same; obviously because he had already submitted his joining report to the Superintending Engineer of Talwara Circle, BBMB Thereupon, the Government of India informed the petitioner that since he had not communicated acceptance of the post to the Southern Command authorities, no further action was to be taken at the end of the Engineer-in-Chief, Army Headquarters, New Delhi.
After waiting for more than two years, when the petitioner found that he did not receive any posting order, he invoked the writ jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution for the issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents for taking back the petitioner into service and to issue the necessary posting order in compliance with the statutory directive issued by the Government of India on 1st November, 1983.
2.
In the written statement, though the factual position has been admitted, yet the petitioner is sought to be non-suited on the ground that the petitioner failed to submitted his joining report.
In reply thereto, when the petitioner enclosed a copy of the joining report, Annexure P. 12 with the replication, the respondents, faced with that, submitted reply to the replication of one para the last sentence whereof reads, "The document Annexure P.1 is a made up document."
3.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and having gone through their pleadings and the material on the record, I am of the considered view that the plea taken by the respondents is not borne out by the record and there is enough documentary evidence on the record to the effect that the petitioner had in fact submitted the joining report on 25th September, 1984, to the Superintending Engineer, Talwara Circle, BBMB, in pursuance of the letter dated 21st September, 1984.
If due to the reasons best known to the respondents, inadvertently or otherwise, the order of posting could not be issued to the partitioner, the fault lies with the respondent and the petitioner cannot be made to suffer for the remissness and lapse on their part.
4.
Mr. DS Nehra, learned Senior Advocate, appearing on behalf of the respondents, placed reliance of the order of the Government of India dated 20th March, 1985 (Annexure R-7 with reply), according to which the petitioner had been adjudged fit to cross the Efficiency Bar with effect from 1st January, 1985, and was allowed to draw his annual increment.
According to the learned counsel, the said letter is a proof of the fact that the petitioner instead of joining the office of Superintending Engineer, Talwara Circle, BBMB, in pursuance of the order of appointment dated 21st September, 1984, had joined the Government of India, and it was after serving there that he was allowed to cross the Efficiency Bar with effect from 1st January, 1985.
5.
With respect to the learned counsel, a closer scrutiny of the aforesaid document (Annexure R-7) clinches the issue against the respondents, inasmuch as there is intrinsic evidence in the document itself which conclusively proves that the petitioner had not joined any office under the Government of India and was still with the Superintending Engineer, Talwara Circle, BBMB, and the crossing of the Efficiency bar and the grant of annual increment with effect from 1st January, 1985, was only an administrative actions for maintaining continuity in service of the petitioner to facilitate him to draw his salary after addition of the annual increment.
Otherwise, it is evident from the opening portion of the order itself that the petitioner had been described as "Shri Manohar Lal Erry, a surplus Sectional officer (c) of the office of the SE Beas Dam Circle, Talwara Township" and a copy of this order was endorsed to him vide endorsement serial number 4 at his address "C/o Office of the SE Beas Dam Circle, Talwara Township (Pb.)"
In addition to that, a copy of the order was also forwarded, with the following endorsement, to "The Superintending Engineer, Beas Dam Circle, Talwara Township, District Hoshiarpur (Punjab).
CR dossier of the official is sent herewith.
Pleaser acknowledge the receipt."
6.
If the argument of the learned counsel for the respondents is to be accepted that the petitioner was not at Talwara Township and had joined the Government of India, then the question of endorsing a copy of the aforesaid order to the Superintending Engineer, Beas Dam Circle, Talwara Township, and of enclosing the CR Doosier of the petitioner therewith, did not arise.
Otherwise also, but for a bald statement made in reply to the replication, filed on 7th July, 1990, after the writ petition had been listed for hearing in early 1990 and adjourned as part-heard, no other material has been disclosed by the respondents in support of their plea.
7.
Consequently, I allow this writ petition and by issuing a writ of mandamus declare the petitioner as having continued in service as Sectional Officer (Mechanical) under the Bhakra Beas Management Board with effect from 25th September, 1984, the date on which he submitted his joining report.
Resultantly, the petitioner shall be entitled to all the arrears of his salary and allowances, etc. to which he would have been entitled, had the petitioner been issued the necessary posting order immediately on receipt of his joining report.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to the costs of this petition which are quantified at Rs. 1,000/-.
Petition allowed.