GS Chahal, J - Since the facts and question of law involved in these 15 writ petitions, Nos. 7748, 5164, 6644, 6850, 7686, 8123, 8171, 8255, 8282, 8286, 8292, 8413, 8496, 8505, and 8608 of 1990 are identical, we propose to dispose of all these petitions together by this common judgment.
The facts are being taken from CWP No. 7748 of 1990.
2.
The petitioners seek a writ in the nature of certiorari for quashing the selection of Taxation Inspectors made by the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana (the Board in brief).
The brief facts pleaded are that the Board advertised 96 posts of Taxation Inspectors vide Advertisement No. 3/88 dated 771988, Annexure P 1.
In pursuance thereof, the petitioners applied for the said posts.
They appeared in the written examination and qualified the same.
They also appeared in the interview and showed good performance.
Shri Anand Singh Dangi, Ex-Chairman of the Board, respondent No. 4, resigned from the office of the Chairman and a new Chairman was appointed in his place.
On the following day of the said appointment, a selection list was announced.
However, the list was not displayed on the Notice Board of the respondent-Board and the names were secretly sent to the concerned department.
The Department, without verifying the antecedents of the candidates and medical examination, sent individual intimation to the selected candidates through the police.
Appointment letters were also personality issued to them and they were directed to submit their joining reports.
This entire procedure was adopted so that other candidates might not know as to who had been selected.
The petitioners had been able to procure the roll numbers of the selected and appointed candidates.
These roll numbers have been detailed in paragraph 6 of the writ petition.
Many candidates had neither qualified the written examination, nor had they appeared for interview but have been selected by the Board.
A statement to a similar effect was also made by respondent No. 4 of the newspapers and a news item to the same effect was published in the Indian Express.
The impugned selection was thus, illegal.
The candidates who had appeared and qualified the written examination and given good performance, both in the written examination and interview, had not been selected and those who did not sit in the examination have been selected.
The final selection was not made by respondent No. 4 who was the Chairman at the time of interview, but it was his successor who finalised the same though the latter never participated in the process of interview.
250 marks were allocated for written examination and 100 marks for interview.
In case the written papers are examined, it will be seen that there are overwritings.
Many of the candidates selected were closely related to the kith and kin of the politicians and the selection was made for extraneous consideration.
Relatives of the Members of the Board and a son of the Secretary thereof have been selected although they had neither qualified the written examination nor had they appeared the interview.
It was also pleaded that even proper procedure for appointment has not been followed.
3.
The respondent-authorities in the return contested the allegations in the petitions.
The facts with regard to the petitioners having taken the written examination, qualified it and also appeared in the interview were admitted.
It was pleaded that the performance of the petitioners in the interview was poor.
The list of 96 candidates was claimed to have been prepared according to merit and forwarded to the Department for making appointments in accordance with the rules.
It was, however, admitted that respondent No. 4 had resigned from the post of Chairman.
The result was declared after new Chairman was appointed.
The result was displayed on the Notice Board on 6490.
The selection was averred to have been made purely on merit.
4.
The record of the Board with respect to the selection process of the Taxation Inspectors was requisitioned, but the respondent-authorities informed that the answer-sheets and the sheets tabulating the result had been destroyed.
On account of non-availability of this record, correctness of the petitioners' pleas about their performance and the selection of the candidates, vis-a-vis the petitioners cannot be ascertained.
5.
The petitioners have also challenged the allocation of 100 marks out of 350 marks for interview.
These 100 marks work out to 285 per cent of 250 marks.
This matter was considered in the context of the Haryana Excise and Taxation Inspectorate (State Service, Class III) Rules, 1969.
Allocation of 285 per cent marks for viva voce test in comparison to written test was held to be not excessive, in Joginder Singh (FB) v. The State of Haryana and others, 1986(3) SLR 644.
This matter is thus, squarely covered by the Full Bench decision of this court and affords no ground to the petitioners to challenge the validity of the selection of the Taxation Inspectors.
6.
The petitioners have made vague allegations about the relationship of the selected and appointed candidates with political leaders.
Only one specific instance of a candidate, Puneet Kumar Jain being son of the secretary of the Board has been cited.
This fact is admitted in the return by the respondent authorities.
Obviously, the secretary was not a Member of the Board that made the selection.
This fact will not invalidate his selection.
7.
Re CWP 8286/1990, it has been alleged that Chet Ram (petitioner No. 5) had two roll numbers when rechecking was made.
It has been explained in the return by the respondent-authorities that some of the candidates had reapplied when a fresh notification was issued, calling for new applications although there was a condition that the candidate who had already applied need not apply again.
In that situation, a separate roll number will not affect the validity of the selection.
8.
To this case, the petitioner had also moved Civil Misc. 6983 of 1990 for amendment of the writ petition.
We, however, do not find any justification for allowing the same at this belated stop.
We, therefore, decline the Civil Miscellaneous.
9.
Keeping the foregoing discussion in view, the irresistible conclusion is that the selection in question made by the Board does not suffer from any illegality.
10.
With regard to CWP 5164 of 1990, the learned counsel has only urged that he will feel satisfied if a direction is issued that vacancies are not filled beyond No. 96 for which the publication was made.
He has relied upon Prem Chand Naib Tehsildar and others v. The State of Haryana and others, 1989(2) SLR 556.
We accept his argument and direct that posts beyond the advertised number will not be filled in.
11.
We are of the opinion that the record in such like cases of selection should be preserved by the concerned authorities for a period of six months from the declaration of the result so that it is made available to the Court, if need be, in appropriate cases.
These directions shall be followed by the Board in future.
12.
With the aforesaid directions, the writ petitions detailed in paragraph 1 above, are dismissed, with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.