KP Bhandari, J - The petitioner is Ziledar and was posted as such in Chandpur Section of Tohana Canal Division.
He states that his performance in service was commendable and therefore, he was granted extension in service with a right to continue from the age of 55 years upto 58 years vide order Annexure P-1, passed by Shri AN Gupta, Engineer-in-Chief, Irrigation Department, Haryana on 2621988.
Normal transfers in the cadre of Ziledars were ordered on 3041989 vide order Annexure P-3.
It is averred in the petition that respondent No. 3 exercised political influence and got himself posted to the post which the petitioner was holding.
He states that the transfer order of respondent No. 3 was made on his own request and that is why no TA/DA was paid to him.
The transfer order is Annexure P-4 which is dated 261989.
The petitioner submits that out of the 17 persons affected by the aforesaid transfer order, 9 persons were transferred on extraneous considerations and this is evident from the fact that they have not been paid any TA/DA.
He has challenged the order of transfer Annexure P-4 on the ground that this order has been passed in flagrant violation of the Government instructions laying down the guidelines for postings and transfers contained in letter No. 45/7/89-5 GSI dated 7.4.89 from the Chief Secretary to Government of Haryana to all Heads of the Departments.
The order of transfer has been challenged on the following grounds :  (i) This was a mid-term transfer which could not be ordered without prior approval of the Chief Minister, according to Annexure P-2.
(ii) The petitioner had less two years service to his credit before his retirement.
According to the policy of the Government no transfer should be made where a government servant has less than two years service the his credit.
(iii) The order of transfer is contrary to the principles as laid down in Annexure P-2; 2.
Mr. MP Vachher, Chief Engineer Drainage, Irrigation Department, Haryana, Chandigarh filed written statement on behalf of the State.
In the written statement the State has taken the stand that the transfer was made with the approval of the Chief Minister.
It has been further averred that the transfer of the petitioner has been made on the basis of complaints Annexures R-1 and R-2 in the administrative interest.
Annexure R-1 a letter from the Superintending Engineer, Hissar Bhakra Canal Circle, Hisar to the Engineer-in-Chief, Irrigation Department, Haryana, Chandigarh, dated 2431988.
The Superintending Engineer in his official letter has stated the behaviour of the petitioner is not proper with the subordinates and there are complaints from the Jamidars.
3.
It is thus apparent that the transfer had been ordered on the basis of the complaint received by the Chief Engineer from the Superintending Engineer.
Neither the Chief Engineer nor that Superintending Engineer gave any opportunity of hearing to the petitioner nor any enquiry was held into the complaints made against the petitioner.
The petitioner has been punished on the basis of the complaints without affording him any opportunity of being heard.
It is well settled that if a transfer order has to be made by way of punishment the employee concerned should be given an opportunity of hearing before taking such administrative action.
No opportunity of being heard was given to the petitioner at all before passing the order of transfer.
4.
It is well settled by the decision of the Supreme Court in EP Royappa v. State of Tamilnadu and another, AIR 1974 Supreme Court 555 that any order of transfer which is arbitrary, unreasonable and capricious and proceeds on extraneous considerations will be violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
In my opinion, the order of transfer could not be passed unless the petitioner was given opportunity of being heard and proper enquiry was held.
The matter as it stands indicates that the order has been passed in an arbitrary and unreasonable manner denying the petitioner of his right of equality before law and equal opportunity guaranteed by Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
5.
In this view of the matter, the order of transfer is liable to be set aside.
I consequently issue a writ of mandamus and set aside the impugned order of transfer and direct the respondent Chief Engineer to post the petitioner back to his place of posting with immediate effect.
Costs Rs. 500/-.
Petition allowed.