Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - The petitioner who is widow of one Shri Chhotu Ram; through this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India has prayed for quashing of orders copies Annexures P-1, P-6 and P-8 (Dated 2331988, 2681988 and 691988) passed by the respondents declining the petitioner to pay a sum of Rs. 5000/- under the Haryana State Employees Group Insurance Scheme Rules, 1975, family pension and death-cum-retirement gratuity along with interest till the date of payment.
2.
The undisputed facts of the case are that the husband of the petitioner was appointed as Mortar Mate no 16.12.1972 on work charge basis by the Executive Engineer, Provincial Division, P.W.D.
(B&R), Charkhi Dadri, respondent No. 3, that after having put in more than 8 years of service, the services of the husband of the petitioner on the post of Mortar Mate were regularised by the Superintending Engineer (B&R), Bhiwani Circle, Bhiwani, respondent No. 2 vide his office order dated 19.12.1980 with effect from 371980.
The husband of the petitioner while working as Mortar Mate died on 15111980 in a road accident.
After the death of her husband the petitioner requested respondent No. 3 to prepare pension papers so as to enable her to get retiral benefits.
To her great dismay, the petitioner was informed by respondent No. 3 vide letter dated 2331988 that since the petitioner's husband had put in less than one year of regular service, therefore, she was not entitled to any family pension.
The petitioner was also informed vide letter of respondent No. 3 dated 2681988 that she was not entitled to the amount of Rs. 5000/- under the Group Insurance Scheme as the service of her husband was regularised after his death.
Consequently, the petitoiner approached this Court seeking the aforesaid relief.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner argued that it was incumbent upon the respondents to have granted family pension to the petitioner under the provisions as contained in Punjab Civil Services Rules provided the deceased employee has put in more than one year of service.
It was specifically urged that since the husband of the petitioner had put in more than 8 years of service and had died while working as Motor Mate, as such the action of the respondents denying family pension to her is unjust.
4.
On the other hand the stand of the respondents is that the petitioner's husband had put in less than one year service as Mortor Mate as regular employee before his death and as such family pension was not granted to her.
5.
I have given my thoughtful consideration to the respective submissions and perused the provisions of law.
I am of the view that it is the duty of modern employer to see that the family of its employee who dies in harness is not led to starvation.
6.
For that purpose, hypertechnical view of the matter is not to be taken.
Rather, rules and regulations are not to be interpreted literally but compassionate view of the matter has to be taken.
I am of the view that stand of the respondents is not at all convincing.
This Court in Sita Devi v. The Secretary State Electricity Board, 1990(2) P.L.R.
81, held that whether the employer had ordered regularisation of the services of the deceased employee one day before the date of death or a decade back, the same is wholly irrelevant for the purposes of entitlement of family pension.
Once an employee completes five years' continuous service, on regularisation the whole service becomes regularised and has to be counted for pension.
Any other interpretation would defeat the purpose of grant of family pension.
7.
In the case in hand it is not disputed that the husband of the petitioner had put in more than 8 years of service.
His services were regularised from 371980.
As such the service rendered by the deceased has to be counted for pension and not to be thrown to the wind.
8.
The benefit of General Insurance Scheme cannot be extended to the petitioner as her husband was a work charged employee prior to his death and his services were regularised after his death.
Per Section 4 of the General Insurance Scheme Rules, a work charge employee cannot become a member of the scheme.
9.
For the foregoing reasons, this writ petition is allowed and order Annexure P-1 is quashed.
The respondents are directed to release the family pension to the petitioner within three months.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to interest at the rate of 12% per annum on the said amount.
No costs.