GS Singhvi, J - The petitioner has questioned the selection and appointment of respondent No. 5 as Lecturer, Religion, in the service of Shri Guru Teg Bahadur Khalsa College, Anandpur Sahib on the ground that the respondent No. 5 does not fulfil the conditions of eligibility.
In order to decide the issue, a brief reference to the facts will be useful.
2.
The petitioner, the respondent No. 5 and some others applied for recruitment as Lecturer, Religion in the service of respondent No. 6 in response to the advertisement which was published in the Tribune dated 2961995.
All those who were considered eligible by the respondents No. 4 and 6 were called for interview.
The Selection Committee recommended the name of respondent No. 5 for appointment as Lecturer, Religion.
The petitioner has questioned the entitlement of respondent No. 5 to be appointed as Lecturer, Religion, by stating that he does not fulfil the qualifications laid down by University Grants Commission/Director Public Instruction.
3.
There is no dispute between the parties that the petitioner has passed MA (Political Science), MA (Religion), MPhil.
(Religion) and she is doing PhD since 1992 in Religion.
There is also no dispute that respondent No. 5 has passed MA in History, MPhil.
(Religions Studies) and he is doing PhD in Theological Perspective of the Sikh Takhts in Religious Studies.
Respondent No. 5 has also got teaching experience of about four years.
4.
Contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that MA in History cannot be treated as MA (Religion), which a candidate should have passed for being considered for appointment as Lecturer (Religion) and as the respondent No. 5 does not have the basic qualification for recruitment as Lecturer (Religion), his selection and appointment are illegal and he is liable to be declared as a usurp for high public office.
Another contention urged by the learned counsel for the petitioner is that but for the inclusion of an ineligible candidate like the respondent No. 5 in the zone of consideration the petitioner would have been selected for the purpose of appointment as Lecturer (Religion) in view of her good academic record.
5.
Learned Deputy Advocate General argued that both the petitioner and the respondent No. 5 were ineligible to be considered for appointment because the petitioner has not passed MA (Religion) with 55% marks and respondent No. 5 is simply MA in History and, therefore, the selection made by the Committee constituted by the respondents No. 4 and 6 is illegal.
Learned counsel appearing on behalf of respondent No. 3 defended the impugned selection by arguing that the selection made by a duly constituted Committee cannot be upset by the Court because it is the primary function of the Committee to determine the eligibility of the candidate and the Court cannot substitute its own opinion vis-a-vis the opinion formed by the Selection Committee.
Counsel appearing for respondent No. 4 and 6 as well as the counsel for respondent No. 5 opposed the writ petition by arguing that a large number of persons who have passed MA in History have been treated eligible by the University Grants Commission for appointment as Lecturer in Religious Studies and, therefore, no illegality has been committed by the Committee in recommending the name of the respondent No. 5 for appointment as Lecturer, Religion.
Shri Patwalia relied on annexures R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-5A, R-6 and R-7 to support his contention that the University Grants Commission has treated the qualifications of MA (History) as a sufficient qualification for the purpose of appointment as Lecturer (Religion).
Shri Patwalia and Shri Amarjit Singh also challenged the locus standi of the petitioner on the ground that after having taken part in the process of the selection, the petitioner cannot challenge the recommendations made by the Selection Committee in favour of respondent No. 5.
6.
In order to decide whether the respondent No. 5 fulfilled the conditions of eligibility it is necessary to refer to the advertisement issued by the respondent No. 4 which has been reproduced at page 2 of the reply filed on behalf of respondent No. 4 and 6.
It reads as under :-  ``S.G.T.B.
Khalsa College, Anandpur Sahib  Wanted Lecturers in Commerce and Religion in this College on regular basis.
Qualification and grade as per U.G.C./D.P.I.
norms.
Apply within 15 days along with copies of testimonials and a bank draft of Rs. 50/- in registered cover to the Principal with a copy of application only to Dean, College Development Council, Punjabi University, Patiala.''
7.
The Punjabi University, Patiala, to which the respondent No. 6 is affiliated has laid down the following qualifications for recruitment for Lecturers in the affiliated colleges :-  ``Candidate must possess Master's Degree in the relevant subject with at least 55 % marks or its equivalent grade and `good academic record.'
Provided that only those candidates who, besides, fulfilling the minimum prescribed qualifications, have qualified in a comprehensive test (NET specially conducted by the UGC or such other test as has been approved/conducted by the State Government) or for this purpose who hold M Phil.
Degree upto 31121992 or who holds PhD Degree/submitted PhD Thesis upto 31121993 will be eligible for appointment as Lecturer/Part time Lecturer.''
The Government of Punjab has laid down the following qualifications for recruitment of Lecturers in college cadre :-  (i) Bachelor degree 50% (ii) Master's degree in relevant subject 55% (iii) qualify the JP.T.
(Joint Preliminary Test) conducted by the Govt./U.G.C.''
+ The University Grants Commission has separately laid down the following qualifications for recruitment of Lecturers :-  ``Good academic record with atleast 55% marks or an equivalent grade at Master's degree level in the relevant subject from an Indian University or an equivalent degree from a foreign university.
Candidates besides fulfilling the above qualifications should have cleared the eligibility test for lecturers conducted by UGC, CSIR or similar test conducted by the UGC.
Provided that candidates who have submitted PhD thesis or passed the M Phil.
examination by 31st Dec, 1993 are exempted from the eligibility test for lecturers conducted by UGC, CSIR or similar test accredited by the UGC.''
The proviso mentioned in the qualifications laid down by the University Grants Commission came to be added in the regulations framed by it in the year 1991 vide amendment Notification dated 2161995 (annexure R-6/5.
R-7/5).
This Notification has been adopted by the Punjabi University, Patiala as well as the Government of Punjab as would appear from annexures R-8/5 and R-8/10.
On a careful reading of the above it becomes clear that the qualifications prescribed by the University Grants Commission, the Government as well as the qualifications laid down by the University for appointment of Lecturers in the affiliated colleges require that a candidate must possess the Mater's degree in the relevant subject with alteast 55% marks and he/she must qualify the Joint Preliminary Test conducted by the Government/University Grants Commission.
The qualifications prescribed by the University Grants Commission also require good academic record.
A candidate possessing equivalent degree from a foreign university is also eligible for recruitment as per University Grants Commission's qualifications.
The qualifications prescribed by the Government also require Bachelor's degree with 55% marks.
It is, therefore, clear that the University as well as the Government have prescribed the degree of MA in the relevant subject as one of the necessary qualifications for recruitment as Lecturer.
8.
The crucial expression used by the University Grants Commission as well as the Director Public Instruction is ``Master's degree in the relevant subject''.
If we hold that the words `relevant subject' refer to the subject in which the appointment is to be made then the respondent No. 5 will have to be declared ineligible for appointment as Lecturer, Religion.
On the other hand if we hold that the words `relevant subject' take within their fold qualifications in allied subjects then the appointment of respondent No. 5 cannot be faulted.
9.
However, before we proceed further, it will be appropriate to consider the submissions made by Shri GRP Singh, Shri Patwalia and Shri Amarjit Singh regarding the jurisdiction of this Court.
Learned counsel vehemently argued that the interpretation of the qualifications for appointment as Lecturer (Religion) as made by the Selection Committee and the University should not be upset by the Court.
They referred to the often quoted dictum that the Court should not substitute its opinion for the one formed by the institutions like the Universities.
In our opinion, though it appears to be quite attractive, this argument of the learned counsel cannot be accepted.
The principle that the decisions of the academic bodies and educational institutions should be respected by the Courts is applicable to matters relating to academic like admissions, examinations, course of studies and syllabus, discipline etc.
However, appointments/promotions seniority and matters relating to other service conditions do no fall in that category.
These matters are subject to judicial review in the context of the doctrine of equality enshrined in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
Selection made by a Committee consisting of persons having long academic background deserve the same degree of respect which is required to be given by the Court to the recommendations made by Public Service Commission etc.
However, recommendations made by such bodies and their decisions cannot remain immune from judicial review merely because the final appointment is to be made in University or a college or such like institution.
We, therefore, refuse to put our seal of affirmation on the selection of respondent No. 5 only on the ground that his name was recommend by a Selection Committee which included some Professorsn.
10.
(sic) background.
For taking this view we draw support from the following observations of the Supreme Court in Dr. JP Kulshrestha and others v. Chancellor, Allahabad University and others, AIR 1980 Supreme Court 2141 :-  ``Rulings of this Court were cited before us to hammer home the point that the Court should not substitute its judgment for that of academicians when the dispute relates to educational affairs.
While there is no absolute ban, it is a rule of prudence that courts should hesitate to dislodge decisions of academic bodies.
But University organs, or for that matter any authority in our system, is bound by the rule of law and cannot be a law upto itself.
If the Chancellor or any other authority lesser in level decides an academic matter or an educational question, the Court keeps its hands off; but where as provision of law has to be read and understood, it is not fair to keep the Court out.
In Govinda Rao's case, (1964) 4 SCR 575 at p. 586 : (AIR 1965 SC 491) Gajendragadkar, J (as he then was struck the right note: ``What the High Court should have considered is whether the appointment made by the Chancellor had contravened any statutory or binding rule or ordinance and in doing so, the High Court should have show due regard to the opinions expressed by the Board and the recommendations on which the Chancellor has acted.''
(Emphasis added).
The later decisions cited before us proudly conform to the rule of caution sounded in Govinda Rao.
But to respect an authority is not to worship it unquestioningly since the bhakti cult is in-ept in the critical field of law.
In short, while dealing with legal affairs which have an impact on academic bodies, the views of educational experts are entitled to great consideration but not to exclusive wisdom.
Moreover, the present case is so simple that profound doctrines about academic autonomy have no place here.''
11.
Another contention urged by Shri Patwalia and Shri Amarjit Singh is based on Annexure R-2 to R-7.
Learned counsel pointed out that the University Grants Commission has treated Shri Deepak Anand eligible for appointment as Lecturer in Religious Studies Theology, even though he is MA in Philosophy.
Likewise Ms. Harpreet Kaur who is MA in Sociology and has been treated eligible for Junior Research Fellowship in Religious Studies Theology.
She has also been treated eligible to be considered for appointment as lecturer in accordance with Rules and Regulations laid down for the purposes.
Similarly, Ms. Kuldip Kaur, who is MA in Punjabi has been treated eligible for appointment as lecturer.
Reliance has also been placed on the opinion expressed by Prof. Nirbhai Singh, Head of the Department of Philosophy, Punjabi University regarding the eligibility of respondent No. 5.
Argument of the learned counsel is that if persons having the qualifications of MA in History, Sociology and Philosophy are eligible for appointment as Lecturer in Religious Studies, there is no reason why the recommendations made by the Selection Committee in favour of respondent No. 5 should be upset.
On the other hand learned counsel for the petitioner argued that recommendation made by the Selection Committee is contrary to well established principles of law and the opinion of Prof. Nirbhai Singh should be ignored because he has the obvious interest in defending the selection because he was a member of the Selection Committee.
Shri Jasbir Singh further argued that what the University Grants Commission has opined regarding the subject of Religious studies cannot hold good for appointment as Lecturer in Religion.
In our opinion, the expression `MA in the relevant subject' must be interpreted by applying the well established principles of statutory constructions one of which is that plain language of the statute must be given its full meaning irrespective of the hardships or inconvenience unless such an interpretation leads to absurdity or public mischief.
We also find merit in the submission of Shri Jasbir Singh that the Court should interpret the language used in the University Statutes and the qualifications laid down by the University Grants Commission/Government without being influenced by the opinion expressed by one or the other individual.
If we apply the rule of literal interpretation the words `relevant subject' can only mean the subject concerned and not the other subjects which can be treated as allied to the subject concerned.
If we were to accept the submission of the learned counsel for the respondents that a person possessing the qualification of MA in History is eligible for appointment as a Lecturer in Religion merely because one of the papers in the syllabus of MA (History) relates to religion then we shall have to hold that such person is eligible for appointment as Lecturer in all those subjects which are taught as a part of the syllabus of MA (History) and also that a person possessing qualification of MA in other subjects will be eligible for appointment as Lecturer in all those subjects which are taught as a part of the syallbus.
This approach does not commend to us because it would amount to rewriting of the Statute by deleting the words `relevant subject'.
We, therefore, hold that even though one or two papers taught to the students of MA (History) may relate to religion but on that basis a person possessing Degree of MA in History cannot be treated as MA in Religion so as to become entitled to be considered for appointment as Lecturer in Religion.
12.
At this stage we may notice two decisions which have direct bearing on this case.
In The Union of India and others v. Dr. (Mrs.) SB Kohli and another, AIR 1973 Supreme Court 811, their Lordships interpreted Rule 8(3) of the Central Health Service Rules, 1963 and the qualifications prescribed for appointment to the post of Professor of Orthopaedics.
The expression which found mention in the qualifications prescribed for recruitment to the post of Professor Orthopaedics was `a Post Graduate degree in the concerned speciality'.
Respondent No. 2 whose appointment was successfully challenged before the High Court by Dr. (Mrs.) SB Kohli possessed the qualification of MBBS and FRCS of Edinburgh University.
While upholding the decision of Delhi High Court the Supreme Court observed :-  ``There is no dispute that according to the Second Schedule, which deals with selection by the Union Public Service Commission a Professor in a medical college or teaching institution should have a post-graduate degree in the concerned speciality mentioned in Part A of Annexure II or equivalent.
It is not necessary to refer to the other qualifications because they do not arise for decision in this case.
In Annexure II to the Schedule against Item 7 (Orthopaedics), the qualifications mentioned are MS, M.C.H.
(Orthopaedics)/(Liverpool), FRCS The Ist respondent as already mentioned has got the degree of M.C.H.
(Orth.)
(Liverpool).
The 2nd respondent is a FRCS If FRCS mentioned therein can be considered to be a post-graduate degree in the concerned speciality, Orthopaedics, the first respondent's petition cannot obviously succeed.
It seems to us that the qualification of FRCS cannot be deemed to be a post-graduate degree in Orthopaedics.
xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx As mentioned earlier, FRCS (Canada) has many specialities.
MD also can be in many specialities as indeed Annexure III itself shows.
So, also MS We are, therefore, in complete agreement with the view of the learned Judge of the High Court that FRCS by itself cannot be said to be a post graduate degree in Orthopaedics.
The mere fact that a degree is mentioned against speciality of Orthopaedics does not make it a post-graduate degree in Orthopaedics.''
Admittedly, the second respondent does not possess the qualification of FRCS in Orthopaedics.
In the circumstances the fact that FRCS is also shown against the entry `Orthopaedics' in Annexure II is not an answer to the question whether it is a post-graduate degree in Orthopaedics.
It was urged that FRCS examination has an orthopaedics content.
In that sense the holder of every medical degree knows something of every subject in medicine or surgery.
Nobody can contend that a mere MBBS is a degree in surgery or Opthalmology because it has a content of surgery of opthalomology.
We therefore hold that the 2nd respondent does not hold a post-graduate degree in the concerned speciality, Orthopaedics.''
13.
In Narinder Kumar v. Panjab University and others, 1996(3) All Instant Judgments 131 a learned single Judge dealt with an issue which is more or less identical to the one raised in this petition.
That case related to appointment on the post of Lecturer in Gandhian Studies.
The qualifications prescribed by the Punjabi University for recruitment of lecturers require that a candidate must possess good academic record with alteast 55% marks or an equivalent grade in Master's degree level in the relevant subject from an Indian University or an equivalent degree from a foreign University .............
The learned single Judge interpretated the advertisement and held as under :-  ``The advertisement has been noticed in detail only with the object of facilitating the consideration of the question involved in the present case.
A perusal of the advertisement shows that posts of lecturers in various subjects/specialization had been advertised.
The essential qualification in all the cases, according to the advertisement, was a Master's degree `in the relevant subject' from an Indian University or an equivalent degree from a Foreign University.
Additional qualifications as relevant for different subjects/specializations were separately prescribed.
To illustrate; two posts in the subject of Ancient Indian History, Culture and Architecture had been advertised.
For one of these posts, specialisation in pre-historic or proto- historic or Field Archaeology followed by PhD in any of these specialization was a desirable qualification.
Similarly, for the post of Lecturer in Tibetan, advance level teaching experience was mentioned as a desirable qualification.
It, thus, appears that under `A' the essential qualification have been prescribed.
Thereafter, for every post, the additional qualifications which were considered desirable, were laid down.
If the terms of the advertisement are strictly construed, it is clear that to be eligible, a candidate had to possess a Master's degree in the subject of Gandhian studies.
The qualifications stipulated under the heading `Desirable' were the additional qualifications.
xx xx xx xx xx xx It may be that Gandhian studies is an inter disciplinary subject.
It is also true that the Courts are reluctant to enter into academic thickets.
However, the advertisement as it stands requires that to be eligible, a candidate must possess a Master's degree in the relevant subject which in the present case was Gandhian Studies.
Respondent Nos. 4 and 5 admittedly do not possess this qualification.
Consequently they were not eligible for appointment as lecturers.''
In view of the law laid down by the Supreme Court in Dr. (Mrs.) SB Kohli's case (supra) and the view taken by the learned single Judge in Narinder Kumar's case (supra) with we which are in respectful agreement, it is held that the respondent No. 5, who is MA in History was not eligible to be considered for selection and appointment as Lecturer, Religion in response to the advertisement issued by the respondents No. 4.
Consequently, his appointment on the post of Lecturer, Religion is liable to be declared as void.
For the reasons mentioned above the writ petition is allowed.
Selection and appointment of respondent No. 5 as Lecturer, Religion is declared illegal and is quashed.
Respondent No. 4 and 6 shall be free to re-advertise the post and fill the same.
We hope that this would be done by them at the earliest.