Amarjeet Chaudhary J (Oral) - The petitioner, who is an Agriculture Inspector in the Agriculture Department, Punjab, has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India praying for issuance of a direction to the respondents to quash the order dated 8.12.1988, Anenxure P-2, whereby the petitioner has been ignored for promotion to PAS Class II (Administrative Wing) and the respondents be further directed to treat the petitioner promoted w.e.f.
the date i.e. 8.12.1988, the persons junior to him were promoted.
2.
In brief, the case of the petitioner is that he was selected as Agriculture Inspector in the Punjab Agriculture Department through the Subordinate Service Selection Board and joined as such on 161965.
The State of Punjab notified Punjab Agriculture Services (Class-II) Rules, 1974, hereinafter referred to as the 'Rules' for making promotion to the post of Agriculture Officer (Class II) post.
Rule 8 of the Rules provides for method of recruitment to the Service.
As per clause (1)(b) of the said Rule, 66-2/3 per cent of the posts are to be filled in by promotion from amongst the members of the subordinate services.
As per provisions contained in this Rule, a member of the subordinate services having a minimum experience of five years is eligible to be considered for promotion to the post of Agriculture Officer on the basis of seniority-cum-merit.
Rule 9 of the Rules prescribes, qualifications for appointment to the post of Agriculture Officer.
The respondents circulated a seniority list, as it stood on 151979, in which the petitioner's name figured at Sr. No. 270.
3.
The petitioner claims that though he fulfilled all the requisite qualifications prescribed under the Rules, but he was not considered for promotion.
Faced with the situation, he filed writ petition No. 7921 of 1988 on this Court claiming his right of consideration for promotion.
The respondent-State filed the written statement to the said Writ Petition and in para No. 18 thereof, it was stated that the name of the petitioner was under consideration for promotion to P.A.S.
Class-II.
It was further stated therein that he would be considered alongwith the other Agriculture Inspectors on the basis of their service record.
The said writ petition was disposed of having become infructuous vide order dated 16.11.1988 in view of the stand taken by the respondent in the above said written statement.
The petitioner was not promoted despite the fact he had also a good service record.
4.
The Director, Agriculture Department, Punjab, Chandigarh respondent No. 2 had issued order dated 10.6.1988, Annexure P-1 whereby recovery of Rs. 50,19196 was ordered to be effected from the petitioner.
He challenged the same by way of filing another writ petition No. 6317 of 1988 in this Court and the recovery of the said amount was ordered to be stayed.
5.
The learned Counsel for the petitioner contended that the respondent- department vide order dated 8.12.1988, a copy of which is Annexure P-2 to the writ petition, promoted as many as nine Agriculture Inspectors to the post of P.A.S Class-II Officers, but the petitioner was ignored despite the fact that he had a good service record.
However, in the impugned order of promotion, there was a clear mention that one post of PAS Class-II had been kept vacant for the petitioner, and he was to be considered for promotion after the settlement of the amount which was due from him to the Government.
Feeling aggrieved against the impugned order Annexure P-2 ignoring the petitioner for promotion, he filed the present writ petition.
6.
On the other hand, the stand taken by the respondent in the written statement is that the case of the petitioner was considered for promotion in terms of the written statement filed in the earlier writ petition No. 7921 of 1988, but he was not found suitable for the same.
A sum of Rs. 5010196 is also to be recovered from him on account of seed depot money.
It was further stated therein that one post of PAS Class-II was kept vacant for the petitioner while issuing the impugned order of promotion, Annexure P-2.
It has also been stated in para No. 12 of the written statement that the petitioner will be again considered after he settled the amount due from him to the Government.
It is also averred in the written statement that no Govt. servant can claim promotion as a matter of right.
The promotions are made after taking into consideration the entire service record as well as the work and conduct of the employee.
Two increments of the petitioner were stopped by way of punishment after holding enquiry for claiming false T.A.
Since the petitioner was not possessing neat and clean service record, he was rightly ignored for promotion.
7.
I have considered the submissions made at the Bar by the learned Counsel for the petitioner.
8.
In para 18(ii) of the written statement it has been clearly averred by the respondents that the order of recovery Annexure P-1 had to be withdrawn as certain formalities viz. opportunity of being heard to the petitioner or holding of enquiry and fixing the responsibility, were not observed before passing the same, the action against the petitioner is being taken after following the procedure as laid down in the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970.
Under these circumstances, it cannot be concluded whether any action under the Rules has been taken against the petitioner or not till date.
9.
In view of the categorical stand taken by the respondents in para No. 18(ii) of the written statement and in case no order adversely affecting the petitioner has been passed by the respondent-department till date as per procedure laid down in the Service Rules, a direction is issued to the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner for promotion to the post of P.A.S.
Class-II within one month from the receipt of a copy of this judgment.
10.
The writ petition stands disposed of in the terms indicated above.
No order as to costs.
Ordered accordingly.