KP Bhandari, J - This is a writ petition by Mr. MS Sisodia, Executive Engineer, Haryana, P.W.D.
(B and R Branch), Rohtak, challenging the order of compulsory retirement passed under the provisions of Rule 532(c) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume II and Rule 3.26(d) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume I, Part I, as applicable to the State of Haryana.
The order of compulsory retirement dated September 14, 1989 (Annexure P-3) reads as follows :  "Whereas the Governor of Haryana is of the opinion that it is in the public interest to retire Shri MS Sisodiya, Executive Engineer, Haryana, PWD B and R Branch from service after his attaining the age of 50 years by giving him three months notice.
Now, therefore, in pursuance of the provisions contained in Rule 532(c) of the Punjab Civil Service Rules, Volume II and Rule 3.26(d) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume I, Part I, as applicable to the State of Haryana, the Governor of Haryana, in the public interest, hereby serves him with three months notice.
He will retire from Government service on the expiry of three months period from the date of receipt of this notice by him."
2.
The petitioner's challenge in the writ petition is that his service record is good and the order of compulsory retirement is arbitrary, capricious and has been passed on extraneous considerations.
The order of compulsory retirement cannot be justified by the record of service.
3.
Shri SR Sharma, Under Secretary to Government, Haryana, P.W.D.
(B and R) Department, had filed the written statement on behalf of the State.
The State has controverted the stand taken by the petitioner in the written statement and has justified the order of compulsory retirement passed in this case.
4.
It is submitted by the counsel for the petitioner that the entire service record of the petitioner is good.
Two adverse entries were conveyed to the petitioner but, subsequently, on representation the adverse remarks were expunged.
The petitioner has taken the stand in the petition that Shri RA Goel, respondent No. 2 was inimically disposed towards him and he has arbitrarily made out a case of compulsory retirement against the petitioner.
It is further contended by the counsel for the petitioner that the order of compulsory retirement was issued by downgrading his Annual Confidential Reports on account of minor punishment awarded to the petitioner.
It is further contended that the order awarding minor punishment has been challenged by the petitioner in the Civil Court and the Civil Court has stayed the recovery.
Reliance had also been placed by the petitioner's counsel on the instructions of the Haryana Government issued vide memo No. 4/105/87-5(B and R) and Estt.I dated July 13, 1988.
According to these instructions minor punishments could not be used for downgrading the Annual Confidential Reports and could not be treated as an obstacle for promotion.
The relevant portion of the instructions reads as follows :  "The Government have reconsidered the matter and advice of the Chief Secretary to Government, Haryana, has been taken.
Therefore, it is clarified that minor punishment orders do not downgrade any of the Annual Confidential Reports, but according to the instructions contained in Memo No. 3588-4GS- 73/1854 dated July 19, 1973, minor punishment is not an obstacle in the way of promotion.
It is contended that the order has been passed on account of mala fide of Shri RA Goel, respondent No. 2.
The allegations of mala fide are elaborated stated in para 22 of the writ petition.
Respondent No. 2 has not filed any written statement to controvert the allegations made against him."
5.
In the absence of any reply on behalf of respondent No. 2, a presumption can be drawn a against him.
However, I am not going to base my judgment on the grounds of mala fide.
According to the instructions of the Haryana Government, for the purpose of passing the order of compulsory retirement, the State has to review the record of service.
If the record of service shows that the Annual Confidential Reports of the government servant are not good or his integrity is doubtful, then the order of compulsory retirement can be passed.
In the written statement, the respondent has not denied that the record of the petitioner contained any adverse report.
It is admitted by the State that the adverse remarks conveyed to the petitioner in his report for the period from August 12, 1975 to March 31, 1976 and for the year 1981-82 were expunged as the adverse remarks were considered to be advisory in nature.
6.
The counsel for the State has brought to my notice the written statement filed by the State, and the various minor punishments which have been awarded to the petitioner by the State from time to time.
He pointedly drew my attention to preliminary objection No. 1.
I am afraid, these punishments cannot be made the basis for ordering compulsory retirement of the petitioner.
The order can only be justified if there is any adverse report in the service record of the petitioner.
There are no adverse reports.
Therefore the order of compulsory retirement cannot be justified.
7.
The order of compulsory retirement, under the statutory rules, can be passed in public interest.
The order can be passed only to chop off the dead wood.
If the record of service is good and does not contain any adverse report, the order of compulsory retirement cannot be considered.
in public interest.
There are certain orders imposing minor punishments.
It is no ground to order compulsory retirement of the petitioner.
The government servant at the age of 50 is in the crucial age group.
He is at the height of his career.
He has rich experience to his credit.
This is the crucial stage where he is to settle his children.
The government servant cannot be dealt with in arbitrary manner and capricious fashion by invoking the power of compulsory retirement when the record of service does not justify the same.
In my opinion the order of compulsory retirement passed in the present case is clearly arbitrary and cannot be sustained.
I, therefore, allow the writ petition with cost, quash the order of compulsory retirement and direct that the petitioner shall be entitled to all rights and benefits which are available to him including the right to be promoted to the higher post.
He shall also be entitled to all the arrears of pay and allowances with 12 per cent interest.
This order be complied with within one month from today.
Counsel's fee Rs. 500/-.
Petition allowed.