RS Mongia, J - This judgment of ours shall dispose of LPA No. 266 of 1986 as well as LPAs No. 267 to 271 of 1986, as the writ petitions against which these LPAs have been filed were disposed of by the learned Single Judge by a common judgment in C.W.P.
No. 4158 of 1983, decided on 12th February, 1986 against which L.P.A. No. 266 of 1986 has been filed.
2.
It would be necessary to state the facts giving rise to the present appeals (the facts are being taken from C.W.P.
No 4158 of 1983), as it would be revealed from the facts that the controversy ultimately narrows down to a very small point.
3.
Under the Punjab Excise and Taxation Service (Class III-A) Rules, 1956, (hereinafter called the Class III-A Rules) Taxation Inspectors, Excise Inspectors and Members of the Ministerial establishment of the Excise and Taxation Department, were eligible for promotion as Assistant Excise and Taxation Officers (in brief AETOs) to the extent of 50% of the vacancies in that cadre.
Their respective shares were as under :-  (i) Taxation Inspectors.
25% (ii) Excise Inspectors.
12% (iii) Ministerial establishment of Head office (ITC Office) 6-1/4% (iv) Ministerial establishment of Sub offices.
6-1/4% 4.
Promotions in accordance with the aforesaid Rules were made to the cadre of AETOs upto 18th May, 1977, on which date the Government decided to abolish the cadre of AETOs, upgraded the status of the then AETOs to the Excise and Taxation Officers (in brief ETOs) and merged those posts in the cadre of the ETOs.
The aforesaid Class III-A Rules of 1956 become redundant and inoperative thereafter.
The appointments to the cadre of ETOs are governed by the Rules known as Punjab Excise and Taxation Department (Class II) Rules, 1956 (hereinafter called the Class II Rules).
Under these Rules, the appointments to the post of ETOs were made as under :-  (i) by direct recruitment, (ii) by promotion from amongst the AETOs and Taxation Officers, and  (iii) by transfer.
There was no provision in the above cited Class II Rules for the promotion of Taxation Inspectors, Excise Inspectors and Ministerial Staff of the Department to the post of ETOs.
5.
The writ-petitioners (now respondents, namely (1) Amar Chand Kaplish, (2) Rajinder Pal Goel, (3) O.P. Raj Pal, (4) Dharam Singh, (5) Hardev Singh Mavi, (6) Hem Raj Goel, and (7) OP Bajaj) belonged to the cadre of Ministerial staff as envisaged by Class III-A Rules.
They were appointed as Taxation Inspectors on different dates by way of transfer under Rule 7 of the Punjab Excise Subordinate Service Rules, 1943.
6.
As stated above, there was no provision in the Class II Rules for the promotion of Taxation Inspectors, Excise Inspectors and Ministerial Staff of the Department to the posts of ETOs.
In order to provide avenues of promotion to these categories of subordinate staff in the department, it was decided in the year 1982 by the State government to make suitable amendments in the aforesaid Class II Rules.
Accordingly, an amendment in Rule 5 of the aforesaid Class II Rules was proposed relating to the method of recruitment.
The proposed amendment to Class II Rules was in the following terms :-  "5.
The members of the service shall be required in the following manner, namely :- (a) xxx xxx xxx (b) In the case of an Excise and Taxation Officer :- (i) by promotion from amongst the Taxation Inspectors and Excise Inspectors who have an experience of working as such for minimum period of five years; or (ii) by promotion from amongst the Superintendents, Assistants, Accountants and Senior Scale Stenographers working in the Excise and Taxation Commissioner's Head Office and in the Divisional and District Offices of the Department of Excise and Taxation, Punjab, who -  (a) have an experience of working as such for a minimum period of five years; (b) have not attained the age of fifty years on or before the first day of October immediately preceding the date on which candidates shall be considered for appointment by selection; and (c) are graduates of a recognised University; (iii) xxx xxx xxx  (iv) xxx xxx xxx" It was further provided that there will be certain quota for each of the above categories for promotion to the rank of ETO.
7.
It was the case of the State Government that the matter regarding formal promulgation of the amendment to the Class II Rules was under process but keeping in view the interest of the government work in the meantime and the need to fill up the vacancies in the cadre of ETOs and further to meet the genuine aspirations for promotions of the categories mentioned in the amended Rule 5 quoted above, it was decided by the State Government to adopt and apply the aforesaid draft provisions of the Rules in the matter of filling up the vacancies in the cadre of ETOs before the Rules could be formally promulgated.
8.
On 22nd August, 1983, Sarvshri OP Singla and Ram Saran, belonging to the Ministerial cadre were promoted as ETOs under the above-quoted amended Rule 5.
The case put forth by the petitioners in the writ petition was that they were senior to Sarvshri OP Singla and Ram Saran in the Ministerial cadre.
They (petitioners) had been appointed as Excise & Taxation Inspectors by way of transfer under Rule 7 of the Punjab Excise Subordinate Service Rules, 1943, and they held a lien on the posts in the Ministerial cadre, as their lien had only been suspended and not terminated and they being senior to Sarvshri OP Singla and Ram Saran, had a prior right of consideration for the post of ETO.
Simply because they were at the relevant time working as Excise & Taxation Inspectors was no ground to ignore their claim for consideration for the posts of ETOs.
The petitioners challenged the order of promotion of Sarvshri OP Singla and Ram Saran as ETOs and prayed that their claim should be considered prior to them for the promotion to the rank of ETOs.
In other words, their case was that on the basis of their seniority and lien on the post forming part of Ministerial cadre, they had a right of consideration prior to Sarvshri OP Singla and Ram Saran.
It is not necessary to give the dates of appointments of the petitioners as well as of the respondents in the Ministerial cadre, as it is the admitted case of the parties that in the Ministerial Cadre, the writ-petitioners were senior to Sarvashri OP Singla and Ram Saran.
Suffice it to mention that petitioners were appointed as Clerks between year 1955 to 1962 and promoted as Accountants on various dates between December, 1971 to June 1972.
They were appointed as Excise & Taxation Inspectors by way of transfer on 10th August, 1971, 16th March, 1972 and 4th July, 1972.
They were confirmed as Clerks in the Ministerial Cadre.
9.
On behalf of the State, it was pleaded in the written statement that though the lien of the petitioners in the Ministerial cadre was suspended vide different orders in terms of Rule 314(b) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, yet "if the petitioners want that they should be considered for the post of Excise and Taxation Officers on the basis of their lien in the Ministerial cadre they may seek reversion whereafter their case would be considered on merits and under the Rules".
With effect from which date their claim for the promotional post of ETOs would be considered was not made clear anywhere in the written statement of the Government.
It was stated before the learned Single Judge by the counsel for the writ-petitioners that if the State Government was willing to consider the claim of the petitioners to the promotional post with effect from the dates any of their juniors were promoted to the posts of ETOs, they would feel satisfied and in case the State wants to consider their claim only with effect from the date they came back to the posts on which they held lien, then the plea of the State was untenable.
As stated above, since in the written statement, it was not made very clear by the State Government as to from which date the case of the writ-petitioners would be considered for promotion to the post of ETOs if they chose to come back to the Ministerial cadre, the learned Single Judge directed the writ petitioners to make a comprehensive representation which was to be disposed of by the Government by passing a speaking order within the specified period.
After the said representation was made, the Financial Commissioner Taxation, and Secretary to Government, Punjab, Department of Excise and Taxation, passed a detailed order running into 25 typed pages on 7th August, 1985 (Annexure P-7 to the writ petition), wherein he held that in case the petitioners chose to come back to the Ministerial cadre, their case for promotion shall be considered to the rank of ETOs from the date their juniors in the ministerial cadre were so promoted.
However, he added one word that the cases would be considered in the light of the eligibility under the relevant Rules i.e. to say the amended Rule 5.
10.
When this Annexure P-7 was filed in the Court, the petitioners were satisfied to the extent that their cases would be considered for promotion to the rank of ETOs from the date when their juniors were promoted, but the pinch they were feeling was that what was being given to them on one side, had been taken away by the Financial Commissioner on the other side by introducing the eligibility under the Rules, as according to the writ petitioners, the service rendered by them as Excise and Taxation Inspectors was not being considered as service rendered in the Ministerial cadre and if that was not taken into consideration then they would be ineligible for consideration to the post of ETO.
11.
The main thrust of the argument before the learned Single Judge by the counsel for the writ-petitioners was that the amended Rule 5 laying down eligibility etc. was a Draft Rule and could not be made applicable till promulgated or a conscious decision taken by the State Government to implement these rules as executive or administrative instructions, till the Rules were formally promulgated.
The case of the respondent-State as well as the private respondents Sarvshri OP Singla and Ram Saran was that there was a conscious decision to apply these Rules for filling up the posts of ETOs till the Rules were formally promulgated.
The learned Single Judge sent for the Government files to find out if there was nay conscious decision of the State Government to implement the Draft Rules till those were formally promulgated.
The learned Judge came to the conclusion that there was no conscious decision to apply these Draft Rules, and consequently.
The writ petitioners were entitled to be considered for the post of ETOs without any bar of eligibility as their juniors had already been considered for the posts.
The writ petition was consequently, allowed.
12.
Dissatisfied with the judgment of the learned Single Judge, the State Government as well as the private respondents have filed separate Letters Patent Appeals as mentioned above.
13.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, we are of the view that in peculiar facts and circumstances of this case, it is not necessary to go into the fact whether there was any conscious decision to implement the Draft Rules till they were formally promulgated.
In fact, it was the case of the State Government as well as of the private respondents that the Draft Rules were rightly implemented before they were formally promulgated.
We will proceed with the assumption that the Draft Rules were rightly implemented.
This view we are taking because it is because of these very draft Rules that for the first time the members of the Ministerial cadre were made eligible for being considered for promotion to the post of ETO.
That being so, the members of the Ministerial cadre who derived their right of consideration from the Draft Rules must also have the necessary eligibility qualification for consideration which are mentioned in the Draft Rules.
In view of this the question that calls for determination is as to whether on the return of the writ petitioners from the post of Excise and Taxation Inspector to the Ministerial cadre, the service rendered by them on the post of Excise & Taxation Inspector could by deeming fiction be considered as having been rendered in the Ministerial cadre ?
The answer to this question is that such a service is to be counted as if the petitioners were always in the Ministerial cadre.
Once it is held that the petitioners' lien was only suspended under Rule 314(b) of the Punjab Civil Service Rules, the petitioners had a right to come back to their posts in the Ministerial cadre.
Since that is so, the rest would follow as if for all times deemingly they were in the Ministerial cadre.
Analogy to this can be taken from an illustration where a person goes on deputation to some other cadre and when he comes back his entire service in the other cadre is taken in the parent cadre for all purposes deemingly as if for all intents and purposes during the period of deputation, such a person had been working in the parent department.
This point arose before the Apex Court in State of Mysore and another v. PN Naujundin and another, 1969 SLR 346, wherein it was held that the service rendered in the department where an employee is on deputation would be considered for all purposes as service rendered in the parent department.
That being the position in law, the entire service rendered by the petitioners as Excise and Taxation Inspectors will be considered in the Ministerial cadre.
If that is counted the petitioners would be eligible for promotion under the relevant Rules.
14.
Mr. JL Gupta, Senior Advocate, learned counsel for the appellants (private respondents in the writ petition) submitted that the petitioners could not be said to be retaining lien in the Ministerial cadre as they had successfully completed the period of probation as Excise and Taxation Inspectors and they will be deemed to be confirmed there.
No such plea has been raised nor there is any material to that effect on the record that the petitioners were ever confirmed as Excise and Taxation Inspectors.
Moreover this was not the case of the State Government.
Otherwise there was no need to sent the case to the Financial Commissioner at all.
15.
The learned counsel for the appellants further submitted that because the petitioners were allowed to come back to the Ministerial cadre, their lien would revive only from the date they come back and not from any earlier date.
In other words, he wanted to submit that the period of service spent as Excise and Taxation Inspectors could not be counted, in the ministerial cadre.
Before the learned Single Judge, a similar plea was raised, which has been repelled by observing as follows :-  "Otherwise also I see no merit in the submission of Mr. Gupta that the lien of the petitioners in case of their reversion and rejoining the posts of the ministerial staff, would be revived only with effect from the date they rejoin these posts.
Clause (d) to this very rule, i.e. Rule 3.14, says that if a Government employee's lien on a post has been suspended under clause (b) and the post in question has been filled in, then the whole "arrangements shall be reversed as soon as the suspended lien revives."
If Mr. Gupta's argument is to be accepted that there has to be a breach in the lien of a promoted employee, then the reviving of his lien with his reversion or reappointment to the post from which he had been promoted, would lose all meaning as they may lead to the affecting of his seniority in the cadre of the ministerial staff.
To my mind, the reviving of lien essentially means that it stands revived with effect from the date it has been suspended.
The provision for suspension of lien appears to have been made in these rules with a view to make the permanent vacancy-against which a promoted employee holds the lien-available for promotion or appointment of another person and nothing further."
We find this reasoning of the learned is single Judge to be sound.
16.
In view of what has been said above, we find no merit in these appeals and dismiss the same.
However, there will be no order as to costs.
17.
Before parting with the judgment, we may observe that the petitioners shall now be considered forthwith for the posts of ETOs from the date their juniors were promoted and if found suitable they will be promoted to that rank from the dates their juniors were promoted and they would be entitled to all the consequential benefits arising out of their promotion from the said date.
Appeals dismissed.