G Bikshapathy, J - In this Writ Petition, GOMs.
No. 103 dated 2921996 appointing the 3rd respondent as Additional Public Prosecutor to the Court of the Additional District and Sessions Judge-cum-Metropolitan Sessions Judge, Vijayawada, is challenged.
2.
The petitioner is a practising Advocate in Vijayawada Courts.
He had conducted number of criminal cases.
One Sri T Sivarami Reddy was functioning as Additional Public Prosecutor.
His term expired on 2081994 and the same was being extended from time to time pending regular appointment.
The appointment to the post of Additional Public Prosecutor is required to be made in accordance with Section 24 of the Criminal Procedure Code.
Therefore, a panel for the said post was prepared by the District Magistrate.
In the said panel, the petitioner figures at Serial No. 2.
Even though the said panel was sent to the Government, the same was not acted upon, but the Government again called for a fresh panel.
After considering the said panel, the 3rd respondent was appointed as Additional Public Prosecutor.
The said order is assailed by the petitioner.
The petitioner contends that under Sections 24(4) of the Criminal Procedure Code, the concerned Session Judge should be consulted by the District Magistrate, before the panel for Additional Public Prosecutor is prepared.
The Vijayawada town is declared as Sessions Division and also a Metropolitan area.
Therefore, Metropolitan Sessions Judge is only the concerned judge who has to be consulted under Section 24(4) of Criminal Procedure Code, for the appointment to the post of Additional Public Prosecutor.
The petitioner submits that in the instant case, the Metropolitan Sessions Judge sent a panel earlier in which the 3rd respondent was not empanelled and therefore without exhausting the first panel sent by the Metropolitan Sessions Judge, the second panel ought not to have been acted upon.
The learned counsel submits that the post of Public Prosecutor carries very onerous responsibilities and until and unless the incumbent possessed thorough knowledge in the fieled, it would cause irreparable loss to the State.
It is also averred in the affidavit that the 1st respondent never practices on criminal side and he never appeared before any Magistrate Court.
Therefore appointing such a person is absolutely untenable and the very purpose is frustrated.
3.
In the counter filed, the 3rd respondent denied the averments mentioned in the Writ Petition.
4.
The learned counsel mainly contends that provisions of Section 24 of the Criminal Procedure Code have not been complied with and therefore, the appointment is wholly illegal and it is liable to be set aside.
For proper appreciation of the matter, it is necessary to extract Section 24 of the Criminal Code.
``24.
Public Prosecutors - (1) For every High Court, the Central Government or the State Government shall, after consultation with the High Court, appoint a Public Prosecutor and may also appoint one or more Additional Public Prosecutors, for conducting in such Court, any prosecution, appeal or other proceeding on behalf of the Central Government or State Government, as the case may be.
(2) The Central Government may appoint one or more Public Prosecutors, for the purpose of conducting any case or class of cases in any district or local area.
(3) For every district, the State Government shall appoint a Public Prosecutor and may also appoint one or more Additional Public Prosecutors for the district; Provided that the Public Prosecutor or Additional Public Prosecutor appointed for one district may be appointed also to be a Public Prosecutor or an Additional Public Prosecutor as the case may be for another district.
(4) The District Magistrate shall, in consultation with the Sessions Judge, prepare a panel of names of persons, who are, in his opinion, fit to be appointed as Public Prosecutors or Additional Public Prosecutors for the district.
(5) No person shall be appointed by the State Government as the Public Prosecutor or Additional Public Prosecutor for the district unless his name appears in the panel of names prepared by the District Magistrate under sub-section (4).
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (5), where in a State there exists a regular Cadre of Prosecuting Officers, the State Government shall appoint a Public Prosecutor or an Additional Public Prosecutor only from among the persons constituting such Cadre; Provided that where, in the opinion of the State Government, no suitable person is available in such Cadre for such appointment that Government may appoint a person as Public Prosecutor or Additional Public Prosecutor, as the case may be, from the panel of names prepared by the District Magistrate under sub-section (4).
(7) A person shall be eligible to be appointed as a Public Prosecutor or an Additional Public Prosecutor under sub-section (1) or sub- section (2) or sub-section (3) or sub-section (6), only if he has been in practice as an advocate for not less than seven years.
(8) The Central Government or the State Government may appoint, for the purposes of any case or class of cases, a person who has been in practice as an advocate for not less than ten years as a Special Public Prosecutor.
(9) For the purpose of sub-section (7) and sub-section (8), the period during which a person has been in practice as a pleader, or has rendered (whether before or after the commencement of this Code) service as a Public Prosecutor or as an Additional Public Prosecutor or Assistant Public Prosecutor or other Prosecuting Officer, by whatever name called, shall be deemed to be the period during which such person has been in practice as an Advocate."
Therefore, a perusal of the said provision will indicate that the concerned District Magistrate shall forward the panel to the Government after consultation with the Sessions Judge concerned only the person figuring in the panel shall be appointed by the Government.
5.
The Government have not filed any counter, however, the learned Government Pleader advanced the arguments on the basis of the record of the Government.
He submits that on earlier occasion when the panel was called, the District Collector sent the panel containing three names which included the name of the petitioner and the said panel was prepared on the basis of the names sent by the District Judge, Krishna.
Second time also when the fresh panel was called the District Magistrate, Krishna, after consultation with the District Judge, sent panel containing three names.
However, the learned Government Pleader submits that in the later panel also apart from the names sent already, three names have been added.
Therefore he submits that the petitioner cannot claim that his name has been deleted.
So long as his name exist in the 1st and 2nd panel, it is for the Government to choose a person taking into consideration various aspects.
It is not necessary for the Government to record the reasons while selecting the candidates for the post.
While, it is true that the interference in such matters by the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India is very limited, but at the same time it has to be ensured that there is no arbitrariness in the procedure adopted by the Government.
I have perused the file, wherein a panel containing three names was sent by the District Magistrate, Krishna initially by his proceedings dated 2581995 to the Government for consideration.
In the said panel the name of the petitioner figures at Serial No. 2.
The District Collector had sent the names on the basis of panel prepared by him after ascertaining the names from the Metropolitan Sessions Judge, Vijiayawada.
The Metropolitan Sessions Judge, Vijayawada forwards the names of Sri T Sivarami Reddy (2) V Ramachandra Babu (the Writ Petitioner) and MS Khalid by his letter dated 11101994 to the District Judge.
The very same names were transmitted by the District Judge to District Collector finally.
But, however, the Government had called for another panel by memo dated 1741995.
The District Collector accordingly sent three more names viz. A.V.
Ramana, (2) S Ramaprasad (3rd respondent) and S Hanumanth Prasad.
The District Judge, while sending the panel of three more names clarified that those persons should be considered along with the names of persons already sent.
Thus, the six names came up for consideration before the Government.
Out of the said names, the Government appointed the 3rd respondent as Additional Public Prosecutor for the Court of II Additional District and Sessions Judge-cum-Metropolitan Sessions Judge, Vijayawada by the impugned GO  6.
The learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the Government violated the provision of Section 24 of Criminal Procedure Code.
He also submits relative merits have not been considered by the Government and the appointment is wholly mala fide and it is tainted by extraneous considerations.
He further submits that when the 1st panel was sent, there is no requirement to call 2nd panel and it amounts to cancellation of 1st panel without action on it.
7.
It has to be remembered, this is an appointment under Section 24(3) of the Code.
No selection process is involved nor any statutory rules have been prescribed.
Under these circumstances, the question of assessment of relative merits does not arise as in the case of appointment by proper selection.
But, at the same time, the process should not be arbitrary or smack of extraneous considerations.
I do not find any such elements in the process.
8.
The learned counsel for the petitioner relied on the judgment of the learned single Judge of this Court reported in Smt. P Vijayalakshmi and another v. The Government of Andhra Pradesh and others, 1990(2) An.
W.R. 21.
The facts in the said case are not applicable to the case on hand.
It was the contention in the said case that the rejection of the 1st panel sent by the District Magistrate was illegal and without jurisdiction and therefore the appointment of the candidates selected from the 2nd panel was illegal.
But in the instant case, it is not rejection of the panel sent by the District Magistrate, but in addition to the panel already sent, additional panel was sought from the District Magistrate.
He also cited the judgment reported in P Keshava Reddy v. State of AP and another, 1980(2) (H.C.) APLJ 122.
That was a case where the challenge was made to the appointment of the Government Pleader under the provisions of Andhra Pradesh Law Offices (Recruitment, Conditions of Service and Remuneration) Rules, 1967 framed under Article 309 of the Constitution of India.
In that case the 1st panel sent by the District Collector was rejected and the Government called for fresh panel.
The petitioner was 2nd in the rejected panel, filed the Writ Petitioner contending that the rejection was illegal.
The Court held that the 1st panel was cancelled without recording any reasons and declared the action illegal and therefore directed the Government to consider the panel sent by the District Collector.
Even though there is a stipulation in the Rule that the District Collector shall send the panel of 3 names in the order of merit, this Court held that it is open for the Government to appoint any person out of the said panel and that it need not necessarily appoint the 1st person in the panel.
Rule 6 was held to be only a directory and not a mandatory.
This also does not help the case of the petitioner in any way.
9.
The issue however in this case is whether there was any rejection of the 1st panel.
Section 24 of the Code of Criminal Procedure does not specify as to how many names the panel should contain and whether the panel should be prepared in order of merit.
Therefore, the panel having been sent by the District Collector, it is open for the State Government which is the appointing authority to appoint one among the persons figuring the panel.
Thus, I find that this issue also does not suffer from any infirmity.
It is not a cancellation or rejection of panel in this case.
As already noted by me after perusing the records, the panel consisted of six names as against 3 names originally sponsored.
That cannot be a ground to set aside the appointment.
It is always open for the Government to have a wider choice and considering one person from among six candidates cannot said to be arbitrary or illegal.
10.
It is lastly contended by the learned counsel for the petitioner that under Section 24 of the Criminal Procedure Code, it is only the concerned Metropolitan Sessions Judge, who is empowered to send the panel and the panel sent by the District Judge is incompetent and cannot be acted upon.
He submits that under Section 6 of the Criminal Procedure Code, the Metropolitan Sessions Judge is an independent District Judge and therefore, the panel ought to have been called for only from the said Metropolitan Sessions Judge.
He relies on Sections 6 and 7 of Criminal Procedure Code, which are as follows:  "6.
Classes of Criminal Courts: - Besides the High Courts and the Courts constituted under any law, other than this Code, there shall be, in every State, the following classes of Criminal Courts namely: (i) Courts of Session; (ii) Judicial Magistrate of the First and, in any Metropolitan area, Metropolitan Magistrate; (iii) Judicial Magistrates of the Second Class, and (iv) Executive Magistrates.
7.
Territorial divisions: - (1) Every State shall be a Sessions division or shall consist of Sessions divisions, and every sessions division shall, for the purpose of this Code, be a district or consist of districts; Provided that every Metropolitan area shall, for the said purpose, be a separate sessions division and district.
(2) The State Government may, after consultation with the High Court, alter the limits or the number of such divisions and districts.
(3) The State Government may, after consultation with the High Court, divide any district into sub-divisions and may alter the limits or the number of such sub-divisions.
(4) The Sessions divisions, districts and sub-divisions existing in a State at the commencement of this Code, shall be deemed to have been formed under this Section."
From the said sections, it is clear that every Metropolitan area shall be deemed to be a sessions division and district.
It is not in dispute that Vijayawada is not a metropolitan area.
Therefore the Metropolitan Sessions Judge's Court is put on he par with the District and Sessions Court.
Though the Judge presiding over the Court is designated as Additional District and Sessions Judge-cum-Metropolitan Sessions Judge, Vijayawada, under proviso to Section 7, he is deemed to be equivalent to District and Sessions Judge.
Under Section 24, the District Magistrate shall prepare the panel in consultation with Sessions Judge.
Therefore, from a conjoint reading of Sections 7 and 24(4) it is manifest that for the posts of Public Prosecutor/Addl.
Public Prosecutor, the District Magistrate shall prepare the panel in consultation with the District and Sessions Judge concerned.
But, however, in case of Metropolitan areas, it is the Metropolitan Sessions Judge, who is required to be consulted.
For proper working out of the provision, a harmonious construction has to be given.
In the interest of administration of justice at district level, it is always necessary to keep the District Judge in picture.
Therefore, there can be no illegality or infirmity if the panel sent by the Metropolitan Sessions Judge is transmitted by the District and Sessions Judge to District Magistrate.
Though the learned Government Pleader submits that the expression "Sessions Judge" should only be understood as District and Sessions Judge of the District concerned irrespective of metropolitan area, I am not persuaded to accept in view of proviso to Section 7.
Admittedly, in the instant case, the legal provision was correctly understood initially.
The Metropolitan Sessions Judge, Vijayawada sent the 1st panel consisting of three names, which was forwarded to the District Magistrate.
To that extent, there was no dispute.
However, when a further panel was sought for by the Government, the 2nd panel prepared by the District Magistrate did not have the consultation with the Metropolitan Sessions Judge, Vijayawada.
From the records, I find the District Judge without getting the panel of names from the Metropolitan Sessions Judge, Vijayawada straightaway sent three names, in which the name of 4th respondent figures.
Therefore, it has to be construed as if the panel was prepared without consulting the Sessions Judge (in this case Metropolitan Sessions Judge).
Therefore infraction of Section 24(4) is writ at large.
On this ground as a last straw in the camel's mouth the petitioner should succeed.
11.
Accordingly, impugned GO is quashed setting aside the appointment of 3rd respondent.
This order, however, does not preclude the authorities from making appointment keeping in view the observations of this Court.
12.
Before parting with the case, I must observe that I am not satisfied with the inordinate delays in making the appointments.
The posts of Public Prosecutor/Addl.
Public Prosecutors are most sensitive in nature and carry onerous responsibilities.
The void cannot be compensated by incharge arrangements indefinitely and that would be contrary to Section 24 of Criminal Procedure Code.
In the instant case, the post fell vacant on the expiry of tenure of previous incumbent on 2081994, the GO though quashed now, was issued only on 2921996.
Movement of files appear to be on a very slow pace.
This would have serious effect on the functioning of administration more especially in important matters like the one on hand.
In bureaucratic set up a small element of laxity yields enormous negative results.
The District Collector and Government appears to have realised the vacancy after more than 9 months after its occurrence.
This type of lackadaisical attitude on the part of the authorities, cannot be appreciated.
To avoid such recurrence in future, the Government shall direct the concerned authorities to initiate action well in advance that is to say three months prior to the occurrence of vacancy and it shall be ensured that the new incumbent takes charge on the next day of expiry of tenure of previous incumbent.
This would cause least inconvenience to the administration of Criminal justice at District level besides avoiding the existing person to continue beyond the expiry of his term.
It would also be worthwhile for the Government to issue appropriate orders for time bound transmission of files from one seat to another for attaining optimum administrative efficiency.
13.
The existing arrangements shall continue for a period of two months from the date of receipt of this order.
14.
The Writ Petition is ordered accordingly.
No costs.
Ordered accordingly.