MR Agnihotri, J - This judgment shall dispose of three C.W.P.
Nos. 12062, 12063 and 12064 of 1990 as common questions of fact and law are involved.
2.
Ms. Jeevan Kumari (petitioner in CWP 12062 of 1990), Mrs. Jatinder Malhi (Petitioner in CWP 12063 of 1990) and Mrs. Satwant Kaur (petitioner in CWP 12064 of 1990) were appointed as Lecturers in the SD College for Women, Jullundur City, on 21st July, 1988, 8th August, 1988, and Ist August, 1988, respectively.
According to the terms and conditions laid down in the orders of their appointment, the appointment was to be on one year's probation in each case.
This period of one year's probation was extended by order dated 7th August, 1989, upto 31st July, 1990/8th August, 1990, though in the meantime on 2nd August, 1990, the Vice-Chancellor, Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, had approved their appointment as lecturer on permanent basis.
Despite this, services of the petitioners were terminated by orders dated 24th/25th August, 1990.
3.
Aggrieved against the termination of their services, the petitioners have invoked the writ jurisdiction of this Court mainly on the ground that as they have already completed their statutory period of probation, including extension period, satisfactorily and approval of the Vice-Chancellor, Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, to their appointment had also been communicated, the order of termination of their services was contrary to the provisions of the Punjab Affiliated Colleges (Security of Service of Employees) Act, 1974 (Act 23 of 1974), as it amounted to their dismissal from service.
It has further been contended that according to Section 4 of the aforesaid Act, "the penalty of dismissal or removal from service shall not be imposed unless the same is approved by the Director" - 'Director' means, the Director of Public Instruction (Colleges), Punjab, in the present case.
4.
In the written statements filed by the respondents, it has been pleaded that the Audit Party of the office of Director, Public Instruction (Colleges), Punjab, had visited the College on 23rd July, 1990, and after scrutinising the relevant records and the accounts, pointed out that three posts of Lecturers had been wrongly included in the sanctioned strength of Lecturers in the College.
Therefore, it was due to this reason that services of the petitioners were terminated before the expiry of the extended period of probation.
It has also been pleaded that the College, which was a private institution, was founded and managed by a private committee according to the principles of Sanatan Dharam and as such it was protected under Article 30 of the Constitution  5.
In the replication filed by the petitioner (in CWP 12062 of 1990), it has been stated that "the College in dispute is receiving grant-in-aid to the tune of 95% of its deficit from the State Government; the services of the employees are governed by the provisions of Punjab Affiliated Colleges (Security of Service of Employees) Act, 1974, as well as the provisions of Guru Nanak Dev University Calender, Amritsar."
6.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I find that instead of approaching this Court, the petitioners should have approached the learned Director of Public Instruction (Colleges), Punjab, for the redressal of their grievances, as statutory remedy was available to them under Section 4 of the aforesaid Act.
Since the contention of the petitioners is that they had already completed the statutory period of probation and had become permanent on the expiry of the probation period, and on that account, termination of their services, which penalty could not be imposed unless the same was approved by the Director under Section 4(1) of the said Act, they should have approached to Director, Public Instruction (Colleges), Punjab, for the necessary relief.
7.
Faced with this, the learned counsel for the petitioners has stated that the petitioners had not approached the authorities under the Act, as the stand of the respondents was that Sanatan Dharam institutions being minority institutions, the aforesaid Act was not applicable to them.
On this, Mr. JL Gupta, learned Senior Advocate, assisted by Mr. Sumant Batra, Advocate, appearing on behalf of the respondents, stated that if the petitioners even now approach the Director, Public Instruction (Colleges), Punjab, the respondent-Management of the College shall not raise any objection to the maintainability of their petitions.
8.
In view of the aforesaid position, I relegate the petitioners to the remedy under the aforesaid Act by approaching the Director, Public Instruction (Colleges), Punjab.
In case the petitioners present their petitions within one month from today, those petitions shall be considered and decided by the Director, Public Instruction (Colleges), Punjab, on merits, after affording an opportunity of being heard to the respondent-Management of the College, expeditiously, preferably within three months.
With the above directions, the petitions stand disposed of.
Ordered accordingly