SC Malte, J - The State of Punjab has preferred this appeal.
The plaintiff-respondent was a Constable.
He has filed a suit for declaration that the order of dismissal passed consequent to the departmental enquiry held against him was illegal and it was against the provisions of law, service rules and rules of natural justice and that he should be reinstated with all the benefits.
The trial Court dismissed the suit.
The Additional District Judge, however, decreed the suit.
Against that judgment, the State has preferred the appeal.
2.
The plaintiff-respondent joined as Constable on 2961960.
He was promoted as a Head Constable from 711977.
He remained absent from duty from 30.4.1983 to 161983 due to which he was once reverted to the rank of Constable from 25.1.1984.
He claims that he was sick from 2161983 to 181983.
For obtaining leave during that period he claims to have submitted certain applications to the authorities, but the authorities did not communicate him any order that might have been passed on those leave applications.
In respect of his absence, he was served with a charge-sheet and was called upon to face departmental enquiry.
As a sequel of that, he ultimately came to be dismissed from service.
He challenged the dismissal on the ground that the enquiry was conducted without affording adequate opportunity to him and it was held contrary to the rules meant for holding departmental enquiries.
His further grievance was that the copy of the impugned order was not supplied to him despite repeated requests.
3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the State, it was contended that the plaintiff-respondent remained absent without obtaining proper leave and, therefore, he was subjected to departmental enquiry in respect of his unauthorised absence.
The other contentions raised by the plaintiff also came to be denied.
It was submitted that despite repeated opportunities afforded to the plaintiff, he remained absent deliberately and the Enquiry Officer was left with no alternative but to proceed in the absence of the plaintiff.
It was claimed that the enquiry was held as per the rules and procedure and the plaintiff was rightly dismissed.
4.
The text of the judgment of the trial Court indicates that the record and proceedings of the departmental enquiry had been placed before the Court and on perusal of it, he found that the enquiry was held in accordance with the rules and procedure.
The departmental enquiry file revealed that the plaintiff had received the charge-sheet and the list of allegations and witnesses but he did not attend despite repeated service of notice on him.
On one occasion the plaintiff had even refused to accept the notice of the date on which the departmental enquiry was fixed.
Even the notice that the enquiry is being proceeded ex parte because plaintiff did not attend, had been sent to the plaintiff on 1721984.
But that notice came back with the report that the plaintiff refused to accept the said notice.
Ultimately, the enquiry was concluded and on the basis of that a show-cause notice was served on the plaintiff, and he was called upon to show-cause against the proposed penalty of dismissal from service.
A copy of the report of the Enquiry Officer was also attached with the show-cause notice.
The plaintiff received that communication, and in token of that, attestation of Panchayat Member of the village was also obtained on the date of receipt of communication on 931984.
Despite that, the plaintiff neither replied the show-cause notice nor did he attend the office of the competent authority for personal hearing.
Under these circumstances, ultimately the order in question came to be passed.
The trial Court dismissed the suit on being satisfied that sufficient opportunity was thus afforded to the delinquent/plaintiff but he did not care to attend the departmental enquiry.
5.
When the matter came up before the Additional District Judge, he observed that the order by which the plaintiff was dismissed shows that his absence in respect of the period covered by the charge-sheet in departmental enquiry was treated as extraordinary leave.
The Additional District Judge considered that the treatment of that period as extraordinary leave was tantamount to sanctioning the leave without pay.
According to him, there was no difference between granting leave without pay, and treating the period of absence as leave without pay.
Thus by using the term ``extraordinary leave'', the absence was condoned by treating it as without pay and the absence was thus regularised.
I am unable to appreciate the correctness of such an approach by the Additional District Judge.
The Additional District Judge has further observed that in such cases it was not open to the employer to proceed against the servant in a departmental enquiry and punish him.
6.
It appears to me that the Additional District Judge totally misunderstood and misinterpreted the order by which the plaintiff was dismissed from service.
The order passed in the departmental enquiry is as follows :-  ``Therefore, Sadhu Singh C. No. 153 of Distt.
Jalandhar is hereby dismissed from police department today i.e. 4484 A.N.
The period of absence for 40 days is being treated as extraordinary leave.
The entry of the order may be made in the (Order book) and a copy of it may be sent at his home address through registered post.''
7.
While interpreting it, Additional District Judge sought to distinguish the ruling of State of Punjab v. Harihar Gopal, 1969 SLR 274 (SC).
In the reported case the delinquent was dismissed from service on the charge of his absence.
By a subsequent order passed, the period of his absence which was subject matter of the charge, was ordered to be treated as earned leave for 29 days, half-day leave for 40 days and leave without pay for 89 days.
The High Court was of the view that the grant of the kind of leave as mentioned above amounted to retrospective effect of authorising the absence from duty for the period in question, and the State was not justified to proceed in departmental enquiry on the basis of that very period on the ground that it was unauthorised absence.
While considering those observations by the High Court, the Supreme Court expressed the view that the sequence of order should have been taken into consideration.
By the first order the delinquent was removed from service.
Later on, by communication the period of his absence was brought under different heads to the extent of leave available to his credit.
In these circumstances, their Lordships of the Supreme Court observed that they were unable to hold that authority after terminating the employment would intend to pass an order invalidating the earlier order by sanctioning the leave.
The said authority was distinguished by the Additional District Judge on the ground that in that case these were two different orders, the one on which the employment was terminated, and the subsequent order was intimation in respect of treating the absence under different heads of kind of leave.
Obviously, the Additional District Judge has missed the ratio of that ruling.
He did not take into consideration the subsequent portion of the observations made in the case of Harihar Gopal.
In para 8 of the judgment, the Supreme Court observed that there was another aspect of the case which the High Court had not considered.
That aspect was that the charge against the delinquent was that he had absented himself without obtaining leave in advance.
The Enquiry Officer characterised the conduct of the respondent as "irresponsible in extreme and can hardly be justified".
On the finding of the Enquiry Officer, the charge was proved and the subsequent order passed in that case had no effect of the charge the the respondent had remained absent without obtaining leave in advance.
8.
The trial Court sought support from the cases of State of Punjab v. Chanan Singh (deceased), 1988(2) C.L.J.
21, and the case of Tito Francisco Pereira v Administrator of Goa, Daman and Diu and others, 1982(1) All India Services Law Journal 614, and case of Bhursinh Hamsinh Rajput v. State of Gujarat and another, 1982(1) All India Services Law Journal 697.
The case of Chanan Singh was a Single Bench decision of this Court.
In that case the order of dismissal stated that the period of absence shall count as `leave without pay'.
His Lordship relied on the above-mentioned cases of the other High Court, and the case reported in AIR 1976 AP page 75 (G Papaiah v. Assistant Director, Medical Services, Secunderabad) and held that once the period of absence is treated as leave of any kind whatsoever, that would not be available to base charge for departmental inquiry.
On perusal of the case on which reliance was placed in Chanan Singh's case (supra), the position appears to be somewhat controversial.
In the case of Tito Francisco Pereira v Administrator (supra), the Judicial Commissioner Goa, Daman and Diu was dealing with a case in which there were number of periods of absence under consideration.
In that case it transpired that some of the period of absence has been not regularized or condoned by grant of leave.
In that case, His Lordship was of the opinion that if the absence is treated as `leave without pay', that amounts to condonation.
But in that case some of the period of absence was not thus condoned.
In order to appreciate that ruling, a brief reference to the term `extraordinary leave' would be necessary, which I will discuss at a later stage.
In case of Bhur Singh v. State of Gujarat, the Single Bench of Gujarat High Court was considering a case in which the absence was already considered by treating as `leave without pay'.
In that case, therefore, His Lordship observed that the charge would not sustain on the ground that the absence was unjustified.
In case of G Papaiah, the Single Bench of AP High Court was dealing with a case in which the absence was regularised.
It was, therefore, held that the regularisation by granting extraordinary leave has nullified the basis of the charge.
In that case disciplinary inquiry had followed the regularisation of the absence.
It would, therefore, appear that the case on which reliance was placed in case of State v. Chanan Singh (supra), one finds that the absence which was regularized was held to be taking away the basis of departmental inquiry initiated subsequently.
Besides that, in view of the Supreme Court ruling in case of State of M.P. v. Harihar Gopal (supra), it can be now said that the position of law was already settled by the Apex Court to the effect that the authority terminating the employment cannot be said to have intention to pass an order that would result into setting at naught the earlier order.
Thus, while imposing the punishment of dismissal if that order contained a clause indicating that the absence was to be treated as an extraordinary leave, that does not amount to condonation of absence by grant of some kind of leave.
I would further say that grant of some kind of leave is different from treating the absence under one of the heads of leave.
Such a treatment of absence is nothing but for the purpose of record.
9.
In the context of this, it would also be convenient to ascertain the meaning and the scope of the term `extraordinary leave'.
Use of that term is found in the Punjab Civil Service Rules, and also in the Fundamental Rules applicable to the Central Government Employees which are applicable to the Punjab Police as per Chapter VIII of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934, which are as follows :-  ``8.121.
(1) - Extraordinary leave may be granted to any Government employee in special circumstances : (a) when no other leave is admissible, or  (b) when other leave is admissible, but Government employee concerned applies in writing for the grant of extraordinary leave.
(2) The authority empowered to grant leave may commute retrospectively (a) period of absence without leave into extraordinary leave.
(b) extraordinary leave granted into leave of a different kind if the later type of leave was admissible at the time extraordinary leave was granted.''
10.
In this case while dismissing the plaintiff, the period of his absence is required to be treated in one way or the other for the purpose of record.
The order of dismissal was on the ground that the plaintiff remained absent for a span of 40 days without obtaining any kind of leave.
The report of the Enquiry Officer indicates that the delinquent was absent from the headquarters even till the date of dismissal order on 441984.
He also took into consideration other factors, and found that the dismissal was proper punishment.
It may be recalled here that even during the departmental enquiry, the delinquent did not participate despite the fact that repeated efforts were made to secure his presence, and sufficient opportunity was afforded.
The text of the judgment of the trial Court amply indicates that fact.
Since the plaintiff came to be dismissed in the circumstances mentioned above, it is not possible to imagine that in the next breath the Disciplinary Authority would intend to grant leave to the plaintiff and thereby would exonerate him of the charges.
The term `extraordinary leave' is understood to mean that his absence is not attributable to any kind of leave admissible.
That absence is termed as `extraordinary leave'.
That was not granting of leave with a view to condone unauthorized absence, but was meant for record consequent upon order of dismissal.
The terminology thus used is not properly understood by the Additional District Judge.
The case law considered by him has also not been properly interpreted and understood by him.
11.
The judgment of the Additional District Judge also cannot be sustained in respect of his appreciation of merits of the case.
While considering the merits, he reverted back to the reasoning that by treating the absence as extraordinary leave, the absence was regularised, and thereafter the plaintiff could not have been proceeded against in departmental enquiry in respect of that very absence.
12.
However, this case deserves to be considered from a different angle in view of the subsequent events.
The counsel for the respondent submitted that consequent upon the order dated 211993 passed by the Additional District Judge, the respondent was reinstated in service on 22121994 and he got superannuation on 2921996.
The counsel for the appellant submitted that stay to the execution of the decree had been granted on 2141995.
However, that stay was effective in respect of the part of the decree that was not executed.
Undisputed position is that he was reinstated in service as mentioned above.
Only the monetary aspect of the decree was in effect stayed by this Court on 2141995.
These events deserve to be considered while passing the final order.
Further, till the time the respondent came to be dismissed on 441984, he had put in more than 23 years of service, since his appointment on 2961960.
All these factors deserve due consideration in addition to the fact that mere absence from duty would not always necessarily amount to a gravest act of misconduct or would not prove incorrigibility and complete unfitness for police service, in terms of Rule 162 of Chapter XVI of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934.
That rule further provides that even while passing an order of dismissal, regard shall be had to the length of service of the offender and his claim to pension.
In the set of facts, it is obvious that from the date of dismissal on 441984 till reinstatement on 22121994, he was not in service.
In view of the facts mentioned above, I pass the following order :  The appeal is partly allowed and it is hereby ordered that the respondent/plaintiff be deemed to have been terminated from service instead of dismissed from service.
His period from 441984 till 21121994 shall be treated as a period not on duty.
However, the period from 22121994 till superannuation on 2921996, shall be treated as period on duty, and shall be counted for the purposes of pension and other benefits coupled with period on duty already spent by him till 441984.
Further, the period of absence for which he was departmentally proceeded against, shall be treated as extraordinary leave for the purpose of record and preparation of pension papers only.
Insofar as his period during which he was departmentally proceeded against and appears to be suspended, that period shall be treated by the concerned department as per rules applicable to the suspension period in such cases.
The appeal is accordingly disposed of.
No order as to costs of the appeal.
Appeal disposed of.