Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The petitioner in this writ petition dated August 18th, 2004 questioned the decision of the government dated July 27th, 2001 directing him to refund with interest the excess amount drawn by him during the period from August 2nd, 1990 to March 23rd, 1992 for entitling him, as a special case, to get pension in terms of the Revision of Pay and Allowances Rules, 1990, and informing him that his request to recover the refundable amount from the prospective pension arrears was not accepted.
2.
He was working us an assistant teacher in Gardenreach KCM High School, Kolkata.
On reaching sixty, the age of superannuation, he was to retire on June 1st, 1987.
In terms of the existing government circulars and orders he was entitled to apply for extension, his applications were considered and allowed, and he was permitted to enjoy the benefit of extension upto the age of sixty-five that he reached on May 31st, 1992.
In the meantime the 1990 ROPA Rules came into force.
Pension would have been available to him, if he was willing to refund the excess amount drawn by him in the revised scale of pay.
He approached the authority seeking the benefit, and after examining the request the government issued the order dated July 27th, 2001.
3.
During pendency of the writ petition the government took a decision dated August 19th, 2004 that treating the case once again as a special one amount refundable by the petitioner with interest would be recovered from the pension arrears payable to him in terms of the revised rules and accordingly, after adjusting the amount pension arrears were released and made available to him.
That order of the government dated August 19th, 2004 was brought on record by filing a supplementary affidavit dated September 22nd, 2004.
4.
In view of the decision of the government dated August 19th, 2004 counsel for the petitioner submits that today she is seeking only an order directing the respondents to pay interest on the pension arrears released and made available to the petitioner.
The question is whether the petitioner is entitled to get any interest on the pension arrears paid by the government.
In my view, unless the government's decision dated July 27th, 2001 is found illegal, no order can be made directing the respondents to pay interest.
5.
There is no reason to say that the government committed any wrong by taking the decision dated July 27th, 2001 that for getting pension under the revised rules the petitioner must refund with interest the overdrawn amount; that was exactly what was provided in the relevant government order.
For becoming entitled to get the benefit the petitioner was to refund, with interest the excess amount drawn by him under the revised rules.
He however, made an unusual request for recovery of the amount from the pension arrears that would have become payable to him.
6.
In my view, by not obliging him the government did not commit any wrong.
Simply because subsequently, treating his case once again as a special one, it decided to adjust the amount payable by him and to release the benefit, I do not think it can be said that it incurred any obligation to pay interest.
It made an exception for the petitioner, and for that it should not suffer.
It is not the case that benefit which became payable was withheld by it without any valid reason.
In fact the benefit became payable only when it took the decision dated August, 19th, 2004.
7.
Admittedly, the benefit was made available immediately thereafter.
The fact that the refundable amount was adjusted with interest cannot be a ground to say that the government too became liable to pay interest.
Interest and additional interest were to be paid by the petitioner for becoming entitled to get the benefit, interest would have been payable by the government for wrongful withholding of the benefit to which the petitioner had become entitled.
That is not the case.
Hence, I hold that there is no reason to direct the respondents to pay interest.
For these reasons, I dismiss the writ petition.
There shall be no order for costs in it.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this order, if applied for, shall be supplied to the parties within three days from the date of receipt of the file by the section concerned.
Petition dismissed.