Mohinder Pal, J - In this petition filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner has prayed for issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to consider his name for promotion to the rank of Naib Risaldar for which he was entitled with effect from February 2005, when NCOs junior to him i.e. respondent Nos. 7 and 8 were promoted to the rank of Naib Risaldar with all consequential benefits.
2.
Brief facts of the case are that on March 17, 1982, the petitioner was enrolled in the Army.
After his enrolment in the Army, the petitioner was allocated the trade of Gunner/Driver.
He was not only excellent in his profession but also did extremely well in the sports, specially in Basket Ball.
In the month of October, 1998, the petitioner while participating in the Brigade Basket Ball tournament suffered injury to his back bone.
He was operated in January, 1999 and was placed in medical category CEE (TEMP) for six months.
He was again put through the re-categorisation Medical Board in September, 1999 and the medical category continued as BEE (Temp.)
for two years.
After two years, the petitioner was placed in the medical category BEE (Permanent) with effect from 1342000 due to LVS-SV (OPTD).
On 5th April, 2004, the Review Medical Board kept the petitioner in the same category i.e. BEE (Permanent).
It has been claimed that the petitioner worked hard to the entire satisfaction of his superiors.
However, he was left out at the time of promotion and respondent Nos. 8 to 11 who were junior to him were promoted, despite the fact that the petitioner was placed in low medical category while performing official duty in the organised games, which crippled him.
3.
In the written statement filed by the respondents, they contested the claim of the petitioner on the ground that the petitioner was awarded 28 days rigorous imprisonment for an offence under Section 63 of the Army Act.
Further the case of the petitioner was not of battle casualty as there was no relevancy for this category as far as his claim for promotion is concerned.
The case of the petitioner for promotion to the rank of Naib Risaldar was not recommended by Armoured Corps Records and as such he was not promoted.
4.
We have heard Mr. Rajinder Kumar, Advocate, appearing for the petitioner and Mr. Amandeep Singh, Advocate, appearing for the respondents and have also gone through the documents available on record.
5.
Annexures P-3 and P-4 are the legal notices under Section 80 of the Code of Civil Procedure, which were issued through counsel for the petitioner to the respondents.
These were replied vide Annexure P-5 dated 862005, wherein it was stated that the Commanding Officer of the petitioner submitted non- proficiency certificate stating therein that he was not suitable for promotion to the rank of Naib Risaldar due to permanent Low Medical Category P2 (Permanent) and as such he had not been considered for his next promotion, while the persons junior to him were promoted.
The criteria for promotion of JCOs/NCOs has been contained in the Army Regulations Headquarters Letter No. 94930/AG/PS 2(c) dated 16121985 as amended from time to time.
The medical standards for all promotions to the rank of Dfr/Hav and above are mentioned in para 4, which is reproduced as under :-  Regulation 4(b) :-  "Eligible upon Medical Category `BEE' :- Personnel placed in medical category `BEE' will be eligible for promotion to the next higher rank.
This will include both temporary and permanent low medical categories.
This will be irrespective of whether or not the disease, sickness or injury is attributable to or aggravated by service conditions.
However, case of medical category `BEE' (both temporary and permanent) due to psychological causes, misconduct or self-inflicted injuries will not be eligible for promotion."
A careful perusal of Regulation 4(b) above shows that the personnel placed in medical category `BEE' will be eligible for promotion to the next higher rank, which will include both permanent and low medical categories, irrespective of the fact whether the disease or the injury was attributable or aggravated by service conditions or not.
As per Annexure P-5, the only ground for rejection of the case of the petitioner appears to be that he has been placed in permanent low Medical Category, which is contrary to the aforementioned provisions.
Even the petitioner during low medical category has earned high to above average grading and he has been recommended both by the Initiating Officer and Reviewing Officer for further promotion.
However, when it came to actual recommendation for promotion, discrimination has been shown in case of the petitioner while respondent Nos. 8 to 11 being low Medical Category (Permanent) due to the serious disease like Heart trouble etc. have been promoted.
For the aforesaid reasons, this writ petition is allowed and the respondents are directed to consider the name of the petitioner for promotion to the rank of Naib Risaldar from the date when persons juniors to him were promoted and the petitioner will also be held entitled to all the consequential benefits.
Petition allowed.