Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The petitioner is questioning the selection process initiated for appointing the principal in District Institute of Education and Training (DIET) under the School Education Department of the Govt. of West Bengal.
Her case is that the state public service commission had no authority, power or jurisdiction to make recruitment and recommendation for the post.
2.
The writ petition was admitted on August 31st, 2006 when the respondents were directed to file opposition.
They have chosen not to file any opposition.
Since at the date the writ petition was admitted on one was appointed, it was made clear in the order dated August 31st, 2006 that all steps taken by the respondents including appointment, if any, given by them would abide by the result of the writ petition.
3.
It has been alleged in the writ petition that for the post in question recruitment, selection and appointment all these were to be done strictly according to the detailed guidelines issued by the central government that sponsored the scheme for restructuring and reorganization of teacher education, a component whereof was establishment of DIETs.
The scheme is fully funded by the central government; and the employees in connection with the scheme are to work as employees under the scheme, not as employees appointed to the services of the union or the services of the state.
In the guidelines regarding recruitment procedure, eligibility criteria and cadre management, para 4, it was specifically mentioned how the selection committee would be constituted for making appointment to any academic posts in the DIETS.
4.
Paragraph 4 of the guidelines is as follows :-  "There should be a high level selection committee for each category of posts.
The committee should have at least two experts.
It would be advisable to include the Field Advisers, NCERT or a member of the Department of Teacher Education, NCERT in the Committee constituted for the post of Principal, Vice Principal and Senior Lecturers.
State Governments may also wish to associate an academic from NCERT or Regional College of Education in selection of lecturers."
5.
In the recitals of the guidelines it was stated that both short and long terms selection procedures for filling DIET faculty posts would be so revised that only persons of understanding, or at least very good ability were recruited to those posts, and that they did not become mere promotion posts for incumbents of lower level posts in the state education department, nor a dumping ground for the unwanted elements of the department.
6.
There is nothing to show that the guidelines authorized or empowered the state education department to get any person recruited, selected and recommended for appointment to any academic posts in the DIETs through the state public service commission.
The question is whether in such a situation the state education department was competent to ask the state public service commission to recruit, select and recommend for the post in question.
It is not the case of the state, it has, in fact, come up with no case at all except the case argued at the bar by its counsel that only the state administrative tribunal has jurisdiction to deal with the matter, that no acceptance of the recommendations of the commission the principal was to be appointed to the services of the State.
7.
The constitutional duty of the state public service commission, cast by art. 320, is to conduct examinations for appointment to the services of the state.
Nothing has been shown to me from which it can be held that the state public service commission was authorized or empowered to recruit, select and recommend candidates also for posts such as the one for which it published the advertisement.
True it is that in response to the employment notice published by the commission, with others, the petitioner applied as a candidate.
But that, in my view, should not be a ground to perpetuate the illegality.
8.
In my opinion, the respondents acted in clear violation of the guidelines which were to govern the recruitment, selection and appointment to the post for which the selection process was initiated.
They were not at liberty to decide their own course of action.
When the central government, funding the scheme entirely, specifically stated in the detailed guidelines how the selection committee for recruiting and selecting persons for appointment to such academic posts as the present one would be constituted, the respondents were not entitled, authorized or empowered to get the recruitment and selection done by some other selection committee.
9.
Though the guidelines have no statutory force, there is no reason to say that the respondents were not under any obligation to follow them.
Their decisions not to follow them must be held to be arbitrary, and hence violative of Art. 14.
I therefore, hold that the selection process in question is liable to be quashed.
As I have already mentioned, at the time of admission of the writ petition it was made clear that appointment, if any, given by the respondents would abide by the result of the writ petition.
Hence any appointment, if they have given, must of, of course, come to an end.
10.
For these reasons, I allow this writ petition and quash the selection process for which the state public service commission published the advertisement dated September 10th, 2005.
All steps taken by the respondents for appointing the principal in DIET under the School Education Department, West Bengal are hereby quashed.
Needless to say that if any appointment has been given, that shall also stand quashed.
The respondents will be at liberty to initiate appropriate selection process in terms of provisions of the guidelines, and if the petitioner is entitled to participate, she will be at liberty to do that.
There shall be no order for costs in the case.
11.
Urgent certified Xerox copy of this order, if applied for, shall be supplied to the parties within three days from the date of receipt of the file by the section concerned.
Petition allowed.