Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The petitioner is aggrieved by the decision of the District Inspector of Schools (SE), Bankura dated August 21st, 2006 directing him to refund the amount received by him in terms of voluntary retirement scheme, for becoming entitled to get salaries and allowances as headmaster of Chhagulia Sammilani Nehru High School, Bankura.
2.
He was an assistant teacher in a Central government undertaking (Mining and Allied Machinery Corporation, Durgapur).
That corporation was closed and a voluntary retirement scheme was floated.
He took the benefit of the scheme, and as a result, amounts receivable were paid to him.
By an order dated November 6th, 2001 the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises, Department of Public Enterprises of the Government of India modified the scheme that had been floated by office memorandum dated May 5th, 2000.
3.
One of the modifications was, "Once an employee avails himself of voluntary retirement from a PSU, he shall not be allowed to take up employment in another PSU.
If he decides to do so he shall have to return the VRS compensation received by him to the PSU concerned.
Where the compensation was paid out of a Government grant, the PSU concerned shall remit the refunded amount to the Government.
In case the PSU is already closed/merged, the VRS compensation shall be returned directly to the Government."
4.
After taking voluntary retirement as noted before, he participated in a selection process initiated by the West Bengal School Service Commission for appointing headmaster in secondary schools.
He was selected, and according to his merit position was recommended for the above-named school he joined it on April 7th, 2004.
It is an aided non-government recognised institute governed by the provisions of the West Bengal Board of Secondary Education Act, 1963.
The appointment was a school specific appointment.
It was not an employment in a central government undertaking nor was it an employment in a state government undertaking.
5.
Out of misunderstanding of the modified provisions of the scheme notified by the central government (as noted before), he submitted an application dated June 16th, 2004 to the district inspector of schools seeking advice for depositing the voluntary retirement scheme compensation he had received in connection with the previous employment.
That matter culminated in the decision dated August 21st, 2006 impugned in this petition.
6.
Admitted position is that from April 7th, 2004 he has not been getting anything on account of salaries and allowances.
When he detected that according to the terms and conditions of the modified scheme he was actually not to deposit the amount of compensation he had received, he requested the district inspector of schools to release the salaries and allowances without asking him to deposit any amount.
But the authority declined to release salaries and allowances.
As a result, he took out the present writ petition.
7.
Counsel submits that in terms of provisions of the scheme the petitioner was under any obligation to refund the amount of compensation, since he did not take up an employment in any Central government undertaking.
He says that the employment taken up by the petitioner was not covered by the modified terms and conditions of the scheme.
Counsel for the state submits that the district inspector of schools proceeded on the basis of the petitioner's own decision to refund the amount.
8.
She says that though the petitioner did not take up an employment in any public sector undertaking, salaries and allowances that will be paid to him will ultimately be released by the state government.
She finds little to say when it was pointed out to her that the petitioner took up the employment in an aided institute to which the state government can stop aid at any moment.
Facing with the situation, she submits that on the facts of the case there is no need to file any opposition, since the question can be decided on the basis of the admitted facts, and by interpreting the modifications brought into the scheme concerned.
9.
I fully agree with counsel that the condition put by the modified scheme has no manner of application to the present employment taken up by the petitioner.
There is no reason to say that the employment was taken up in a public sector undertaking.
The institute is not a juristic person; it is not created by any statute; and it is not a company as well.
It is just governed by the provisions of the West Bengal Board of Secondary Education Act, 1963 and the rules framed thereunder.
Those provisions simply regulate its activities and affairs.
10.
It gets aid from the state government as a recognized non-government institute.
Over the petitioner the state government has no manner of control or supervision.
The employer-employee relationship exists only between the institute and the petitioner.
Simply because salaries and allowances are paid out of funds made available by the state government, in my view, it cannot be said that terms and conditions brought into existence in the scheme through modifications would cast an obligation on the petitioner to refund the compensation he had received consequent upon voluntary retirement.
11.
I have no hesitation in holding that those terms and conditions have no manner of application to the petitioner's employment, and that on accepting the employment he did not incur any obligation to refund any portion of the compensation to the Central government or to the state government.
On the basis of the provisions of the scheme, the state government was not entitled to get refund of any amount from anyone.
Hence the district inspector of schools was not justified in withholding payment of salaries and allowances to the petitioner.
12.
For these reasons, I set aside the impugned decision dated August 21st, 2006 and order that within three weeks from the date of communication of this order the respondents, and in particular the district inspector of schools and the director of school education, shall approve the petitioner's appointment and pay him all salaries and allowances.
On the facts of the case (particularly because of the petitioner's own application dated June 16th, 2004 seeking advice for refund), I am not inclined to make any order for costs and interest.
Hence it is ordered that salary arrears shall be paid without any interest.
There shall be no order for costs in the case.
13.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this order shall be supplied to the parties, if applied for, within three days from the date of receipt of the file by the Section concerned.
Petition allowed.