Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - By consent of counsel for the parties the writ petition and the applications (CAN 2657 of 2006 taken out by the fifth respondent and CAN 6653 of 2006 taken out by the sixth respondent) are taken up for hearing together.
The application, CAN 2657 of 2006, not appearing today is treated as on the day's list.
The fifth and sixth respondents filed the applications for modification and variation of the interim order made in the writ petition.
2.
Both the petitioner and the sixth respondent were candidates for the post of headmaster.
They had applied in response to advertisement published by the West Bengal School Service Commission inviting applications.
While the petitioner was not called for interview, the sixth respondent was called and selected.
The commission recommended the sixth respondent for Balighai Fakirdas High School (HS), Purba Medinipur, and the school authority offered him appointment that he accepted.
The petitioner questioned the selection and appointment of the sixth respondent.
His case is that the school service commission acted wrongfully by not calling him for interview.
3.
Counsel for the petitioner submits that the petitioner was eligible for the post of headmaster.
The position is disputed by counsel for the commission and the other respondents.
Case of the commission, as was stated in para 4 of its opposition, is that the petitioner having obtained his master's degree from the Utkal University through correspondence course was not eligible for the post.
Counsel for the commission says that in view of Government Notification No. 742-SE (Apptt.)
dated July 31, 2002 degrees conferred by the Utkal University through distant education or correspondence courses are not recognized.
4.
Counsel for the petitioner submits that the petitioner has not obtained the degree through correspondence course.
For this he relies on the certificate issued by the university.
He says that the petitioner had obtained the degree as a non-collegiate candidate.
In support of the statement made in para 4 of its opposition, the commission, through its counsel, has produced before me the relevant page of the application submitted by the petitioner for the post of headmaster.
In that application the petitioner himself wrote that he had obtained the master's degree in 1998 from the Utkal University through correspondence course.
5, In the fact of such evidence, and in the face of the evasive reply given by the petitioner to the specific case of the commission made out in para 4 of its opposition, I do not find any reason to say that the petitioner had not obtained the master's degree through correspondence course.
It was his own declaration that he had obtained the degree through correspondence course.
That degree, in view of government notification dated July 31, 2002 was not recognized.
It is therefore clear that the commission was fully justified in treating him as a candidate not eligible for the post of headmaster, since he did not possess the requisite qualification mentioned in the advertisement.
6.
By filing a supplementary affidavit the petitioner has alleged that persons possessing degrees conferred by the Utkal University were considered eligible for the post of headmaster by the school service commission.
Counsel says that by not treating the petitioner as eligible the commission acted in a discriminatory manner.
It is not the case of the commission that no degree conferred by the Utkal University is recognized.
It is its specific case that degrees conferred on a person prosecuting the course through correspondence is not recognized.
In the supplementary affidavit it has not been alleged that the persons named therein obtained master's degree from the Utkal University through correspondence course.
In any case, even if a person was considered by the commission illegally, that cannot be made on ground by the petitioner for alleging discrimination.
By applying provisions in arts.
14 and 16 the commission cannot be directed to repeat a wrong, even if it had committed one.
7.
For these reasons I hold that there is no merit in the writ petition.
It is accordingly dismissed.
As a result the two applications shall be deemed to be disposed of.
There shall be no order for costs in the case.
8.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this order shall be supplied to the parties, if applied, for within three days from the date of receipt of the file by the section concerned.
Petition dismissed.