JS Khehar, J - Petitioner No. 1 Yashpal Ghai was posted as Lecturer at Government Higher Secondary School, Jandiali in District Ludhiana.
On 27.6.1969 he commenced to draw House Rent Allowance with effect from December, 1975.
His wife Mrs. Jaswant Ghai was posted as Social Studies Mistress at the Govt. Senior Model School, Miller Ganj, Ludhiana whereupon she commenced to draw House Rent Allowance with effect from June, 1983.
It is the case of the respondents that in case both the spouses are posted in offices the distance between which is more than 8 Kms.
they would be entitled to draw House Rent Allowance separately and individually, if they are residing separately and individually.
Although it is conceded, in the Audit Report, a copy of which has been placed on the record as Annexure P-3, that the distance of the posting between the offices where the afore-stated two spouses were posted was in excess of 8 Kms, it is alleged that they were residing together in the same premises and, therefore, they were not entitled to claim House Rent Allowance individually.
2.
Petitioner No. 2 Davinder Singh was posted as a Science Master at the Govt. Higher Secondary School, Jandiali in District Ludhiana.
This is the same school in which petitioner No. 1 was posted.
He commenced to draw House Rent Allowance with effect from May, 1982.
His wife Surinder Bhatia was allegedly posted as a Staff Nurse at Ludhiana.
She also commenced to draw House Rent Allowance in January, 1984.
Although it is conceded in the Audit Report Annexure P-3 that the distance of the posting of petitioner No. 2 and his wife was in excess of 8 Kms from one another, yet, on account of the fact that the two were residing together, it is alleged that they could not claim House Rent Allowance individually and separately.
3.
As a consequence of the aforestated determination at the hands of the respondents, the House Rent Allowance payable to both the petitioners was stopped.
It is the instant action of the authorities which is subject-matter of challenge through the instant writ petition.
4.
The respondents in the written statement have acknowledged that if and when recovery is to be made from the petitioners, an appropriate show-cause notice be issued to them so as to afford an opportunity of hearing to them before effecting any recovery from the petitioner.
In sum and substance, therefore, it is apparent that the impugned action at the hands of the respondent at the present juncture is only of stopping the payment of House Rent Allowance to the petitioners.
5.
In order to assail the action of the respondents in stopping the payment of House Rent Allowance to the petitioners, it is the vehement contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners that petitioner No. 1 commenced to draw House Rent Allowance with effect from December, 1975 and petitioner No. 2 commenced to draw House Rent Allowance with effect from May, 1982.
As against this the payment of House Rent Allowance to the petitioners from the dates mentioned above, their spouses i.e. wife of petitioner No. 1 Jaswant Ghai commenced to draw the House Rent Allowance with effect from June, 1983 and the wife of petitioner No. 2 Surinder Bhatia commenced to draw the House Rent Allowance with effect from January, 1984.
It is, therefore, apparent, that after the posting of the petitioners at Government High Secondary School, Jandiali in District Ludhiana, their wives started drawing House Rent Allowance later than the date from which they (the petitioners) started drawing House Rent Allowance.
6.
The vehement contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners is, that no fault can be found with petitioners in claiming the House Rent Allowance.
If there is any fault in claiming House Rent Allowance that may be by their spouses, who commenced to draw the House Rent Allowance after them.
It is, therefore, contended that the action of the petitioners for claiming House Rent Allowance cannot be considered to be illegitimate in any manner.
This assertion of the learned counsel for the petitioners has been admitted by the respondents in paragraph 6 of the written statement, wherein it is asserted as under:-  "Para No. 6.
Denied.
The petitioners had been drawing House Rent Allowance according to government instructions but the objection is about the wrong and fraudulent drawal of House Rent Allowance by the wives of the petitioners as stated in the foregoing paragraph.
Both the petitioners continued to draw the House Rent Allowance as heretofore without disclosing that their wives had also started drawing House Rent since 6/83 and 1/84 respectively".
7.
In view of the above, there can be no doubt what-so-ever that the action of the petitioners in drawing House Rent Allowance cannot be considered to be in violation of any statutory rules or instructions issued by the State Govt. Having arrived at the aforesaid conclusion, it is natural to set aside the impugned order by which the petitioners were prevented from drawing the House Rent Allowance.
Ordered accordingly.
Despite the aforesaid conclusion drawn herein above, since it is indirectly conceded by the learned counsel for the petitioners that fault, if any, lay at the hands of the spouses of the petitioners in drawing House Rent Allowance, liberty is granted to the respondents to initiate action against the spouses of the petitioners to as to recover House Rent Allowance, if permissible, in accordance with law.
Petition allowed.