RA Sharma J - Fourteen banks including the Punjab National Bank Ltd (hereinafter referred to as PNB) were nationalised by The Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Under takings) Act 1970.
Six more Banks were nationalised by The Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act 1980 (hereinafter referred to as the Act).
The New Bank of India (hereinafter referred to as NBI) was one of six Banks which were nationalised by the Act.
The Central Government in exercise of power conferred on it by Section 9 of the Act framed on 491993 the New Bank of India (Amalgamation and Transfer of Undertakings) Scheme 1993 (hereinafter referred to as the Scheme) for amalgamation of NBI with PNB On the commencement of the Scheme the Undertakings of NBI stood transfered to and vested in PNB Thereafter on 1691993 PNB framed guidelines for deployment of the officers and workmen staff of NBI Pursuant to the said guidelines at number of orders were issued transferring the workmen staff of NBI to various branches of PNB Being aggrieved by the said transfers the All India New Bank of India Employee Federation and New Bank of India Employees Union as well as some of the employees of NBI filed writ petition before this Court which has been allowed by the learned single Judge on November 11 1993 at Allahabad.
PNB and their officers have filed this special appeal against the said judgment before the Lucknow Bench of this Court.
Parties have exchanged affidavits and we have heard the learned counsel for parties.
2.
An application for impleadment has been made on behalf of 27 employees of NBI for their impleadment and they have sought opportunity of arguing the case and to place their legal submissions on the basis of existing facts.
We have allowed their learned counsel Sri Rakesh Dwivedi to make his submissions while hearing this appeal.
3.
Sri Sudhir Chandra learned counsel for the appellants has made three submissions in support of the appeal viz. (i) the impugned orders are not the orders of transfers.
They are the orders for deployment of surplus staff of NBI and the learned Judge was therefore not justified to quash those orders treating them as orders of transfer; (ii) Even if those orders are treated as orders of transfer PNB has the power to transfer its employees from one place to another; and (iii) the writ petition has been allowed by the learned Single Judge without giving reasonable opportunity of being heard to the appellants.
Sri Raj Kumar Jain learned counsel for the respondents who filed the writ petition has apart from disputing the above contentions made the following submissions:  (i) Against the Judgment of the learned Single Judge disposing of the writ petition of the petitioner-respondents at Allahabad no special appeal could have been filed before the Lucknow Bench and such an appeal is incompetent and is liable to be dismissed on this ground alone.
(ii) The appellants are guilty of filing false affidavit and of making misrepresentation before the Lucknow Bench.
(iii) The appeal was filed and interim order was obtained in special appeal without giving any opportunity to the counsel for the respondents to oppose it.
(iv) No opportunity of being heard was given to the respondents before issuing the orders of deployment/transfers.
(v) There is no order of Board of Directors of PNB for deployment of the employees of NBI The contention of Sri Rakesh Dwivedi learned Additional Advocate General who appeared for the interveners is that the orders of deployment of the employees of NBI could not have been passed by PNB because such a power is vested in the Central Government under Clause 5(4) of the scheme.
Chapter 1 of the scheme is introductory Clause 2 of which a definition clause according to which "transferee bank" means PNB and "transferor bank" means NBI Chapter II of the scheme provides for consequences of amalgamation Clause 3 of which has laid down that on the commencement of the scheme the undertakings of NBI shall be transferred to and shall vest in PNB Clause 5 which proves for dissolution of the Board of Directors and the matters pertaining to the officers and other employees of NBI is as under:  "5.
Dissolution of the Board of Directors etc. - (1) On and from the commencement of this scheme: (a) The Chairman or any other wholetime Director including the Managing Director of the transferor bank shall cease to hold office and shall be entitled to receive three months salary and allowances in lieu of the notice of three months specified in sub-clause (2) of Clause 8 of the Nationalised Bank (Management and Miscellaneous Provisions) Scheme 1980; (b) The Board of Directors of the transferor bank shall stand dissolved.
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this scheme every officer or other employee of the transferor bank shall become on the commencement of this scheme an officer or other employee as the case may be of the transferee bank and shall hold his office or service in that bank on the same terms and conditions and with the same rights to pension gratuity and other matters as would have been admissible to him if the undertakings of the transferor bank had not been transferred to and vested in the transferee bank subject however to such facilities being available at the time of the transfer to similarly placed officers and employees of the transferee bank and continue to do so unless and until his employment in the transferee bank is terminated or until his remunerations terms or conditions are duly altered by the transferee bank.
(3) Any officer or other employee of the transferor bank who does not want to hold his office or service in the transferee bank under sub- clause (2) shall be entitled to leave his office or service on the same terms and conditions and with same rights to pension gratuity and other matters as would have been admissible to him if the undertaking of the transferor bank had not been transferred to and vested in the transferee bank.
(4) The Central Government shall as soon as possible after the commencement of this scheme make a scheme in consultation with Reserve Bank of India for determining the placement of the employees of the transferor bank including the determination of their inter se seniority vis-a-vis the employees of the transferee bank while making the scheme the Central Government shall take account of relevant factors such as experience of the employee of the transferor bank.
(5) The trustees or administrators of any Provident Fund Gratuity and such other funds constituted for the employees of the transferor bank shall on or as soon as possible after the commencement of this scheme transfer to the trustees of the Employees Provident Fund Gratuity and any other fund constituted for the transferees bank or otherwise as the transferee bank may direct all monies and investments held in trust for the benefit of the employees of the transferor bank.
Provided that such latter trustees shall not be liable for deficiency in the value of investments or in respect of any act neglect or default done before the commencement of this scheme."
4.
According to Clause 5(i) the Board of Directors stands dissolved on the commencement of the Scheme.
Clause 5(2) has laid down that on the commencement of the Scheme the officers and other employees of NBI become officers and employees of PNB on the same terms and conditions and with the same right to pension gratuity and other matters as would have been admissible to them if the undertakings of NBI had not been transferred to and vested in PNB Sub-clause (3) of clause 5 gives option to the employees of NBI to opt out of the service of PNB Clause 5(4) mandates that the Central Government shall as soon as possible after commencement of the Scheme make a Scheme in consultation with Reserve Bank of India "for determining the placement of the employees of the transferor bank including the determination of their inter se seniority vis-a-vis the employees of the transferee bank".
This clause further requires that while preparing such a Scheme the Central Government has to consult the Reserve Bank of India and is also required to take into account the relevant factors such as experience of the employees of NBI The Central Government has framed a scheme known as the New Bank of India (Determination of Placement of Employee (Officers and Workmen) of the New Bank of India in Punjab National Bank) Scheme 1993 (hereinafter referred to as the Placement Scheme) on 8121993 under Clause 5(4) laying down criteria for deployment of the officers and workmen staff of NBI  5.
Although in view of the provisions contained in Clause 5(2) of the Scheme employees of NBI have become the employees of PNB on the commencement of the Scheme but their conditions of service remain the same as were admissible to them while working in NBI unless and until those conditions are altered by PNB Thus although the employees of NBI on the commencement of the Scheme became the employees of PNB but they did not become part and parcel of the existing service of PNB Their merger in the existing service of PNB will become effective only after the Central Government has framed Placement Scheme under Clause 5(4) of the Scheme providing for their placement/deployment.
6.
According to the New Lexcon Webster's Dictionary "placement" means "a placing or being placed/the manner of placing or placed/the finding of employment for worker".
As per the World Book Dictionary Vol. II this expression means "the state of being placed; location; arrangement; the act or process of finding work or a job for a person."
Its meaning can also be determined with reference to the Placement Scheme dated 8121993.
The principle of contemporana expositio is a well known principle according to which a document or a statute can be interpreted with reference to the exposition it has received from the contemporary authority.
In this connection reference may be made to DB Gupta and Company v. DSE Asson, AIR 1979 SC 1049 wherein it was laid down as under:  "It may be stated that it was not disputed before us that these two documents which came into existence almost simultaneously with the issuance of the notification could be looked at for finding out the true intention of the Government in issuing the notification in question particularly in regard to the manner in which outstanding transactions were to be closed or liquidated.
The principle of contemporaa expositio (interpreting a statute or any other document by reference to the exposition it has received from contemporary authority) can be invoked though the same will not always be decisive of the question of construction.
(Maxwell 12th Edn.
p. 268).
In Cranford on Statutory Construction (1940 Edn.)
in para 219 (at pp. 393-395) it has been stated that administrative construction (i.e. contemporaneous construction placed by administrative or executive officers charged with executing a statute) generally should be clearly wrong before it is overturned; such a construction commonly referred to as practical construction although not controlling is nevertheless entitled to considerable weight it is highly persuasive."
To the same effect is Indian Metals and Ferro Alloys Ltd v. The Collector of Cuttack, AIR 1991 SC 1028 wherein it was held as under:  "The practice of the department in assessing the poles to duty (except in cases where they were exempt as the conditions in the issue of notification from time to time (the first of which was almost contemporaneous with the insertion of item 26-AA) are being relied upon on the doctrine of contemporanea expositio to remove any possible ambiguity in the understanding of the language of the relevant statutory instrument.
See Varghese v. ITO, 1982(1) SCR 629 : AIR 1981 SC 1922, State of Tamil Nadu v. Mahi Traders, 1989(1) SCR 445, CCE v. Andhra Sugar Ltd, 1989(Supp) 1 SCC 144 and Collector of Central Excises v. Parle Exports P Ltd, 1989(1) SCC 345 : AIR 1989 SC 644.
Applying the principle of these decisions that a contemporanea exposio by the administrative authorities is a very useful and relevant guide to the interpretation of the expressions used in a statutory instrument we think the assesse's contention that this product fall within the purview of item 26-AA should be upheld."
7.
Applying the above principle it is clear that the Central Government has used the word "placement" in the sense of deployment of the employees of NBI in the existing service of PNB so as to bring about the complete merger of the employees of the two banks.
Such deployment has to be made on the basis of the principles and the criteria laid down in the Placement Scheme framed by the Central Government in consultation with the Reserve Bank of India under Clause 5(4) of the Scheme.
8.
That apart there is a well known principle laid down by Privy Council in Nasir Ahmad v. Emperor, AIR 1936 PC 253 to the effect that when a mode for doing a thing is laid down all other modes necessarily stand excluded.
In the instant case mode for placement/deployment of the employees of NBI in the service of PNB has been laid down under Clause 5(4) of the Scheme according to which deployment has to be made on the basis of the scheme framed by the Central Government in consultation with the Reserve Bank of India.
When the Scheme itself has laid down the mode it is not open to PNB to by- pass it and pass orders for deployment in the absence of any such Scheme.
9.
Placement/deployment of the employees of NBI is a one-time event and is part of the amalgamation process provided for by the Scheme.
Therefore provision for placement was made in the scheme itself.
Such a course was necessary so as to complete the amalgamation process which includes the integration of the services of the two banks in accordance with the principle and guidelines laid down by the Central Government in the Scheme in consultation with the Reserve Bank of India.
This matter was not left to the sweet-will of PNB but was entrusted to the Central Government and the Reserve Bank of India.
It was necessary so as to prevent giving of step- motherly treatment to the employees of NBI by PNB P.N.O.
thus has no power to pass orders for placement of the employees of NBI except in accordance with the Placement Scheme framed by the Central Government under Clause 5(4) of the Scheme.
After these employees have been placed in Service of PNB in accordance with the Placement Scheme they can be transferred by PNB in accordance with law or the standing order as the case may be.
The impugned orders are not rotational/routine orders of transfer.
They are the orders of placement/deployment.
Such orders could not have been passed by PNB in the absence of the Placement Scheme by the Central Government under clause 5(4) of the Scheme.
It is admitted that there was no such scheme till those orders were passed.
10.
The Central Government issued the Placement Scheme on 8121993 under Clause 5(4) of the Scheme.
Clause 3 of the Placement Scheme which deals with the deployment of officers/workmen staff of NBI is reproduced below:  "3.
Re-deployment of Officers/Staff.
- The transferee bank may redeploy/transfer the officers/Award Staff of transferor bank to any of the offices/branches of the transferee bank keeping in view the suitability of the officer/employee administrative exigencies and man-power requirements of the transferee bank in accordance with the provisions contained in the Punjab National Bank (Officers') Service Regulations 1978 or existing Awards/Bipartite Settlements.
The officers may be transferred to any place in India and the postings/transfers of workmen employees will be made within the same linguistic area."
Under the said clause deployment of workmen staff of NBI to any of the offices/branches of PNB is to be made "keeping in view of the suitability of the officers/employees administrative exigencies and man-power requirements of the transferee bank in accordance with the existing Awards/Bipartite Settlement".
Although the said clause provided for transfer of the officers to any part of India but posting and redeployment of the workmen/employees of NBI were to be made within the same linguistic area.
This scheme also contains the principle for determining their seniority and other matters connected with their service conditions.
However without waiting for the Placement Scheme by the Central Government Clause 5(4) of the Scheme the personnel officer of PNB issued an order on 1691993 for deployment of the officers and workman staff of NBI in various branches of PNB and in pursuance of the said order the impugned orders of deployment/transfers were issued.
The criteria and the principles for deployment laid down by the order dated 1691993 are different and are in fact contrary to the criteria and the principles laid down in Clause 3 of the Placement Scheme of the Central Government which has already been reproduced before.
For the sake of comparison the criteria and the principles laid down by order dated 1691993 are also reproduced below:  "Reg : Guidelines for deployment of workmen staff of erst.
New Bank of India (NBI) as a result of amalgamation of the said bank with our bank.
(1) After the surplus staff has been identified its redeployment may be considered within the same language area in the Zone.
(2) In the event the staff is identified as surplus for the Zone the matter may be taken up with HO Personnel Division for the redeployment of such staff in the same language area of nearby Zones.
(3) For out of station transfers but within the Region/Zone the criteria should be the length of service of an employee i.e. the employees with lesser length of service should be transferred first.
This will however not apply in case of lady employees and physically handicapped employees employed on this ground and employees retiring within next three years subject to merits of each case.
(4) In case of transfers within the same station the total stay of an employee in a branch shall be the criteria of transfer and those employees having longest stay in the branch will be transferred fist.
(5) In case of employees who are drawing special allowances the posting for which is made on town-wise seniority in our bank they may be retained within the same town/city with the concurrence of Zonal Manager.
(6) Transfer request of employees from the surplus Regions to the deficit Regions within the Zone may be acceded to by the Zonal Manager.
(7) Keeping in view the administrative exigency and merits of each case the ZMs may exercise their discretion to effect transfers beyond these guidelines only in exceptional cases which shall be reported to HO.
Personnel Division with full details in each case.
(8) The ZMs shall ensure inter-change of employees in the branches located at the same station so that at least 20-30% of the workmen staff in the branches of erest.
NBI are from PNB Officers in order to hastern the process of assimilation of systems and procedures.
(9) While effecting transfers order these guidelines our instructions regarding Rotational Transfers of the staff may also be kept in view and the staff of PNB as well as erst.
NBI who fall due for transfers under the Rotational Transfer Guidelines may also be transferred simultaneously."
Clause 3 of the said order has provided that for out of station transfer but within the Region/Zone the criteria would be length of service of an employee i.e. the employees with lesser length of service should be transferred first.
Clause 4 on the other and has laid down that for transfer within the same station the total stay of the employee in the branch shall be the criteria of transfer and employees having longest stay in the branch will be transferred first.
However according to Clause 5 the employees who are drawing special allowances the posting for which was made on town-wise seniority can be retained within the same town.
Clause 7 mandates that the departure from the criteria laid down in the said order shall only be made in exceptional cases.
Criteria such as suitability of the employee administrative exigencies as well as the terms and conditions of the Awards/Bipartite Settlements for making deployment are not the principle/criteria in the said order dated 16th September 1993 although these are the principles on which deployment of the officers and staff of NBI has to be made in view of Clause 3 of the Placement Scheme.
The order dated 1691993 as such runs counter to the Placement Scheme framed by the Central Government on December 8 1993.
The impugned orders having been passed on the basis of the criteria laid down in the order dated 1691993 are not in conformity with and are in fact contrary to the principle and criteria laid down by the Central Government in the Placement Scheme.
11.
Placement Scheme has been given retrospective operation with effect from 491993.
The said Scheme is an administrative order.
It is well settled that such an order cannot be given retrospective effect unless authorised by law.
No such provision has been placed before us justifying the retrospective operation of the said Scheme.
That apart even if retrospective operation of the said Scheme is taken as valid it cannot help the appellants because as mentioned before the criteria and the principle for deployment laid down in the order dated 1691993 framed by PNB are different from and are contrary to the criteria and principles laid down by the Central Government in the Placement Scheme.
12.
In this connection learned counsel for the appellants has placed reliance on two judgments of the Delhi High Court viz. Civil Writ No. 4652 of 1993 and Civil Writ No. 4835 of 1993 decided on October 5 1993 and October 28 1993 respectively.
For the reasons given below these cases are of no assistance to the appellants; (i) the first case was decided as if it was a simple case of transfer/deployment of the employees and arguments about necessity of the Placement Scheme by the Central Government under Clause 5(4) of the Scheme was neither raised nor decided in that case and (ii) it is true that in the second case; the argument based on Clause 5(4) of the Scheme was raised and the High Court held that PNB can transfer/deploy the employees of NBI even in the absence of the Placement Scheme of the Central Government.
The Court relied on the principles of Article 309 of the Constitution of India under which the Government by Administrative order can regulate the conditions of service of its employees in the absence of any statutory provisions.
But in the said case neither the effect of the provisions contained in Clause 5(2) of the Scheme according to which although on the commencement of the Scheme employees of NBI become employees of PNB but they do not become part of the existing services of PNB and they continue to be governed by the old conditions of service as would have been admissible to them if the undertakings of NBI had not been transferred to and vested in PNB nor the fact that the integration of the service of the two banks will take place only after the Placement Scheme has been framed by the Central Government in consultation with the Reserve Bank of India were considered by the Court.
As mentioned before the placement of the employees of NBI in the existing service of PNB is a one-time event and is part of the amalgamation process provided for by the Scheme.
In order to complete the amalgamation of the two banks not only the amalgamation of the assets and liabilities but also the amalgamation of the two services have to take place.
It is for this reason that sub-clauses (2) and (4) of Clause 5 of the Scheme have been incorporated therein.
But these aspects do not appear to have been placed before the High Court in the aforesaid two cases.
For the reasons given above the impugned orders cannot be sustained and have to be quashed.
The third contention of the learned counsel for the appellants is also devoid of merit.
In the affidavit filed by the appellants in this appeal it has been stated that on November 1 1993 ......... the writ petition of the respondents came up for admission before the learned Single Judge before whom Sri K.L.
Grover Advocate appeared on behalf of the bank to oppose the writ petition and on the said date the court granted an interim order staying the order dated 1691994 passed by PNB for deployment of the employees of NBI till 1011994 it has further been stated that the appellant-bank thereafter moved an application for vacation of the stay order along with a short affidavit which was put up before the learned Single Judge on 9111993 on the which date the learned Judge reserved the judgment which was delivered on 11111993 allowing the writ petition.
It has been stated in para 8 of the said affidavit that the bank has been denied the opportunity to file a comprehensive counter affidavit in reply to the writ petition.
The above averments have been denied by the respondents herein who were petitioners in the writ petition.
They have stated that the bank has engaged a senior counsel Sri VB Upadhyay who appeared before the learned Single Judge on 9111993 and agreed for final disposal of the writ petition without filing any other counter-affidavit.
This position is not disputed.
Learned counsel who argued the writ petition before the learned Single Judge is not the same counsel who appeared before us in the appeal for the Bank.
Sri Upadhyay has not appeared before us complaining against the denial of opportunity of being heard or denial of opportunity to file comprehensive counter-affidavit.
It is not open to a counsel who was not the counsel in the writ petition to say as to what happened before the learned Judge about which he has no personal knowledge.
Here it may also be mentioned that the bank has filed a detailed affidavit alongwith this appeal in reply to the writ petition and the respondents herein who were petitioners in writ petition have filed rejoinder-affidavit in reply thereto.
The complaint of the bank regarding denial of opportunity of being heard and of filing comprehensive counter-affidavit thus stands removed even though it was not factually correct.
13.
As regards the contention raised by Sri Raj Kumar Jain learned counsel for the respondents herein regarding maintainability of the appeal and the conduct of the appellants in filing Special Appeal before Lucknow Bench it may be observed that Special Appeal against the judgment in a writ petition passed by the learned Judge at Allahabad is not maintainable before Lucknow bench.
It is clear from Clause 14 of the UP High Court Amalgamation Order 1948 as interpreted by the Supreme Court in Nasiruddin v. State Transport Appellate Tribunal, AIR 1976 SC 321; SK Misra v. State, 1986 AWC 957 (FB); and Surendra Singh v. State of UP, 1988 (14) ALR 215 (DB).
This appeal as such should not have been filed before the Lucknow Bench.
Although this appeal was filed before Lucknow Bench which has no jurisdiction to entertain it but vide order dated 3.12.1993 passed by the Division Bench the record of the appeal has been summoned from Lucknow to this Court at Allahabad.
This appeal has accordingly been heard at Allahabad.
Division Bench of this Court in Surendra Singh v. State of UP (supra) following the Full Bench decision of this Court Nirmal Das v. STAT, AIR 1972 All 200 has held that even if a case has been filed before a bench of this court which has no jurisdiction to entertain it cannot be dismissed straight away on that ground but it has to be transferred to the appropriate bench.
As mentioned beforethis case has already been transferred from Lucknow to Allahabad in view of order dated 3.12.1993.
This appeal as such cannot be dismissed merely on the ground that it was filed before the Lucknow Bench which has no jurisdiction to entertain it.
14.
Grievance of the respondents herein to the effect that the appeal was filed before Lucknow Bench on the unwarranted assumption that the Courts at Allahabad are closed due to advocates' strike appears to be justified.
It has been stated in the affidavit filed by the respondents herein along with application dated 3.12.1993 that notice for filing Special Appeal along with an affidavit was given on 18.11.1993 to Sri Raj Kumar Jain Advocate learned counsel for the respondents herein.
But it could not be filed on 18th and 19th November 1993 because of the advocates' strike at Allahabad.
But the said strike was withdrawn on 19111993 itself and the withdrawal of the strike was given wide publicity and it was also published in newspapers including the newspaper publilished from Lucknow on 20111993.
But even then the appeal was presented on 20111993 before the Lucknow Bench when there was no strike at Allahabad.
It is further pointed out that the appeal was filed before the Lucknow Bench without even informing the learned counsel for the respondents and thus the said respondents and their counsel were denied the opportunity to oppose the appeal and the stay order to which they were entitled to under the Rules of the Court.
This grievance of the learned counsel for the respondents is fully justified.
It was the duty of the appellants to inform the learned counsel for the respondents about filing of the appeal before the Lucknow Bench.
But that was not done.
But as the record of the appeal has already been summoned from Lucknow to Allahabad and it has been heard at Allahabad the appeal should not be dismissed on this ground.
15.
As the appeal is being dismissed for the reasons mentioned above it is not necessary to deal with the remaining contentions raised by Sri Raj Kumar Jain learned counsel for the respondents.
16.
Before parting with the case it may be observed that after implementing the Placement Scheme framed by the Central Government on 8121993 it will be open to PNB to pass rotational transfer orders regarding the erstwhile employees of NBI in accordance with law.
17.
With the above observations this appeal is dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.