NK Sodhi, J (Oral) - By a notice published in the `Daily Tribune' on 2391979 Haryana Urban Development Authority (for short HUDA) invited applicants amongst others for eight posts of Accounts Assistants.
The qualifications prescribed for this post were that candidates should be B.Com.
in Ist or 2nd Division with an advance accountancy or auditing as an optional subject.
Two years' experience in a large commercial establishment was essential.
The age limit prescribed in the advertisement was that candidates should be between 17 to 27 years of age as on 191979.
The upper age limit could, however, be relaxed in the case of Scheduled Caste/Ex-servicemen candidates as per the Government instructions.
Fourteen candidates in all including the petitioner and respondents No. 3 and 4 responded to the advertisement and submitted their applications.
They were interviewed by the Selection Committee but none other than one Radhey Shyam Goel was found eligible for the post.
He was given a regular appointment and we are not concerned with him in this writ petition.
Petitioner as well as respondents No. 3 and 4 along with other candidates were fond ineligible.
Keeping in view the urgent requirement for manning the posts, the Chief Administrator, HUDA, who is the appointing authority decided to appoint six other candidates including the petitioner and respondents No. 3 and 4 on ad hoc basis.
It was realised that the posts of Accounts Assistant carried a very meagre pay which did not attract enough candidates with B.Com.
in Ist and high 2nd Division and, therefore, it was decided to drop out this condition and a fresh requisition was sent to the Employment Exchange for filling up the back-log of posts all belonging to the reserved category.
As a result of the interview then held, respondent No. 3 was given a fresh appointment on regular basis as per letter dated 10.3.1980 (Annexure R-1 with the written statement).
The services of the petitioner and respondent No. 4 were subsequently regularised on 11121981.
HUDA then circulated a tentative seniority list of the Ministerial establishment on 31101983 in which the petitionr was placed at serial No. 7 whereas respondents No. 3 and 4 were placed at serial nos. 5 and 6 respectively.
Petitioner is said to have filed objections against this tentative seniority list clamining that he was placed higher in the order of merit by the Selection Committee and, therefore, he ought to have been made senior to respondents No. 3 and 4.
His grievance is that the objections were not considered and the tentative seniority list was finalised.
In the final seniority list the position of the petitioner and respondents No. 3 and 4 remained the same.
It is then that the present petition was filed under Article 226 of the Constitution challenging the seniority list.
Since respondent No. 3 had in the meantime been promoted as an Accountant by order dated 12.5.1986 his promotion was also challenged in the writ petition.
2.
In the written statement filed by HUDA, some of the averments made by the petitioner have been controverted.
It is stated that Shri Radhey Shyam Goel was placed at serial No. 1 in the order of merit whereas respondent No. 4, petitioner and respondent No. 3 were placed at serial nos. 2, 3 and 4 in the order of merit in the select list.
The seniority assigned to respondent No. 4 over and above the petitioner is sought to be justified on the ground that he was placed higher in merit by the Selection Committee.
Similarly the seniority assigned to respondent No. 3 over and above the petitioner has also been justified on the plea that he had been given regular appointment on 10311980 as a result of the fresh interview held on the basis of the requisition sent to the Employment Exchange.
As already observed, the services of the petitioner were regularised on 11121981.
3.
I have heard the learned counsel for the petitioner and perused the pleadings of the parties and find that there is no merit in the writ petition.
4.
The dispute herein is in regard to the seniority of the petitioner vis-a- vis respondents No. 3 and 4.
Admittedly, respondent No. 4 was placed at serial No. 2 in the order of merit in the select list by the Selection Committee whereas petitioner was shown at serial No. 3.
This being so, he was rightly placed above the petitioner in the seniority list.
It is true that respondent No. 3 was at serial No. 4 in the order of merit in the select list but he had been given regular appointment in the meantime on 10.3.1980.
He, therefore, ranked senior to the petitioner when tentative seniority list was issued because services of the petitioner had been regularised on 11121981 when he became a member of the service.
Prior thereto he was working on adhoc basis.
I am clearly of the view that HUDA rightly placed respondents No. 3 and 4 above the petitioner in the two seniority lists.
In this view of the matter, no fault can be found even with the promotion of respondent No. 3 to the post of Accountant which was made on 12.5.1986.
In the result, the writ petition fails and the same stands dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.