Viney Mittal, J - The present petition under Articles 226 of the Constitution of India has been filed by petitioner Om Parkash Sharma for the issuance of a writ of certiorari for quashing the order dated January 24, 1995 which has been appended as Annexure P/3 with the writ petition.
A further prayer has been made for the issuance of a writ of mandamus for directing the respondents to grant the scale of Rs. 1400-2600 to the petitioner from the date when the same has been granted to other Shashtri Teachers and also to the persons who were lower in qualifications than the petitioner.
2.
A further prayer has also been made for issuance of a direction to the respondents to grant annual increments as per rules to the petitioner with consequential benefits.
3.
The petitioner joined as Shastri Teacher in the Government High School, Kalirawan, District Hisar with effect from December 13, 1971.
The petitioner is qualified as Visharad which is stated to be equivalent to FA (Inter) and Shastri Part-I which is equal to BA Part II and OT which is equal to B.Ed.
The petitioner was initially appointed with effect from December 13, 1971 as untrained Shastri in the fixed pay of Rs. 100/- plus allowances thereon and thereafter with effect from December 7, 1972 the scale was revised and petitioner was paid Rs. 150/- fixed plus allowances and since the petitioner has been granted the scale of Rs. 200/- and thus gradually the petitioner was periodically getting the increase in his fixed pay with effect from April 1, 1979 and with effect from January 1, 1986 he was granted the scale of Rs. 1200/- fixed plus allowance thereon.
4.
The grievance of the petitioner is that while he was getting a fixed salary, in the case of C&V teachers and Prabhakar plus OT, the scale was revised with effect from April 1, 1979 and the persons who have been drawing Rs. 125/- to Rs. 250/- prior to April 1, 1979 had been granted the revised pay scale of Rs. 420-700 with effect from April 1, 1979 along with 20% selection grade in the scale of Rs. 525-900/-.
Subsequently, with effect from January 1, 1986, C&V Teachers and Prabhakar with OT were drawing the pay scale of Rs. 1400-2600/-.
The petitioner states that Prabhakar which is one year course after Matric and OT was lesser qualification as held by the petitioner i.e. Visharad plus Shastri which is equal to BA Part II plus OT.
On that basis, the petitioner has stated that those persons who were having lesser qualification were getting higher pay scale than the petitioner.
Another grievance has been made that the petitioner was performing the same duties and the same responsibilities as was being performed by persons similarly situated and other Shashtri Teachers who were working in the pay scale of Rs. 1400- 2600/-.
On that basis, the petitioner has averred that he was also entitled to the pay scale of Rs. 1400-2600/- which has been given to other Shashtri Teachers.
5.
Upon a notice of the petition having been given to the respondents, a written statement has been filed by respondents No. 1 and 2.
In the written statement it has been stated that the petitioner was working on the post of Shashtri Teacher and was drawing a fixed pay being untrained Shashtri Teacher.
It was further stated in the written statement that the petitioner did not possess the requisite qualification.
6.
The main thrust of the objections taken in the written statement filed by the respondents is that the petitioner does not possess the requisite qualification.
The averments made in the written statement that the petitioner was working continuously since 1971 and was performing the same duties and carrying the same responsibilities as were being performed and borne out by the other similarly situated persons is not denied by the respondents.
7.
We find it rather astonishing that whereas right from the year 1971 the petitioner has been kept on the job and has been assigned the duties of teaching the same still even when the petitioner filed the present writ petition in the year 1995, an objection was taken with regard to his qualifications.
The stand taken by the respondents cannot be sustained and would actually amount to exploiting the petitioner who had been silently working for a period of almost a quarter of century.
It is too late in the day for the respondents to have contested the claim made by the petitioner, which was nothing else except the claim made for equal pay for equal work.
8.
In these circumstances, we allow the writ petition filed by the petitioner and quash the order dated January 24, 1995 (Annexure P/3) whereby the claim made by the petitioner has been denied by the respondents.
The respondents are directed to grant the scale of Rs. 1400-2600 to the petitioner from the same date when it had been granted to other Shashtri Teachers who were performing the same duties and responsibilities as the petitioner.
However, it is made clear that the petitioner would be entitled to claim his arrears of salary for a period of 38 months prior to the date of filing of the present writ petition i.e. May 29, 1995.
The respondents are further directed to process the case of the petitioner and make payment of all arrears as aforesaid within a period of four months from the date a certified copy of this order is produced before them.
As a matter of consequential relief, the petitioner shall also be entitled to all benefits with regard to the annual increments and retiral benefits.
Petition allowed.