Arun Kumar Goel, J - Admitted facts of this case are that the petitioner applied for being enrolled as a Research Scholar for PhD degree in English vide Annexure-A to the writ petition.
As per this document amongst other conditions one of the condition was in following terms :-  "You shall be governed by the Statutes & Regulations relating to Discipline of students of the Teaching Departments of the University as prescribed by the University from time to time during the period you remain on rolls of a Department as Research Scholar."
It may also be appropriate to notice here Statute 13 whereunder whole time Research Scholar is prohibited from taking up a job or engage himself in any business, profession or avocation during the minimum period as required under Statute 7(a), which prescribed two years from the date of registration.
For ready reference Statute 7(a) as well as 13 are also extracted herein below :-  "7(a): Every candidate shall pursue, as a whole time research student of the University, a course of research for not less than two years from the date of registration.
13.
In no case a whole-time research scholar shall take up a job or engage himself in any business, profession or avocation during the minimum period as required under Statute 7(a)."
2.
Petitioner has filed this writ petition challenging the validity of statute 8 of the University statutes as there is no rational basis behind it and as also there is no intelligible differentia on the basis of which classification between college and university teacher on one side and those teaching elsewhere on the other.
Here it may be noted that under the aforesaid Statute 8, College and University Teacher can be part time research scholars but not others like petitioner.
Similarly another exception is carried out in case of employees other than University and college Teacher who seek part time registration for PhD they must have at least three years permanent service to their credit.
Admittedly the petitioner does not have this qualifying service.
3.
All these pleas have been controverted on behalf of the respondents who have justified the legality and otherwise of aforesaid statutes and submitted that the statutes referred to in the writ petition and those extracted hereinabove are legal and consequently, validity therefore deserves to be upheld.
It has been further stated by them that the whole exercise is aimed at obtaining excellence in the field of Education, when students like petitioner are imparted higher education at the level of M Phil.
and PhD with a view to achieve this object above noted statutes have been framed which clearly make out intelligible differentia and thus no fault can be found with those.
4.
After the arguments had been heard with a view to further supplement the case of his client Shri Basotra, learned counsel for the petitioner has place on record written submission also.
5.
Learned counsel for the parties have during the course of hearing advanced their submission on the lines what is contained in their respective pleadings.
6.
After due consideration of the arguments both oral and written, as well as pleadings filed by both sides as also on examination of the statutes, and for the reasons set out hereinafter this writ petition must fail.
7.
In this behalf it may be appropriate to observe that so far College and University teachers are concerned, there is larger classification between both of them on one side and teachers teaching in Primary, Middle, High and Higher Secondary Classes on the other.
So far a teacher in the University or College is concerned he has enough time at his disposal looking to the nature of his duty and teaching hours, wherein he can devote more time towards his study as a part time student when registered in MPhil.
or PhD courses.
They only teach a particular subject.
For teaching higher classes at college and University level, extent of preparation is much larger and wider which by itself is a part of continuing study as well as research.
8.
In this behalf it may be clarified that no doubt teachers teaching in schools also prepare for teaching classes allotted to them.
But looking to the teaching and working hours in a school as compared to college and University, a school teacher on an average gets lesser time.
Therefore, there is clear and marked distinction in classification between college and school teachers on one side and school teachers like petitioner on the other.
It is a matter of common knowledge that besides time factor, library facilities in University and colleges are many times better as compared to Schools.
That gives better reading material to research scholars teaching in the former as compared to those teaching in schools.
9.
In addition to this when petitioner joined M Phil course, she was well aware that her admission is to be governed by Statute and Regulations relating to discipline of the students of the teaching departments of the University so long she was on roll of the department as a research scholar.
This is an additional ground whereby she is precluded from challenging the legality/validity of statute 8 (supra).
10.
Another factor that needs to be noted here is that under statute 13, reproduced hereinabove in no case whole time research scholar can take up a job or engage himself in any business, profession or avocation during the minimum period as required under Statute 7(a), which is two years.
A perusal of the writ petition suggests that neither Statute 7(a) nor 13 have been challenged.
So even if it may be assumed for the sake of argument without being conceded that plea put forth by the petitioner by challenging the validity of the Statute 8 is accepted, still on the basis of the statute 7(a) and 13 petitioner could not engage herself in any business, profession and avocation much less take up a job which she had admittedly taken up.
This is a further ground to negative the claim of the petitioner.
11.
Another plea put up in the written arguments on behalf of the petitioner is that she had applied for registration for PhD Degree in English after her appointment as government teacher.
But this position is factually incorrect.
Reason being that annexure-A at page No. 8 is dated 23.02.1999 and her registration with effect from 1st October, 1997, whereas the appointment letter of the petitioner is dated 13031999.
There is nothing on record brought by the petitioner to suggest that when she applied to the University for registration for PhD Degree in English, she ever disclosed that she has been appointed as a teacher.
Had this fact been disclosed-respondent No. 1 would have dealt with the matter in accordance with law governing the same.
Thus, I am satisfied that Statute 8(b) or any other sub-clause of that Statute does not suffer from any infirmity, or illegality so as to call for any interference in these proceedings much less to say that is arbitrary or does not achieve any object as alleged by the petitioner.
No other point is urged.
In view of the aforesaid discussion, there is no merit in this writ petition which is accordingly dismissed.
No costs.
CMP No. 655/99  No orders in view of the disposal of the main case.
Petition dismissed.