Swatanter Kumar, J - I have heard the learned counsel for the parties at some length.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as a Teacher on 19-3-1995.
Her services were terminated vide order dated 6-5-1998 on the ground that she did not pass diploma course from the recognised institution.
Admittedly, there is no other ground for terminating the services of the petitioner.
In this regard, the controversy being such a short one, reference can straightway be made to the contents of Annexure P-6, the letter issued by the Government of India, Ministry of Home Affairs, on 4-7-1962 which reads as under :-  "Similarly no orders are required for the formal recognition of any certificate or diploma awarded by Boards of Secondary and Intermediate Education duly set up and recognised by the Central Govt. or the State Government concerned."
This was duly accepted by the Commissioner and Secretary to Government, Haryana, Education Department vide letter dated 18-3-1975 which reads as under:-  "You are hereby informed on the above subject that the Government of Haryana has under consideration its present policy regarding the recognition of different education qualifications.
Now the Govt. has decided as follows :- 1) The degree and diploma which are recognised by the Government of India will have recognition of Haryana Government; ii) The degree and diploma etc. which are awarded by recognised Universities and High /Higher Secondary Education Board established by State will also have ipso facto recognition; iii) Apart from the above degree/diploma which are referred by any other State Government, it shall be examined and only those diploma/degree will be recognised which are on reciprocal basis; iv) Any other requests from any other institution which are not covered under the above three heads, which are run by basic and Art Institution and which have already get the recognition, the request of such institutions regarding their degree and diploma will be considered on merit.
No policy can be laid down in advance."
3.
On the basis of the above 2 documents, it is contended by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the diploma passed from Gujarat State Education Board, would be deemed to have been recognised and the Haryana Government having accepted it, cannot be permitted to turn back now to the disadvantages of the petitioner particularly when she has already served for more than 3 years.
On the other hand, the learned State counsel while vehemently opposing the case relied upon in clause 3 of Annexure P-7 dated 18-3-1975 contended that the recognition has to be on reciprocal basis.
4.
The contention of the learned State counsel is contrary to the one contained in written statement and to the correct interpretation of Annexure P-7.
In the written statement, it is specifically admitted that the petitioner had done her course from Gujarat State Examination Board and this Board was duly authorised to issue certificate under the State of Gujarat vide Gujarat Education Institution Regulation Act, 1984.
As far as clause 3 of Annexure P-7 is concerned, it says "apart from the above degree/diploma which are referred by any other State Government, it shall be examined and only those diploma/degree will be recognised which are on reciprocal basis."
This expression clearly shows the intention on the part of the authority concerned to exclude clauses (i) and (ii) which are mentioned in the said letter.
The entire document must be construed and clause (iii) of the letter cannot be read in abstract.
Therefore, I am of the view that the contention raised on behalf of the State is without any basis.
5.
For the reasons aforestated, this writ petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to consider the case of the petitioner for re- instatement in accordance with the rules while not rejecting the case that she does not have the recognised diploma from a recognised institution.
Consequently, Annexure P-8 is also quashed.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.