NK Agrawal, J - This is a petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India by the State of Punjab and the Director of the State Transport, Punjab, seeking the quashing of the award of the Labour Court dated 331980, whereby respondent No. 1, Gurbachan Singh, was ordered to be reinstated in service.
2.
The workman, Gurbachan Singh, was an employee of the Punjab Roadways at Moga.
His services were terminated on 1.9.1975 on a charge that he had committed theft of 27 litres of diesel oil.
The termination order had been passed after a regular departmental enquiry.
The Labour Court quashed the order primarily on the ground that the enquiry had been held without there being a Presenting Officer before the Enquiry Officer.
3.
The petitioners' grudge against the quashing of the enquiry is based on the provisions contained in clause (c) of rule 8(5) of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970 (for short, the rules), which reads:-  "(c) Where the punishing authority itself inquires into any article of charge or appoints an inquiring authority for holding an inquiry into such charge, it may, by an order, appoint a Government employee or a legal practitioner, to be known as the "Presenting Officer" to present on its behalf, the case in support of the articles of charge."
4.
The learned counsel for the petitioners has argued that the requirement about the appointment of a Government employee or a legal practitioner as the Presenting Officer in an enquiry is only directory in nature and not mandatory one.
If a person it not so appointed, the enquiry does not stand vitiated.
The word `May' used in clause (c) of rule 8(5) simply indicated that a Presenting Office may be appointed by the punishing authority to present the case on its behalf in support of the articles of charge.
Reliance has been placed on a decision of the Madras High Court in Secretary, Central Board of Excise and Customs, New Delhi, and others v. KS Mahalingam, 1988(3) SLR 665.
In para 30 of the said decision, it has been observed, while discussing rule 14(5)(c) of the CCA Rules, that appointment of a Presenting Officer is not at all obligatory.
There is no further discussion.
5.
The plea of the respondent-workman is that clause (c) of rule 8(5) of the Rules explicitly required the appointment of a Government employee or a legal practitioner as the Presenting Officer so that the case of the accused may be presented in support of the charges.
In the case of the workman, Shri Ram Saran Sharma, General Manager, was appointed as the Enquiry Officer.
The said Enquiry Officer himself acted as Presenting Officer and, therefore, the enquiry was neither proper nor fair and, therefore, bad in law.
The proceedings could not be said to have been held in accordance with the procedure laid down in the Rules.
6.
The word `may' in clause (c) of Rule 8(5) occurs in the context of the requirement of the procedure to be followed in the enquiry.
The punishing authority may himself enquire to the charges or may appoint an enquiry authority for holding the enquiry.
In either situation, he has to appoint a Presenting Officer.
The occurrence of the word `may' here cannot be said to be simply an enabling provision but should be read in the context of the requirement of law.
In Collector v. Habib-Ullah-Din and others, AIR 1967 Jammu and Kashmir 44, a Full Bench of the Jammu and Kashmir High Court had an occasion to examine the word `may'.
The following observations made by his Lordship Mr. Justice S Murtaza Fazl Ali (as his Lordship then was) are relevant:-  "The use of word `may' in a provision will not by itself show that it is directory.
It may be used as a conventional courtesy and yet intend a mandatory force.
To construe it, one has to consider the object, context and background of the Act and purpose of use of the word `may'.
Where the word `may' involves a discretion coupled with an obligation or where it confers a positive benefit to a general class of subjects in a utility Act or where a remedy is advanced and a mischief is suppressed or where giving the word a directory significance will defeat the object of the Act, the word `may' should be interpreted to convey a mandatory force."
The aforesaid observations were made while examining the provisions of the Jammu and Kashmir Land Acquisition Act, 1990.
The Supreme Court also had an occasion to examine the word `may' in State of Uttar Pradesh v. Jogindra Singh, AIR 1963 Supreme Court 1618.
That was a case where a Naib Tehsildar in the service of the Uttar Pradesh Government was suspended and an enquiry into certain complaints was contemplated.
Charges were framed against him and the case was referred for investigation to the Administrative Tribunal appointed under the Rules.
The Tribunal held an enquiry and exonerated the respondent of the charges.
The power of the Governor to refer the case to the Tribunal was under examination under the relevant rule wherein it was provided that the Governor may, in respect of a gazetted Government servant on his own request, refer his case to the Tribunal in respect of matters referred to in sub-rule (1).
The question arose before the Supreme Court whether the word `may' confers a discretion on the Governor or does the word `may' really mean `shall' or `must'.
The following observations are relevant:-  "There is no doubt that the word `may' generally does not mean `must' or `shall'.
But it is well settled that the word `may' is capable of meaning `must' or `shall' in the light of the context.
It is also clear that where a discretion is conferred upon a public authority coupled with an obligation, the word `may' which denotes discretion should be construed to mean a command.
Sometimes, the Legislature uses the word `may' out of deference to the high status of the authority on whom the power and the obligation are intended to be conferred and imposed."
The Supreme Court in AC Aggarwal, Sub Divisional Magistrate, Delhi and another v. Mst.
Ram Kali etc., AIR 1968 Supreme Court 1, was again examining the meaning of the word `may' occurring in section 190(1)(b) of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
It was held that, under the said provisions, the Magistrate was bound to take cognizance of any cognizable offence brought to his notice.
The words "may take cognizance" in the context mean "must take cognizance".
The provisions of section 17(2) of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954, came to be examined by the Supreme Court in State (Delhi Admn.)
v. IK Nangia and another, AIR 1979 Supreme Court 1977.
It was held that where a company had different establishments or branches or units, it may nominate different persons and, in that situation, the persons nominated in relation to an establishment, branch or unit, shall be deemed to be the persons responsible in respect of that establishment, branch or unit.
While examining the Explanation to Section 17(2), it was observed that the provisions in that Explanation laid down the mode in which the requirements of section 17(2) should be complied with.
Normally, the word `may' implies optional, but for the reasons stated, it should, in the context in which it appears, mean `must'.
There is an element of compulsion.
It is a power coupled with duty.
The Madhya Pradesh High Court in Mahesh Kumar v. State of MP, 1986(3) SLR 42, was examining the validity of an enquiry where the Superintendent of Police wanted to punish certain policeman for their activities.
The said Superintendent of Police framed charges against them and the enquiry was given to an Enquiry Officer.
It was observed that a Judge cannot play a dual role, one a Judge as well as accuser.
The Bombay High Court, Panaji Bench, in Ganesh Morto Naik v. The Goa State Co-operative Bank Ltd and another, 1993(4) SCT 685(Bom.
)(DB) : 1992(6) SLR 251, has also held that, where in a departmental enquiry, disciplinary authority acted as Presenting Officer, the enquiry was bad.
7.
The absence of a Presenting Officer in the enquiry against the workman does create grave doubts on the procedure adopted by the Enquiry officer while holding the enquiry.
If no Presenting Officer is appointed, the Enquiry Officer has himself to decide as to what evidence should be adduced against the delinquent.
In the light of the view taken by the Supreme Court as well as other High Courts and also in the light of the explicit provisions contained in clause (c) of rule 8(5) of the Rules, the quashing of the enquiry is found to be justified.
8.
The learned counsel for the respondent - workman has pointed out that the Labour Court, while directing the reinstatement of the workman with continuity of service, did not permit the payment of back wages.
It is stated that no reasons have been given for withholding the back wages though the workman had remained unemployed during the period of termination.
9.
The petitioners have objected to the said plea with the argument that, in the present petition, the respondent cannot seek any relief.
It is stated that the Labour Court looked into the material on the record and thereafter found it appropriate not to allow back wages to the workman.
In the absence of sufficient evidence regarding unemployment during the period of termination, the Labour Court simply directed the reinstatement with continuity of service.
10.
Since the respondent-workman has not taken recourse to a proper remedy, no relief can be allowed to the respondent-workman in the present petition which has been filed by the employer.
It is, therefore, not necessary to go into the merits of the workman's claim that back wages should have been allowed.
It is for the workman to seek relief through a proper mode.
The writ petition has no force and is dismissed.
No costs.