RS Mongia, J - The petitioner was a Secretary, Market Committee, Gobindgarh on February 3, 1959, where he joined as such on February 17, 1959.
Orders of regular appointment were issued on March 13, 1959 and vide resolution dated March 20, 1961 (Annexure P.3) he was confirmed as such with effect from February 17, 1959.
As an enquiry was contemplated against the petitioner, he was placed under suspension vide order dated Feburary 17, 1971 passed by the Chairman of the Punjab State Agricultural Marketing Board (hereinafter referred to as 'the Board').
Thereafter, the Chairman of the Board issued charge sheet to the petitioner on July 7, 1971, vide Annexure P6, to which the petitioner filed reply on July 27, 1971 (Annexure P.7).
Since the reply was not found satisfactory, regular enquiry was ordered and after holding regular enquiry, enquiry report followed, which has been appended as Annexure P.8.
It may be observed that the Chairman of the Board was himself the Enquiry Officer.
All the charges contained in the charge sheet, excepting those contained at Sr. No. 1(e), 3(a) (viii), and 3(d)(e) stood proved against the petitioner.
A show cause notice was issued on January 4, 1972 to which the petitioner filed reply on January 19, 1972.
After considering the reply, the petitioner was dismissed from service by the Chairman on 1531972 (order of Annexure P-1).
The petitioner filed an appeal before the Government against the order of dismissal, which was rejected vide order dated March 25, 1976.
2.
The petitioner approached this court by way of filing a writ petition No. 3542 of 1976 against the orders of dismissal and the rejection of his appeal by the Govt. the Writ Petition was decided on May 2, 1983.
No return had been filed on behalf of the Board.
It had been averred in that petition that no reasonable opportunity had been granted to the petitioner to defend himself during the course of enquiry.
Since no return had been held, these assertions were accepted.
In view of this position, the other points raised by the petitioner were not gone into and the impugned orders were quashed.
The Letters Patent Appeal against the above said judgment was dismissed.
However, the Board took the matter before the Apex Court.
The Apex Court vide order dated February 10, 1984 (Annexure R.2 with the written statement) observed that no doubt the written statement had not been filed by the Board in the High Court, but the whole enquiry report was annexed by the petitioner with the writ petition and the averments made in the report of enquiry clearly showed that four witnesses were examined on behalf of the department and the petitioner was present during the enquiry and he had cross-examined those witnesses.
In view of these circumstances, it was observed that the court (i.e. Apex court) was unable to appreciate the findings of the High Court that the respondent (now petitioner) was not afforded sufficient opportunity to participate in the enquiry and to rebut the charges.
Consequently, the judgment of the learned Single Judge and that of the Letters Patent Bench were set aside and the matter was remanded back to the High Court for fresh disposal.
On remand, the matter came up for hearing before the same Hon'ble Judge, who had earlier disposed of the writ petition filed by the petitioner.
The learned Single Judge vide order dated September 6, 1985, held that in the appeal filed before the State Government, various points had been raised, but the appeal has been rejected without passing a speaking order.
Consequently, the appellate order of the Government, dated March 25, 1976, was set aside and the case remanded back to the Appellate Authority for redecision on merits by passing a speaking order.
In pursuance to that order, on remand, the Deputy Secretary (Development), Government of Punjab, rejected the appeal on January 29, 1986 (Annexure P17).
This led the petitioner to file the present writ petition.
Return has been filed on behalf of the respondents.
The order of dismissal of the petitioner, dated March 15, 1972 (Annexure P.11) and the appellate order dismissing the appeal, dated January 29, 1986 (Annexure P17) have been impugned in this writ petition.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner raised the following points :-  (i) That the order of suspension had not been passed by the competent authority.
It was the Board which was competent to pass the order of suspension, dated February 17, 1971.
The Chairman of the Board had no authority to pass the order; (ii) Order of dismissal has also not been passed by the competent authority.
It is the Board who could pass the order and not the Chairman of the Board; (iii) The Board, which is the competent authority to pass the order of dismissal, could not have delegated the power of appointment and dismissal to the Chairman of the Board.
In any case, it is a case of excessive delegation; (iv) The order of dismissal, dated March 15, 1972 (Annexure P.11) is not a speaking order; (v) The principles of natural justice were violated inasmuch as list of witnesses/documents was not supplied to the petitioner and the petitioner was not afforded opportunity to defend himself; Before dealing with the points raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner, it will be relevant to notice a few further facts and the provisions of law.
4.
The petitioner, who was Secretary of the Market Committee, Mandi Gobindgarh, had been appointed by the Market Committee and his conditions of service were initially governed by the provisions contained in Patiala Agricultural Produce (Markets) Act, 2004 B.K.
This Act was repealed by the Punjab Agricultural Produce (Markets) Act, 1961 (hereinafter referred to as the '1961 Act').
The Market Committee itself was the punishing authority.
Section 20(5) of the 1961 Act provides as under :-  "20)(5) The Secretaries in the service of Market Committees constituted under the Punjab Agricultural Produce Markets Act, 1939 and the Patiala Agricultural Produce Markets Act, 2004 B.K., shall be deemed to be the servants of the Board and their emoluments and other conditions of service shall be such as may be determined by the Board."
Section 20(1) of 1961 Act provides for the appointment and salaries of officers and servants of the Market Committees which is in the following terms :-  "20.
Appointment and salaries of officers and servants of Committees.- (1) Every Committee shall have a person as its Secretary, appointed by the Board as its servant, and lent to the Committee subject to such terms and conditions as the Board may prescribe."
Section 3 of the Act deals with the constitution, powers and duties of the Board.
Sub sections (1), (12) and 17 (i) & (ii) of Section 3 of 1961 Act which are relevant for the purpose of this case may be noticed as under :-  "3.
State Agricultural Marketing Board, Constitution, Powers and Duties.- (1) The State Government may, for exercising powers conferred on and performing the functions and duties assigned to the Board by or under this Act, establish and constitute a State Agricultural Marketing Board, consisting of a Chairman to be nominated by the State Government and sixteen other members of whom eight shall be officials and eight non-officials, to be nominated by the State Government in the following manner :- (a) official members shall include a Joint Secretary to the State Government in the Department of Finance, the Director of Horticulture, Punjab, the Secretary of the Board and five other officials, one representing the Agriculture Department, the second representing the Co-operation Department, the third representing the Animal Husbandry Department, the fourth representing the Colonization Department and the fifth representing the Food & Supplies Department;  (b) of the non-official members :- (i) one shall be a producer member of a Committee; (ii) one shall be from among such persons licensed under section 10 as are members of a Committee; (iii) one shall be from among such persons licensed under section 13 as are member of a Committe : (iv) one shall be a member of a registered organisation of farmers; (v) three shall be progressive producers of the State of Punjab, one from each division; and (iv) one representing the Co-operative Societies; Provided that when the non-official members referred to in sub- clause (i), (ii) and (iii) of clause (b) cannot be nominated owing to all the Market Committees being under supersession, the Board shall consist of all the members, including the Chairman, referred to in this Sub-section excepting the members referred to in the aforesaid sub-clauses and the same shall be deemed to be a validly constituted Board till such members are nominated by the State Government after the Market Committees are constituted."
"3(12) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules and bye-laws made thereunder, the Board may employ such persons for the performance of the functions of the Board under this Act, and may give them such remuneration, as it may think, fit, and may suspend, remove, dismiss or otherwise punish any person so employed."
"3(17) (i) The State Government may delegate to the Board or its Chairman or Secretary any of the powers conferred on it by or under this Act; and  (ii) The Board may, with the prior approval of the State Government, delegate any of its powers to its Chairman, Secretary, or any of its officers."
Section 47 regarding repeal and savings may also be noticed at this stage, which is as under :-  "47.
Repeal and Savings.
- The Punjab Agricultural Produce Markets Act, 1939, and the Patiala Agricultural Produce Markets Act, 2004 B.K.
are hereby repealed : Provided that such repeal shall not affect -  (a) The previous operation of any Act repealed or anything duly done or suffered thereunder; or (b) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired or incurred under any Act so repealed; or (c) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of any offence committed against any Act so repealed; or (d) any investigation, legal proceedings or remedy in respect of any such right, privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment as aforesaid; and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced, and any such, penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be imposed, as if this Act had not been passed; Provided further that anything done or and any action taken under the Acts so repealed shall be deemed to have been done or taken under this Act, and shall continue to be in force accordingly, unless and until superseded by anything done or any section under this Act; Provided further that the State Marketing Board constituted under the Patiala Agricultural Produce Markets Act, 2004 B.K., and functioning immediately before the Commencement of this Act shall, till a Board is established and constituted under action 3, be deemed to be the State Agricultural Marketing Board for the purposes of this Act and all employees in the service of the State Marketing Board immediately before such commencement shall be deemed to be the employees of the State Agricultural Marketing Board and their emoluments and other conditions of service shall not be varied to their disadvantage; Provided further that the Market Committees function immediately before the commencement of this Act shall be deemed to be constituted for the first time under sub-section (4) of section 12 and their members including the Chairman and Vice Chairman shall hold office until new Committees set up under this Act are notified."
5.
Exercising powers under Section 3(17)(ii), the Board passed a resolution No. 5, dated 1651970.
Vide this resolution, (copy at Annexure P5) all the powers of the Board under Section 3(12) and other Sections were delegated to the Chairman of the Board, which he was to exercise in consultation with and after the sanction of five members of the Board mentioned therein.
However, vide another resolution No. 6, dated March 15, 1971 (copy of Annexure R1), it was resolved by the Board that the powers under section 3(12) of the Act be delegated to the Chairman of the Board without any reservations.
It may, however, be noticed here that the Board had also passed a Resolution No. 3 dated January 19, 1963 (copy at Annexure P-4) that all the employees of the Board and the Market Committees may be governed under the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970 with effect from May 25, 1961.
Rule 6 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970 reads as under :-  "6.
Punishing authorities - Subject to the provisions of clause (1) of Article 311 of the Constitution of India, the punishing authority shall be such as may be specified in the rules regulating the appointment and conditions of service of the employees concerned."
6.
Point (i) :  In support of the first point, learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the suspension order was passed on February 17, 1971 by the Chairman of the Board prior to the resolution dated March 15, 1971, by which the powers under Section 3(12) of the Act regarding removal, dismissal, suspension etc. were delegated to the Chairman.
Prior to the date of suspension, the powers of the Board under Section 3(12) of the Act had been delegated to the Chairman on May 16, 1970 but he had to exercise those powers in consultation and sanction of five members mentioned in the resolution.
This consultation had not taken place at all, which fact is admitted by the respondent Board.
Consequently, learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the Chairman had no power independently to suspend the petitioner.
This is apart from the argument that in fact no power under section 3(12) of the Act could be delegated to the Chairman.
I do not find any merit in the aforesaid submission.
7.
Apart from the fact that the order of suspension merged with the order of dismissal which order in turn stood merged with the appellate order passed by the Government, I am of the view that the order of suspension, dated February 17, 1971 was not challenged immediately when the same was passed.
It is not clear from the record of this case whether the same was challenged in the earlier writ petition which was filed in the year 1976.
In any case it seems that it was not perused.
Even if the writ petition was being allowed on a technical ground, it could not be ipso facto taken that the suspension order was either without jurisdiction or the same had been passed without any justifiable cause.
The petitioner has already attained the age of superannuation in the year 1993.
It would be too late in the day now to rake up the matter regarding suspension, which order was passed on February 17, 1971.
The suspension order was not ordered by way of punishment.
Even on merits, I am not inclined to interfere with the order on hyper-technical ground that five members of the Board had not been consulted, as ultimately the order of suspension came to merge in the order of dismissal.
Consequently, I find no merit in the first point raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
8.
Points No. (ii) & (iii) :  Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that in view of the provisions of Section 20(5) of the 1961 Act (supra), the petitioner, who was a Secretary in the service of a Market Committee, under the Patiala Agricultural Produce Markets Act, 2004 B.K.
became a member of the Board constituted under the 1961 Act.
As per provision of Section 20(1) of the Act, quoted above, the Secretary of the Market Committee had to be appointed by the Board and, therefore, by reading Sections 20(5) and 20(1) of the 1961 Act conjunctively the petitioner had become the servant of the Board and his appointing authority would be deemed to be the Board.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner also referred to the first proviso to section 47 of the 1961 Act, quoted above, to submit that all actions and orders passed under the repealed Acts would be deemed to have been passed under the 1961 Act and, therefore, even though the petitioner had been initially appointed by the Market Committee, he would be deemed to have been appointed under the 1961 Act.
He further submitted that under Section 3(12) of the Act (supra), it is the Board which has the power to dismiss its employee and, therefore, the order of dismissal passed by the Chairman was invalid.
9.
According to the learned counsel under Section 3(12) of the Act read with the Rule 6 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970 the Punishing authority cannot be subordinate in rank to the appointing authority.
10.
It was contended that the power under Section 3(12) of the Act regarding appointment, dismissal, removal etc. could not have been delegated by the Board to an authority subordinate to it.
It was contended that under Rule 6 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970, which are applicable to the Board's employees, dismissing authority cannot be subordinate in rank to the appointing authority.
It was contended that the delegation of the powers by the Board to the Chairman vide Resolution No. 6, dated March 15, 1971 (Annexure R1), at the most the power of dismissal could be exercised by the Chairman qua those employees, who had been appointed by him after the delegation and could not have exercised that order qua the employees, like the petitioner, who had been employed by the Board prior to March 15, 1971.
According to him, if this is allowed, the very safeguard that the person would not be dismissed by an authority subordinate in rank to his appointing authority would become nugatory.
He relied upon the following authorities :-  (Rangachari v. Sect.
of State), AIR 1937 PC 27  (Mahadev Prasad v. SN Chatterjee), AIR 1954 Patna 285  (Ramchandra Gopalrao v. DIG, Police,), AIR 1957 MP 126  (Management of DTU v. BBL Hajelay and another), 1972 S.L.R.
299  (Management of DTU v. BBL Hajelay and another), 1972 S.L.R.
787 (SC)  11.
Mr. Gupta, learned counsel for the petitioner, further argued that in any case it was a case of excessive delegation.
The Board under Section 3(17)(ii) could not have delegated its essential functions to the Chairman.
The Board as a collective body, exercises the power to appoint or dismiss, which is an essential power of the Board under Section 3(12) of the Act.
This power could not have been delegated to a single individual.
The delegation being excessive, the delegatee i.e. the Chairman could not have passed the impugned order by virtue of the delegated powers.
12.
On the other hand, Mr. Mann, learned counsel for the Board, submitted that under the Act, there is no prohibition that powers of the Board under Section 3(12) of the Act cannot be delegated to the Chairman and further there is no provision in the Act that delegation by the Board cannot be to any authority which may be held to be subordinate to the Board.
Section 3(17)(ii) rather specifically provide that any power of the Board under the Act can be delegated to the Chairman.
Rule 6 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules (supra), which was adopted by resolution of the Board, cannot override the provisions in the Act to lay down that power of dismissal etc. under Section 3(12) cannot be delegated by the Board to the Chairman.
The Board under Section 3(17)(ii) of the Act with the approval of the State Government could delegate all its powers under the Act to the Chairman and it cannot be said that powers under Section 3(12) cannot be delegated to the Chairman.
There is no question of excessive delegation and the provision of Section 3(17)(ii) of the Act could not be read down to mean that the Chairman of the Board cannot be delegated the powers of the Board under Sections 3(12) as the provision is all pervasive.
In any case it cannot be said that powers under Section 3(12) of the Act i.e. the power of appointment of the employees are the essential powers of the Board as the Board is not constituted under the Act to make appointments, but it has been constituted under the Act to regulate the marketing and management of the agricultural produce.
It was further contended by Mr. Mann that even if it is held that the powers under section 3(12) could not be delegated to any subordinate of the Board, the powers cold be delegated to the Chairman of the Board as he cannot be said to be subordinate in rank to the Board.
He is a member and very a important functionary of the Board and heads it as its Chairman.
It was still further submitted by Mr. Mann that under Section 20(5) of the Act, the petitioner had become the servant of the Board and his emoluments and conditions of service had to be determined by the Board.
The Board did not ipso fact become the appointing authority of such servants.
Their appointing authority remained the same by which those servants might have been appointed.
Under Section 20(1) of the Act.
a person who is the servant of the Board is lent to the Committee.
According to the learned counsel, it is only for those servants of the Board who are appointed Secretaries of the Committees after the enforcement of the Act whose appointing authority shall be the Board and not of the servants of the Board envisaged by Section 20(5) of the Act, who deemigly became the servants of the Board.
13.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties on these points, I do not find any merit in the submissions of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
For the purpose of these points, it will be assumed that the appointing authority of the petitioner was the Board as per provisions of Section 20(5) read with Section 20 and second proviso to Section 47 of the Act.
The primary reliance of the petitioner's counsel to submit that there cannot be delegation of power of dismissal etc. to a person subordinate in rank than the authority who had appointed him is on the Delhi High Court judgment in The Management of Delhi Tansport Undertaking v. Sh. BBL Hajelay and another, 1972 S.L.R.
229, which was upheld by the Apex Court in case reported as The Management of Delhi Transport Undertaking v. Sh. BBL Hajelay and another, 1972 S.L.R.
787.
In that case, it was specifically provided in Section 95 of the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1956, that "provided that no such officer or other employee as aforesaid shall be reduced in rank, compulsorily retired, removed or dismissed by any authority subordinate to that by which he was appointed."
It was in view of this specific provision in the Act itself that the Delhi High Court held that by exercise of the powers of delegation, which was also provided by the Act, the power to remove, dismiss etc. could not be delegated to an authority subordinate to that by which he was appointed.
According to the High Court, if such delegation was to be permitted, it will negate the safeguard provided in the Act itself.
As observed, this view was upheld by apex Court (1972 S.L.R.
787).
In the present case, there is no provision in the Act itself that the power under Section 3(12) of the Act cannot be delegated to any authority subordinate to the Board, wherever it is the appointing authority.
In other words in the Act, there is no provision parallel to Section 95 of the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act.
It was by a Board's resolution dated January 19, 1963 copy Annexure P-4 that the Board had made Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970 applicable to the Board's employees.
Rules 6 in these Rules, which has already been quoted in the earlier part of the judgment, only provides that the punishing authority shall be specified in the Rules regulating the appointment conditions of service of the employees concerned and specifying of the punishing authority in the Rules shall be subject to the provisions of clause (1) of Article 311 of the Constitution of India.
No rules have been brought to my notice mentioning any punishing authority inasmuch as the Act itself i.e.
Section 3(12) of the Act mentions that the Board is the appointing authority and necessarily the punishing authority.
Rule 6 of the Punishment and Appeal Rules cannot override the Act and, therefore, no fault can be found in the delegation of the powers under Section 3(12) of the Act by the Board to the Chairman.
14.
Even assuming for the sake of argument that the delegation of powers of Board under section 3(12) of the Act could not be made to an authority subordinate in rank, the question that arises is whether the Chairman of the Board is subordinate in rank to the Board to whom the powers under Section 3(12) of the Act were delegated by the Board vide resolution dated March 15, 1971, copy Annexure R-1.
The Chairman is one of the important function of the Board and heads the Board as its Chairman.
He cannot be said to be subordinate in rank to the Board.
In common parlance, when we talk of 'rank', we normally attribute the same in hierarchy of a particular service like D.I.G.
is subordinate in rank to the Inspector General of Police.
Similarly, the Assistant Inspector General of Police is subordinate in rank to the D.I.G.
and so no.
The Chairman may not be the Board itself but he cannot be said to be subordinate to the Board so as to be under the control and directions of the Board.
There is nothing in the Act to suggest that the Board can give any order or directions to the Chairman.
The Chairman is not appointed by the Board.
Rather he is nominated by the Govt. as is clear from the provisions of Section 3(1) of the Act (supra).
In case of autonomous Bodies like the respondents -Board, it cannot be said that the Chairman is subordinate in rank to the Board.
The only prohibition is that the delegation of powers like dismissal, removal etc. cannot be made to a person subordinate in rank.
He may not be the same authority as the appointing authority but if he is not subordinate in rank, the delegation would be good.
A Division Bench of this Court in Madan Lal v. The Registratr, Co-operative Societies, Punjab, Chandigarh, and others, 1995(1) SCT 445(P&H), upheld the order of dismissal of the person passed by the Managing Director of the Punjab Markfed where the power of appointment and dismissal vested in the Administrative Committee.
The dismissal was upheld on the ground that the Administrative Committee had validly delegated its powers to the Managing Director.
In paras 11 and 13 of the judgment, it has been observed as under :  "A perusal of the resolution shows that full powers regarding posting, transfer, training, completion of probation period, grant of annual increments etc. in respect of the staff of all categories of the Common Cadre Service had been delegated to the Managing Director.
Furthermore, the Administrative Committee only reserved the power to take penal action "against any official of the rank of Assistant Secretary and above."
As we read this resolution, it is implicit in it that the power to take penal action against any official below the rank of Assistant Secretary was delegated to the Managing Director.
If this were not so, it was not necessary to mention that the cases regarding penal action against officials of the rank of Assistant Secretaries and above shall be referred to the Administrative Committee.
Accordingly, we are unable to accept the contention that the power had not been delegated to the Managing Director vide resolution dated April 4, 1970.
13.
The provisions in Rule 1.6(d) specifically authorises the Committee to delegate its powers.
This power had been exercised.
The Administrative Committee had delegated its power to the Managing Director.
The resolution has not been rescinded till today.
Nothing has been produced on the record to show that the matter was ever reconsidered.
On the contrary, it has been conceded that the Managing Director has continued to exercise the powers delegated to him vide resolution dated April 4, 1970.
In view of this factual position, we are unable to hold that the order of delegation ceased to be operative on the expiry of the term of the Administrative Committee ... .... ... ... " In another case reported as Daksh Kumar Sharma v. State of Haryana and others, 1991(2) SCT 79(P&H), a learned Single Judge observed as under :  "... ... ... ...
Moreover, the Articles of Association of the Corporation provide in clause 119 and 120 that "the business of the company shall be managed by the Directors, and the Directors shall have the power "to appoint and at their discretion remove or suspend such Secretaries, Officers, Clerks, Agents and servants as they may, from time to time, think fit."
In the face of these specific provisions, it was incumbent on the respondent-Corporation to discharge the burden by placing on record specific order either passed by the Board of Directors dismissing the petitioner from service of the Corporation or some order empowering the Managing Director to exercise the power of dismissal in the case of officers carrying the status and pay scale enjoyed by the petitioner.
In the absence of that, the only irresistible conclusion is that the Board of Directors of the Corporation in pursuance of whose decision the petitioner was appointed as Accounts Officer of the Corporation, alone were competent to initiate the proceedings for taking disciplinary action against the petitioner and impose the major punishment of dismissal from service on him.
Resultantly, the Managing Director of the Corporation, respondent No. 3, was not competent to serve the charge-sheet or show cause notice on the petitioner and to pass the final impugned order."
From the judgment of the Division Bench in Madan Lal's case, it is apparent that the Administrative Committee could delegate the powers to the Managing Director and the delegatee i.e.
Managing Director had rightly passed the order of dismissal.
In Daksh Kumar's case (supra), the learned Single Judge observed that since there was no delegation in favour of the Managing Director, it was only the Board of Directors who could pass the impugned order of punishment meaning thereby that had there been delegation to the Managing Director, no fault could have been found with the impugned order of punishment.
Consequently, I am of the view that the delegation of powers by the Board to the Chairman as contained in Section 3(12) of the Act was not to a person subordinate in rank and, therefore, the delegation is proper and valid.
15.
I also do not agree with the learned counsel for the petitioner that it is the case of excessive delegation.
Section 3(17)(ii) empowers the Board to delegate any of its powers under that Act to the Chairman, Secretary or any of its officers but has to have prior approval of the State Government.
This power is without any reservation that a particular power cannot be delegated.
Moreover, the Board has not been constituted to make appointments etc. as that is not the object of constituting the Board.
The Board has been constituted to regulate the marketing of the agricultural produce.
Consequently, it cannot be said that there is any excessive delegation to the Chairman.
For the foregoing reasons it is held that the impugned order could be passed by the Chairman of the Board by virtue of delegation of powers.
16.
Points (iv) and (v) :  So far as points (iv) and (v) are concerned, I do not find that there is any merit in the submissions of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
Not only that the initial order of dismissal merged in the appellate order but in the earlier order passed by this Court in C.W.P.
No. 3542 of 1976 on September 6, 1985, the learned Judge had found that the appellate order was not a speaking order and therefore, had accepted the writ petition and remanded the case to the appellate authority to pass a fresh order in accordance with law.
Therefore, it cannot be said now that the initial order of dismissal passed by the Chairman was not a speaking order.
Had that been so, then in the earlier order of this Court disposing of writ petition, the case would not have been remanded to the appellate authority but the matter would have gone back to the initial authority to pass fresh orders, in accordance with law.
17.
Further I do not find that there is any infirmity in the impugned order on the ground that the petitioner was not afforded proper opportunity.
Apart from the observations of the Apex Court in the SLP filed by the respondent-Corporation against allowing of the writ petition on the ground that the petitioner had not been given proper opportunity, I find from the record of the case that the petitioner was afforded proper opportunity at all stages and he had even cross-examined the witnesses.
Consequently I find no merit in these points raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
18.
Before parting with the judgment it may be observed here that even in equity, the petitioner has no case.
Very serious charges were levelled against the petitioner.
Charge-sheet was served on July 7, 1971. which runs into 13 typed pages.
There are 11 main heads under which the petitioner had been charge-sheeted, which also consisted of allegations regarding irregularities in money matters.
These main heads have further numerous sub-heads.
All the charges excepting 1(e), 3(a), (viii), and d(a), (e) were proved against the petitioner.
The petitioner was dismissed in 1973.
The petitioner under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, does not deserve any sympathy and cannot be allowed to claim the relief on technical pleas as raised above, Moreover, it has been found that there is no merit even in the technical pleas.
For the foregoing reasons, I find no merit in this writ petition, which is hereby dismissed.
However, there will be no order as to costs.