VK Bali, J (Oral) - Balak Ram, Security Supervisor, employed with the Mansa Co-operative Spinning Mills Ltd, respondent No. 4 herein, seeks writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondent-Mill to pay him salary and allowances from July, 1995 till date.
2.
Brief facts, on which the relief referred to above, is sought to rest, reveal that respondent-Mill made irregular payments of the salary from the beginning of year 1995 but no salary was paid to any of the employees of the Mill since July, 1995 except to the Chief Executive of the Mill, who resigned in the month of December, 1995 after receiving all the dues.
All the workers, it is case of the petitioner, were left high and dry without any wages for almost nine months which compelled the petitioner to raise loans for sustaining themselves and their families.
3.
All that has been contended by Mr. Hemant Kumar, learned counsel for the petitioner, is that as long as petitioner continues to be on rolls of the respondent-Mill, it has no choice but for to pay him his wages whatever be the reasons compelling the Mill to close down.
4.
In the written statement that has been filed on behalf of the contesting respondents, it has been pleaded that the Mill has been suffering losses for the last several years on account of labour strikes, power cuts, labour shortage and unfavourable market trends.
The major contribution in the losses was on account of the labour strikes.
It is also the case of the respondent-Mill that no amount in cash was paid to Shri JN Gupta, Chief Executive of the Mill towards his salary at the time of relieving him and that none of the employees had been paid salary since July, 1995, because of non- availability of funds.
Even the power connection has been disconnected in the month of September, 1995 because of non-payment of electricity bills.
5.
We have gone through the pleadings and heard learned counsel for the petitioner.
It has nowhere been disputed that the petitioner continues to be in the rolls of the respondent-Mill.
This being an admitted position, which is also made out from the various documents annexed with the petition, in our considered view, respondent-Mill has no choice but for to pay to the petitioner his monthly emoluments.
If that be the fact that the petitioner- Mill has closed down on account of heavy losses suffered by it, the Management of the Mill is not without power either to lay off all its workers by following the procedure as laid down in the Industrial Disputes Act or retrench individual workmen including the petitioner by following the previsions contained in Section 25-F of the said Act.
As long as, however, no such orders are passed, the workmen are entitled to their monthly wages.
At this stage Mr. Hemant Kumar, learned counsel for the petitioner contends that petitioner can be accommodated and offered employment with other Sugar Mills run by the Co-operative Department as has been done with regard to number of other workmen of the respondent-Mill.
All that is required to be said at this stage is that the respondent-Mills may consider to accommodate the petitioner on the post that he is holding with some other Co-operative Sugar Mill.
6.
For the reasons recorded above, this writ petition is allowed and a direction is issued to the respondent-Mill to make available to the petitioner all his wages which are stated to be due from July, 1995 till date.
Let the arrears be calculated and handed over to the petitioner within two months from today.
No orders as to costs.
Petition allowed.