NK Agrawal, J - This is a petition by three persons, namely, Devinder Singh Dhull, Shakuntla Devi and Ravinder Singh Rana, under Article 226 of the Constitution, seeking the release of pay scale of Rs. 2200-4000.
2.
Petitioners No. 1 and 2 joined the service as Assistant Sports Officers in the Maharishi Dayanand University, Rohtak in March, 1992.
Petitioner No. 3 was appointed in a Boxing Coach on October 31, 1991.
The post of of Assistant Sports Officer was later on designated as Assistant Director, Sports.
The State Government of Haryana took a decision that Assistant Sports Officers and the Sports Coaches of the Kurukshetra University shall be granted the same pay scale as were available to the Director, Physical Education.
The matter was placed before the Executive Council, which on December 9, 1993, took a decision to revise the pay scale of Assistant Sports Officers and Sports Coaches from Rs. 1640-2900 to Rs. 2200-4000.
A condition was put that the incumbents shall have to fulfil the prescribed qualification before claiming the revised pay scale.
However, another condition was also incorporated that the revision of pay scale was subject to the confirmation by the State Government.
3.
The petitioners' case is that the second condition regarding confirmation by the State Government was unnecessary.
Since the State Government had taken a decision to grant the revised pay scale, there was no necessity to seek confirmation from the State Government after the Executive Council took a decision for the purposes of revision of the pay scale.
The petitioners fulfilled the condition regarding qualification.
The University requested the Director, Higher Education, Haryana, vide letter dated June 18, 1994, to accord approval.
Since no approval was conveyed by the State Government, the petitioners filed representation before the University for the grant of revised pay scale.
It was, however, not granted on the plea that decision from the State Government has not been received.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioners has argued that no further approval from the State Government with regard to the revised pay scale was actually required because the Executive Council of the University has taken a decision for the grant of revised pay scale on the basis of the Government's decision only.
The Executive Council was the competent authority to revise the pay scale.
It had already revised the same relying upon the Government's letter dated September 18, 1986.
Since the Assistant Director, Sports and the Sports Coaches in all the Universities in Haryana are getting the revised pay scale of Rs. 2200-4000, there is no valid reason to deny the same scale to the petitioners who are working in the Maharishi Dayanand University, Rohtak.
The State Government is not right in with holding its decision on the letter sent by the University in June, 1994.
The petitioners are being deprived of the revised pay scale without any reason or justification.
5.
In the written statement, the Maharishi Dayanand University, Rohtak, has taken a plea that the University is not competent to revise the pay scales of the teaching and non-teaching employees without prior approval from the State Government.
Section 9F of the Maharishi Dayanand University Act, 1975, requires such approval.
Further the State Government had to bear the additional financial burden arising from the revision of the pay scale.
The posts of Sports Officers, Assistant Sports Officers and Sports Coaches in the Kurukshetra University were declared by the State Government of Haryana as equivalent to the post of Director, Physical Education, with effect from April 1, 1980.
The officers of the Kurukshetra University were, therefore, given the revised pay scale.
The same could not be released to the petitioners till approval was accorded by the State Government.
It has been admitted in para 4 of the written statement that sanction for the revision of the pay scale of the Assistant Sports Officers and the Coaches in the Kurukshetra University has been accorded by the State Government.
6.
The State of Haryana and the Director of Higher Education, Haryana, have, in their written statement, stated that the employees of the Kurukshetra University were appointed earlier and, therefore, they have been granted the higher pay scale.
On the contrary, the petitioners were appointed in the lower pay scales.
Since they accepted the pay scales at the time of their appointment in the years 1991-92, they could not claim higher scale thereafter.
It is also stated that the proposal for the revision of pay scale was rejected by the Sub Committee of the High Powered Co-ordination Committee in its meeting held on October 1, 1993.
7.
On the consideration of the controversy, it is noticed that the respondents have not been able to put forward any plausible or valid explanation for denying the benefit of higher pay scale to the petitioners.
It is not denied that the officers of the equivalent rank in the Kurukshetra University have been granted the pay scale of Rs. 2200-4000.
There appears no reason to deny the same scale to the petitioners who are working in the Maharishi Dayanand University, Rohtak.
It is also not disputed that the State Government had taken a decision with regard to the revision of pay scales of Assistant Sports Officers and the Sports Coaches of the Kurukshetra University.
They were granted the same pay scale as given to the Director, Physical Education.
In such a situation, it appears wholly arbitrary and discriminatory to deny the same pay scale to the petitioners.
The State Government has for no good reason with held the sanction for the revised pay scale to the petitioners.
8.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed, the respondents are directed to grant the revised pay scale of Rs. 2200-4000 to the petitioners from the date it was granted to the Assistant Sports Officers and Sports Coaches of the Kurukshetra University.
The arrears of salary and allowances shall be paid to the petitioners within three months from the date of this order failing which the petitioners shall be entitled to get interest from the respondents at the rate of 12% per annum on the amount of arrears.
No costs.
Petition allowed