HS Bedi, J - The petitioner took the 8th Class middle standard examination in February, 1995 but failed.
She also took the supplementary examination for the said class in September, 1995 and secured a compartment.
The petitioner thereafter took admission in the MRD High School, Dhanana, District Ambala in 9th class as a regular student and cleared the class 8th and 9th examinations successfully in March, 1996 and thereafter, joined the 10th Class (matric) in the same school.
Her candidature for the examination to be held in March, 1997 was also accepted by the respondent-Board and she was allotted Roll No. 260006 and on the declaration of result she was notified as having passed the examination.
A copy of the gazette notifying the result has been appended as annexure P/3 to the petition.
The petitioner thereafter took admission in the +1 class in the Government Senior Secondary School, GT Road, Ambala City and it is the admitted position that she has passed the said class and is now studying in the +2 class.
The petitioner through her brother in the meanwhile applied to the respondent-Board for the issuance of a matriculation certificate but vide order of the Chairman dated 2911998 (annexure P/5) she was informed that her result has been quashed on the basis of the authority conferred by regulation 52(iii) of the examination regulations on the ground that a period of two years had not elapsed between the middle (8th class) and matriculation examination.
This information was also conveyed to the petitioner's brother vide letter dated 2721998 annexure P/6 to the petition.
Annexures P/5 and P/6 have been impugned with the petition.
2.
Notice of motion had been issued in this case and a reply has been filed by the respondent-Board.
The facts narrated above have not been denied but reliance has been placed on regulation 8(1) of the Examination Regulations which postulated the existence of a two years gap between the passing of the middle examination and the taking of the matriculation examination as a private candidate and as the petitioner had not fulfilled this condition and had appeared as a private candidate in March, 1997 in the class 10th examination, her result has been rightly cancelled.
3.
Mr. Singla, the learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that the petitioner had, on the basis of result declared vide annexure P/3 got admission in the higher class and she was now in the 10+2 class and as no information had been withheld by her at the time of submitting her application for the class 10th examination in March, 1997 she could not be penalised for a fault committed by the respondent-Board as it was their duty to have scrutinised the form and rejected her candidature in case she was found to be ineligible.
4.
As against this Mr. Malik has argued that admittedly the petitioner was not eligible in terms of regulation 8(1) of the examination Regulations and as such petition was liable to be dismissed.
5.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties I am of the opinion the present petition deserves to succeed.
It is the admitted position that no information of any kind had been withheld by the petitioner at the time that she had submitted her application form for the class 10 examination and as a matter of fact even her success in the examination had been notified vide annexure P/3 dated 23697 by the respondent itself.
The only grievance of the petitioner now is that the matriculation certificate was not being issued to her which was a necessity for her future course of study.
In Swaranjit Singh v. State of Punjab, 1998(1) Judicial Reports (Labour and Service) page 27 : 1997(4) SCT 511 (P&H) while dealing with an admittedly faulty admission to a course the Full Bench observed that once the candidate concerned had given full and correct particulars in the application form and admission had been given albeit wrongly, it was not open to the authority to cancel the admission thereafter.
The ratio of the aforesaid judgment applies fully to the facts of the present case.
As a matter of fact the petitioner's case is still better for the reason that she has not only passed the matriculation examination but one class thereafter as well.
The denial of the matriculation certificate, therefore, is absolutely unjustified.
The petition is accordingly allowed.
Annexure P/5 qua the petitioner and Annexure P/6 are quashed and direction is issued to the respondent to issue the matriculation certificate forthwith.
The petitioner shall have her costs which are quantified at Rs. 2000/-.
Dasti order.
Petition allowed.