Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner is aggrieved by the order dated September 4, 1996 by which he has been dismissed from the post of Distillery Manager of the Panipat Co-operative Sugar Mills Limited.
It is alleged that the order has been passed without holding any enquiry into the charges and without giving him any opportunity.
It has been further alleged that the action has been taken mala fide and on account of extraneous considerations.
2.
Admittedly, the petitioner was appointed as a Distillery Manager on November 29, 1994.
He had been given charge of the post in anticipation of the issue of a formal letter.
While the petitioner was holding the post, a charge-sheet dated July 11, 1996 was issued to him.
It was inter alia alleged that according to the report submitted by the Cane Advisor and the Financial Advisor of the Sugarfed, the Distillery had suffered a loss of Rs. 15676 lacs during the year 1994-95.
This loss had occurred on account of reasons of mismanagement, lower recovery, leakages, abnormally high rate for washing charges etc.
The petitioner was informed that he was thus ``guilty of causing financial losses to the distillery for Rs. 15676 lacs during 1994-95 when you had been working as Distillery Manager....'' He was asked to explain his position.
The petitioner submitted a detailed reply.
He controverted the allegations and gave facts to show that the same were unfounded.
The respondents held no enquiry.
A show cause notice was given to the petitioner calling upon him to explain as to why he should not be dismissed.
He again submitted a reply.
Thereafter, the impugned order was passed.
It has been inter alia observed in the order that the petitioner had ``failed to rebut the same or say anything in his defence.''
This order reads as under :-  ``The Cane Advisor and Financial Advisor of Haryana State Federation of Co-op.
Sugar Mills Ltd, Chandigarh had conducted a detailed enquiry into the losses of Rs. 15676 lacs suffered by the distillery unit during the year 1994-95 and Sh. S Mukerjee, Distillery Manager was fully associated with the enquiry.
As a result of such enquiry, Sh. S Mukerjee, Distillery Manager had been found guilty of incurring financial losses to the distillery to the tune of Rs. 15676 lacs during the year 1994-95 due to his mismanagement, lower recovery and less production.
The management is of the firm opinion that no confidence can be reposed in Sh. Mukherjee as his further retention in service of this Co-op.
institution will be much detrimental to is name and fame.
Show cause notice No. Gen. 96-97/2705 dated 13896 was, therefore, issued to him per regd.
post as well as delivered in person on 21.8.96 as to why he should not be dismissed from the services of this institution.
The said show-cause notice had been duly served upon him, but he has failed to rebut the same or say anything in his defence.
Taking into account all the aspects of the matter, I hereby dismiss Sh. S Mukherjee, Distillery Manager from the services of this Co-operative Institution with immediate effect.
He may collect his final dues, if any, from the Distillery Unit on any working day on production of usual clearance chit from the concerned departments, His gratuity may be forfeited.
The remaining losses may be recovered through proper channel.
All concerned to note for compliance.''
3.
We have heard counsel for the parties.
It is admitted that no enquiry was held after the issue of charge-sheet.
It is also admitted that the petitioner had denied the allegations levelled against him in reply to the charge-sheet.
He had also submitted a detailed reply to the show cause notice.
A persual of the order as quoted above shows that the explanaton submitted by the petitioner has not even been considered.
In this situation, the impugned order cannot be sustained.
4.
Even today, at the hearing, learned counsel for the respondents is unable to explain as to how and why the entire responsibility for the losses during the year 1994-95 is being placed on the petitioner.
He is unable to support the order passed by the respondents.
It is the admitted position that the petitioner had joined only in November 1994.
Yet, he is being blamed for the losses that had already occurred during the year 1994 itself.
It is not understood as to how the petitioner was responsible for the losses which the Distillery had suffered even prior to his joining.
Still further, the orders for the forfeiture of his gratuity and even regarding the recovery of the losses have been passed.
To say the least, the order is absolutely arbitrary, unfair and smacks of total disregard for administrative propriety and judicious fairness.
5.
Mr. Goel, counsel for the respondents submits that as a Manager, the petitioner was responsible for all the affairs of the industrial unit.
6.
It is undoubtedly correct that the petitioner was the Manager.
However, it is also admitted by the learned counsel that the affairs of the Sugar Mill are being managed by a Board of Directors.
It is headed by the Managing Director.
It is not even suggested that the mill was making profits prior to November 1994. Who was responsible for the losses incurred by the mill till November 1994 ?
What was the function of the Board of Directors ?
What was the Managing Director doing while the mill was suffering losses ?
What preventive action was taken by him ?
Was the petitioner ever informed that he is not performing his duties properly and, thus, he is liable for the losses being suffered by the mill ?
These questions remain unanswered.
Mr. Goyal, counsel for the petitioner points out that he had been continuously informing the authorities of certain defects which needed to be remedied.
No action was taken by them.
He appears to be right.
7.
Counsel for the petitioner has vehemently contended that the whole action has been actuated by consideration of parochialism.
The petitioner has been made a scapegoat and victimised only because he did not belong to the State.
8.
At present, we do not wish to say anything in this behalf except that the order is most arbitrary and does not meet test of fairness.
9.
In view of the above, the writ petition is allowed.
The impugned order is set aside.
The respondents are directed to release all the consequential benefits to the petitioner within a period of one month from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
If the respondents fail to do so, the petitioner shall be entitled to the amount with interest @ 12% per annum from the date of accrual till the date of actual payment.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to his costs which are assessed at Rs. 5,000/-.
10.
Mr. Goel, counsel for respondents Nos. 2 and 3 submits that the direction for the payment of arrears should not be given as the petitioner had submitted a resignation and has not performed the duties of the post.
11.
The contention raised by the counsel is contrary to the pleas taken in the written statement.
In paragraph 21 of the written statement, it has been averred on behalf of respondents Nos. 2 and 3 that ``It is factually wrong and hence denied that the petitioner submitted any resignation, as alleged in this para.
However, when the petitioner appeared before the Deputy Commissioner on 15.7.96 and stated that he has submitted his resignation, the replying-respondent-Mill, vide memo dated 17796, requested the petitioner to supply two copies of such resignation, as the management has not received the same.
It is only thereafter that the petitioner submitted two copies of the alleged resignation.''
Even if it is assumed that the petitioner submitted a resignation, it has admittedly not been accepted at any stage.
Thus, the factual position that emerges is that the petitioner had been dismissed vide order dated September 4, 1996.
Till then and in fact till today, the resignation has not been accepted.
In view of the above, the question of denying the consequential benefits to the petitioner cannot arise.