Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner complains that his services have been arbitrarily terminated vide order dated July 15, 1996.
Is it so ?
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner was initially a member of the Indian Armed Force.
He was awarded the ``Vishist Sewa Medal'' by the President of India vide notification dated January 26, 1986 for distinguished service of a high order.
He retired from the India Army in the rank of a Colonel on April 30, 1989.
3.
The State of Haryana advertised the post of Secretary Haryana Rajya Sainik Board in the year 1990.
The petitioner was one of the applicants.
He was considered alongwith the other eligible candidates.
He was selected.
On November 2, 1990, the petitioner was offered the post of Secretary.
A copy of this communication is at Annexure P.1 with the writ petition.
He joined duty on December 3, 1990.
While the petitioner was working as Secretary of the Board, the State Government issued an order dated April 24, 1995 (Annexure P.2 with the writ petition) by which the petitioner was re-employed ``for a period of one year w.e.f.
151995.''
The necessity for this order had arisen as the petitioner was to attain the age of 58 years on April 7, 1995 and would have been due to retire on April 30, 1995.
A copy of order dated April 24, 1995 has been produced as Annexure P-2 with the writ petition.
It was stipulated in this letter that the terms and conditions of his re-employment shall be issued later on.
These were actually issued vide letter dated December 6, 1995, a copy of which is at Annexure P.3 with the writ petition.
On May 1, 1996, the State Government issued another order extending the petitioner's appointment ``for a period of one year with effect from 151996 on the same terms and conditions of re-employment as are contained in para 2(i to v) of order.... dated 11.12.95''.
On July 15, 1996, the State Government passed the impugned order by which the petitioner's services were terminated ``in accordance with the terms and conditions of his appointment with immediate effect after paying him one month's salary in lieu of one month's notice, being no longer required.''
A copy of the order is at Annexure P.5 with the writ petition.
It was also ordered that the salary for the period from July 1, 1996 to July 15, 1996 shall be disbursed to the petitioner with immediate effect.
Aggrieved by this order, the petitioner has filed the present writ petition.
He alleges that the order of termination is absolutely illegal, arbitrary and malafide.
He prays that the order be quashed and he be allowed to continue in service till he completes his term of one year.
4.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondent.
It has been stated by way of preliminary objection that the services of the petitioner ``were terminated strictly in accordance with terms and conditions of his re-employment and in view of instructions issued vide circular... dated 19.10.1954....'' A copy of this circular has been produced as Annexure R.I with the written statement.
According to the respondent, the action is in strict conformity with the terms of appointment and the instructions issued by the Government.
It has been prayed that the writ petition be dismissed with costs.
5.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
The short question that arises for consideration in this case is - Has the respondent terminated the petitioner's services in accordance with the terms of appointment ?
According to the respondent, the relevant condition in the terms of appointment is contained in para 2(v).
This clause reads as under :-  ``2(v).
In all other matters he will be governed by the Punjab Civil Services Rules as applicable to Haryana Govt. employees and/or executive orders/instructions issued by the Government from time to time and as applicable to temporary government servant.''
Mr. Jaswant Singh, learned counsel for the respondent submits that by virtue of this condition in the letter dated December 6, 1995 (Annexure P.3 with the writ petition), all instructions issued by the State Government from time to time had become applicable to the petitioner.
In the instructions issued vide letter dated October 19, 1954, it had been inter alia provided that the services of a temporary employee ``will be terminable on notice of one month on either side provided that it will be open to Government, to pay, in lieu of notice, the official's salary, and allowances, in respect of the period by which the notice given by him falls short of one month''.
The learned counsel submits that in accordance with these instructions, the petitioner has been paid one month's salary in lieu of the notice.
6.
A perusal of the letter dated December 6, 1995 shows that various terms and conditions had been prescribed which were to govern the petitioner during the period of his re-employment.
According to these terms and conditions, the petitioner's pay was to be determined in accordance with the provisions of Rule 718 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume II.
He was entitled to the medical facilities in accordance with the Medical Attendance Rules, 1940 and the executive instructions issued by the Government from time to time.
In the matter of discipline, the petitioner was to be governed by ``The Government Employees Conduct Rules, 1966 as amended from time to time.''
It was further provided that ``for the purpose of leave, travelling allowance, Dearness Allowance and House Rent, he will be governed by the rules/instructions as applicable to temporary Government Servants''.
Thereafter, condition No. (v) as reproduced above had been laid down.
It was in the nature of a residuary provision.
It only provides that in respect of matters for which no provision had been made in conditions (i) to (iv), the petitioner shall be governed by the provisions of the Punjab Civil Services Rules and the executive orders/instructions issued by the Government in respect of the temporary government servants.
It did not, however, mean that the petitioner's services were liable to be terminated at any time by issue of one month's notice.
The plea raised on behalf of the respondent that the provision in this behalf was contained in the Government instructions and these should be read as a part of the terms of appointment cannot be accepted, for two reasons.
Firstly, the instructions issued by the Government are not to the effect that the services of a temporary Government servant shall always be terminable by one month's notice.
A perusal of the instructions shows that there was a controversy with regard to the period of notice.
In some cases, it was stated that ``employment is terminable on one month's notice on either side.''
In other cases, the period was stated to be ``longer than one month''.
In this context, the Government had issued the instructions vide letter dated October 19, 1954 inter alia to the effect that ``in order to observe uniformity in this important matter, it has now been decided to adopt it as a general rule that future recruitment of temporary officers and staff, whether technical or other, should take place on the basis that service of the official concerned will be terminable on notice of one month on either side provided that it will be open to Government, to pay, in lieu of notice, the official's salary, and allowances in respect of the period by which the notice given by (to) him falls short of one month''.
The obvious implication was that such a stipulation should be made in the terms of appointment.
To put the matter beyond any shadow of doubt, it was specifically observed in these instructions that ``a specific provision in this behalf should, therefore, invariably be made, in future in the terms of appointment of temporary officials''.
In spite of the existing instructions, no such stipulation was made in the terms of appointment issued to the petitioner.
It is true that in accordance with these instructions, it was open to the Government to provide that the petitioner's services shall be terminable at any time by issue of one month's notice.
However, no such power was reserved in the order by which the petitioner's appointment was extended from May 1, 1996 for a period of one year.
The Government having not reserved this power to itself, cannot now be permitted to turn around and say that the petitioner's services were liable to be terminated at any time by issue of one month's notice.
7.
There is another aspect of the matter.
The petitioner was initially appointed vide order dated November 2, 1990.
At that time, a clear stipulation had been made in the order that the petitioner could leave the service by giving one month's notice.
It was further provided that ``such a notice will also be given to him by the Government in case it is proposed to terminate his services for any reason...'' Consequently, it is apparent that the Government was aware that such a condition can be imposed.
In fact, it was actually imposed.
However, while re-employing the petitioner vide order dated April 24, 1995 or at the time of granting him extension for a period of one year vide order dated May 1, 1996, such a provision was not made.
The omission to make the stipulation was obviously deliberate.
It was a conscious decision.
No power having been reserved, none can be read into the terms of appointment so as to entitle the State Government to terminate the petitioner's services.
It may also be mentioned that in the letter dated November 2, 1990, a residuary provision as contained in clause (ii) of the letter dated December 6, 1995 had been made in Clause (iii).
This leaves no doubt that the residuary clause did not cover the case like the present one.
8.
Irrespective of the above, it may also be noticed that neither in the written statement nor at the hearing of the case, it has been suggested on behalf of the respondent that the petitioner was found wanting in any manner whatsoever.
If the petitioner had been appointed on purely temporary basis and his work and conduct were found to be wanting, it may have been possible for the respondent to contend that a temporary employee has no right to the post and that his services can be terminated as any time.
Learned counsel for the respondent has been specifically asked if there is any adverse comment on the petitioner's work or conduct.
On instructions from Basti Ram Bhardwaj who is present on behalf of the department, learned counsel has very fairly stated that there is no adverse comment regarding the petitioner's work and conduct on the record.
In such a situation, there appears to be no justification for the impugned order.
No other point has been urged.
In view of the above, the writ petition is allowed.
The order dated July 15, 1996 by which the petitioner's services were terminated, is set aside.
He will be entitled to the consequential benefits as well.
The petitioner shall be entitled to token costs of Rs. 1000/-.