M R Agnihotri and S S Grewal, JJ.
- After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, we find that the petitioner has got an outstanding scholastic record.
She is M.A.B.Ed., and right from Matriculation, she has throughout been securing first class in all the examinations.
She has graduated with Sanskrit as one of the elective subjects, with Hindi as an additional subject, securing 70 per cent marks.
Later on, she was appointed as Hindi/Sanskrit teacher which post had been duly approved and recognised much earlier to her appointment.
Qualifications for the post of Hindi/Sanskrit teachers are, Matric, Prabhakar (Hons.
in Hindi) O.T./Matric, Shastri with O.T.
Obviously, the petitioner possesses much higher qualifications than the qualifications required for the post of Hindi/Sanskrit teacher, and has been performing her duties as Hindi/Sanskrit teacher efficiently, as per the certificate dated 27th April, 1992, Annexure P.8, issued by the Principal of the School, which is reproduced below :-  "Certified that Miss Praveen Lata d/o Sh. Mohan Lal was appointed as Skt./Hindi Teacher in the School on 13.7.1991 and she joined her duties on 2071991.
She has been teaching Hindi and Sanskrit upto High Classes and her work and conduct are excellent.
She has shown good results.
Her way of teaching is perfect and has full command over the students.
She bears good moral character.
Sd/- Principal,  A.D.
Her Sec. School,  Dharamkot(Pb)."
The aforesaid factual position has, in fact, been admitted by the respondents in their written statement, and still it has been pleaded that the petitioner does not possess the requisite qualifications for appointment as Hindi Mistress.
The relevant extract from para 2 of the written statement under 'preliminary objections' is reproduced below :-  "The petitioner does not possess the requisite qualifications for the appointment as Hindi Mistress.
The requisite qualifications for the post of Hindi Mistress are BA with elective subject Hindi and in B.Ed.
Hindi as teaching subject where as the petitioner is BA with elective subject Sanskrit and in B Bed.
Hindi as teaching subject."
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and having gone through the record, we are of the considered view that the petitioner is duly qualified for the post of Hindi/Sanskrit teacher and, as such, is entitled to hold the post, and respondent Nos. 1 to 2 cannot refuse to grant approval to her appointment as such.
Accordingly, we allow this petition and direct the respondents to approve of the appointment of the petitioner as Hindi/Sanskrit teacher and to release to her the salary of the post held by her forthwith.
There shall be no order as to costs.