Satya Brata Sinha, J - This appeal is directed against a judgment and order dated 8th December, 1987 passed by a learned single Judge of this Court in CR No. 9213(W) of 1978 whereby and whereunder the said learned Judge allowed the writ application filed by the writ petitioner/respondent No. 1.
2.
The basic fact of the matter is not in dispute.
The petitioner at all material times was serving as Police Constable under the Superintendent of Police, Burdwan, having joined in the year 1960.
On 7th June, 1976 while he was posted at Burdwan, he took casual leave for 8 days but he overstayed.
The petitioner was charge-sheeted, a copy whereof is contained in Annexure 'A' to the writ application.
A disciplinary proceeding followed which was held ex parte and by reason of an order dated 30th May, 1977 he was dismissed from service.
3.
The only question which arose before the learned trial Judge was as to whether overstaying of a leave is a misconduct within the meaning of the provisions of the West Bengal Police Regulation Bengal or not.
The learned trial Judge on interpretation of Regulations 856, 857 and 875 and relying on the decision in the case of Ram Nagima Dhubey v. Commissioner of Police, Calcutta reported in 1986(2) CHN 227 and Nirode Kumar Roy v Deputy Inspector General of Armed Police, WB reported in 1987(1) CHN 457, inter alia observed that overstaying of casual leave by a police man cannot be considered to be as serious, and in any event such a misconduct being not a misconduct involving moral turpitude, on major punishment could be imposed upon the petitioner.
The learned Trial Judge, therefore, directed as follows :-  "Until that is done, I do not think that the concerned authority can inflict major punishment of dismissal, removal from service etc. for overstaying casual leave without permission or authority."
4.
Mr. Bose appearing on behalf of the appellant has raised a short question in support of this appeal.
The learned counsel submits that a plain reading of Regulations 856, 857 and 875 of the Police Regulations, Bengal militates against the contention raised on behalf of the respondent before the trial Judge that overstayal of the leave for about 9 months is not a misconduct.
According to the learned Counsel the order of dismissal was passed as against the delinquent officer keeping in view his past conduct which is permitted under Regulation 856 aforementioned.
The learned Counsel submits that the 'casual leave' has been dealt with under provision of Regulation 818(1) and in terms thereof overstayal of casual leave would be a misconduct.
Regulations 856 and 857 read thus :-  "856.
General instructions as to punishment.
- Officers shall avoid undue harshness in awarding punishments and shall discriminate carefully between offences connoting moral turpitude and minor offences.
Every effort shall be made to maintain discipline and to correct the minor faults of police officers by instructions and by warnings without resorting to more severe punishment.
In awarding punishment, the general character of the offender and the nature of his evidence shall be taken into consideration.
No major punishment shall be awarded to a police officer, until proceedings, as prescribed hereinafter, have been drawn up against him.
For the purpose of punishment an officer officiating in a higher rank shall be deemed to be of that rank.
857.
Major and minor punishment.
- Punishments are divided into major and minor.
Major punishments include dismissal, removal from service, reduction, deprivation of approved service increment, removal from any office of distinction or special employment and award to black marks.
Minor punishments include censure (reprimands for misconducts), extra drill, extra fatigue duty and confinement to quarters with or without punishment drill, extra guard, fatigue or other duty."
5.
It is not in dispute that misconduct has not been defined in Police Regulations, Bengal.
The Police Regulations also do not specify as to what should be misconduct inviting major punishment and what is the misconduct which would invite minor punishment.
6.
It is now well known that when misconduct has not been defined in service rules governing the service conditions, the same has to be given a general meaning.
The word 'misconduct' is a generic term.
This aspect of the matter has been considered by one of us (Satyabrata Sinha, J) in Probadh Kumar Bhowmick v. University of Calcutta reported in 1994(2) CLJ 456, wherein his Court took note of various decisions of the Supreme Court defining the word 'misconduct'.
In paragraphs 14, 18, 20 and 21 of the said judgment it has been held as follows :-  "14.
Misconduct, inter alia, envisages breach of discipline, although it would not be possible to lay down exhaustively as to what would constitute misconduct and indiscipline which, however, is wide enough to include wrongful omission or commission whether done or omitted to be done intentionally or unintentionally.
It means, "improper behaviour, intentional wrong doing or deliberate violation of a rule of standard or behaviour."
"Misconduct is transgression of some established and definite rule of action, where no discretion is left except what necessity may demand; it is a violation of definite law, forbidden act.
It differs from carelessness, Misconduct even if it is an offence under the Indian Penal Code is equally a misconduct."
18.
In Delhi Cloth and General Mills Co Ltd v. Its Workmen, reported in (1969) 2 LLJ 755 at 772, Shah, J states 'misconduct spreads over a wide a and hazy spectrum of industrial activity; the most seriously subversive conduct rendering an employee wholly unfit for employment to mere technical default covered thereby."
20.
The Supreme Court in State of Punjab and others v. Ram Singh Ex. Constable, reported in 1992(3) SCT 448(SC) : 1992(4) SCC 54 upon which Mr. Mukherjee himself has placed reliance upon held :-  "5.
Misconduct has been defined in Black's Law Dictionary, a forbidden act, a dereliction from duty, unlawful behaviour, wilful in character, improper or wrong behaviour, its synonymous are misconduct, offence but not negligence or carelessness".
Misconduct in offence has been defined as : "Any unlawful behaviour by a public officer in relation to the duties of his office, wilful in character.
The terms embraces acts which the office-holder had no right to perform, acts performed improperly and failure to act in the face of an affirmative duty to act."
21.
P Ramnath Aiyar's Law Lexicon, Reprint, Edition 1987 at page 821 defines misconduct thus :-  "The term misconduct implies a wrongful intention and not a mere error of judgment.
Misconduct is not necessarily the same thing as conduct involving moral turpitude.
The word misconduct is a relative term, and has to be construed with reference to the subject matter and the context wherein the term occurs, having regard to scope of the Act or statute which is being construed.
Misconduct literally means wrong conduct or improper conduct.
In usual parlance, misconduct means a transgression of some established and definite rule of action where no discretion is left, except what necessity may demand and carelessness, negligence and unskilfulness are transgression of some established, but indefinite, rule of action, where some discretion is necessarily left to the actor.
Misconduct is a violation of definite law; carelessness or abuse of discretion under an indefinite law.
Misconduct is a forbidden act; carelessness, a forbidden quality of an act and is necessarily indefinite.
Misconduct in office may be defined as unlawful behaviour or neglect by a public official, by which the rights of a party have been affected.
6.
Thus it could be seen that the word 'misconduct' though not capable of precise definition, on reflection receives its connotation from the context, the delinquency in its performance and its effect on the discipline and the nature of the duty.
It may involve moral turpitude, it must be improper or wrong behaviour, unlawful behaviour, wilful in character forbidden act, a transgression of established and definite rule of action of the code of conduct but not mere error of judgment, carelessness or negligence in performance of the duty; the act complained of bears forbidden quality or character.
Its ambit has to be construed with reference to the subject matter and the context wherein the term occurs, regard being had to the scope of the statute and the public purpose it seeks to serve.
The police service is a disciplined service and it requires to maintain strict discipline.
Laxity in this behalf erodes discipline in the service causing serious effect in the maintenance of law and order."
7.
Regulation 818 clearly states that any officer granting the leave and the officer taking it shall be held responsible if the public service suffer in any way from the absence of the officer on casual leave.
It is stated that causal leave should only be granted for adequate reasons and cannot be claimed as of right or given when the interests of public service forbid it.
From the impugned order as contained in Annexure 'C' to the writ application it appears that the petitioner proceeded to avail 8 days' CL with effect from 7.6.76 which expired on 15676 but he overstayed till 15.3.77 without any leave or permission from the competent authority in an unauthorised manner.
8.
The question as to whether overstayal is by itself a misconduct or not is neither in doubt nor in dispute.
Neither the learned trial Judge nor Mr. Adhikary appearing on behalf of the writ petitioner-respondent raised any contention that overstayal is not a misconduct.
Regulations 875 and 876 of the Police Regulations Bengal, upon which strong reliance has been placed by Mr. Adhikary reads thus :-  "875.
When an officer absents himself without leave (otherwise than by overstaying leave) and it is not thought desirable to grant him regular leave, the delinquent may be punished for misbehaviour after drawing up regular proceedings.
"876.
(a) Police officers who absent themselves without leave are liable to prosecution under section 29 of the Police Act, 1861.
Prosecutions, however, shall only be instituted in exceptional circumstances.
x x x x x x" 9.
It is true that in Regulation 875 absence "otherwise than by overstaying leave" have been excluded from the purview thereof, but Regulation 876 specifically states that the police officers who absent themselves are liable to prosecution under section 29 of the Police Act, 1861.
Prosecution, however, shall only be instituted in exceptional circumstances.
If a person overstays his leave, be absents himself without leave.
In fact, by way of analogy reference may be made to Rules 153, 161 and 162 of the West Bengal Service Rules.
From a perusal of those rules, it is evident that even casual leave cannot be sought for as a matter of right.
Police service, as has been noticed in P Ramnath Aiyar's Law Lexicon, Reprinted Edition 1987, as quoted in Probodh Kumar Bhowmick v. University of Calcutta (supra), is a disciplined service and it requires to maintain strict discipline.
Laxity in this behalf erodes discipline in the service causing serious effect in the maintenance of law and order.
10.
The question posed by the learned trial Judge with reference to Regulation 875 and upon which strong reliance has been placed by Mr. Adhikary, appears to be wholly misplaced.
Regulation 856 has been made by way of guideline.
The said provision appears to be in consonance with the principle embodied under Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution of India, inasmuch as, it is now well known that although an employer has an inherent right to impose any punishment upon a delinquent employee, such punishment should not be shockingly disproportionate to the charge, and if that be so that power of judicial review can be exercised.
Regulation 856 merely makes a distinction between a moral turpitude and minor offences, but it also states in no uncertain terms that every Judge has referred to his own decision in the case of Nirode Roy v DIG and others, reported in 1987(1) CHN 457.
In the said decision, the learned Judge does not appear to have taken note of Regulation 876 as also section 29 of the Police Act.
The learned trial Judge himself agreed that overstaying leave without proper authority of absence without leave are clear acts of indiscipline for any service holder, far less to speak of a police officer who is member of disciplined force.
Having said so, the learned trial Judge relied upon the Regulation 856 to hold that an attempt should be made to correct these acts of indiscipline by instructions and/or warning without resorting to more serious punishment.
With utmost respect, we disagree with the aforementioned observations.
As has been noticed by the Apex Court times without number, when misconduct is not defined, general meaning of misconduct has to be given.
If overstayal of leave by itself is misconduct in absence of any definition in the Police Regulation Bengal specifying as to which misconduct would entail minor punishment and which misconduct would entail major punishment the disciplinary authority would be entitled to consider the gravity of the misconduct and pass an appropriate order of punishment.
By way of example, we may state that overstayal of leave by one day may not entail a major punishment, but overstayal by a number of months or number of years as a result whereof public service for which members of the police force are employed suffers to a great extent, may entail a major punishment.
The learned trial Judge, in our opinion, made an error in holding that unless the offence involves moral turpitude, no major punishment can be inflicted at all.
There is no warrant in law for such a proposition.
Gross insubordination is misconduct, but it cannot be an offence involving moral turpitude.
If a delinquent employee can be dismissed from service for gross insubordination, in our opinion, there cannot be any reason whatsoever as to why an employee cannot be dismissed from service for gross indiscipline by way of overstays of leave for a long time without any reason whatsoever.
We have noticed that Police Regulations Bengal also makes a distinction between a bona fide overstayal, and a mala fide overstayal.
If such overstayal is mala fide according to the competent authority, the same in our opinion, would amount to a gross indiscipline and may entail a major punishment.
11.
For the reasons aforementioned we are unable to agree with the decision in Nirode Roy's case (supra) as also the decision of the learned trial Judge.
The view which we have taken is fortified by a recent decision of the Supreme Court of India in the case of BC Chaturvedi v Union of India, reported in 1996(1) SCT 617(SC) : Judgments Today 1995(8) SC 65.
In the aforesaid judgment, the Supreme Court distinguished its earlier decision in the case of AL Karla v. Project and Equipment Corporation, reported in 1984(3) SCC 316 as was done by this Court in Probodh Bhowmick's case (supra).
The learned Judges in the aforementioned decision, inter alia, held that a misconduct can be tried even after grant of promotion in the meantime.
The Apex Court clearly held that in view of the fact that the principles of Evidence Act have no application is a disciplinary proceedings, strict proof by legal evidence is not necessary.
The Apex Court further held that it is not an appeal, but a review of the manner in which the decision is made.
It was held :  "Whether the findings or conclusions are based on some evidence, the authority entrusted with the power to hold inquiry has jurisdiction, power and authority to reach a finding of fact or conclusion.
But that finding must be based on some evidence."
12.
It was held that the disciplinary authority is the sole judge of facts.
As regards the power of this court to interfere with punishment, it was observed :-  "A review of the above legal position would establish that the disciplinary authority, and on appeal the appellate authority, being fact-finding authorities have exclusive power to consider the evidence with a view to maintain discipline.
They are invested with the discretion to impose appropriate punishment keeping in view the magnitude or gravity of the misconduct.
The High Court Tribunal, while exercising the power of judicial review, cannot normally substitute its own conclusion on penalty and impose some other penalty.
If the punishment imposed by the disciplinary authority or the appellate authority shocks the conscience of the High Court/Tribunal, it would appropriately mould the relief, either directing the disciplinary/appellate authority to re-consider the penalty imposed, or to shorten the litigation, it may itself in exceptional and rare cases, impose appropriate punishment with cogent reasons in support thereof."
13.
Hansaria, J while agreeing with the conclusion reached by Ramaswamy, J however, observed that even a writ court can interfere in the matter of punishment when it is shockingly disproportionate.
We may, however, notice that in the case reported in 1994(2) SCC 537, the Supreme Court has held that in the power of the Supreme Court under Article 136 of the Constitution is wider than the power of the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
In that case, the Apex Court clearly held that the High Court should not substitute one punishment by another punishment which has been inflicted by the disciplinary authority.
However, it appears that the learned trial Judge held that keeping in view the defence of the writ petitioner, and particularly the fact that he could not join the organisation because of his brother's death in an accident, we are of the opinion that if the assertion is correct, it would be proper for the disciplinary authority to reconsider the question of quantum of punishment.
We are making this observation in view of the fact that according to the writ petitioner he had filed such an application before the concerned authority for extension of this leave, but the same had not been taken into consideration by the disciplinary authority.
We have noted earlier that the disciplinary proceedings were held ex parte.
14.
In this view of the matter, we allow the appeal, set aside the judgment and order with the observation and direction that the matter relating to quantum of punishment may be considered afresh by disciplinary authority having regard to the peculiar facts and circumstances of this case, at an early date and preferably within a period of 6 weeks from the date of communication of this order.
These observations are being made keeping in view the fact that from the records it appears that the petitioner is to reach his age of superannuation shortly.
In the fact and circumstances of this case there will be no order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.