Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner was working as a teacher vide order dated May 17, 1971, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P.11 with the writ petition, his services were ordered to be terminated.
He filed an appeal.
On June 3, 1971, the Secretary to the Government, Department of Education, ordered "the termination of services of the appellant be stayed till the decision of the appeal."
Vide communication dated February 12, 1982, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P13 with the writ petition, the Block Primary Education Officer informed the School that the Government had dismissed the petitioner's appeal vide order dated January 28/29, 1982 and that the petitioner had been ordered to be removed from service.
A copy of this communication is on record as Annexure P13.
Thus, the petitioner learnt that his appeal had been dismissed.
The petitioner impugns the order dated May 17, 1971 and the communication dated February 12, 1982 (copies at Annexures P.11 and P.13 with the writ petition) through the present writ petition.
He prays that these orders be quashed and that he be reinstated in service with all consequential benefits.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner had been appointed as a JBT teacher on July 16, 1959.
In the year 1963, he was given a questionnaire.
The effort was to find out if he had married more than once.
He submitted his reply on November 11, 1963.
The replies given by the petitioner to the questionnaire indicate that he was married to Rajwinder on April 17, 1953.
He married second time in May 1955 to Ajit Kaur.
On October 9, 1964, the petitioner was served with a charge sheet.
The precise allegation levelled against the petitioner was:-  ``That while posted in Goverment Primary School, Ajnala (Amritsar) in April 1963, he acted in an irresponsible manner and contracted a second marriage with Smt. Rajwinder Kaur, teacher, Government Middle (Girls) School, Chetanpur while his first wife Smt. Ajit Kaur was alive.''
The petitioner submitted a reply.
An Enquiry Officer was appointed.
He submitted a report.
On November 13, 1967, the petitioner was given a show cause notice, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P.8.
He was informed that on a consideration of the report, a penalty of dismissal was proposed to be imposed on him.
The petitioner was called upon to show cause as to why the proposed action be not taken against him.
The petitioner submitted a detailed reply pointing out inter alia that the charge was not proved against him and that the proposed punishment should not be awarded.
The Director of Public Instructions by an order dated May 17, 1971 ordered the termination of the petitioner's services.
This order reads as under :-  "Punjab Education Department  Order No. 10434-ET-6/28-70(3)  Dated, Chandigarh the 17.5.1971.
On a careful consideration of the reply in regard to show cause notice No. 6/39-64T(2) dated 13111967, it has been decided to terminate the service of Shri Sukhdev teacher Government High School, Sangapura, District Amritsar with immediate effect.
Sd/- G Parampal Singh Director of Public Instructions,  Punjab."
Dated 20.4.1971.
3.
The petitioner filed an appeal.
The operation of this order was stayed.
However, the petitioner complains that without informing him and giving him any opportunity of hearing, the appellate authority dismissed that appeal.
However, no order has been conveyed to him.
Only the School authorities were informed that the Government had rejected the petitioner's appeal.
As a result, it was directed that the petitioner be relieved of his duties.
In pursuance of this communication, the petitioner was actually relived of his duties in February 1982.
4.
The petitioner challenges the orders dated May 17, 1971 and February 12, 1982 on various grounds.
Inter alia it is alleged that the orders are wholly cryptic and have been passed without any consideration of the factual position.
5.
On behalf of the respondents, a written statement has been filed by Mr. DA William, Deputy District Primary Education Officer, Amritsar.
It has been inter alia stated that the petitioner has two living wives.
He has, thus, violated the Government Conduct Rules.
He has concealed this fact before the appointing authority ``at the time of his appointment''.
On coming to know of this fact, the petitioner was charge-sheeted and the appropriate action has been taken against him.
In para 3 of the written statement, it has been averred as under :-  ``Admitted that the petitioner had entered into second marriage with Ajit Kaur in spite of the fact that the had already a living wife named Smt. Rajwinder Kaur.
The petitioner had concealed these facts from the department at the time of his entry into goverment service.''
It has been further stated that the petitioner ``was charge-sheeted as he was unfit for Government service due to having two living wives in violation of Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 and Government Service Rules''.
According to the respondents, ``the petitioner was appointed on 1671959 and had concealed this fact from the appointing authorities and got the appointment by supplying false information, in his application form.
When this fact came to the notice of the Department in the year 1964, the petitioner was charge-sheeted and on proving his guilt his services were terminated on 17.5.1971 against which the petitioner filed an appeal to the Government which was decided against the petitioner 2911982 confirming his termination......''  It has been further mentioned that the date of birth of Smt. Rajwinder Kaur is October 13, 1939.
If it is accepted that she had married in the year 1953, then her age was 13 years at the time of marriage.
The first issue is alleged to have been born on February 5, 1964.
This clearly shows that the marriage had taken place in the year 1963 which was against the Government instructions and the service rules.
On this basis, it is prayed that the writ petition be dismissed.
6.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
This precise charge levelled against the petitioner was that he had "contracted a second marriage with Smt. Rajwinder Kaur........while his first wife Ajit Kaur was alive''.
The Enquiry Officer vide his report, a copy of which is at Annexure P.7 with the writ petition found that ``Smt. Rajwinder Kaur was tenant in Sukhdev Singh's house while posted Urdhan.
They fill in love with one another and later on their illicit relation led them to show themselves married.
Actually, no marriage took place''.
On this basis, he concluded that ``the Department has failed to prove it beyond (doubt) that Shri Sukhdev Singh married Rajwinder Kaur in 1963''.
A show cause notice was given to the petitioner vide letter dated November 13, 1967.
It was observed that ``on a careful consideration of the report, on the basis of the charges framed against you, I am provisionally of the opinion that a penalty of dismissal should be enforced on you.....'' It was nowhere suggested that the conclusions recorded by the Enquiry Officer were wrong or contrary to the evidence on record.
It was not even indicated that the punishing authority was not agreeing with the conclusions recorded by the Enquiry Officer.
Yet, the punishment of dismissal was proposed.
The petitioner submitted a detailed reply.
He even produced certain affidavits with a supplemental reply.
However, without even considering the matter, the Director of Public Instructions, Punjab, ordered the petitioner's termination by a wholly cryptic order.
The petitioner was informed that on a consideration of the reply ``it has been decided to terminate'' his services.
No reason what-so- ever for reaching this conclusion was recorded.
Mr. Dhillon, consel for the respondents points put that the appeal was decided by a regular speaking order.
It may be so.
However, the fact remains that the punishing authority had not assigned any reason.
7.
On a perusal of the above documents, it is clear that the charge as levelled against the petitioner was not found to have been proved by the Enquiry Officer.
Yet on the basis of the findings recorded by the Enquiry Officer, the petitioner was ordered to be removed from service.
This too was done without assigning any reason.
There is an apparent infirmity in law.
If the punishing authority was not accepting the findings recorded by the Enquiry Officer, it should have been recorded its reasons.
Those reasons should have been conveyed to the petitioner and he should have been afforded an opportunity to explain the position.
This was not done.
Resultantly, there was miscarriage of justice.
The fact that the appellate authority has passed a detailed order would not cure the defect.
8.
Even otherwise, the case made out by the respondents against the petitioner does not appear to be tenable.
As already noticed, the charge against the petitioner was that he had contracted a second marriage with Smt. Rajwinder Kaur when his first wife Smt. Ajit Kaur was alive.
In para 3 of the written statement filed by the respondents, it has been categorically stated that the petitioner has ``entered into second marriage with Ajit Kaur in spite of the fact that he had already a living wife named Smt. Rajwinder Kaur''.
The charge and the plea taken in the written statement are self- contradictory.
Even at the hearing, it has not been possible for the learned counsel for the respondents to explain this incongruity.
9.
Mr. Dhillon submits that even if the charge as levelled aginast the petitioner is ignored, he was guilty of misconduct inasmuch as he had not disclosed the factum of his second marriage at the time of his entry into Government service in the year 1959.
The plea of the learned cunsel cannot be accepted for the simple reason that such a charge had not been levelled aginast the petitioner.
If it was the department's case that the petitioner had violated certain instructions or with-held some information, a charge to that effect should have been levelled agianst him.
This was not done.
10.
It was also pointed out on behalf of the respondents that the petitioner had been removed from serivce in the year 1982.
Since then, he must have remained gainfully employed in one form or the other.
The State should not be burdened with the arrears of his salary.
This fear of the State counsel has been allayed by the counsel for the petitioner by filing an affidavit.
The petitioner has categorically stated in his affidavit that he gives up his claim for arrears of salary.
It was also stated by Mr. Patwalia, counsel for the petitioner that he having retired on September 30, 1994 would only be entitled to pension with effect from October 1, 1994.
11.
In view of the above, the writ petition is allowed.
The impugned orders, copies of which have been produced as Annexures P.11 and P.13 are set aside.
The petitioner will, however, not be entitled to any arrears of salary.
He shall be entitled to the payment of pension with effect from October 1, 1994.
He will also be entitled to the other retiral benefits.
These would be paid to him within three months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
In the circumstances, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.