RL Anand, J - Release of pension and other retirement benefits in favour of the petitioner, who admittedly has retired from the service of respondent No. 4, is the main prayer of the present writ petitioner.
He has also prayed that interest at the rate of 18 per cent per annum be allowed on the amount due to him.
Also it is to be seen whether respondent No. 2 can direct refixation of the salary of the petitioner after more than 20 years, when the petitioner has even retired from service, particularly when the salary of the petitioner was fixed after due approval of the Director Public Instructions (Schools) (for short 'the DPI'), as required under the rules.
2.
Petitioner Manmohan Singh joined service as a Science Teacher in Sargodha Khalsa High School, Ludhiana, (respondent No. 4) on 10.1.1958.
This School is a privately managed recognised school and is getting grant-in-aid from the State Government under the Delhi Pattern Grant-in-aid Scheme (for short 'the Scheme') providing for grant-in-aid to the privately managed schools.
The Scheme was introduced in Punjab by the Education Department with effect from 1121967.
Thereafter the service record of the teachers was scrutinised and verified by the Education Department.
The petitioner alleges that he was promoted as Headmaster on 1981976 in the pay scale of Rs. 300- 600, and this promotion was duly approved for the purpose of grant-in-aid by the DPI vide office order dated 28.2.1977 (P1).
At the time of promotion, the petitioner was drawing basic salary of Rs. 292/- and his next increment was due on 1101976 and he was to get the basic pay of Rs. 300/- with effect from that date.
As per notes 1 and 8 of Rule 4.4 of the Punjab Civil Service Rules the petitioner was entitled to get one increment on promotion.
The school management agreed to defer the promotion of the petitioner and making it effective with effect from 3101976 in the pay scale of Rs. 300-600 and his Basic Pay on the date of promotion was fixed at Rs. 325/- with effect from that date because the petitioner started drawing Basic Pay of Rs. 300/- as on 1101976.
The case of the petitioner was sent for approval for promotion with effect from 3101976 instead of 1981976 and the DPI granted the necessary approval for promotion as Headmaster with effect from 3101976 for the purpose of giving grant-in-aid vide office order dated 2811982.
Consequently, the salary of the petitioner on the promoted post of Headmaster was fixed at Rs. 325/- with effect from 3101976 and necessary approval in this regard was granted by the DPI vide Annexure P3.
The pay scale of the teachers working in the Government as well as privately managed recognised schools was revised with effect from 111978.
The salary of the petitioner was fixed in the revised pay scale and was verified by the District Education Officer and a certificate was also given in the service book of the petitioner.
The pay scale was further revised with effect from 111986 and the salary of the petitioner was again fixed in the revised pay scale by making an entry in the service book duly verified by the District Education Officer.
The petitioner retired from service on 351991.
3.
The State Government introduced pension scheme to the employees of the privately managed recognised schools under the title Punjab Privately Managed Recognised Aided Schools Retirement Benefits Scheme, 1992 (for short 'the Pension Scheme') and it was applicable to all the employees who were in service as on 521987 and all the employees of such schools became entitled to the pensionary benefits.
Since the petitioner retired on 351991, i.e., subsequent to 521987, he also became entitled to the retirement benefits, such as pension, gratuity etc.
The school management prepared the pension case of the petitioner and it was sent to the District Education Officer for the release of pension and other terminal benefits.
However, the case was returned with objections.
The objections were removed.
The District Education Officer then forwarded the case of the petitioner for grant of pension and other retirement benefits to the office of the DPI.
The case was returned by the latter, stating that the pay of the petitioner had been wrongly fixed from the date of promotion as Headmaster and as such the entries in the service book are required to be changed and the amount allegedly due to the Department was required to be recovered from the petitioner.
The petitioner alleges that the order of the DPI ordering refixing of the salary of the petitioner from the date of his promotion till retirement is wholly arbitrary, unconstitutional, mala fide and unreasonable.
The copy of the order is Annexure P 6 on the record.
The school management replied to the objections raised by the DPI and clarified that the salary of the petitioner had been rightly fixed at Rs. 325/- with effect from 3101976 with the approval of the office of the DPI and cannot be now changed after a lapse of 20 years.
However, the DPI again returned the pension case of the petitioner to District Education Officer, stating that the pay of the petitioner had been fixed upwards in his promotion as Headmaster.
It was further stated that more than due increments were granted before 1121967 and that the record of the case should be produced.
These orders were passed in Annexure P9.
The position was again explained by the District Education Officer by returning the pension papers to the DPI and it was explained that it would not be proper to reduce the salary of the petitioner after more than 20 years, specially when the petitioner has retired from service.
In spite of all this, nothing yielded for the petitioner, who served a legal notice (P11) on 851995.
The impugned orders (Annexure P6 and P9) dated 25.10.1994 and 3131994, respectively, have been challenged mainly on the ground that it is not open now for the respondents to reopen the case after such a long time, when the Department itself had verified the salary of the petitioner.
Annexures P6 and P9 are also visited with vices as they were passed at the back of the petitioner without affording any opportunity of hearing to him.
On account of the passing of the orders Annexures P6 and P9 the pensionary benefits of the petitioner have also been withheld in an illegal manner and under these circumstances the action on the part of respondents Nos. 1 to 3 is wholly arbitrary and illegal.
Finally it was prayed that a writ of certiorari be issued for the quashing of the orders dated 25.10.1994 and 3131994, Annexures P6 and P9, respectively.
Further prayer was made for the issuance of writ of mandamus directing the respondents to release pension, gratuity and other retirement benefits with interest, as stated above.
4.
Notice of the petition was given to the respondents.
Joint written statement was filed on behalf of respondents Nos. 1 to 3.
No written statement was filed by respondent No. 4, i.e., the School.
The respondents denied the allegations and blame was sought to be put on the petitioner by alleging that he managed to get the approval/orders from the Department.
He managed to defer his pay till 3101976, which was contrary to the facts and rules applicable to the petitioner.
Orders Annexures P2 and P3 were issued inadvertently and by mistake and this mistake was rectified.
The case of the petitioner was scrutinised at various levels but it was not found satisfactory.
Respondent No. 2 was competent to raise objection with regard to the fixation of salary of the petitioner.
The competent authority can rectify the wrong orders mistakenly issued without adopting the principles of natural justice.
The petitioner is not entitled to claim interest as the pension scheme came into existence with effect from 1021992.
5.
We have heard Shri BR Mahajan, learned counsel for the petitioner, and Shri SS Shergill, D.A.G., Punjab appearing on behalf of the respondents, and with their assistance have gone through the record of this case.
We are of the considered view that this petition is liable to succeed by quashing the orders as contained in Annexures P6 and P9.
It is not open for the Government at this belated stage to review the fixation of the salary of the petitioner, specially after his retirement.
Moreover before passing the orders Annexures P6 and P9 no opportunity of hearing was ever afforded to the petitioner.
The respondents cannot be allowed to reduce the salary of the petitioner after more than 20 years, specially when it was duly verified earlier and that at no point of time it was ever objected to by the respondents that the salary of the petitioner was not being fixed in accordance with the rules.
It will be a big hardship to the petitioner if the respondents are permitted to reopen the case.
We are not in agreement with the argument of Shri SS Shergill that since the information was to be supplied by respondent No. 4, therefore, the Government could not pass the orders earlier with regard to the alleged correct fixation of the salary of the petitioner.
Respondent No. 4 had been sending the pension papers of the petitioner to respondent No. 2 and at no relevant time the petitioner was ever informed that his salary has not been correctly fixed.
Resultantly, we repel the argument of Shri SS Shergill and declare that the petitioner is entitled to the grant of retirement benefits and other benefits as laid down in the Pension Scheme of 1992, which has come into force with effect from 521987.
6.
Now the other point for determination is which of the respondents is liable to pay the retirement benefits to the petitioner.
We have stated the provisions of the Pensions Scheme as notified in the Government Gazette dated 1221992.
Respondent No. 4 is a Government aided institution.
The Scheme at Chapter V as contained in Regulation 22 shows that at the time of drawal of grant-in-aid by the Managing Committee, the share of the Managing Committee towards pension and death-cum-retirement gratuity benefits in respect of each is liable to be recovered from the grant-in-aid amount through book transfer in the concerned treasury.
Before us also respondent Nos. 1 to 3 have not denied their liability to release the retirement benefits.
The only ground for withholding the retirement benefit to the petitioner was that his salary had been wrongly fixed at the initial stages.
Since we have repelled the submissions made on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 to 3, therefore, there is no difficulty on our part to declare that all the respondents are liable to pay the retirement benefits to the petitioner.
Otherwise also, respondent No. 4 has not contested this writ petition.
The amount has been withheld without any justification.
Therefore, the respondents are also liable to pay interest at the rate of 12% per annum from the date of the retirement of the petitioner till payment.
7.
In view of the aforesaid discussion, this writ petition is allowed by quashing of orders dated 25.10.1994 (Annexures P6) and 3131994 (Annexures P9), and we direct the respondents to refix the salary of the petitioner from the date of his appointment till retirement.
We further issue a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to release pension, gratuity, Provident Fund and other pensionary benefits along with interest at the rate of 12% per annum.
The retirement benefits will be calculated by the respondents in accordance with law and as per the rules applicable to the petitioner.