NK Sodhi, J - Regional Engineering College, Kurukshetra (for short, `the College') held a Common Engineering Entrance Test in May, 1992 for admission to undergraduate engineering courses for the session 1992-93.
The admissions were to be for the College as well as for the Chhotu Ram State College of Engineering, Murthal District Sonepat.
The entrance test was open to candidates who had passed the qualifying examination (10+2 examination or equivalent) from schools/colleges/institutions located in Haryana and Union Territories of Delhi and Chandigarh.
It was also open to (i) children of Haryana Government employees, (ii) children of employees of autonomous bodies, boards, corporations of Haryana State irrespective of location of school/college/institution from where they passed the qualifying examination and (iii) to candidates of Haryana domicile irrespective of location of school/college/institution from where qualifying examination was passed.
Both the colleges had issued their separate admission brochure/prospectus.
2.
Admission Brochure of the College stated that a candidate was eligible for the seats of that State in which the school or college from where he had passed the qualifying examination was located.
It also allocated seats for the children (a) of Haryana Government employees, (b) persons employed in connection with the affairs of the Haryana Government including those on deputation to the Government of India or other similar organisations and (c) employees of autonomous bodies/boards/corporations of Haryana State irrespective of the location of school/college/institution from where they had passed the qualifying examination.
In the Chhotu Ram State College of Engineering, Murthal, District Sonepat, twenty per cent of the seats were reserved for candidates of Haryana domicile irrespective of the location of institution from where the qualifying examination was passed.
There was no such reservation or allocation of seats in the College.
3.
Petitioner passed All India Secondary School Examination (10 + 2) from DAV College, Chandigarh in the year 1991 and sat for the Common Engineering Entrance Test held by the College.
It is common case of the parties that the petitioner ranked at Sr. No. 954 in the merit list prepared by the College.
Since he had passed his qualifying examination from Chandigarh, he was entitled to be considered against the seats meant for the Union Territories of Chandigarh and Delhi.
He was duly considered against these seats but could not make the grade and consequently, not admitted against any of these seats.
The rank of the last candidate admitted against the seats reserved for Union Territories of Delhi and Chandigarh is 672 whereas the rank of the petitioner was 954.
He can, therefore, have no grievance on this account.
4.
In the present petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution, the petitioner claims that he is entitled to be considered for admission to the College against seats meant for the children of persons employed in connection with the affairs of the Haryana Government as his father is a permanent employee in the office of Post Master General, Haryana Circle, Ambala and has been posted at Ambala Cantt.
since February 14, 1969.
The argument is that being the child of a person employed in connection with the affairs of Haryana Government, he was entitled to be considered against the seats meant for such children irrespective of the location of School/College from where he passed the qualifying examination.
There is no merit in this contention.
No doubt, father of the petitioner is a permanent employee in the office of Post Master General, Haryana Circle, Ambala and has been posted there since the year 1969, but he is not employed in connection with the affairs of the Haryana Government.
He is, of course, working in Haryana State inasmuch as he is handling the post in the territory of Haryana but he cannot be said to be employed in connection with the affairs of the Haryana Government.
Being in the employment of the Postal Department of Government of India and posted at Ambala, he has no connection with the affairs of the Haryana Government.
Haryana Government is obviously different from Haryana State and the condition necessary to make him eligible for admission to the College is that his father should be employed in connection with the affairs of the Haryana Government.
Petitioner is, therefore, not entitled to be given admission to the College against a seat meant for children of persons employed in connection with the affairs of the Haryana Government.
The contention has no merit and has, thus, to be repelled.
5.
It was then urged by Mr. Arun Jain, Advocate, that father of the petitioner has been a permanent resident of Ambala since the year 1960 (as per Annexure P2 with the writ petition), and therefore, petitioner is a candidate of Haryana domicile and is entitled to be considered for one of the seats meant for the State of Haryana and if he is so considered he would be entitled to admission as candidates lower in merit than him from Haryana have already been admitted.
This contention is equally devoid of merits.
Even if the petitioner is treated as a candidate of Haryana domicile, he cannot be admitted in the College as there are no seats reserved for candidates of Haryana domicile unlike Chhotu Ram State College of Engineering, Murthal where such reservation has specifically been made.
A candidate is eligible for admission to the College for seats of that State in which the school or college from where he had passed the qualifying examination is located.
This allocation of seats does not mean that seats are meant for students of Haryana domicile.
The clause in the admission brochure means only this much that students who have passed their qualifying examination from schools/colleges/institutions located in the State of Haryana are eligible for admission.
The petitioner had passed his qualifying examination from Chandigarh and had been considered for seats reserved for the Union Territories of Delhi and Chandigarh but he was not high up in the list to get admission.
No other point was raised.
In the result, there is no merit in the petition which stands dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.