Jawahar Lal Gupta, J (Oral)- The petitioner was appointed as JB.T.
teacher in the provincialised cadre in May 1957.
Vide order dated 6th February, 1964, a copy of which has been produced on record as Annexure P.1 the petitioner was confirmed with effect from 9th May, 1959.
She made a request for her transfer from Government Middle School, Rohna, District Rohtak, to Government Girls High School, Thanesar, District Karnal.
Her request was accepted subject to the condition that she loses her seniority of District Rohtak and is placed at the tail of her cadre in Karnal District, She was accordingly transferred.
Her grievance is that she was placed at the tail of the teachers in the State Cadre instead of those in the provincialised cadre.
As a result, she has suffered in the grant of selection grade etc.  2.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been, inter alia, averred that the petition is belated.
It is also stated that the provincialised Cadre is a diminishing cadre, and as such, anyone who seeks transfer is not transferred to a post in the Provincialised Cadre, but to a post in the State Cadre.
On this premises, the claim of the petitioner is contested.
3.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I find that the case is squarely covered by the judgment of the Division Bench in Naginder Singh and another v. The State of Punjab and others, 1990(1) RSJ 123.
Their Lordship were pleased, inter alia, to observe as under :-  So long as the Government maintains the Provincialised Cadre list for each of the district, the appellants being in that service, will have to be shown at their proper places in Provincialised Cadre service only and not in the State Cadre Service list.
If it is so taken, then there can be no doubt that the appellants are entitled the relief which they have prayed for in this petition.
We may mention that though the writ petition has been filed long after the seniority list was settled, we are not persuaded to deny the relief to the appellants especially because the Government is not going to be affected by the orders made in this appeal and no JB.T.
T. teacher is affected by this order as the appellants are willing to go at the bottom in the Provincialised Cadre list."
The above observations squarely cover the petitioner's case.
These also answer the objection of delay raised on behalf of the respondents.
In view of this, the claim of the petitioner for fixation at her seniority in the provincialised cadre has to be accepted.
4.
Accordingly, this writ petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to fix the seniority of the petitioner in the provincialised cadre and the petitioner's claim for the grant of selection grade etc. shall be considered accordingly.
In the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.