HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner secured admission in the Bachelor of Technology Course of the GND University Amritsar in the subject of Electronic Engineering.
It has been averred that the said course of study is of the duration of four years divided into eight semesters and the petitioner accordingly completed the course securing 4067 marks out of 6800 marks, which in terms of percentage marks came to 5981%.
Considering himself entitled to grace mark of rounding off of his percentage of 60% which would have entitled him to pass in the 1st Division, the petitioner moved a representation before the Vice-Chancellor of the University on 10th December, 90, a copy whereof has been appended as Annexure P-2 to the petition.
As nothing was done in the matter, the petitioner has filed the present petition.
2.
The petition earlier came up before me when it was thought fit to move an application to amend the same.
The requisite application alongwith the writ application was issued for 27th March, 1992.
However, as the matter appeared to be urgent, the respondents also filed the reply expeditiously and the case is being taken up today on the request of both the counsel.
Mr. Sharma, learned counsel for the petitioner has urged that a reading of Chapter-V of Guru Nanak Dev University Calendar, Edition 1986 which deals with the award of the grace marks provides that in certain situations the total marks obtained have to be rounded up to the next higher figure and in the alternative a certain number of grace marks are to be given to a candidate as provided by Regulations 21 to 25.
The regulations mentioned above are reproduced below :  "21 (i) A candidate who appears in all subjects of an examination and who fails in one or more subjects (written, practical, sessional or viva voce and/or the aggregate (if there is a separate requirement of passing in the aggregate) shall be given grace marks upto maximum of one per cent of the total aggregate marks (excluding marks for internal assessment) to make up the deficiency, if by such addition the candidate can pass the examination.
Provided that grace marks shall also be awarded to a candidate if by awarding such marks he can earn exemption or compartment in subject(s) and Part (s) (ii) A candidate who reappears to clear the compartment or subject(s) and part(s) in which he has been declared to reappear shall be awarded grace marks upto one percent of the total marks of the subject(s) and part(s) in which the reappears if by such condition the candidate can pass in that subject (s) or part(s).
Exception : (a) in the case of MBBS and BDS examination where the grace marks, however, shall be given upto one per cent of the total marks of each subject and not upto one percent of the aggregate of all the subjects.
In other words, each subject will be, for MBBS and BDS examination, treated as a separate unit, and a candidate who fails in a subject by not more than one per cent of the aggregate marks of that subject may be given the required number of marks to enable him to pass in that subject.
(b) in case of B.Ed.
examination, one per cent grace marks of total marks for each part (excluding the marks for internal assessment) shall be given to a candidate either to pass or earn a higher class in that part, in comparison to what he could earn on the basis of his obtained score.
In other words, each part in this examination may be treated as a separate unit for giving grace marks.
The candidates appearing under re-appear Ordinances (in whole part) will also be given the benefit of grace marks.
While awarding grace marks, fraction working to 05 or more will be rounded to a whole.
22 For MA/MCom/MPEd.
and MA (Physical Education), to enable a candidate to get higher class or secure 55 per cent marks, grace marks upto one per cent of the total marks of Part I and Part II examination shall be added to the aggregate of both Part I and Part II Examinations, provided that grace marks have not already been given for passing the examination either in Part I or in Part II.
23 For MA/M.Com examination, a candidate who appears in either Part I or Part II or both the parts of the examinations for purpose of improving his division, shall be given grace marks upto one per cent of the total marks of the Part/Parts in which he appears.
24.
All examinations, except the examinations which have, already been specifically mentioned or Ordinances 21, 22 and 23 to enable a candidate to earn a higher class, grace marks, upto one per cent of the total marks provided that grace have not already been given for passing the examination.
This, however, shall not apply to B.Sc./ M.Sc.
Honours School Examinations.
25.
In the detailed marks certificate, the original marks and revised marks will be indicated.
It is clear from the above that Regulations 21 to 23 could not cover the case of the petitioner and his case would be covered specifically under Regulation 24 as the Bachelor of Technology Examination for which the petitioner has appeared does not find mention in Regulations 21 and 23.
The petitioner is therefore entitled to grace mark up to one per cent of the total marks in order to earn a higher class provided he has not received any grace marks for passing the examination in question.
It has been averred in paragraph 8 of the petition and not denied by the respondents that the petitioner did not get the benefit of any grace marks in order to clear the examination and he, in fact, did so on his own steam.
3.
The stand of the respondents that Regulation 21 would cover the case of the petitioner and he would not be entitled to any grace marks as he had been declared compartment in some of the earlier semesters, is untenable on the above score.
4.
In view of what has been held above, the second argument of the counsel for the petitioner that the fraction percentage of marks 5981% should be rounded off to 60 per cent as provided by Regulation 21 need not be gone into.
5.
For the reasons recorded above, the present petition is allowed and a direction is issued to the respondent-University to comply with Regulation 24 and to issue the revised marks card to the petitioner within a period of two weeks from today.
There will however be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.