SS Saron, J - This petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India has been filed seeking quashing of the orders dated 31.05.2007 (Annexure P-1) and 22.11.2007 (Annexure P-2) insofar as the petitioner has been transferred from Village Gujjarpura to the post of Assistant Office Kanungo at Ajnala then as Assistant Office Kanungo, Baba Bakala.
2.
Heard counsel for the parties.
3.
The petitioner Mukhwinder Singh was appointed as Patwari on 10102003.
He was transferred for Gujjarpur to the post of Assistant Kanungo, Ajnala vide order dated 31.5.2007 (Annexure P-1).
His name figured at Serial No. 49 in the said order of transfer.
Thereafter, the petitioner on 22.11.2007 (Annexure P- 2) was transferred from the post of Assistant Officer Kanungo, Ajnala to that of Assistant Officer Kanungo, Baba Bakala within six months of the earlier transfer order.
Baba Bakala is at a distance of 65 Kms from the residence of the petitioner.
The petitioner is a handicapped person and is suffering from post Polio Paralysis of both lower limbs and his disability has been assessed as 60%.
The petitioner has placed on record the Certificate dated 23.02.1988 (Annexure P-3) issued by the Office of Civil Surgeon Amritsar wherein it is recorded that the petitioner is a case of post Polio Paralysis of both lower limbs and his disability is of 60%.
For going to the place of his posting he has to change three buses.
Besides, Smt. Kulwinder Kaur wife of the petitioner is serving as ETT Teacher at Government Elementary School, Nangal Amb, Block Ajnala, District Amritsar.
She is also stated to be disabled with disability of 40% in the lower limb.
Therefore, the petitioner, it is stated, is covered by the guidelines dated 13042007 (Annexure P-7) relating to the posting of couples at a convenient and preferential station.
4.
After giving our thoughtful consideration to the matter, we are of the view that the guidelines laid down by the State for the transfer of its employees from one place to another are for the guidance of officers and are not enforceable for the purpose of assailing their transfer.
These do not vest any immunity in an employee from transfer in Government service.
Besides, transfer of an employee from one station to another is a normal feature and incidence of service which does not, in any manner, alter the conditions of his service.
No Government servant can claim to remain at a particular post or a station of his choice.
An order of transfer may be assailed on the ground of mala fide.
In the present case, there is no mala fide alleged against any person.
It is not alleged as to whether any has been ill disposed towards the petitioner so as to see that he is transferred.
Therefore, in the absence of any allegation against any particular official and in the absence of impleading such person eo nominee so as to enable him to answer the charge (sic) allegation of mala fide, which would warrant interference of this Court.
However, keeping in view the fact that both the husband and wife are physically disabled inasmuch as the petitioner is suffering from 60% post Polio Paralysis and his wife Smt. Kulwinder Kaur who is also an ETT Teacher at Government Elementary School, Nangal Amb, Block Ajnala, Distt Amritsar is also disabled with disability of 40% in lower limb, it would be justified and expedient in the facts and circumstances that the Deputy Commissioner-cum-Collector, Amritsar (respondent No. 3) considers and posts the petitioner at a place which would be convenient for both the disabled husband and wife to live together.
Accordingly, the writ petitioner is disposed of and the Deputy Commissioner shall consider and dispose of the request of petitioner for a posting at a place near to the place of his wife as expeditiously as possible and preferable within period of one month from receipt of the copy of the order.
Petition allowed.