Mohinder Pal, J - In this petition filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner has prayed for issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari, thereby quashing the order dated February 18, 2002 (Annexure P-5) passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal, Chandigarh Bench, Chandigarh (hereinafter referred to as `the Tribunal') whereby Original Application No. 111-CH/1998 filed by Sukhdev Singh (respondent No. 5) under Section 19 of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 (hereinafter referred to as `the Act'), was allowed.
2.
The facts of this case lie in a narrow compass :  The Railway Recruitment Board, Chandigarh (hereinafter referred to as `the Board') advertised posts of Enquiry-cum-Reservation Clerks in the year 1990 through an advertisement.
The petitioner being eligible, applied for the said post.
She participated in the written test conducted by the Board.
She was selected for the post.
She joined as Enquiry-cum-Reservation Clerk, New Delhi, on October 01, 1991.
Sukhdev Singh (respondent No. 5) was also selected for the post of Enquiry-cum-Reservation Clerk under handicap category and joined as such on March 31, 1992.
3.
Before joining as Enquiry-cum-Reservation Clerk, the candidate had to pass T-12 Course from Zonal Training School, Chandausi in Uttar Pradesh.
Only one chance is given to the candidate to pass the said test.
However, if a candidate has got compartment in any subject, he is given four chances to clear the same within one year.
The petitioner had passed the said Course held from April 29, 1991 to August 20, 1991, before joining as Enquiry-cum- Reservation Clerk, New Delhi on October 01, 1991.
However, respondent No. 5 could not clear the Course held from July 14, 1992 to August 19, 1992 as he got compartment in one of the subjects i.e Commercial Theory Paper.
4.
The petitioner got transfer on request from Delhi Division to Ambala Division as her husband was working at Chandigarh.
She joined Ambala Division on December 18, 1992.
Thereafter, she was posted at Chandigarh, which comes under Ambala Division, on December 31, 1992 on the post Enquiry-Reservation Clerk.
As the petitioner had joined Ambala Division on request, she was placed at the bottom of seniority in Ambala Division as per the Rules and Regulations governing the service conditions of the petitioner.
5.
Sukhdev Singh (respondent No. 5) cleared the T-12 Course, which was a pre- condition to join as Enquiry-cum-Reservation Clerk, in the year 1994 i.e. much after the petitioner had joined the Ambala Division.
The respondent- Department circulated the seniority list dated October 22, 1995, of the Enquiry-cum-Reservation Clerks of Ambala Division showing the petitioner at serial No. 15 and respondent No. 5 at serial No. 22.
Respondent No. 5 submitted representation against the said seniority list, which was rejected by the respondent-Department.
He then filed OA No. 111-CH-1998 before the Tribunal, which was allowed.
Hence this writ petition.
6.
It is the case of the petitioner that under Rule 303 of Chapter III of Indian Railway Establishment Manual, Volume I, respondent No. 5 will rank junior to her as she had passed the T-12 Course prior to him.
7.
The case of respondent No. 5 before the Tribunal was that he had been posted at Chandigarh after his practical training from August 25, 1992 to September 07, 1992.
In 1994, while posted at Chandigarh, he came to know from one of his colleagues that he had got compartment in Commercial Theory Paper.
According to respondent No. 5, the respondent-Department did not disclose that he had got compartment in Commercial Theory Paper and when he brought this fact to the notice of the authorities, he was deputed for the Course on September 01, 1994.
He completed the Course on October 31, 1994 and was posted with effect from the same date at Chandigarh.
8.
We have heard Mr. DS Nalwa, Advocate, appearing for the petitioner, Mr. Jagdish Marwaha, Advocate, appearing for respondents Nos. 2 to 4 and Mr. Raj Kumar Sharma, Advocate, appearing for respondents Nos. 5 to 13 and have gone through the records of the case.
9.
Though in the written statement filed by the official respondents before this Court, it has been stated that the Tribunal rightly allowed the Original Application filed by respondent No. 5 as the respondent-department did not send his name for clearing the compartment in the Supplementary Examinations for T-12 Course after 1992 due to administrative reasons, but in the written statement filed before the Tribunal it was stated that after the petitioner got compartment in T-12, he was deputed for 14 days local practical training from August 25, 1992 to September 07, 1992, and was formally appointed as Enquiry-cum-Reservation Clerk vide order dated September 17, 1992.
It was made clear to respondent No. 5 that in case of adverse result from the training school, his services would be terminated without any further notice as the appointment was made pending receipt of result.
Thus, the respondent- Department showed leniency towards respondent No. 5 as the condition of passing the T-12 Course before joining as Enquiry-cum-Reservation Clerk was relaxed and he was allowed to join as such formally after imparting him 14 days local practical training.
Under these circumstances, the finding of the Tribunal that qualifying the test by respondent No. 5 in this case will have to relate to the batch of respondent No. 5 of 1992, can, by no stretch of reasoning, be held to be tenable.
It cannot be accepted that the not know his result of T-12 training, in which he got compartment.
Firstly, it was the duty of the respondent No. 5 to know his result and, secondly, it is presumed that he was in the know of his compartment in Commercial Theory Paper because the order dated September 17, 1992 whereby he was formally appointed as Enquiry- cum-Reservation Clerk was passed to accommodate him keeping in view the fact that he had got compartment in T-12 Course, as has been stated by the respondent-Department in its written statement filed before the Tribunal.
More so, when the order dated September 07, 1992, was passed with the specific condition that in case of adverse result from the training school, services of respondent No. 5 would be terminated without any further notice as the appointment was made pending receipt of result.
The order of the Tribunal is, thus, not maintainable.
10.
The order passed by the Tribunal is also contrary to the provisions of Rule 303 ibid, which provides as under :  "303.
The seniority of candidates recruited through the Railway Recruitment Board or by any other recruiting authority should be determined as under : "(a) Candidates who are sent for initial training to training schools will rank in seniority in the relevant grade in the order of merit obtained at the examination held at the end of the training period before being posted against working posts.
Those who join the subsequent Courses for any reason whatsoever and those who pass the examination in subsequent chances, will rank junior to those who had passed the examination in earlier courses.
(b) In the case of candidates who do not have to undergo any training in training school, the seniority should be determined on the basis of merit order assigned by the Railway Recruitment Board or other recruiting authority".
A perusal of the above-quoted Rule makes it abundantly clear that the seniority has to be assigned in order of merit obtained at the examination held at the end of the training period.
The candidates who joined the Course subsequently for any reason whatsoever, or passed the Course in subsequent chances will rank junior to the candidates who have passed the examination in earlier Courses.
Thus, the Tribunal ignored the provisions of Rule 303 ibid while passing the impugned order.
Consequently, this writ petition is allowed and the order dated February 18, 2002 (Annexure P-5) passed by the Tribunal is set aside.
Petition allowed.