MM Kumar, J - The instant petition is directed against order dated 372001 (P-12), passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal, Chandigarh Bench, Chandigarh (for brevity, `the Tribunal'), in OA No. 1102/PB/93.
The Tribunal has dismissed the Original Application filed by the petitioners in which it was claimed that the petitioners were entitled to the grant of seniority in the cadre of Junior Clerk and subsequent promotion with effect the dates they have been working in Railway Coach Factory, Kapurthala (for brevity, `the RCF') with all consequential benefits such as arrears of pay alongwith interest etc.  2.
Few undisputed facts may first be noticed.
All the four petitioners are regular Group `D' screened Khalasis who were working on the post of Khalasi in Ferozepur Railway Division and they held a lien on That post.
They came on transfer to the RCF as Clerks and there was promise of some incentive.
The incentive scheme was introduced vide letter dated 3171986 (P-1) after joining of the petitioners in the RCF.
According to the provisions made, the staff belonging to Group `C' and `D', which has been diverted from other railways, was to be considered for out of turn promotion up to two grades than the grade held by them in their parent cadre.
The petitioners were promoted as Clerk-cum-Typist in the pay scale of Rs. 950-1500 on ad hoc basis with a clear stipulation that they were to have no right of seniority over their seniors, as is evident from order dated 361987 (P-5).
Thereafter they were promoted as Senior Clerks in the scale of Rs. 1200-2040 again on ad hoc basis but were reaverted as Junior Clerks vide order dated 10101988 (P-8).
It is pertinent to mention that there was a group of candidates eligible for Group `C' posts from the category of `Oustees' whose land was acquired.
Those candidates were working in Group `D' service and a screening test was held for them on 1331988.
The petitioners made an unsuccessful attempt to seek participation in that test by pleading equality with them but their claim was not considered.
The `oustees' were however, selected vide eater dated 1431988 (P-7).
It was at this stage that the petitioners were reverted from the post of Senior Clerk to that of Junior Clerk.
It is alleged that one Shri Kamal Kumar respondent No. 4, who was junior to the petitioners, was not reverted.
3.
The petitioners represented for their regularisation as Clerk-cum-Typist in the RCF from the initial date of their appointment there with all benefits of seniority etc.
The test was held in December, 1991.
It is claimed that they appeared and qualified and Shri Kamal Kumar respondent No. 4 failed in the test, who continued to work as Senior Clerk.
Vide notification dated 56 1992 (P-10), the petitioners were placed on the panel for the post of Clerk- cum-Typist against ranker's quota.
The RCF was declared as production unit with effect from 1.4.1990, which was not to have any effect on the incentive enjoyed by the staff under the Scheme extended to them.
The benefit of the Scheme was, however, closed with effect from 1.4.1990 and those who joined after introduction of the Scheme were not given any benefit.
The petitioners have repeatedly represented for regularisation as Junior Clerk with claim of seniority from the date of their initial appointment.
They pleaded that some persons who were first appointed as Casual Khalasis and then approved as Junior Clerks, were their junior and submitted that they were entitled to be regularised as Junior Clerks along with `oustees' appointed against the ranker's quota from the date of their appointment in RCF.
They also claimed that they should be made senior to `oustees' with all consequential benefits.
In the alternative it was claimed that they should be deemed to be regularised with effect from 1.4.1990 by quashing order of their reversion dated 10101988 (P-10).
4.
The Tribunal after recording the stand taken the respondents on the question of challenge to order dated 10.
(P-8), observed that there was huge delay.
On merit, the Tribunal rejected the claim of the petitioners that they were entitled to the benefit of incentive scheme introduced through letter dated 3171986 (P-1), by observing as under :-  "10.
Admitted case of the parties is that applicants continued retaining their lien in their parent cadre as Group `D' employees.
Under the scheme A-2, such employees were to be granted on one adhoc promotion and two advance increments.
Even though prior to issuance of letter, no incentive had been promised, it was extended to the persons appointed before the introduction of the scheme by treating it as per part of incentive.
Applicants were given one adhoc promotion as Clerk-cum-typists in the scale of Rs. 950-1500 from their substantive post of group `D' and were also given two advance increments.
They were given another adhoc promotion as Sr.
Clerk for which no basis of scheme has been brought to our notice.
Respondent claim this to be result of mistake and when they noticed it, they withdrew through A-12.
We can not find any legal fault with such an action."
5.
The further claim of the petitioners for their regular appointment was considered and rejected by the Tribunal with the following observations :  "11.
The stand of the respondents that persons who came to RCF on deputation/transfer by retaining their lien in their parent cadres were always allowed to participate in their parent cadres in the selection for higher posts.
If they were given such promotion there, benefits was extended to them while working in RCF Cadre of RCF was closed w.e.f.
1.4.1990 and all those who were found suitable after screening were absorbed in their respective posts which were held on regular basis in their parent cadre.
Through circulars issued by Railway Board and also enforced in RCF their promotions earned while in RCF were treated as adhoc purely temporary and fortuitous.
After the date of closure of the cadre, they were considered for the post of Clerk-cum-typists against rankers quota in a selection and after finding them suitable, they were placed on the panel through A-15 dated 5.6.92.
Thus, their claim for regular appointment has to be related with their qualifying in the selection.
12.
In these circumstances, their claim for regularisation as junior clerk-cum-typists w.e.f.
the date they joined RCF is not made out, particularly when it was made clear in their appointment order through specific conditions that the promotion being given to them from Group `D' posts to the post of Junior Clerk is temporary, adhoc and fortuitous which will not confer any right on them to claim either of the claims being made by them now which is regularisation and seniority.
RCF was a project and they continued in it on adhoc basis while retaining their lien in the parent cadre.
They thus, are held to be not entitled to get any benefit out of such adhoc- fortuitous promotions given to them under the incentive scheme.
Their rights, if any, against the post of Junior Clerk-cum-typists start after they being placed on the panel through process of selection in 1992."
The Tribunal also held that the rights of the petitioners against the post of Junior Clerk-cum-Typist came into existence only after they were placed on the panel through the process of selection in the year 1992.
The Tribunal also rejected the claim of the petitioners that they deserve to be given the same benefit as was given to the oustees.
The observations of the Tribunal reads as under :  "14.
On the claim of the applicants that they should have been considered for regular absorption in class III through the test, through which the oustees were selected and appointed, we find no legal basis for such a claim.
Persons whose land had been acquired had been given benefit of appointment in the RCF and they constituted a category/class in itself which is quite distinct from the category of the applicants.
Applicants were regular Group `D' employees of the railways and they can not claim such benefit by comparison with a distinct class which have been given some benefit for a valid reason.
Applicants are definitely not part of oustees category.
15.
Annexure A-25 which reliance is placed by the applicants towards the end of their submissions is again misplaced.
It indicates that once an oustees has accepted group `D' post in RCF, he has to wait for his promotion and can not directly be appointed to Class III post.
We would again hold that the applicants are trying to expand the scope of the present OA as appointment to class III of candidates to oustee category is not under challenge in this OA nor they are impleaded as parties in his case.
Applicants are in fact trying to get benefit of direct recruitment on the basis of A-25, which in our opinion, is not made out unless some specific rules had been framed for such purpose.
They were entitled to promotion for appointment to a higher post against rankers quota which they ultimately have received."
6.
In respect of Shri Kamal Kumar-respondent No. 4, the submission made by the petitioners were also considered and rejected, as is evident from the perusal of para 16, which reads as under :  "16.
Coming to the grievance of the applicant against Respondent No. 4 and considering the judgment rendered by the Principal Bench in his favour, we find that his case is clearly distinguishable from the claim of the applicants.
Respondent No. 4 Shri Kamal Kumar had been officiating as a Material Checking Clerk on adhoc basis w.e.f.
861981 after he had cleared a written test for it in the construction organization.
He came on deputation to RCF after that on 12.1.1985 and thereafter he was promoted as a Sr.
Clerk w.e.f.
7.1.1987 and absorbed in RCF on 1.4.1990.
He had worked as MCC after qualifying a test for more than three years and his services were not regularised in terms of C.M.s letter dated 26788 whereas all other MCCs were regularised.
We would thus hold that the case decided by the principal Bench was on its own peculiar facts and it can not be cited as a precedent particularly when applicants admittedly had remained group `D' employees in their parent department and were taken in RCF as junior clerks on adhoc basis."
7.
Mr. TPS Chawla, learned counsel for the petitioners has made two submissions before us.
Firstly, he has submitted that the petitioners were entitled to be considered as Clerks with effect from the date they were appointed by transfer in the RCF.
According to the learned counsel the petitioners were entitled to the benefit of all the incentives as envisaged by the Scheme dated 3171986.
The other submission made by the learned counsel is that they are entitled to the grant of all the benefits as Junior Clerk-cum-Typist with effect from the dare they have been absorbed.
In that regard reliance has been placed on order dated 2731990 (R-5), passed in favour of Satinder Kumar petitioner No. 2.
The last submission made by Mr. Chawla that the petitioners are entitled to equal treatment with that of oustees should have been subjected to screening test on 1431988 (P-7).
8.
No one has put in appearance on behalf of the respondents.
9.
After hearing learned counsel for the petitioner and perusing the records with his able assistance, we have reached the conclusion that there is no merit in this petition because the petitioners are holder of substantive posts in Group `D' as Khalasi.
They hold lien on the post of Khalasi and were brought to RCF by transfer on certain conditions contemplating some incentives on 181986 (P-2).
It was clarified in the aforementioned office order issued in the favour of petitioner No. 1 that he was appointed to officiate as Clerk in the Grade of Rs. 260-400/- on adhoc basis and such a promotion/appointment was not to confer any right upon him.
According to the incentives contemplated by the Scheme dated 3171986 (P-1), the petitioners were sanctioned out of turn promotion and two advance increments.
They were also given an option to revert back to their parent department after a period of five years.
The whole arrangement was made on ad hoc basis.
It is well settled that such an employee who is holding lien on a permanent post, could be appointed on an ad hoc basis either on deputation or by transfer.
In the transferred department such an employee cannot claim promotion by competing with those employees who are working in transferred Department because his substantive appointment is in his parent Department.
Such an employee can always claim the right of consideration for promotion in his parent Department or another benefits in case person junior to him in his parent department are considered either for promotion or for grant of any other benefits.
In that regard, reliance may be placed on the judgment of Constitution Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of State of Mysore v. M.H.
Bellary AIR 1965 SC 868, while interpreting rule 50(b) of the Bomaby Civil Services Rules, their Lordships' considered the question of lien in para 5 and 6 and proceeded to observe as under :"  "(5) ........Where the lien is suspended the rule speaks of the "post or posts, if any he would have held if his lien had not been suspended".
By the use of the plural, it is clear that the rule contemplated the suspended lien being transferred from one post to another in other words, to a promotion from one post to another during the period of the service in another department.
If there was any ambiguity in what the rule meant it is wholly dispelled by reference to the circular which ensures to the officer on deputation in another department that he shall restored to the position he "would have occupied in his parent department had he not been deputed".
It was not suggested that there was any ambiguity in the wording of this circular which, in our opinion, gives proper effect to the provisions of Rule 50 (b).
"......... (6)......
The service of an officer on deputation in another department is treated by the rule as equivalent to service in the parent department and it is this equation between the services in the two departments that forms the basis of Rule 50(b).
So long therefore as the service of the employee in the new department is satisfactory and he is obtaining the increments and promotions in that department, it stands to reason that satisfactory service, and the manner of its discharge in the post he actually fills, should be deemed to be rendered in the parent department also so as to entitle him to promotions which are open on seniority-cum-merit basis...."  It is thus obvious that the petitioners have been given all the dues which they would have earned, had they not been transferred.
In addition, all the incentives in terms of transfer have also been extended to then.
Thus, there is no merit in this petition.
10.
The Tribunal has recorded categorical findings that as per the incentive schemes, ad hoc promotion along with two increments were given to the petitioners and any benefit given in their parent cadres were also extended to them while they were working in the transferred department namely RCF.
They were also allowed to participate in the selection/promotion process for any promotional posts in their parent cadre because they had retained lien on Group `D' post while working on transfer basis in RCF.
We find that the Tribunal has rightly rejected the claim of the petitioners either for appointment or for promotion in RCF or from regularization in RCF on the post of Junior-Clerk-cum-Typist w.e.f.
the date of their joining there.
11.
We also accept the approach adopted by the Tribunal holding that the petitioners could not have claimed equality with candidates who were in `oustees' quota.
In other words a separate category of those candidates in RCF was carved out who had acquired a right.
On account of the fact that their property was acquired and on that basis, they were granted benefit of appointment in RCF.
Such a category has to be regarded as a class apart and the petitioners who were working on transfer basis in RCF could not claim any equality with them.
Therefore, the Tribunal has correctly concluded that there is no violation of Article 14 of the Constitution.
Likewise the case of Kamal Kumar respondent No. 4 has been found to be entirely different than the case of the petitioners.
The Tribunal has found that Kamal Kumar, respondent No. 4 was officiating as a Material Checking Clerk on ad hoc basis w.e.f 861981.
He had also cleared written test for the post in the construction organization and had been working on deputation with RCF since longtime.
He had also been promoted as Senior clerk w.e.f.
7.1.1987.
He was absorbed in RCF on 1.4.1990.
It is thus, obvious that the petitioners cannot seek equality with Kamal Kumar respondent No. 4, provisions of Article 14 & 16(1) of the Constitution.
There is thus, no violation either of equality clause or any Rules and Regulations.
12.
The argument of Mr. Chawla that the petitioners were entitled to be considered as Clerk and also deserve to be given all the benefits of the Scheme dated 3171986 cannot be accepted as has already been discussed above.
Likewise, the other arguments of granting them benefits as Junior Clerk-cum- Typist w.e.f.
the date of their absorption could also not be accepted.
There is thus, no merit in the petition and the same is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.