Hemant Gupta, J - The challenge in the present writ petition is to the order passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal, Chandigarh Bench, Chandigarh (hereinafter referred to as `the Tribunal') on 1522002, whereby an application filed by the petitioner under Section 19 of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 (for short `the Act'), claiming counting of his past service rendered in the Department of Agriculture in the State of Pepsu (subsequently merged with the State of Punjab) for the period 19.7.1955 to 19.12.1962, was dismissed.
2.
The petitioner joined the Department of Agriculture in the State of Pepsu as an Agricultural Inspector on 1111956.
The petitioner became a member of the Research Staff of Soil Section of Department of Agriculture.
The petitioner's services were transferred to the Punjab Agricultural University with effect from 20121962, in terms of Sections 22 and 25 of the Punjab Agricultural University Act, 1961.
The petitioner went on deputation to Indian Council for Agricultural Research (for short `the ICAR') on 6121983 and was absorbed against a regular post on 6.12.1988.
On the said date, his lien with the Punjab Agricultural University was terminated.
It is the case of the petitioner that the period from 20121962 to 5121988, has been taken into consideration by the ICAR for the purpose of pensionary benefits, but the services rendered by the petitioner from 19.7.1955 to 20121962 have not been taken into consideration for grant of pensionary benefits.
Thus, he invoked the jurisdiction of the Tribunal to claim the said benefit.
3.
The learned Tribunal dismissed the application on the ground that the dispute relates to the service of the petitioner rendered with the Punjab Agricultural University and Government of Punjab and as both the organisations do not fall within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal and therefore, the Tribunal is not in a position to consider the claim of the petitioner.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has vehemently argued that since the petitioner is claiming pensionary benefits from the ICAR by taking into consideration his past service rendered by him in the State of Punjab, therefore, the application is maintainable before the Tribunal itself as the pensionary benefits are to be paid by ICAR alone by taking into consideration his past service.
5.
The said argument raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner could not be disputed by the learned counsel for the respondents in any meaningful manner.
However, Shri Deepak Agnihotri, learned counsel representing the Punjab Agricultural University, has pointed out that the services rendered by the petitioner in the Department of Agriculture in the erstwhile State of Pepsu and subsequently in the State of Punjab, was temporary in nature and cannot be counted towards the pensionary benefits.
It is also pointed out that as a matter of fact, no benefit was transferred to the Punjab Agricultural University, when the services of the petitioner were placed at the disposal of the University in the year 1962.
Therefore, the claim of the petitioner for counting of his past service is not tenable.
6.
A perusal of the reply filed by the Punjab Agricultural University shows that the services rendered by the petitioner for the period 19.7.1955 to 19.12.1962 were said to be temporary and that no financial reimbursement has been made by the Government of Punjab to the Punjab Agricultural University.
In para No. 20 of its written statement, the Punjab Agricultural University has pointed out to the following effect :-  "20.
That in reply to the contents of para 20, it is stated that the petitioner was transferred from Punjab Government side to PAU under Sections 22 and 25 of the Punjab Agricultural University Act, 1961 on 20121962.
The petitioner, prior to service rendered in the Agricultural department, PEPSU from 19.7.1955 to 19.12.1962 i.e 7 years 5 months was eligible for being counted in qualifying service for determination of pensionary benefits in PAU, if the petitioner would have been retired from PAU (respondent No. 5) on attaining the age of superannuation while working in PAU, the petitioner proceeded on deputation w.e.f.
6121983 with the ICAR.
The ICAR gave approval for absorption in ICAR w.e.f.
6.12.1988.
Accordingly, the University terminated his lien from University w.e.f.
6.12.1988.
Had the petitioner not proceeded on deputation with the ICAR, he would have been accorded the benefit of his service rendered in Department of Agriculture in the PAU for the purpose of pensionary benefits, after obtaining the affidavit to the effect that no case of pensionary benefits has been submitted by him to the Director of Agriculture, Punjab and no benefit has been received by the petitioner.
But as the petitioner permanently absorbed in the ICAR and has not retired on superannuation from PAU, no liability is to be shouldered by the PAU on account of service rendered by him on Punjab Government side."
7.
As a matter of fact, on 2791995 (Annexure R2/7), ICAR, communicated to the Punjab Agricultural University to remit the pensionary liability in respect of the services of the petitioner with the State of Punjab, for the period 19.7.1955 to 19.12.1962, as has been done in respect of some of the other colleague Scientists of the petitioner.
In reply to the said communication, the Punjab Agricultural University communicated vide letter dated 361996 (Annexure R.2/10) that had the petitioner not proceeded on deputation with ICAR, he would have been granted the benefit of the services for the purposes of pension by the Punjab Agricultural University as per the Pension Rules.
8.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and are of the opinion that the past service rendered by the petitioner with the State of Pepsu (subsequently merged with the State of Punjab) for the period 19.7.1955 to 19.12.1962, is required to be counted for the purposes of pension, firstly by the Punjab Agricultural University and subsequently by the ICAR.
In Para No. 20 of the written statement filed by the Punjab Agricultural University, the stand taken by the University is that had the petitioner retired from the University, his past service would have been counted towards the pensionary benefits.
If for the past service, the Punjab Agricultural University has not sent the contribution by the Punjab government, it is for the University to insist upon the said contribution for onward transmission to the ICAR, but the petitioner having worked with the State of Punjab, cannot be deprived of the benefit of counting the said service for his pensionary benefits.
9.
In view of the above, we allow the present writ petition, set aside the order passed by the Tribunal and direct the State of Punjab to send its contribution in respect of the pensionary benefits for the period 19.7.1955 to 19.12.1962 to the Punjab Agricultural University.
In turn the Punjab Agricultural University will transmit the said amount to the ICAR for computation of the retiral benefits to the petitioner in accordance with law.
The necessary compliance be made by the State of Punjab within three months from today.
The Punjab Agricultural University on receipt of the amount, shall transmit the amount within one week thereafter to the ICAR.
The ICAR shall disburse the pensionary benefits by recalculating the same within two months thereafter.
It is made clear that if the aforesaid directions are not complied with within the period stipulated, the petitioner shall be entitled to interest @ 9% from the date of his retirement till the payment from the respondent(s), who defaults in complying with the order passed by this Court.
Petition allowed.