VS Aggarwal, J - One Santokh Singh made a complaint that on 28101987 he went to get himself medically examined.
Vijay Kumar petitioner was a doctor in the said hospital while Surinder Kumar petitioner was a pharmacist.
They refused to examine Santokh Singh.
Illegal gratification was demanded.
It was settled that medical examination will be done only in case Santokh Singh pays Rs. 600/-.
Santokh Singh showed his inability to pay the amount.
Thereupon, petitioner Vijay Kumar asked him to pay Rs. 400/- to Surinder Kumar petitioner and the balance amount to be paid on the next day.
On the next day, Santokh Singh came to the Vigilance Department.
A raid was organised and thereafter both the petitioners were apprehended.
2.
The petitioners were tried for the offences punishable under Section 5(2) read with Section 5(1)(d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act.
Special Judge, Amritsar on 11.10.1993 acquitted the petitioners and held :-  "More than 16 opportunities have been given to the prosecution to produce the witness namely, Balwant Singh and the Investigating Officer but no effect and thus the prosecution evidence was closed vide my separate order as referred to above.
Therefore, there is no other evidence to connect the accused-persons with the commission of the crime and the case against the accused cannot be said to be proved beyond doubt.
14.
For the forgoing reasons and discussion, I come to the conclusion that the prosecution has failed to prove its case against the accused.
Therefore, both the accused namely, Vijay Kumar and Surinder Kumar are hereby acquitted of the charge framed against them."
3.
Vijay Kumar (petitioner in CWP No. 16063 of 1994) has since retired.
He has been served with a show cause notice/charge sheet pertaining to the said facts regarding which he was tried by the Special Judge, Amritsar.
He seeks quashing of the said charge-sheet pleading inter-alia that he has since been honourably acquitted by the Court and the departmental proceedings cannot be initiated against him.
Furthermore he asserts that no charge- sheet could be issued in respect of a matter beyond a period of four years prior to the retirement of the said petitioner.
The incident pertains to the year 1987 and serving of the charge-sheet at this stage adversely affects his defence.
4.
Petitioner Surinder Kumar (in CWP No. 13921 of 1994) also seeks quashing of the impugned charge-sheet on almost identical facts but with the defence that he has not since retired from service.
He also claims that show cause notice has been issued by the Joint Secretary, Vigilance Department who is not a disciplinary authority.
The Director, Health and Family Welfare, Panjabcannot delegate powers to any other authority.
5.
Needless to say that in the separate replies filed, the petitions have been contested.
There is no controversy raised about both the petitioners having been acquitted by the Special Judge, Amritsar.
However, as per the respondents, they have a right to initiate departmental proceedings.
After the acquittal of the petitioners, it was decided by the Government to initiate departmental action against the petitioners because they have been acquitted by giving them benefit of doubt which cannot be considered as decision on merit.
No prejudice is stated to have caused to the petitioners.
The charge-sheet to petitioner Vijay Kumar has been issued on 12.9.1994 well before his retirement.
6.
The short question that comes up for consideration is as to if when the petitioners had been acquitted by the Court, departmental proceedings could be initiated against them pertaining to the same incident and that too after inordinate delay of more than 7 years.
On the question of effect of a judicial acquittal on further departmental action, generally speaking, diametrically opposite view have been expressed.
7.
PK Tare, J. went to the extent of saying in Amar Ali Wahid Ali v. State of Madhya Pradesh, AIR 1959 Madhya Pradesh Page 16 that a government servant who was prosecuted on a criminal charge and honourably acquitted cannot be subjected to a departmental enquiry on the same facts again.
Strong observations were made that while the Court would not sit over the judgment of the enquiry as an appellate Court, a departmental authority cannot be permitted to sit in judgment over the Court of law as if it were the appellate authority.
It was pointed that the same result would follow both in the event of conviction as well as acquittal of the government servant concerned.
It was held, therefore, that the charge framed in the departmental enquiry could not have been framed at all and the further proceedings in that were a nullity; those proceedings could be well ignored by the Court.
8.
A Division Bench of the Bombay High Court came to a contrary conclusion in Bhaurao v. State of Maharashtra, 1972 SLR 862.
It was found that the domestic Tribunal such as a dismissing authority in departmental proceedings violate any rule of law or any other principle of law when it chooses to ignore the findings of the Criminal Court and decides to act on the evidence led before him and ultimately comes to the conclusion that such Police Officer is not fit to be retained in service inspite of his acquittal by the Criminal Court.
A Division Bench of Gujarat High Court in Moti Singh Chaga Singh Vaghela v. SC Mehta, AIR 1966 Gujarat 233 also dissented from the view of Tare J in AIR 1959 MP 46.
It was explained that departmental proceedings did not amount to prosecution within the meaning of Section 403 of Criminal Procedure Code and as such there is no legal bar.
9.
It will be proper to refer to the Bhagwati J speaking for the Supreme Court in Pritam Singh v. State of Punjab, AIR 1956 SC 415 quoted the following observations of Lord Mac Dermot in Sambasivam v. Public Prosecutor, Malaya, 1950 A.C. 458 :-  "The effect of a verdict of acquittal pronounced by a competent Court on a lawful charge and after a lawful trial is not completely stated by saying that the person acquitted cannot be tried again for the same offence.
To that it must be added that the verdict is binding and conclusive in all subsequent proceedings between the parties to the adjudication.'
The maxim 'RES JUDICATA PRO VERITATE ACCIPITUR' is no less applicable to criminal than to civil proceedings."
In fact Wanchoo, CJ speaking for the Supreme Court in RP Kapur v Union of India, AIR 1964 SC 786 observed :-  "If the trial of the criminal charge results in conviction, disciplinary proceedings bound to follow against the public servant so convicted even in case of acquittal proceedings may follow where the acquittal is other than honourable."
10.
On the question as to the scope of interference by the Court in the departmental proceedings there is no controversy that in considering whether a public servant is guilty of misconduct charged against him, the rule followed in criminal trial that it must be proved beyond all reasonable doubt does not apply and that the High Court has not constituted any proceedings under Article 226 of the Constitution, as the court of appeal over the decision of the authorities holding or contemplating a departmental action.
It is concerned to determine whether the enquiry is held by the authority competent in that behalf and according to the procedure prescribed following the normal rules including that of natural justice.
To the same effect is the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of State of Andhra Pradesh and others v. S Sree Rama Rao, AIR 1963 Supreme Court 1723.
Strictly speaking, if after a person is acquitted, there is no statutory bar and it may be open to the disciplinary authority to continue with the departmental proceedings but a rule of caution has to be adverted.
The same would be to the effect that the order passed acquitting the person concerned cannot be ignored and must invariably be adverted to.
The Supreme Court again had the occasion to consider this controversy in the case of Corporation of the City of Nagpur, Civil Lines, Nagpur and another v. Ramchandra G Modak and others, AIR 1984 Supreme Court 626.
It was held that where accused is acquitted honourably, it would not be expedient to conduct departmental enquiry.
In paragraph 6, it was concluded :-  "The other question that remains is if the respondents are acquitted in the criminal case whether or not the departmental inquiry pending against the respondents would have to continue.
This is a matter which is to be decided by the department after considering the nature of the findings given by the criminal court.
Normally where the accused is acquitted honourably and completely exonerated of the charges it would not be expedient to continue a departmental inquiry on the very same charges or grounds or evidence, but the fact remains, however, that merely because the accused is acquitted, the power of the authority concerned to continue the departmental inquiry is not taken away nor is its direction (discretion) in any way fettered."
To the same effect was the view expressed by the Calcutta High Court in the case of Rajendra Kumar Paul v Union of India, 1976(2) S.L.R.
296, Herein the charge-sheet issued to the petitioner concerned rested on the same allegations and charges in the criminal case.
It was held that the said disciplinary proceedings could not be initiated nor any punishment could be awarded.
The conclusion drawn in paragraph 18 was :-  "The position therefore, in the present case appears to be as follows : 'The charge-sheet dated 16th December, 1970, issued against the petitioner initiating a disciplinary proceeding rests on the same allegations and charges which were also the subject matter of the criminal trial in which the petitioner has been honourably acquitted.
Accordingly the said disciplinary proceeding could not be initiated nor any punishment could be awarded on the basis of the same."
The view point of the Rajasthan High Court was also identical in the case of Mohammad Umar v. The Rajasthan State Electricity Board and another, 1992(3) SLR 598.
Herein the petitioner had been prosecuted for an offence punishable under section 379 Indian Penal Code on the charge that he had committed a theft of 800 metres wire.
The Judicial Magistrate acquitted him.
Thereafter, a charge sheet was issued on the same fact that he had taken away 800 metres wire as such.
The Single Judge of the Rajasthan High Court held that departmental action would be permissible only where acquittal is based on technical ground like lack of jurisdiction, want of sanction or bar of limitation etc.
The relevant extract of the decision drawn would make the position clear :-  "I am clearly of the opinion that once a competent court records a finding of not guilty against an employee in respect of an act involving criminal offence, it is not open to the disciplinary authority to proceed against the employee departmentally on the same facts and pass an order of punishment by holding the employee guilty.
This principle will of course be not applicable where the employer proceeds against an employee on some different charge after a finding of not guilty has been recorded by the competent court or where the acquittal is based on technical grounds like lack of jurisdiction, want of sanction or bar of limitation etc." This is in consonance with the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Sulekh Chand and Salek Chand v. Commissioner of Police, 1995(2) SCT 411(SC) : JT 1995(1) SC 23.
It was held as under :-  "It is not in dispute that the proposed departmental enquiry also is related to the self same offence under section 5(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act.
The judgment acquitting the appellant of the charge under section 5(2) became final and it clearly indicates that it was on merits.
Therefore, once the acquittal was on merits the necessary consequence would be that the delinquent is entitled to reinstatement as if there is no blot on his service and the need for the departmental enquiry is obviated."
(emphasis added).
After scanning through various precedents, the position is clear and established to the effect that once the acquittal is on merit and not on a technical ground, then on the same facts departmental proceedings cannot be initiated.
The Supreme Court has set at rest this controversy in the case of Sulekh Chand and Salek Chand (supra) and it is in consonance with the decision of the Supreme Court and also the case of Mohammad Umar (supra).
If the acquittal is on the ground other than merit, only in that event, it may be permissible for the department to proceed against the said official.
11.
Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the State urged that here the evidence had not been proved and, therefore, the acquittal must be taken on a technical ground.
But a clear distinction must be drawn between a decision on merit and on a technical ground.
If the State does not produce evidence despite innumerable opportunities, then it would be a decision on merit rather than on a technical ground.
It would be an acquittal on technical ground if as pointed out above and rementioned for the sake of repetition, it flows for want of a valid sanction if required, limitation or any other such technical flaw that may emerge.
When evidence is not produced, then it must be taken as a decision on merit.
We find ourselves in a agreement with the decision of this Court in the case of Balwant Singh v. The Inspector General of Police and others, 1983(1) AISLJ 176.
12.
The operative part of the judgment of the learned Special Judge, Amritsar has already been reproduced above.
It shows that despite repeated opportunities, the State failed to produce any evidence against the petitioners.
The learned Special Judge in the facts had no option but to close the evidence as such.
It was, therefore, a decision on merit rather than on a technical ground.
13.
Copy of the statement made by Santokh Singh one of the witnesses who appeared before the learned Special Judge, Amritsar has also been appended with the petition.
It reveals that he did not support the prosecution pertaining to the role as alleged against the petitioners.
As per his statement he had no occasion to talk to them and he did not part with any amount on demand or suggestion of the petitioners.
Permitting further departmental action despite the acquittal of the petitioners by the learned Court, therefore, would be an exercise in futility yielding little result.
In addition to that the departmental proceedings are initiated after inordinate delay of 7 years.
Resultantly, Chapter 22 of the Panjab Civil Services Rules Volume II would also come into play.
It would not be appropriate, thus keeping in view the aforesaid, to permit departmental proceedings after the petitioners had been acquitted on merit and not on a technical ground.
For these reasons, the writ petitions are accepted.
The impugned show cause notices/charge sheets are quashed, leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Petitions allowed.