TS Doabia, J - The petitioner in this petition, challenges the initiation of departmental proceedings against him.
The challenge has been made on the ground of mala fide but the basic challenge is based on delay and laches.
It is argued that stale matters are being made subject-matter of this petition.
A plea of estoppel has also been taken.
It is argued that lapses, if any, on the part of the petitioner, were condoned by the UCO Bank, (hereinafter referred to as the Bank) and therefore, departmental proceedings initiated against him are liable to be quashed.
Before noticing the legal issues raised in this petition, it would be apt to notice a few facts.
2.
Initially a member of award staff, the petitioner became a member of the Junior Management Grade Scale I He was promoted to Middle Management Grade Scale II in the year 1983.
The petitioner submits that he has been taking active part in the trade union activities, and he has been espousing the cause of the award staff and also of the officers after he was brought into that hierarchy.
According to him, he has been chairman of the abovesaid Officers Association.
He submits that he is still holding that office.
According to him, he became entitled to promotion to Middle Management Grade Scale III in the year 1982.
He was, however, not promoted.
This non-promotion was challenged by the petitioner in this Court.
A writ petition bearing No. 1839 of 1990, was filed.
This has also been decided today.
It is the case of the petitioner that it was the filing of this petition which led to the problem which he is facing now.
According to him, the respondent management wanted to negative his claim for promotion and therefore with a view to deprive him of the benefits of scale III appointment departmental proceedings have been initiated against him.
It is this background, according to the petitioner, which led to the issuance of the charge sheet.
This is Annexure P/63.
3.
The above charge-sheet has been challenged in this Court by preferring this petition on 8th of January 1992.
This Court permitted the bank to proceed with the enquiry and directed that final order be not passed.
The enquiry proceedings so started stand completed.
Final verdict has not been given because of the interim order passed by this Court.
4.
It is apparent from the charge sheet and the articles of charges that the allegation against the petitioner is that he gave a clean overdraft of Rs. 1,06,53310. to M/s SP Enterprises, Rosy Talkies, Gwalior.
This happened on 4th of July 1994.
The enquiry proceedings were initiated in the year 1991.
To be precise, these are being challenged on the grounds of  (i) Delay,  (ii) Condonation and estoppel, and  (iii) Discrimination.
5.
So far as the question of delay is concerned, there can be no dispute that stale matters should be not permitted to be made subject-matter of departmental enquiry.
Delay may be an ante-thesis of the concept of reasonable opportunity.
One reason for giving relief on this account is that memory of those who were concerned with the events is likely to fade and they may not be able to recapitulate the events as these actually happened.
For the purposes of examining the quashing of departmental proceedings on the ground of delay, it is not necessary to notice any other fact.
The only thing which is being highlighted is that the alleged act of commission or omission is said to have been committed on 4th of July, 1984 and the action is being taken after more than 7-1/2 years.
The question inter alia arises as to whether the delay of 7-1/2 years is fatal to the initiation and continuance of the departmental proceedings.
Some of the decisions on which the petitioner has placed reliance be examined.
6.
In State of Punjab and others v. CL Goyal, 1995(1) SLR 700, a Division Bench of the Punjab and Haryana High Court quashed the enquiry proceedings.
The State of Punjab preferred an appeal before the Supreme Court of India.
The Supreme Court was of the view that in such matters there are several balancing factors and each case is to be examined in the light of the facts contained therein.
In the above case, there was delay of 5-1/2 years.
It was held that this delay was not such which could be taken into consideration to quash the disciplinary proceedings.
The judgment of the Punjab and Haryana High Court was reversed and following observations were made :  "Applying the balancing process, we are of the opinion that the quashing of charges and of the order appointing enquiry officer was not warranted in the facts and circumstances of the case.
It is more appropriate and in the interest of justice as well as in the interest of administration that the enquiry which had proceeded to a large extent be allowed to be completed.
At the same time, it is directed that the respondent should be considered forthwith for promotion without reference to and without taking into consideration the charges or the pendency of the said enquiry and if he is found fit for promotion, he should be promoted immediately.
This direction is made in the particular facts and circumstances of the case though we are aware that the Rules and practice normally followed in such cases may be different.
The promotion so made, if any, pending the enquiry shall, however, be subject to review after the conclusion of the enquiry and in the light of the findings in the enquiry.
It is also directed that the enquiry against the respondent shall be concluded within eight months from today.
The respondent does not so co-operate, it shall be open to the enquiry officer to proceed ex parte.
If the enquiry is not concluded and final orders are not passed within the aforesaid period, the enquiry shall be deemed to have been dropped."
7.
Thus, the above case does not come to the rescue of the petitioner.
The reasons for this would be indicated later on.
However, another decision on which reliance has been placed by the counsel for the petitioner be noticed.
This is reported as State of Madhya Pradesh v. Bani Singh, AIR 1990 SC 1308.
In this case, irregularities which were subject matter of departmental proceedings were committed between the year 1975-77.
It was not the case of the State that they were not aware of the said irregularities.
Thus, the departmental proceedings initiated in 1987 were held to be belated as it virtually amounted to opening of a matter where acts of omission and commission were said to have been committed over 12 years ago.
There was no satisfactory explanation for the inordinate delay.
It was in these circumstances, it was observed that it would be unfair to permit the departmental enquiry to go on.
A decision given by the Karnataka High Court reported as Selvaraj v. KM Nand Gopal, 1995(2) SCT 862(Karnataka) : 1995(2) SLR 227 : 1995(2) S.C.T.
862 is also being relied on.
In this case, it was observed that disciplinary proceedings are essentially governed by the Rules of natural justice and delay factor may deprive a delinquent of an opportunity to defend himself.
The reasoning given was that the delinquent would be heavily handicapped in recalling as to what had happened and he may be further handicapped in producing documents and witnesses who may not be available to him, at a later point of time.
Reference has again been made to the decision given by the Bombay High Court reported as CV Raman v. Mgmt.
of Bank of India, 1988 F.L.R.
257 and a decision of this Court In M/s S.F.
(India) Pvt. Ltd v. Regl.
Dir, ESIC, 1994 (68) FLR 787.
Reliance has also been placed on the decision of the Calcutta High Court reported as RK Gupta v. Coal India Ltd, 1993(1) SCT 47 : 1992 LIC 2603.
A charge-sheet which was issued after 7 years was held to be belated in the above case.
8.
The learned counsel for the petitioner, on the basis of the above authorities, has argued that the petitioner would face difficulty not only with regard recapitulating as to what had happened in July 1984 but he would also be handicapped in the matter of proving his plea that permission to the transaction in question was given by the superior officers.
According to him, he may not be able to recall or recollect all these events and continuance of the enquiry would be negation of all cannons of fair play.
9.
The learned counsel for the bank has argued that this is not a case where the delay is likely to prejudice the case of the petitioner.
10.
I am of the view that this is not such a case where delay would be fatal to the ultimate decision which may be taken in this regard.
It is not in dispute that the bank has already filed a suit for a recovery of the amount which is subject-matter of advance given to the SD Enterprises.
During the course of arguments, the petitioner did make a suggestion that he would see to it that the defaulter makes some commitment towards making the payment.
For this purpose, some endeavour was made by him but it appears that the person to whom the petitioners accommodated is not willing to accommodate him.
Relation of one of the partners did appear in the Court but made no concrete suggestion as to how the bank's liability would be wiped out.
The loan was advanced without there being any collateral security available to the bank.
I am not pronouncing upon this aspect of the matter, but I am of the view that this is not a case where the memory of witnesses is likely to fade or the petitioner is likely to be prejudiced.
As a matter of fact, the enquiry proceedings stand completed and only final action in this regard is required to be taken.
All that is required to be seen is that whether a clean overdraft was given in accordance with the rules and regulations and as to whether the petitioner is to be punished or not.
These are all matters which would now be examined.
Beyond hypothetical argument nothing concrete has been made out to show that delay is fatal.
In CL Goyal's case (supra) delay of 5-1/2 years was held to be of no consequence.
This argument with regard the delay is of no consequence and is rejected.
11.
The argument with regard to condonation and estoppel be now examined.
According to the petitioner, giving of such advance is something not unknown to the banking system.
He submits that he has made a reference to this aspect of the matter in the writ petition.
A specific mention has been made to para 17 of the petition.
According to him other bank managers have also been given such benefit.
Reference to other transactions have been made in para 12 of the petition.
According to the petitioner, if this normal banking practice is not followed, then the banking system might not flourish.
With a view to strengthen this argument of his, he further submits that he was appointed as a Branch Manager.
He submits that he was given higher responsibilities.
As such, the lapse, if any, should be deemed to have been condoned.
He also submits that efforts made by the petitioner in the matter of mobilising deposits have been appreciated by the higher authorities.
For this, reference has been made to Annexure P/4-15 to P/62.
He, accordingly, submits that the lapses, if any, were condoned by the bank.
To summarise, it is submitted :  (i) that, similar advances were given by the other branch managers, Several instances have been quoted with regard to the transactions in Gwalior itself; (ii) that, some instances have been given in para 12 of the petition; (iii) that, the petitioner was promoted from the post of Assistant Manager to Manager and, therefore, it would be presumed that the management has condoned the lapses; (iv) that, the bank has been appreciating the efforts of the petitioner and therefore, no action is called for against the petitioner.
With a view to strengthen his argument he has placed reliance on decisions given by the Supreme Court of India and also by various High Courts.
These decisions be noticed.
State of Punjab v. Deewan Chunnilal, AIR 1970 SC 2086, is the first decision, the person against whom action was sought to be taken had crossed efficiency bar.
It was, in these circumstances, observations were made in favour of the delinquent employee.
It was held that charges relating to the lapses earlier to the crossing of the efficiency bar cannot be made subject-matter of enquiry.
Reference has again been made to a decision given by this Court in Writ Petition No. 220/90 decided on March 18, 1991.
In the above case, it was observed that if lapses or misconduct is one which is known to the authority before the person is promoted and not one which comes to light subsequent to the promotion then it must be deemed to have been condoned.
The other decisions on which reference is being placed is Lal Audhraj Singh v. State of MP, 1967, MPLJ 528, and M/s S.F.
(India) Pvt. Ltd. v. Regl.
Dir, ESIC, 1994 FLR 787.
There cannot be any dispute with the above proposition but in the present case, there is nothing on record to indicate that the petitioner was promoted.
The petitioner is a member of Middle Management Grade Scale II.
He is yet to be promoted to the Middle Management Grade Scale III.
The reasoning given in the above cases does not apply.
As such, the petitioner cannot contend that he having been promoted the lapses stand condoned.
12.
Again, the plea of estoppel and waiver cannot operate against the Bank.
Merely because the petitioner mobilised deposits, it cannot be said that the lapses in the present case stood condoned.
As noticed above, the bank has filed a suit for recovery and this suit is progressing at its own slow pace.
13.
With regard to the argument that similar overdrafts were given by other officers and the petitioner has been singled out in the matter of initiating enquiry be now examined.
First of all, it be seen that merely because another officer gave overdrafts, the petitioner cannot gain any advantage.
In any case, the respondent-bank would look into this aspect of the matter and if any officer who is similarly situated or is guilty of the lapses of the same nature as the petitioner, it would initiate departmental proceedings against those officers as well.
14.
Having considered the facts and the legal position in this case, I am of the view :  (i) That, the delay of 7-1/2 years said to have taken place in this case is not such which is fatal to the ultimate decision which may be taken by the departmental authorities.
This is because : (a) departmental proceedings have already been completed; (b) matters are not such regarding which memory is likely to fade.
(ii) Bank has already filed a suit for recovery.
(iii) The petitioner has not quoted any specific instance from which it can be inferred that he would suffer on account of the matter having become stale.
(iv) That, the plea of estoppel and waiver is again without merit.
The petitioner continues to be member of Middle Management Grade Scale II.
He has not been promoted and as such, the question of waiver would not arise.
(v) So far as non-initiation of proceedings against other similarly situated officers, this would not furnish a ground to the petitioner.
In any case, the bank would examine all such cases and initiate proceedings against such officers who are similarly situated.
The petition is without merit and is accordingly dismissed.
No order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.