Hemant Gupta, J - The petitioner has invoked the writ jurisdiction of this Court for directing the respondents to consider the petitioner as OSP (Scheduled Caste) candidate for appointment as Assistant Lineman.
2.
The petitioner alleges that he is Balmiki by caste.
Such caste is a Scheduled Caste in terms of the Order issued by the President under Article 341 of the Constitution of India called Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950.
Therefore, the petitioner asserts that he is entitled to be considered for appointment to the post of Assistant Lineman reserved for Other State Persons (Scheduled Castes ) category.
3.
It is the stand of the respondents that there is no reservation for Scheduled Castes of Other State Persons.
Rather the abbreviation OSP stands for Outstanding Sportsperson and the reservation is in respect of Scheduled Castes candidates belonging to the said category.
Since the petitioner is not a Scheduled Caste in respect of the State of Haryana by virtue of the Presidential Order, therefore, the petitioner cannot claim consideration for the reserved post.
Reliance is placed upon Note (i) of the advertisement, Annexure P-4, which is reproduced hereunder :-  " The benefit of reservation will be given only to those SC/BC and ESM and outstanding sportsperson candidates who are domicile of Haryana State.
The SC, BC candidates are required to submit SC/ BC certificates duly issued by the competent authority at the time of interview".
4.
A perusal of the said Note clarifies that OSP abbreviation stands for Outstanding Sportsperson, who are domicile of Haryana State.
The certificate for reservation for such post is required to be issued by the competent authority of the State of Haryana.
Admittedly, the petitioner does not possess a certificate of the caste belonging to Scheduled Castes notified for the State of Haryana by the President.
Therefore, the petitioner cannot seek consideration for appointment to the post of Lineman meant for Outstanding Sportsperson (Scheduled Castes).
5.
In view of the said fact, we do not find any merit in the present writ petition.
Dismissed.
Petition dismissed.