TS Doabia, J - The petitioner, in this petition, challenges Annexure P-8.
This as a communication from the Government of India.
By this it has declined to refer the dispute under Section 10, of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter the Act).
The reasons which have been given for declining the reference are as under :  1.
The dispute has been raised belatedly after seven years and no reason has been indicated for raising the dispute late.
2.
The bank had offered one time opportunity to all ex-temporary workmen for consideration for absorption in the services of the bank by inserting advertisements in the leading newspapers.
It was for the workman to avail of the said offer of the bank.
2.
The learned counsel for the respondent bank has stated that as the reference was declined on the ground of delay no interference is called for.
According to him, this is a valid reason and no interference is called for in this regard.
According to him, there was a delay of seven-and-half years in the matter of making the prayer for seeking reference.
He has placed reliance on an unreported judgment of the Rajasthan High Court in the case of Smt. Kamla Jain v State of Bikaner and others, W.P. No. 1340/88, decided on 13th of May, 1988.
3.
There is no dispute with the proposition that the appropriate government can decline to refer a dispute on ground of delay.
But the question is whether such was the situation in this case.
4.
The factual statement as made by the learned counsel for the respondent- bank be noticed.
According to him, Annexure R-1, was issued on 6th of July 1987.
The petitioner was given an opportunity to appear in a test.
It is stated that the petitioner did not appear in this test.
The further fact relied upon by the counsel for the respondent-Bank is that another circular i.e. Annexure R-2 was issued.
5.
Annexure R-2 is dated 24th of October 1990.
It is the case of the bank that the petitioner did not take part in the test.
There is another Annexure R-3.
This is dated 4th of June 1991.
According to these instructions an employee who has rendered 90 days of service for any period prior to 1st June 1982 would be entitled to consideration for appointment in the Bank.
The learned counsel for the respondent bank pleads that the assertion made in this regard in Annexure P-1 be taken note of and as the petitioner had completed only 80 days of service, he is ineligible for appointment even as per Annexure R-3.
6.
On the other hand the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has made a statement at Bar that in similar circumstances, employees who were similarly situated sought adjudication before the Industrial Tribunal under the Act in the State of Uttar Pradesh.
According to him the reference was answered in favour of the workmen.
The employer Bank challenged the same in the High Court of Allahabad.
The learned Single Judge rejected the contention of the employer.
An appeal was preferred before a Division Bench.
The appeal was allowed.
The employees have appealed before the Supreme Court and the Supreme Court has stayed the operation of the order passed by the Allahabad High Court.
The question as to whether there was a delay or not be now examined.
Order Annexure P-8 was passed on 1461990.
The rejection is on the ground that there was delay of seven years and that there was no explanation.
This is apparently incorrect.
Annexure R-1 was issued on 671987.
Whether the petitioner was duly informed and whether he appeared in the test or not are all questions of facts.
The recital in annexure P-8 that there is delay of seven years is incorrect.
Initially conciliation proceedings were resorted to.
This is apparent from Annexure P-7.
These conciliation proceedings were initiated in September 1988.
Thereafter appropriate Government was approached in June, 1990.
Thus, there was no delay and the finding recorded by the appropriate Government is apparently based on incorrect appreciation of facts.
7.
Apart from the above, the statement made at Bar by the learned counsel for the petitioner is significant.
No doubt, this is not supported by any document and the respondent-bank is disputing the same.
Yet all these matters which have been sought to be projected on behalf of the petitioner or on behalf of the bank are disputed questions of fact which are not supposed to be gone into under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
These could also not be examined by the appropriate Government, as it is not supposed to delve into the merits of the controversy.
See the following decision of Supreme Court.
8.
In Bombay Union of Journalists and others v. The State of Bombay and another, AIR 1964 SC 1617, the Supreme Court did observe that the Government was not precluded from making a prima facie examination on the merits of the dispute while considering whether a reference was necessary or not.
The Court observed as under :  "......But is would not be possible to accept the plea that the appropriate Government is precluded from considering even prima facie the merits of the dispute when it decides the question as to whether its power to make a reference should be exercised under Section 10(1) read with Section 12(5) or not.
If the claim made is patently frivolous, or is clearly belated, the appropriate Government may refuse to make a reference.
Likewise, if the impact of the claim on the general relations between the employer and the employees in the region is likely to be adverse, the appropriate Government may take that into account in deciding whether a reference should be made or not."
But above is not the entire statement of law.
In a later portion it was further observed as under :  "......Similarly, on disputed questions of fact, the appropriate Government cannot purport to reach final conclusions, for that again would be the province of the Industrial Tribunal...." Thus, the appropriate Government can examine the limited issues which may fall within the parameters indicated in case of Bombay Union of Journalists (supra).
However, the proposition is well-settled that the appropriate Government cannot reach final conclusion on merits.
This is because this falls within the domain of the authorities constituted under the Act.
9.
In Shambu Nath Goyal v. Bank of Baroda, AIR 1978 SC 1088, the question was considered.
Reference was made to the observations made by Lord Denning in Beetham v. Trinidad Cement Ltd, (1960) 1 All.
E.R.
274, with a view to find out as to what is meant by the terms "difference" and "dispute".
The relevant observation from the above case was quoted and it be noticed again as under :  "by definition a 'trade dispute' exists whenever a 'difference' exists and a difference can exist long before the parties became locked in a combat.
It is not necessary that they should have come to blows.
It is sufficient that they should be sparring for an opening."
The Supreme Court observed that if the dispute was an industrial dispute, its factual existence and expediency of making a reference in the circumstances of a particular case are matters entirely for the Government to decide upon and it will not be competent for the Court to hold the reference bad and quash the proceedings for want of jurisdiction merely because in its opinion there was no material before the Government on which it could have come to an affirmative conclusion of those matters.
10.
In Sindhu Resettlement Corporation Ltd v. Industrial Tribunal, AIR 1968 SC 529, it was ultimately concluded that the question as to whether an industrial dispute exists at the date of reference is a question of fact to be determined on the material placed before the Tribunal with the cautions enunciated in CP Sarathy's case AIR 1953 SC 53.
11.
In Nirmal Singh v. State of Punjab, AIR 1984 SC 1619, the appropriate Government declined to refer the dispute on the ground that the delinquent employee was not workman within the meaning of the definition as occurring in Section 2(s).
The Supreme Court came to the conclusion that the question as to whether the person concerned fell within the definition of the 'workman' or not, was a matter which was supposed to be determined by the authority constituted under the Act and the fact that no reasons were given by the Labour Commissioner who was exercising the powers of the Appropriate Government for declining the reference, the Supreme Court quashed the order of the Labour Commissioner and gave a direction that reference be made to the Labour Court or to the Industrial Tribunal, as the case may be.
12.
In MP Irrigation Karamchari Sangh v. State of MP, AIR 1985 SC 860, the question was whether employees of Chambal Hydel Irrigation Scheme were entitled to dearness allowance equal to that of Central Government employees and that whether they were entitled to Chambal allowance.
The State Government refused to refer the matter on the ground that it would cause additional burden on the State Exchequer.
This reason was found to be a reason not within the four corners of Sections 10 and 12(5) of the Act.
It was observed that as to what are the conditions of service of an employee is a matter which is the special preserve of the authorities constituted under the Act, to be decided in an adjudicatory process and not to be decided by the Government on a prima facie examination of the demand.
It was further observed that there may be some cases where the demand is frivolous or perverse, but even in these matters a note of caution was given.
It was observed that the Government should be very slow to attempt an examination of the demand with a view to decline reference and the Courts should be vigilant whenever the Government attempts to usurp the powers of the Tribunal for adjudication of valid disputes.
It was observed "to allow the Government to do so would be to render Section 10 and Section 12(5) of the Industrial Disputes Act nugatory."
13.
In Ram Avtar Sharma and others v. State of Haryana and another, AIR 1985 SC 915, it was observed that where the Government acted on extraneous and irrelevant grounds, which are not germane to determination of the dispute, then the Government can be called upon to reconsider the matter.
14.
In Telco Convoy Drivers Mazdoor Sangh v. State of Bihar and others, AIR 1989 SC 1565, it was held that while considering question whether reference should be made or not the Appropriate Government cannot delve into merits of disputes and determine the lis itself.
Even the question whether the rejection on the part of the appropriate government to decline to make the reference on the ground of delay is valid or not requires to be gone into.
This was not belated in view of the discussion above.
It be seen that after the rejection of the reference Annexure P-8 certain other facts have come into the existence.
This is the issuance of Annexure R-2 on 24th of October 1990.
There is another communication on which the Respondent Bank is placing reliance.
This is R-3.
The pendency of litigation in Supreme Court of India from Allahabad High Court has some relevancy.
Thus, a direction is given to the respondent No. 2 to reconsider the matter and take note of the factors indicated above and also communications dated 24th of October 1990 and 4th June 1990 which have come into existence now.
The appropriate Government would accordingly take notice of above and the assertion of the petitioner that the Allahabad High Court has taken some view and that the Supreme Court of India has stayed that operation of the order while disposing of the matter under Section 10 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 also requires consideration.
Annexure P-8 is quashed.
This petition is allowed.
Security, if deposited, be refunded to the petitioner.