Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The writ petitioner is questioning the order of the Managing Director, the Calcutta Tramways Company (1978) Limited dated May 31, 2005 imposing on him the penalty of reversion.
He did not prefer any appeal, and instead took out this writ petition questioning the order of the managing director who acted as the disciplinary authority.
2.
In February, 2004 he was working in the company as a truckhand (I am told that in 1997 he was appointed in the company as a helper, and that subsequently he was promoted to the post of truckhand).
On February 19, 2004 he applied for a new identity card on the ground that the old one had been lost by him.
The application was accompanied by particulars of a general diary lodged by him with the Ekbalpore police station on February 18, 2004.
Considering his application, the competent authority issued the new identity card on February 26, 2004.
3.
On March 19, 2004 he applied for another identity card.
In the application he said, "With due respect and humble submission I beg to state that my old identity Card has become in delapitated condition and photo is also defaced.
As such, I am enclosing herewith one copy of my recent photo to facilitate you issue me a new Identity Card and oblige."
On receipt of that application the authority issued a notice dated May 5, 2004 calling upon him to explain why disciplinary action should not be taken for seeking more than one identity card.
By his reply dated May 13, 2004 he said, "I felt that if I receive one more I/Card, I shall be able to utilise the same in absence, of the another one in the event of loss or damage of the rent.
So my conception was very wrong and I beg unqualified apology for my much work."
4.
After considering the reply the competent authority issued charge sheet dated June 11, 2004 initiating major penalty proceedings in terms of clause 12(a) of the standing orders.
The petitioner was initially suspended, and later on was permitted to resume duties.
He participated in the proceedings in which the inquiry officer submitted report dated January 22, 2005 holding that though the allegations had been established, it would be appropriate to impose the penalty of warning.
5.
The disciplinary authority by his notice dated April 11, 2005 called upon the petitioner to submit representation, if any, against the proposed punishment of reversion.
The authority held that having regard to the gravity of proven misconduct, the punishment of reversion was called for.
The petitioner submitted a representation dated April 26, 2005 seeking exoneration.
After considering the materials on record, the disciplinary authority made the impugned order dated May 31, 2005,  6.
Nothing has been said to question the procedure followed by the authorities.
It is not the case either that the proceedings ought not to have been initiated under cl. 12(a) of the standing orders.
The only argument made by counsel is that since it was a mere case of error of judgment on the part of the petitioner, the disciplinary authority ought not to have imposed the punishment of reversion.
It is argued that the punishment is shockingly disproportionate to the gravity of proven misconduct.
7.
Provisions in clause 12(a) of the standing orders provided for the punishment of reversion, discharge or dismissal for commission of any of the acts mentioned in items 1 to 18 of the clause.
The acts mentioned in those items were described as major misdemeanours.
What would be minor offences, and what would be the punishments for them were mentioned in clause 12(b) of the standing orders.
In this case even after the petitioner's admission the disciplinary authority decided to initiate major penalty proceedings.
The petitioner accepted the decision and participated in the proceedings.
8.
The question is whether it can be said that the punishment imposed is shockingly disproportionate to the gravity of proven misconduct.
I am unable to agree with counsel that having regard to the nature of the misdemeanour, the disciplinary authority ought to have, taking a lenient view, imposed some minor punishment.
When the proceedings were initiated under clause 12(a), the authority was to consider the question of imposing punishment provided by that clause only.
It is apparent that the minimum punishment provided by that clause was imposed.
Punishment of dismissal or discharge was not imposed.
The clause did not provide for a more lenient punishment.
Hence there is no scope to contend that the punishment is disproportionate to the gravity of proven misconduct.
9.
I do not find any merit in the contention that since it was a case of mere error of judgment on the part of the petitioner, the disciplinary authority ought to have exonerated him.
The contention is misconceived.
The act was not done by the petitioner in the discharge of his duty; hence there was no scope for him to take the plea of error of judgment.
He applied for a new identity card on the ground that the old one had been lost.
The new identity card was issued on February 26, 2004.
Having found out the old card that at one point of time he thought he lost, there was no reason for him to apply for another identity card, since the new identity card issued on February 26, 2004 was in his possession.
10.
Even then he applies for another identity card on March 19, 2004.
The explanation given by him in his reply to the show cause notice dated May 5, 2004 was found unacceptable.
I do not see any reason to substitute my decision for that of the disciplinary authority, in so far as the question of sufficiency of the explanation is concerned.
It is not for the writ Court to say whether the explanation was sufficient; the disciplinary authority was the authority to accept or not to accept the explanation.
When that authority decided not to accept the explanation, I do not see any reason to interfere with his decision which has not been shown to be illegal or without jurisdiction.
11.
For these reasons I do not find any merit in the writ petition.
It is accordingly dismissed.
There shall be no order for costs in it.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this order shall be supplied to the parties, if applied for, within three days from the date of receipt of the file by the Section concerned.
Petition dismissed.