Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The petitioner is aggrieved by the order of the authority of the school dated February 2, 2006 suspending him from service.
At that time he was working as the headmaster of the institute.
2.
Case of the petitioner is that without giving any opportunity of showing cause the order of suspension was issued.
His further case is that it was not issued in contemplation of any disciplinary proceedings.
He has alleged that the order was issued by the managing committee of the institute in colourable exercise of its powers conferred on it by provisions in Rule 28 (vii a) of the Management of Recognized Non-Government Institutions (Aided and Un-aided) Rules, 1969.
Counsel contends that since the proceedings were not drawn within 90 days from the date of suspension, in view of provisions in R. 28(vii a) the order of suspension must be deemed to have been automatically stood withdrawn.
3.
By filing opposition and a supplementary opposition the authority of the institute has stated that the decision to suspend the petitioner was taken in the meeting held on February 1, 2006, since he had not been responding to the allegations made in the charge-sheet sent to him previously.
It was noted in the resolution that the petitioner had refused to receive the registered letter containing the charge-sheet.
The managing committee decided to suspend the petitioner in the interest of the institute.
It is apparent on the face of the resolution that it has decided to inquire into the allegations levelled in the charge-sheet.
4.
It has further stated in the affidavit that the charge-sheet was sent to the petitioner on more than once occasion, viz. it was sent on January 18, 2006 and again on February 4, 2006.
The envelope of registered letter No.4062 dated January 18, 2006 has been produced before me, and the charge-sheet that was sent to the petitioner has come out of it.
That letter was returned to the school authority with the postal endorsement that the petitioner had refused to receive it.
These facts have assumed significance because of the contention that since the institute did not draw up the proceedings within 90 days, it must be held that the order of suspension stood automatically withdrawn.
5.
In view of the above noted facts, I am simply unable to accept the contention of counsel for the petitioner.
The school authority was not prevented from preparing and sending the charge-sheet even before deciding to suspend the petitioner; in fact that was done in the present case.
The decision to suspend was taken in the context of the petitioner's refusal to receive the charge sheet sent to him by registered post.
I do not see any merit in the argument that since the petitioner was present in school on January 18, 2006, there was no reason for the managing committee to send the charge-sheet to his residential address by registered post.
6.
Not only the postal article containing the charge sheet was not received by the petitioner, from the envelopes and letters produced before me in original, I find that he continued to refuse to receive letters sent to him by post.
I am therefore unable to agree with his counsel that in the present case proceedings were not drawn within 90 days from the date of the order of suspension.
In my view on the facts of the case it must be held that the disciplinary proceedings, by issuing the charge sheet, had been initiated even before the order of suspension was issued.
7.
I do not find any merit in the contention that the suspension order is bad on the ground that before issuing it the managing committee had not given the petitioner an opportunity of showing cause.
In support of this contention counsel has cited to me the division bench decision of this Court in Sujit Das v. WB Board of Secondary Education & Ors., 1997(2) CLJ 497.
By reading out to me para 30 of the report counsel has argued that before issuing the order of suspension the authority was under an obligation to give the petitioner an opportunity of showing cause.
8.
I do not find anything in para 30 of the report to say that their Lordship of the division bench held that before issuing an order of suspension authority of the institute would be under the obligation to give the concerned an opportunity of showing cause.
Needless to say that in the disciplinary proceedings initiated by issuing the charge sheet the petitioner shall be given reasonable opportunity of presenting his case and defending himself.
The question of giving such opportunity will arise at the time of making inquiry.
9.
For these reasons, I find no merit in the challenge thrown to the order of suspension.
The writ petition is accordingly dismissed.
It is hoped and believed that the disciplinary proceedings initiated against the petitioner shall be concluded within a reasonable period (preferably within three months from date).
Needless to say that in the proceedings he shall be given reasonable opportunity of presenting his case, cross-examining the witnesses of the management, examining his defence witnesses, defending himself, etc.
There shall be no order for costs in the case.
10.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this order shall be supplied to the parties, if applied for, within three days from the date of receipt of the file by the Section concerned.
Petition dismissed.