Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The twenty eight writ petitioners are questioning the requisition dated January 13, 2006 put in by the Purulia District Primary School Council to the District Employment Exchange, Purulia asking for names of eligible candidates for the post of primary school teacher to be appointed against the notified vacancies numbering one thousand seven hundred sixty, existing and anticipated till December 31, 2006.
The exchange was informed that the names should be sponsored definitely by February 6, 2006, and that no names sponsored after February 6, 2006 would be entertained.
2.
It was mentioned that names should be sponsored at the ratio of one is to ten, as prescribed the relevant recruitment rules.
As to the validity of the requisition, the only submission made by the counsel is that according to provisions in the National Employment Service Manual the names were to be sponsored at the ratio of one is to twenty, and hence the council was not authorised to fix the ratio at one is to ten.
In support of his contention he gives me a single bench decision of this Court in Pelaram Mahato v. State of West Bengal and Ors, (2003)2 Cal.
L.T.
287.
3.
I do not find any merit in the contention.
The decision cited to me is of no assistance for the simple reason that was given with respect to a recruitment process governed by the rules, regulations and notifications framed and issued under provisions of the West Bengal Board of Secondary Act, 1963 which did not fix any specific ratio for sponsoring names of candidates.
The case is completely different here.
Here the recruitment process is governed by the West Bengal Primary School Teachers Recruitment Rules, 2001.
4.
Rule 8(1) of the rules governing this case specifically says that the names shall be sponsored by the employment exchanges at the ratio of one is to ten.
The recruitment rules governing the present process, and in terms where- of the requisition was made, are not under challenge.
I therefore do not see how the petitioners can say that the requisition was issued illegally or arbitrarily.
In terms of the recruitment rules the names were to be sponsored at the ratio of one is to ten, and hence there was no question of sponsoring names at the ratio of one is to twenty as contended by them.
5.
Although no relief has been sought with respect to a decision of the employment officer-in-charge of the district employment exchange concerned dated October 5, 2006, counsel argues that the petitioners are actually seeking enforcement of that decision.
He says that the employment officer gave an undertaking dated September 4, 2006 that since he had committed a mistake while sponsoring names of the candidates in terms of the requisition, he would take necessary steps for correcting the mistakes and ensuring that list previously sent by him to the council was cancelled.
6.
It is doubtful whether one has come across such an undertaking given by any government official as the one given by the employment officer concerned on September 4, 2006.
It is not known under what circumstances the unusual undertaking was given by the employment officer.
It is curious to note that it was not given to any authority of the government.
I think I should not go further with the issue, since it was for the employment officer concerned to take up the matter with the appropriate authority or forum, if he was made to give the undertaking under extraneous pressure.
7.
However, I have no hesitation in saying that undertaking (the employment officer having no authority of law to give it) never created any right in favour of the petitioners to be considered by the council for the post of primary school teacher.
I also say that undertaking did not create any obligation or duty on the part of the council to accept the subsequent list of seven hundred ninety-two candidates sent by the employment officer long after the cut off date.
The employment officer had no authority to send that long list of candidates.
8.
I must say that no person of reasonable prudence will accept the case of the employment officer that due to over-sight he had committed a mistake by not sponsoring the names of as many as seven hundred ninety-two eligible candidates.
The story is inherently unbelievable.
Be that as it may, the list was not entertainable, and the council was not under any obligation to accept it.
In the requisition the cut off date was specifically mentioned, and in the face of that stipulation the employment officer was not authorized to send the list to the council, also a statutory authority.
9.
For these reasons, the writ petition is dismissed.
There shall be no order for costs in it.
10.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this order shall be supplied to the parties, if applied for, within three days from the date of receipt of the file by the Section concerned.
Petition dismissed.