Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The petitioner is questioning the order of Assistant General Manager (Per.)
of National Jute Manufacturers Corporation Limited dated November 25th, 2005, which is "Your claim for change of date of birth from 1947 to 221954 based on evidence of the certificate of Bihar School Examination Board issued on completion of having passed Secondary Examination in August, 1970, is hereby rejected as you have already retired from the services of Unit-National NJMC Ltd on 162005.
Change of date of birth cannot be allowed after you have retired from the services based on the date of birth recorded in your dossier maintained in Unit National."
2.
He took employment in the company on May 11, 1973.
On the basis of his declaration his year of birth was recorded in the dossier and the ESI records as 1947.
According to that he was to retire from service in June, 2005.
He claims that seeking correction of his date of birth on the basis of school final certificate issued by Bihar Vidyalaya Pariksha Samity (in that it was recorded that he was born on February 2nd, 1954, and that he took the examination in August 1970), he submitted application dated September 19th, 1990.
His further claim is that subsequently he made representations for the same purpose on November 30th, 1996 and December 12th, 2003.
3.
It appears that by a letter dated February 4th, 2004 the authority of the company requested the authority of the board concerned to give necessary information regarding genuineness of the school final certificate produced by the petitioner.
By a letter dated May 16th, 2004 the board informed the company that the certificate was genuine.
Thereupon the manager (personnel) of the company recommended correction of date of birth as wanted by the petitioner.
The matter was placed before the assistant general manager who was the competent authority to give the decision.
By the impugned decision he rejected the prayer for correction.
4.
Counsel submits that when the school final certificate was accepted by the authority of the company, and when the petitioner had approached the company as back as 1990, there was no reason why the date of birth was not to be corrected.
Counsel for the company submits that the request was simply not entertainable since it was not made within five years from the date it was first noted in the service records.
He says that in view of provisions in FR 56 an application seeking correction of date of birth after five years from the date of recording was not to be entertained.
5.
Counsel for the company is absolutely right in his submissions.
Provisions in FR56 Note 6-(a) specifically mentioned that request for alteration of date of birth would be entertainable only if it was made within five years of entry into government service.
In the present case, the petitioner entered into service in 1973, and he made request for correction for the first time in 1990 (if his claim is taken to be true).
Hence in view of provisions in FR 56, Note 6 his request for alteration of the date of birth was not entertainable.
Simply because the board concerned certified genuineness of the certificate, he did not become entitled to get the recorded date of birth altered.
6.
There is no acceptable explanation why the certificate, apparently available at the time of entry into service, was not produced before the employer.
At this distance of time the petitioner cannot be permitted to say (as is said by his counsel), that though he wanted to produce the certificate, the employer declined to accept it.
According to the recorded date of birth he was to retire in June, 2005.
He did not approach the Court of law or seriously agitate the issue before reaching the age of superannuation.
It must be said that he actually agitated the matter at the fag end of his service career.
This writ petition was taken out only on December 5th, 2005, by them he had retired from service.
In my opinion, the authority rightly rejected the request for correction of date of birth.
7.
For these reasons, I find no merit in the writ petition.
It is accordingly dismissed.
There shall be no order for costs in it.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this order, if applied for, shall be supplied to the parties within three days from the date of receipt of the file by the Section concerned.
Petition dismissed.