Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The petitioner is aggrieved by the decision of the District Library Officer, Murshidabad and Secretary Local Library Authority, Murshidabad dated April 24, 2000 that there was no scope to treat her as a cycle peon working in Swami Vivekananda Gramin Pathagar, District- Murshidabad.
2.
The case of the petitioner is that the managing committee of the library that was established in 1982 appointed her as a cycle peon on the basis of resolution dated December 10, 1985.
Her further case is that once the non-government non-sponsored public rural library in terms of order of the District Social Education Officer and District Library Officer, Murshidabad dated March 31, 1987 she became entitled to be treated as an employee working in the government sponsored rural library.
3.
Since her appointment was not approved, she took out a writ petition in 1998, and by the order dated December 15, 1998 that was disposed of directing the authority concerned to give a reasoned decision in the matter.
This is how the impugned decision dated April 24, 2000 came to be given.
Questioning that the petitioner took out this writ petition only on May 14, 2004.
She prays for a mandamus directing the respondents to absorb her against the sanctioned vacancy for cycle peon in the library.
4.
The short question for decision is whether there is any legal right on the basis whereof the petitioner can claim that she became entitled to be absorbed in the government sponsored rural library.
Counsel for the respondents has drawn my attention to the letter of the secretary of the library dated September 2, 1991 sending a no claim declaration with respect to appointment of organizing staff in the un-recognized library.
To this, counsel for the petitioner has said that the declaration was given only in September 1991, when the library had been converted into a government sponsored rural library in terns of order dated March 31, 1987.
5.
There is noting to show that once the non-government public library stood converted into a government sponsored rural library the petitioner acquired any right to be absorbed in the government sponsored rural library as an employee working in the non-government non-sponsored public library.
In the absence of any legal right entitling the petitioner to be absorbed in the government sponsored rural library, in my opinion, she is not entitled to seek a mandamus directing the respondents to absorb her in the library as a cycle peon.
6.
I have not been shown anything in terms whereof the respondents incurred any obligation to consider the question of absorbing the petitioner once the non-government non-sponsored public library was converted into a government sponsored rural library.
The conversion took place in terms of provisions of the West Bengal Public Libraries Act, 1979 and the Rules framed thereunder.
There is no provision in them either creating any right in favour of the petitioner or creating any obligation or duty of the respondents regarding the question of the petitioner's absorption in the library as an erstwhile employee working in the non-government non-sponsored public library.
To my mind, in the absence of any provision of law either creating a right of the petitioner or casting an obligation or duty on the respondents, there is absolutely no scope to issue a mandamus.
7.
Besides it cannot be ignored that, though in 1991, the authority of the library disowned the employees, if any, working in the non-government non- sponsored public library on being appointed by the then managing committee of that library.
Thus the case of the petitioner was not supported even by her alleged employer.
The respondents being various authorities and government officials cannot absorb the petitioner in the government sponsored rural library in the absence of any legal provision.
In this context the constitution bench decision of the apex Court in Secretary, the State of Karnataka and others v. Umadevi and others, AIR 2006 SC 1806 is relevant.
8.
For these reasons I hold that no relief can be given to the petitioner.
The writ petition is accordingly dismissed.
There shall be no order for costs in it.
9.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this order shall be supplied to the parties, if applied for, within three days from the date of receipt of the file by the section concerned.
Petition dismissed.