Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - This writ petition was taken out alleging that though the petitioner retired from service as back as October 31st, 2003, the respondents failed and neglected to release and pay his retirement benefits.
2.
By order dated December 1st, 2004 the writ petition was admitted and the respondents were directed to file opposition by January 18th, 2005.
No opposition was filed, and when the matter was taken up for hearing on December 20th, 2005 none appeared for the respondents.
Hearing was adjourned.
On May 18th, 2007 it was again taken up for hearing and once again none appeared for the respondents.
Hearing was adjourned and time to file opposition was extended till June 12th, 2007.
On June 12th, 2007 once again the respondents stayed away from the Court and no opposition was filed as well.
Hence hearing was adjourned ordering costs assessed at rupees five thousand.
Today the matter has again come up for final hearing and the respondents are represented by their counsel who submits on the basis of written instructions received from the Assistant Director, Pension, Provident Fund and Group Insurance, Government of West Bengal that the requisite pension payment order was received by the petitioner on June 21st, 2007.
He says that the treasury officer concerned was directed to pay the retirement benefits.
3.
Counsel for the petitioner submits that the respondents should pay interest for delay in paying the retirement benefits.
He says that he is unable to make any comments regarding the calculation the authorities made.
Counsel for the respondents finds little to say regarding the prayer for interest.
In my view, the respondents must pay interest for delay in paying the retirement benefits to the petitioner.
The question whether the calculation was correctly made, in my view, cannot be gone into in the present case, since foundation for such a question was never laid down or rather could not have been laid down in the writ petition.
The case was only regarding in action on the part of the authorities.
Hence I only say that if the petitioner is of the view that his benefits have not been properly calculated by the authorities, he will be free to agitate the question and also to initiate an appropriate original proceedings for appropriate relief.
4.
For these reasons, I dispose of the writ petition ordering that on the retirement benefits paid to the petitioner the respondents shall pay interest at the rate of ten per cent per annum for the period from November 1st, 2003 to the date of actual payment of the benefit concerned.
Payment on account of interest in terms of this order shall be made within three weeks from the date of communication of this order to the respondents.
There shall be no further order for costs in the case.
5.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this order, if applied for, shall be supplied to the parties within three days from the date of receipt of the file by the section concerned.
Petition allowed.