Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The petitioner is questioning the decision of the Director Public Instruction, West Bengal, dated July 31, 2006 rejecting his request for giving him a compassionate appointment.
2.
His father was a lecturer in Manickpara Vivekananda Satabarshiki Mahavidyalay, Purba Medinipur.
At the age of 51, he died-in-harness on May 2, 1996.
He was survived by his wife, mother, three daughters and two sons (including the petitioner).
The petitioner applied for compassionate appointment.
In a previous writ petition filed by him order was made on March 13, 2005 directing the director to give a decision in the application.
That is how the impugned decision was given.
3.
The director turned down the request on the ground that financial condition of the family of the deceased did not call for a compassionate appointment.
On the strength of the decision in Gobind Prakash Verma v. LIC of India & Ors., (2005) 10 SCC 289, and Mithun Singha v. Union of India & Ors., 2007(1) CLJ (Cal) 1, counsel submits that the director ought not to have rejected the requisite on the ground of financial solvency of the family.
It is submitted that by giving an adverse decision on the basis of the disclosed particulars, the director acted unfairly and unreasonably.
4.
I am unable to appreciate the contention.
The particulars were to be disclosed by the petitioner as that was the requirement of the relevant circular providing for compassionate appointment.
There is nothing wrong, if the director based his decision, as he actually did, on those disclosed particulars.
In fact he was supposed to give his decision considering those particulars.
5.
In my view, the two authorities cited to me cannot improve the case of the petitioner.
I am unable to accept the contention that financial condition of the family of the deceased could not be made the sole basis for turning down the request.
As is known, a compassionate appointment is to be given only to help the family of the deceased employee to tide over the sudden acute financial crisis that befalls on the dependents of the deceased employee (the sole bread earner of the family) for his overnight disappearance.
If it is found that the family does not face any financial crisis, there is no question of giving compassionate appointment by making exception to the ordinary recruitment process.
6.
In the present case the director found that besides getting substantial financial benefits the family had a regular annual income of Rs. 7,200/-, and that the family pension received by the person concerned was around Rs. 14,940/- per month.
Noticing such financial condition the director held that there was no reason to help the family by giving a compassionate appointment.
I do not see any reason to interfere with his decision.
7.
For these reasons, the writ petition is dismissed.
There shall be no order for costs in it.
8.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this order shall be supplied to the parties, if applied for, within three days from the date of receipt of the file by the Section concerned.
Petition dismissed.