Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The petitioner is questioning the decision of the Lt. Col. Offg.
Commandant, Vehicle Depot, Panagarh dated June 21st, 2003 that there was no scope to give him compassionate appointment.
2.
His father was appointed in the depot as a mazdoor on February 14th, 1962.
He died in harness on January 12th, 1993.
His mother made an application for compassionate appointment.
The case of compassionate appointment to the petitioner was considered by the board of officers in terms of existing circular letter prescribing the guidelines.
3.
The case was first considered on July 17th, 1996.
Among 70 candidates considered for compassionate appointment against 5% quota he secured 52nd position.
Only two vacancies were available.
His case was again considered by the board of officers on August 8th, 1997.
At that time your vacancies were available and candidates considered were 74.
He secured 41st position in the list.
4.
For the third time his case was considred by the board of officers on December 22nd, 1998.
This time 14 vacancies were available and among 42 candidates considered he secured 22nd position.
As a result no appointment was given to him.
He never took any steps to question the decision of the authorities.
In response to a letter written by his mother the personnel officer of the depot wrote a letter dated November 22nd, 2000 stating that the application seeking compassionate appointment had been considered and rejected.
5.
It was mentioned in the letter that time limit for making compassionate appointment was only one year, and that at the time the letter was being written there was no scope to take up the matter once again.
Feeling aggrieved he moved this Court by filing writ petition No. 17148(W) of 2001, which was disposed of by order dated March 20th, 2002.
The respondents were directed to consider his case once again.
This is how the impugned decision was given.
6.
Counsel submits that marks had not been given to the petitioner according to the existing circulars.
His contention is that for giving wrong marks on the several different heads the petitioner was shown for below in the merit list.
I do not find any merit in the contention.
Decisions given by the authorities in 1996, 1997 and 1998 could not be challenged by the petitioner at the date this writ petition was taken out, it was taken out on April 22nd, 2004.
7.
As is known, a compassionate appointment is to be given by making exception to the normal recruitment rules, for helping the family of the deceased to tide over the sudden financial crisis it faces because of the overnight disappearance of its sole bread earner.
Compassionate appointment is not a matter of right.
In this case the board of officers considered the question of giving compassionate appointment to the petitioner on as many as three occasions.
8.
The case reached finality as back as 1998.
In my opinion, there is no reason to interfere in the matter for examining whether in the years concerned the board of officers awarded marks to the petitioner according to circulars existing at the relevant points of time.
There is absolutely no reason to say that even at this distance of time the authorities must consider the question of giving a compassionate appointment to the petitioner.
9.
For these reasons, I dismiss the writ petition.
There shall be no order for costs in it.
10.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this order shall be supplied to the parties, if applied for, within three days from the date of receipt of the file by the Section concerned.
Petition dismissed.