Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The petitioner is aggrieved by the decision of the Under Secretary to the Government of India, Ministry of Home Affairs dated January 27th, 2005 rejecting her request for granting her pension under the S.S.S.P.
Scheme.
2.
She claims that she submitted the requisite application seeking pension as a freedom fighter on January 27th, 1982.
By an undated letter (in which it was mentioned that the petitioners application was dated October 27th, 1982) the under secretary rejected her application on two grounds (i) evidence sent by her did not prove her claim, (ii) her claim had not been recommended by the State Government.
But then, the matter was apparently reconsidered by the Central Government that issued a letter dated April 19th, 1991 informing the petitioner that her application dated January 27th, 1982 seeking pension as a freedom fighter had been sanctioned.
She was directed to submit papers mentioned in the letter.
Alleging that though she submitted all the papers, the central government was not releasing the pension, she moved this Court by filing a writ petition that was disposed of by order dated July 15th, 2004 directing the central government to give the requisite decision.
It is in compliance with that order that the under secretary gave the impugned decision.
3.
Counsel submits that the decision is vitiated by gross-non-application of mind.
He points out that when application for pension was made by the petitioner herself in the capacity of a freedom fighter, the under secretary held that since her husband's applications did not merit consideration, she would not be entitled to pension.
Facing with the situation, counsel for the respondents finds little to say in justification of the decision given by the under secretary.
In my view, the decision should be set aside on this ground alone and the under secretary should be directed to give a fresh decision in the application the petitioner submitted seeking pension as a freedom fighter.
It is not known why the under secretary did not consider the letter of the district magistrate dated May 14th, 1985, certificate of one Kanan Behari Goswami stating that the petitioner was a genuine freedom fighter, recommendation of the state government dated January 2nd, 1990 that the petitioner should be given pension, and the order of the central government deciding to sanction pension to her as was mentioned it its letter dated April 19th, 1991.
In my view, while giving a fresh decision, the competent authority of the central Government should consider all these facts and documents.
4.
For these reasons, I set aside the impugned order dated January 27th, 2005 and allow the writ petition.
I order that the competent authority of the central government shall give a fresh decision in the petitioners application dated January 27th, 1982 seeking pension as a freedom fighter, and not as a widow of a freedom fighter.
The fresh decision shall be given after considering the facts and documents noted hereinbefore.
Copies of the documents shall be supplied to the central government by the petitioner at the time of communication of this order.
The fresh decision, a reasoned one, shall be given within eight weeks from the date of communication of this order to the central government, and it shall be communicated to the petitioner immediately.
If it is found that the petitioner is entitled to get pension, then necessary steps shall be taken for releasing pension to her, and pension arrears payable from the date of submissions of the application shall be released immediately.
There shall be no order for costs in the case.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this order, if applied for, shall be supplied to the parties within three days from the date of receipt of the file by the section concerned.
Order accordingly.