Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The petitioner is aggrieved by the decision of the director of school education dated May 2nd, 2006 rejecting her request to give her benefit of higher scale of pay for possessing a master's degree.
She was appointed as an assistant teacher in Mithani HS School, Burdwan on April 18th, 1990.
Admittedly, she was appointed as a graduate category teacher, though she was possessing a master's degree, not an essential qualification for the post.
2.
She made representations to the authorities for higher scale of pay in terms of certain government orders and circulars issued in 1993 and 1998.
Since benefits were not given, she moved a writ petition before this court in 2005.
That was disposed of by an order dated April 13th, 2005 directing the director of school education to give a reasoned decision.
This is how the impugned decision came to be given.
3.
The director noticed, "In the prior permission the essential qualification was mentioned as BA, B Ed and in the approval of appointment it is shown that the incumbent was B.E.
B Ed.
It appears from the records that in the language group there are 9 teachers of which five are enjoying higher scale.
As per extant GO No. 772-Edn dated 8.7.74 with GO No. 670-SE (S) dated 4998 teaching posts for Hons/Master degree holders shall be limited to 50% of that group.
This is to note that any recommendation by any officer beyond the norms is no recommendation and illegal."
4.
He then said, "This is further to note that in terms of section 14 of the control of expenditure Act, 2005, there is no room to grant the prayer of the petitioner for further reasons that any order prior to control of expenditure act does not have vested right perpetual and that the control of expenditure Act has overriding power.
As this is heard and decided now, during the period of the Act in force and it has the overriding effect this cannot be granted.
Hence in view of the facts and points of law as stated above, I observe that the petitioner has no locus standi, I find nothing to establish his claim for getting higher scale of pay and thus prayer of the petitioner is rejected.
Thus the petition is disposed of and all concerned be informed."
5.
Counsel argues that since the petitioner was agitating her grievances from long before the West Bengal Schools (Control of Expenditure) Act, 2005 came into force, the provisions thereof cannot apply to her case.
According to him, the petitioner is entitled to get the benefit in view of the 1993 and 1998 government orders and rules.
The position is disputed by counsel for the respondents.
6.
I find that the director has rightly turned down the request.
In view of provisions in s. 14 of the 2005 Act, a graduate category teacher is not entitled to claim benefit of higher scale of pay on acquiring any qualification other than the qualifications specified for the post.
A master's degree was not one of the qualifications specified for the post to which the petitioner was appointed in the year 1990.
Hence in view of provisions is s. 14 she was not entitled to claim the benefit.
7.
She is not right either in saying that since she started agitating the matter from the year 1993, the provisions of the 2005 Act would not apply to her case.
In view of provisions in s. 16 of that Act, except the terms and conditions relating to her appointment as a graduate category teacher, nothing has been saved.
It is therefore apparent that her mere claim, even if agitated in and from 1993, was not saved.
Even a pending application for such a claim was not saved.
8.
A claim not decided before the 2005 Act is to be decided keeping in view the provisions thereof.
One cannot be granted benefit in violation of provisions in s. 14 of the that Act.
It is also to be noted that in view of provisions in s. 20 of the 2005 Act all the rules and orders contrary to the provisions of that Act simply stood abrogated.
Hence on the basis of the 1993 and 1998 orders and rules the petitioner was riot entitled to get the benefit.
9.
I therefore do not find any reason to interfere with the impugned decision.
The writ petition is accordingly dismissed.
There shall be no order for costs in it.
Petition dismissed.