Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The petitioner is questioning the decision of the Director of School Education, West Bengal dated January 05, 2004 by this writ petition dated April 20, 2006.
The director of school education declined to approve the proposal for appointing the petitioner on compassionate ground, since he had no clear information whether the petitioner's father was a pension holder.
2.
The petitioner's mother was a primary school teacher.
On medical ground she left the service on February 14, 2003.
According to relevant rules a ward of a teacher retiring from service on medical ground was entitled to apply for compassionate appointment.
The petitioner wanted to take benefit of the rule.
He submitted that requisite application.
The proposal was to be initiated by the district primary school council subject to the approval of the director of school education.
The proposal sent by the council was turned down by the director.
3.
No explanation has been given in the writ petition about the delay.
Counsel argues that the petitioner had no idea that the director of school education had taken the decision dated January 5, 2004 declining to approve the proposal for appointment.
Such explanation coming from the bar cannot be accepted.
After January 2004 the petitioner, as I find from the materials produced before me, did not take any step whatsoever to pursue the cases.
Hence I am unable to accept that he had no knowledge of the decision of the director of school education dated January 05, 2004.
In my view, on the ground of delay alone, that defeats a claim for compassionate appointment also, the writ petition is liable to he dismissed.
4.
Even on merits, I do not find any reason to interfere in the matter.
Admittedly the father of the petitioner is a pension holder.
Compassionate appointment, as is known, is not a matter of right.
It is given by making exception to the recruitment rules only in exceptional case.
The idea is to help the family of the employee that finds itself in extreme financial hardship because of over night stoppage of income through the sole bread earner of the family.
As has been repeatedly held by the apex court the main consideration for giving compassionate appointment is the financial condition of the family.
Here from the conduct of the petitioner it is apparent that the family was not in any extreme financial hardship because of the premature retirement of the teacher who subsequently died on September 22, 2005.
The writ petition is accordingly dismissed.
There shall be no order for costs in it.
Petition dismissed.