Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The petitioner is praying for a mandamus directing the authorities of Siliguri College (Government Sponsored), Darjeeling to permit him to participate in the selection process initiated for appointing a library clerk.
2.
Admittedly the name of the petitioner has not been sponsored by any employment exchange.
The college is affiliated to the North Bengal University.
In, view of the provisions in the statutes relating to the Appointment and Terms and Conditions of Service of Librarian and Non-teaching Staff in Colleges Affiliated to the North Bengal University other than Government Colleges and including Government Colleges in other States affiliated to the University, sts.
2 & 4, the governing body of the college is the authority to initiate the recruitment process and make the appointment in accordance with the rules or orders made by the state government for the purpose.
3.
For the purpose the state government issued the order No. 830-EDN (CS)/10M-47/95 dated October 31st, 1995.
In terms thereof the procedure for direct recruitment has been adopted, and names of the eligible candidates have been requisitioned by the college authority from the employment exchange.
As provided in that order of the government, the source of eligible candidates is confined only to the employment exchanges.
It is therefore clear that unless one is sponsored by an employment exchange, one is not entitled to participate in the selection process.
Since name of the petitioner has not been sponsored, he is just not entitled to participate in the selection process.
I therefore do not find any scope to issue a mandamus as prayed for.
4.
Counsel submits that on the basis of appointment previously given by the college authority the petitioner has been working from February 7th, 2005.
On the strength of the apex court decision in Khagesh Kumar & Ors. v. Inspector General of Registration & Ors., AIR 1996 SC 417, he contends that the petitioner is entitled to get an opportunity of participating in the selection process.
I am unable to agree with him.
Even if the petitioner has been working in the college, as climbed by him, he is not entitled to participate in the selection process, unless he is eligible therefore, I have already been that in terms of the government order governing the recruitment process he is not entitled to participate in the selection process.
5.
For these reasons the writ petition is dismissed.
There shall be no order for costs in it.
6.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this order shall be supplied to the parties, if applied for, within three days from the date of receipt of the file by the section concerned.
Petition dismissed.