Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The first petitioner claims that he is a member of the managing committee.
The second to sixth petitioners claim that they are guardians of students at Nahana Sadharan Vidyabhavan, Birbhum.
2.
They are questioning the steps taken by the managing committee of the school in connection with the selection process initiated for appointing a non-teaching member of the staff.
It is alleged that the previous panel prepared by the selection committee did not get approval of the district inspector of schools on the ground that the external expert participating in the process had been selected in violation of the recruitment procedure.
3.
Counsel says that the same external expert was selected by the managing committee for participating in the process, and hence an order should be made restraining the authorities from proceeding further.
On instructions counsel for the second respondent submits that the allegation is incorrect.
He says that though name of the same gentleman was mentioned while mentioning names of the members of the selection committee, that gentleman actually did not participate in the selection process.
4.
I do not find any reason to interfere in the matter.
The first petitioner is simply not entitled to take out the writ petition, since being a member of the managing committee, the majority whereof took the decision, he cannot challenge the decision by invoking powers of the writ court.
If he is permitted to challenge the decision, it will amount to permitting him to challenge his own decision.
This is so, because the majority decision of the managing committee is binding on him as well.
5.
The other petitioners, in my view, are just meddlesome interlopers.
The managing committee is the appropriate authority to take necessary decisions for concluding the selection process.
The district inspector of schools is the authority competent to accord approval.
Those petitioners claiming to be guardians of students at the institute, to my mind, are not entitled to question the validity or propriety or reasonabless of the decisions of the managing committee of the institute, unless they are personally aggrieved by them.
6.
For these reasons the writ petition is dismissed.
There shall be no order for costs in it.
7.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this order shall.
be supplied to the parties, if applied for, within three days from the date of receipt of the file by the section concerned.
Petition dismissed.