Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The petitioner is fifty-nine.
He is praying for a mandamus directing the respondents to appoint him as a primary school teacher on compassionate ground.
2.
His father was a primary school teacher under the then District School Board, Nadia.
He died-in-harness on March 6, 1977.
At that date he was sixty- two.
In ordinary course he was to retire on reaching the age of sixty.
According to the provision of law existing at that time he was enjoying year to year extension, which he would have, been in a position to enjoy, until he was sixty-five.
Claiming to be a dependant son of the deceased teacher, the petitioner requested the district school board to give him a compassionate appointment.
3.
By call letter dated April 27, 1978 the board directed him to appear for interview on May 5, 1978.
Thereafter nothing happened.
In August 1990 he made a representation to the district inspector of schools that the board had not given him a compassionate appointment.
In August 2006 he made a representation to the Chairman of Nadia District Primary School Council (the council came to be established in place of the previous board), alleging that he had not been given the compassionate appointment.
Since the council did not take any steps, he took out the present writ petition dated September 19, 2006.
4.
I have no doubt in my mind that this is an utterly frivolous writ petition.
The petitioner's case for compassionate appointment was considered by the authority concerned as back as 1978.
It is apparent that the authority found no reason to give him any appointment on compassionate ground.
He took out the writ petition, without their being any visible cause of action, only in September 2006.
According to his date of birth, as pointed out by counsel for the respondents, he is fifty-nine, and the present retirement age of a primary school teacher is sixty.
Even if he is given an appointment, he will be entitled to serve for around eleven months.
5.
I fail to see how on the facts of the case the petitioner can approach the writ court seeking a mandamus directing the authorities to give him compassionate appointment.
The death took place in 1977.
He is seeking compassionate appointment now in 2006.
It is not known whether anyone has come across such a case as this.
A compassionate appointment is to be given at once for saving the family of the deceased employee from being ruined because of the extreme financial hardship that the family faces as a result of over-night disappearance of its sole bread earner.
The concept looses its whole significance, if the question is raised belatedly as in this case after around twenty-nine years.
6.
Such a misconceived and utterly frivolous writ petition as this one must be dismissed with costs.
However, I think I should not impose costs in this case, since I am dismissing it at the admission stage.
Hence I dismiss it without any order for costs in it.
Petition dismissed.