VK Jhanji, J. (Oral) - In the petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, petitioner is seeking a writ in the nature of certiorari for quashing order/letter, Annexure P-4 whereby the representation of the petitioner was rejected.
Petitioner is also seeking a writ in the nature of mandamus, commanding upon the respondents to accord all benefits of seniority, promotion and arrears etc. on the principle/pattern as in the case of Babu Joseph v Union of India and others, i.e. Misc.
Petition No. 257 of 1980 decided by the Madhya Pradesh High Court, Gwalior Bench, on 821990.
2.
Petitioner joined as Head Constable in the Punjab Armed Police on 23.9.1963.
Subsequently, the battalion of the petitioner was embodied in the Border Security Force forming a frontier known as Punjab Frontier.
Like-wise, there are many other frontiers of the force throughout India.
As a result of embodiment, petitioner was appointed as Sub Inspector in Border Security Force.
Border Security Force is a paramilitary force and is a Central Organisation being constituted/raised under a Central enactment.
The employees of the force are governed by Border Security Force Act, 1968.
The rules governing the conditions of service of the employees of Border Security Force are known as Border Security Force Rules, 1969.
These rules have been amended from time to time.
According to these 1969 rules, Border Security Force being one of the disciplined forces, any member of it can be transferred to any part of India or even abroad, irrespective of any frontier.
After service of three years as Sub Inspector, an employee is entitled to pre- promotion test known as `E-List'.
In this way, petitioner became entitled for pre-promotion test (E-list) on 2101968.
Due to lack of co-ordination amongst the different frontiers of the Border Security Force, pre-promotion test could not be held in Punjab Frontier in which the petitioner was detailed in the year 1969-70, whereas the test was conducted in other frontiers of the force.
As a result of this, some of the employees junior to the petitioner became entitled to promotion before the petitioner and in fact many of them were promoted and made senior to the petitioner.
In the Punjab Frontier, pre-promotion test was held in the year 1971 in which the petitioner qualified in the first attempt and accordingly, on 16121971 was promoted alongwith 15 others, to the post of Inspector.
Petitioner was promoted to the post of Assistant Commandant on 381983 and then to the post of Deputy Commandant on 21.9.1989.
Since then, the petitioner is working as Deputy Commandant.
In para 12 of the petition, petitioner has given the details of some of the Inspectors who qualified the E-list, i.e. pre-promotion test, from other frontiers before the petitioner, but were otherwise junior to him.
One Babu Joseph, who was junior to the petitioner, filed writ petition No. 257 of 1980 in the High Court of Madhya Pradesh.
The said writ petition was allowed on 821990.
Pursuant to this decision, the case of Babu Joseph was reviewed from the very beginning and he was awarded benefit of seniority and promotion from back date, thereby fixing deemed date of seniority and promotion in records.
Babu Joseph's petition was allowed on the principle that if an opportunity had been granted to him to qualify the pre-promotion test at a right time, he could have qualified the same and since pre-promotion test was not held, he was entitled to be given seniority and consequential promotion with effect from the date he completed three years of service as Sub Inspector.
Since the benefit of the judgment dated 821990 of Madhya Pradesh High Court was given only to Babu Joseph and not to others who were similarly situated, nine more persons filed different petitions in the Madhya Pradesh High Court at Gwalior.
Relying upon the judgment in Babu Joseph's case, the Division Bench of Madhya Pradesh High Court was pleased to allow the petitions vide judgment dated 271992 and directed the respondents to give to the petitioners therein the benefit of judgment in Babu Joseph's case.
In this case too, petitioner admittedly was senior to Babu Joseph, but he is being denied the relief on the ground of delay and laches, as also on the ground that judgment given in Babu Joseph's case was a judgment in personam and cannot be made applicable to the case of the petitioner.
This very precise stand was considered by the Division Bench at Gwalior in the case of Puran Singh v. Union of India (Misc Petition No. 2940 of 1990 decided on 271992), and it was observed as under:-  "13.
In our opinion, not only the objection as to non-joinder of necessary parties but the other objections too appear to be devoid of any merit because we are much impressed by the submission of the learned counsel for the petitioners that on the law laid down by this Court in Babu Joseph's case (supra), it was obligatory on the part of the respondents to have voluntarily and suo-motu allowed relief to all the petitioners who were similarly situated without driving the nine petitioners to the necessity of filing these petitions.
In support of the contention, reliance has been placed on Inder Pal Padaya v. Union of India, 1985(2) SCC 48 wherein vide para 5 their Lordships have observed :-  "....those who could not come to the court need not be at a comparative disadvantage to those who rushed in here.
If they are otherwise similarly situated, they are entitled to similar treatment, if not by anyone else, at the hands of this Court."
The stand of the respondents thus, cannot be accepted because the petitioner is similarly situated like the cases of Puran Singh and Babu Joseph.
Apart from this, the respondents have not been able to bring anything on record to show that why the relief as given to Babu Joseph be not given to the petitioner, when the petitioner submittedly was senior to Babu Joseph.
Instead of letting the petitioner to approach this Court, the respondents should have given the relief to the petitioner as was given in the case of Babu Joseph and others who subsequently filed writ petitions before the Madhya Pradesh High Court, Gwalior Bench.
In this view of the matter this writ petition also deserves to be allowed.
3.
Consequently, this writ petition shall stand allowed with costs, which are quantified at Rs. 1000/-.
Order, Annexure P-4 whereby rejection of representation was communicated to the petitioner, is quashed.
Petitioner is held entitled to the relief in the same terms as in Misc.
Petition No. 257 of 1980 decided on 821990.
Respondents are directed to accord all benefits of seniority, promotion and arrears of salary, if any, on re-fixation of seniority and consequential promotion with reference to a date falling on completion of three years from the date of joining service on the post of Sub Inspector.
Respondents are directed to complete the exercise of giving benefit to the petitioner in terms of Babu Joseph's case, within six months from the date of communication of order from this Court.