JS Khehar, J (Oral) - The respondents issued an advertisement dated June 12, 2006 (Annexure P-3) inviting applications for 450 posts of Punjabi Masters/Mistresses.
The petitioners considering themselves as eligible for the posts under reference submitted their application forms well before the last date of receipt thereof.
Consequent upon a determination at the hands of the respondents, the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Punjab, issued a public notice in the Tribunal on November 21, 2006 (Annexure P-5) depicting the cut off marks for various categories of candidates who were eligible for appointment against the posts of Punjabi Masters/Mistresses in furtherance of the advertisement dated June 12, 2006 (Annexure P-3).
For the category of Scheduled Caste (Ex Servicemen-dependent) candidates there were no cut-off marks, whereas the cut-off marks for male candidates of the Scheduled Castes (General) category were 13129.
In view of the above, learned counsel for the petitioners vehemently contends that since petitioner No. 1 applied for appointment as a Punjabi Master from the category of Scheduled Castes (Ex- servicemen-dependent) for which there was no cut-off marks, he could not be excluded from the zone of selection; whereas for petitioner No. 2, it is submitted that he could have only been excluded if the marks awarded to him were less than 13129 marks.
2.
The grievance of the petitioners, however, is that their claim for selection and appointment against the posts of Punjabi Masters was never taken into consideration as they were found ineligible for the advertised posts.
This determination at the hands of the respondents is seriously contested by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
In this behalf, it is the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners that statutory rules have been framed by the respondents under Article 309 of the Constitution of India for regulating recruitment, inter alia to the posts of Punjabi Masters.
Reference in this behalf has been made to the Punjab State Education Class III (School Cadre) Service (First Amendment) Rules, 1995 (for short `the 1995 Rules') which were invoked at the time of the issuance of the advertisement dated June 12, 2006 (Annexure P-3).
Relying on the aforestated statutory Rules, learned counsel for the petitioners has invited our attention to the qualifications prescribed therein for the posts of Punjabi Masters/Mistresses.
The relevant extract of the 1995 Rules is being extracted hereunder :-  S. No.
Designation of the post  Minimum qualification and teaching experience  Direct Recruitment  Promotion (75%) 3(b)  Punjabi Masters/Mistress  (i) Graduate from a recognized University with Punjabi as a subject;  25%  75% (ii) B.Ed.
with teaching subject of Punjabi in B.Ed.
3.
It is also the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners that the advertisement issued by the respondents inviting applications for the posts of Punjabi Masters/Mistresses dated June 12, 2006 (Annexure P-3) was in consonance with the statutory Rules, relevant extract whereof has been reproduced hereinabove.
In this behalf, learned counsel for the petitioners has invited our attention to the following qualifications prescribed for the post of Punjabi Masters/Mistresses in the advertisement dated June 12, 2006 (Annexure P-3) :-  "One should be a graduate from the recognised university with Punjabi as subject and B.Ed.
with teaching of Punjabi in B.Ed."
In order to substantiate his claim, learned counsel for the petitioners vehemently contends that both the petitioners had qualified the BA examination with Punjabi as "compulsory subject".
He further contends that both the petitioners had qualified the B.Ed.
examination with teaching of Punjabi as one of the subjects.
Thus viewed, it is submitted that both the petitioners were eligible for appointment against the posts of Punjabi Masters/Mistress.
The factual position noticed hereinabove is not disputed by the learned counsel for the respondents.
4.
In order to repudiate the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners, it is submitted by the learned counsel for the respondents that to be eligible for appointment against the post of Punjabi Master/Mistress, the requirement of qualifying the subject of Punjabi is fulfilled only when the said subject is taken as an "elective subject" during the pursuit of the academic qualification referred to in the Rules/advertisement.
In this behalf, learned counsel for the petitioners has invited our attention to the averments made in paragraph 1 of the preliminary submissions, which is being extracted hereunder :-  "That at the very outset it is submitted that on a cursory reading, there is an element of superficial vagueness in the drafting of "The Punjab State Education Class III (School Cadre) Service Rules, 1978" with regard to MASTERS in specific subjects, which vanishes from their second reading and appreciating the spirit thereof.
In the Rules, for the post of subject specific MASTERS, it has been prescribed that the candidate should be a BA with that particular subject as a "Subject", implying thereby that it should be an elective subject and not the basic compulsory language study.
In fact, this has clearly found mention in case of Mathematics Master or Fine Arts Mistress etc. which have better drafting clarity.
Basic English and Basic Punjabi are taught for compulsory language proficiency in Punjabi to all the undergraduate students, whether they are science students, commerce students or humanities group students.
For acquiring specific knowledge of the language as a subject, a student must opt for it as an elective full fledge Language subject.
It is common knowledge in the academic field that even if Punjabi and English are taught as compulsory subjects, those seeking appointment as Language Teachers should have studied the subject with a more intensive level compulsory language subject which provides no specialised subject-specific knowledge required for a competent teacher.
It is certainly not in the interest of the public and, particularly the students, to have such language teachers who have graduated with only basic language knowledge compulsory for all students and not for subject experts."
5.
Learned counsel for the respondents has also invited our attention to Annexure R-1 appended to the written statement filed on behalf of respondent No. 3.
Annexure R-1, dated July 21, 2006, reads as under :- "Subject :- Recruitment of 2000 Masters in Upper Primary Schools.
Reference your Memo No. 1/17/06-1E/793, dated 2662006 and reminders No. 1/17/06-1E/854, dated 672006 and Memo No. 1/17/06-1E/848, dated 14.7.2006 on the subject noted above.
2.
In this case the reply is as under : (a) Science Master/Mistresses (Medical) : No, only candidates having B.Sc.
with Botany and Zoology are eligible for the post of Science Master/Mistress (Medical).
(b) Punjabi/Hindi Master/Mistress : No, the candidates with graduation from recognised university without Punjabi/Hindi as an elective subject, are not eligible for the post of Punjabi/Hindi Master/Mistress.
3.
You are requested to inform the Government if sufficient numbers of eligible candidates have applied for the posts of Drawing Master/Art and Craft Master advertised under this category."
5.
Having considered the rival submissions advanced on behalf of the learned counsel for the parties, we are of the view that the respondents are reading too much into statutory rules/advertisement whereunder, applications were invited for appointment against the posts of Punjabi Masters/Mistresses.
Relevant portion of the statutory Rules extracted hereinabove only require that a candidate for the posts under reference should be a graduate with Punjabi as a subject without the super-riding condition that the subject of Punjabi should have been taken as an "elective subject".
The same position ensues for the B.Ed.
qualification, wherein also no such precondition has been stipulated.
Rightfully the advertisement issued by the respondents on June 12, 2006 (Annexure P-3) is in consonance with the statutory Rules of 1995.
The petitioners fulfill the eligibility condition stipulated in the statutory rules/advertisement.
The precondition asserted on behalf of the respondents that the subject of Punjabi should have been taken as an "elective subject" is a matter of the respondents imagination, and that, the same does not flow out of the statutory rules/advertisement.
The eligibility of the petitioners has to be viewed by excluding the aforesaid requirement superimposed by the respondents.
Thus viewed the petitioners were bound to be considered as eligible.
We are, therefore, satisfied that the petitioners were wrongfully declared ineligible for selection and appointment to the posts of Punjabi Masters.
6.
It would be unfair to the learned counsel for the respondents if we do not refer to the memorandum dated July 21, 2006 (Annexure R-1) on which he had placed emphatic reliance.
The aforesaid memorandum does not purport to be a clarification either in respect of the earlier advertisement issued on June 12, 2006 (Annexure P-3) or a modification of the existing statutory Rules.
Thus viewed, the memorandum dated July 21, 2006 (Annexure R-1) cannot be made applicable to the process of selection whereunder the petitioners claim eligibility.
Our aforesaid observations should not be taken to mean that this Court has opined that in future for filling up of posts in the cadre of Punjabi Mistress/Mistresses, the respondents can rely upon the memorandum dated July 21, 2006 (Annexure R-1).
Since the same is not subject matter of consideration of the instant selection process, we need say no more on this issue.
7.
For the reasons recorded hereinabove, the instant writ petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to consider the claim of the petitioners for selection/appointment as Punjabi Masters/Mistresses as if they were eligible.
In case the petitioners fall in the zone of selection, they shall be issued offers of appointment within two months from the date of receipt of a certified copy of this order.
Petition allowed.