TPS Mann, J - The petitioner is seeking quashing of the order passed by Director General of Police, Haryana on 7102005, whereby her claim for the grant of Rs. 25 lacs as Ex-gratia Compassionate Financial Assistance (for short `CFA'), was rejected.
2.
Jaimal Singh, husband of the petitioner was serving the Haryana police as Assistant Sub Inspector and was posted at Ambala.
He was due to superannuate on 3052001.
However, on 18.5.2001, said Jaimal Singh died.
The petitioner then filed an application for appointment of her son on compassionate grounds.
However, Inspector General of Police, Ambala Range returned the application on 2842004 to the Superintendent of Police, Ambala with the objection that no case was made out for the appointment of her son on compassionate grounds and a new case be sent for payment of Rs. 25 Lacs as CFA.
Thereafter, the petitioner filed an application on 4102004 before the Superintendent of Police, Ambala for the grant of the aforementioned amount as CFA.
The said application was then recommended by Superintendent of Police, Ambala and sent to Inspector General of Police, Ambala Range, who in turn vide his endorsement dated 1122004 sent the case of the petitioner to the Director General of Police, Haryana with a request to grant CFA to the petitioner.
The case was considered and filed as the application had been submitted by the petitioner on 4102004 i.e. after a period of three years from the death of Jaimal Singh.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the petitioner is an illiterate lady.
She did not know whether any compensation or compassionate appointment was to be given by the government on account of death of her husband.
However, when her application for appointment of her son on compassionate grounds was rejected, she moved the application for the grant of CFA on 4102004.
4.
Learned State counsel has drawn the attention of the Court to Clause 4(1) of the Haryana Government Ex-gratia Rules, 2003, as per which CFA could be granted to the petitioner only if such a request had been made within three years from the date of death of the government employee.
5.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and gone through the documents brought on record.
6.
The petitioner is an illiterate lady.
She does not know how to read and write.
She has even put her thumb-impression on the present petition.
She had initially applied to the respondents for giving compassionate appointment to her son.
This application was considered and rejected on the ground that as ASI Jaimal Singh was about to superannuate when he died on 18.5.2001, therefore, government job could not be given to his son on compassionate grounds.
Later on, the petitioner submitted an application to Superintendent of Police that due to domestic reasons and by her own consent, she did not want any appointment on compassionate grounds, rather she be given Rs. 25 lacs as CFA.
This application was entertained and recommended by Superintendent of Police, Ambala on 25112004 and the same was then sent to Inspector General of Police, Ambala Division, who further recommended it, vide his endorsement dated 1122004 to the Director General of Police, Haryana to grant the aforementioned CFA to the petitioner.
Under these circumstances, it cannot be said that the petitioner had not applied within the prescribed time of three years for the grant of benefits to her on account of the death of her husband Jaimal Singh.
Her request for the grant of CFA was entertained and favourably recommended by the Superintendent of Police, Ambala on 25112004 and by Inspector General of Police, Ambala Division on 1122004.
In case the request made by the petitioner was beyond the period of limitation as prescribed by Clause 4(1) of the Haryana Government Ex-gratia Rules, 2003, either of the two authorities could have rejected such a claim of the petitioner, but nothing of that sort was done.
Instead, the request of the petitioner for the grant of CFA was duly entertained and favourably recommended.
7.
For the aforementioned reasons, we find that impugned order Annexure P.1 passed by Director General of Police, Haryana is liable to be set aside.
Ordered accordingly.
The request of the petitioner for the grant of Rs. 25 lacs as Ex-gratia Compassionate Financial Assistance is accepted.
The necessary payment be made by the concerned respondent to the petitioner expeditiously.
Writ petition is, accordingly, allowed.
No costs.
Petition allowed.