Challenge, in the present Letters Patent Appeal, is to the judgment of the learned Single Judge, dated 2132007, dismissing the writ petition of the appellant.
2.
The appellant was appointed as a Taxation Inspector in the Department of Excise and Taxation, Haryana on 3062000.
He was already serving in the PEC Limited at New Delhi.
He submitted his resignation from the aforesaid company on 772000 and sought extension of time to join the new post.
Three months' time was granted to the appellant to join the said post.
Eventually, the appellant joined on 4102000 and then left on 6102000 after two days.
Thereafter, a notice was served upon him questioning him about his absence.
He was, however, permitted to join his duties as Taxation Inspector, subject, however, to his services being terminated, without any notice, in case it was found that he had served in any other Govt./Semi Government Department or private firms in any capacity during the period from 6102000 to 11.1.2001 i.e. the period of his absence from duty.
The Department thereafter received information that during the period of his absence, the appellant continued to work with the PEC Limited at New Delhi and drew salary.
He was charge-sheeted and after holding an inquiry, a show-cause notice was issued to him.
Thereafter, his services were terminated.
3.
The appellant impugned the order of his termination, inter alia pleading that the inquiry proceedings were violative of Rule 72 of the Haryana Civil Services (Punishment and appeal) Rules, 1987, as the appellant had not been granted an opportunity to cross-examine the witnesses, thus, resulting in prejudice to him.
4.
The learned Single Judge dismissed the writ petition by holding that the order, permitting the appellant to join service, clearly stipulated that his services could be terminated, without any notice, if it was found that he had served any other Government/Semi Government Department or a private firm, during the period of from 6102000 to 11.1.2001.
It was held that in view of the aforementioned order, all that was necessary was a show cause notice reply, and personal hearing, which was provided to the appellant.
5.
Counsel for the appellant contends that as the respondents held an inquiry, witnesses were not examined in the presence of the appellant, thus, depriving him of an opportunity to cross-examine them, serious prejudice has been caused to him.
The inquiry was conducted in violation of the mandate of the Haryana Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1987.
It is further contended that as an inquiry was conducted, and a report submitted, the proceedings were void, as the inquiry report was not appended with the show cause notice.
6.
We have heard learned counsel for the appellant and perused the paper book.
7.
We are satisfied that the appellant's conduct of serving with a Corporation, after joining service as Taxation Inspector in the Excise and Taxation Department, does not entitle him to any relief.
As noticed by the learned single Judge, the appellant was permitted to join duties with the condition that his services would be terminated, without any notice, in case it was found that he had served in any Government/Semi Government Department or private firms in any capacity, during the period 6102000 to 11.1.2001.
During inquiry, it was found that the appellant was a permanent employee of the PEC Limited (a Government of India Enterprises), had drawn salary from the aforesaid company from 91121981 to 1712001 and was, thus, guilty of submitting a false certificate, while joining duties in the Excise and Taxation Department.
8.
Reliance by counsel for the appellant upon a Division Bench judgment of this Court, report as Jitender Singh v. State of Haryana and another, 2006(3) SCT 352, is entirely misplaced.
The entry into service of the appellant was dishonest and based upon a false affidavit.
We find no reason to interfere with the impugned judgment.
Consequently, the present appeal is dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.