Manmohan Sarin, J - Petitioner Union of India by the present writ petition seeks quashing of order dated 19th April, 2006, passed in OA No. 2466/2005, by the Central Administrative Tribunal, hereinafter referred to as the Tribunal.
By the above order, the Tribunal quashed the office order dated 29th August, 2005, passed by the petitioner, posting Dr. Maneesh Khoba, CMO (NFSG), respondent No. 1 herein, to the Casualty in Safdarjung Hospital.
The said order was passed, pursuant to the decision taken in the Ministry to post out Dr. Maneesh Khoba from the Ophthalmology department.
The learned Tribunal held that the order dated 29th August, 2005 to be arbitrary, illegal and issued in colourable exercise of powers by respondent No. 1.
2.
Here are the relevant facts, leading to the filing of the present writ petition :  (i) Respondent No. 1 Dr. Maneesh Khoba completed his MBBS and MD (Ophthalmology) from All India Institute of Medical Sciences.
He had joined in the General Duty Medical Officer Special Cadre (GDMO) in the Central Health Services, after successfully completing the examination, conducted by the Union Public Service Commission.
Thereafter in the year 1988, he took study leave for doing his MD in Ophthalmology.
On completion of three years course of MD in Ophthalmology, he was posted to the department of Ophthalmology, Safdarjung Hospital, New Delhi in July, 2001.
Dr. Maneesh Khoba initially joined as Medical Officer.
He earned promotions as Senior Medical Officer and then in 1994 as Medical Officer.
He was posted as Chief Medical Officer (NFSG) in 2002.
There is no controversy with regard to his academic achievements and the work done by him in the field of corneal blindness.
Dr. Maneesh Khoba belongs to a Scheduled caste.
He claims that despite his academic and professional excellence, he was maltreated, humiliated on caste basis by Dr. KPS Malik, Head of the Department, Ophthalmology and when the maltreatment and humiliation crossed all tolerable limits, he made a detailed complaint dated 22nd December, 2004 to the National Commission for Scheduled Castes.
The Commission took cognizance of the complaint and called upon the respondent No. 3 to furnish comments.
This was followed by a meeting in the chamber of the Chairman of the Commission, attended by the Joint Secretary, Health Ministry and the Additional Medical Superintendent, wherein it was decided that an independent inquiry be conducted by the Director/Department of Health in a month's time and placed before the Commission.
(ii) It is the case of respondent No. 1 Dr. Maneesh Khoba that by way of counterblast.
Dr. KPS Malik, HOD, made a complaint against him, copy of which had not been supplied to him and was supplied only during the inquiry proceedings by the Additional Director General.
It is claimed that the complaint was an undated one and was an after-thought and manipulated one.
He says that the Inquiry Committee, which was to inquire into his complaint expanded its scope without any authorization by considering the counter- complaint of Dr. KPS Malik.
He was denied a fair opportunity of representation in the inquiry proceedings.
Respondent No. 1 claims that Dr. KPS Malik and his associates fabricated and produced false evidence with a view to scuttle his complaint.
(iii) Dr. RK Srivastava after a detailed fact finding inquiry into the complaint of Dr. Maneesh Khoba and counter-complaint of Dr. KPS Malik reached the conclusion that the complaint to the SC/ST Commission indicating various allegations against Dr. KPS Malik and others could not be substantiated, while the allegations made by Dr. KPS Malik in the complaint to the Additional DG and Medical Superintendent, Safdarjung Hospital against Dr. Maneesh Khoba were mostly substantiated.
Further, there was no evidence to support harassment to Dr. Maneesh Khoba on the grounds of discrimination against SC/ST community.
3.
Respondent also places reliance on the observations of the Chairman of SC/ST Commission, who did not accept the report of the Inquiry Committee and observed that untouchability was present in such a form and the Commission advised the Ministry of Health to look into the issue meticulously to redress the grievances of Dr. Maneesh Khoba and see that doctors are not harassed and discriminated upon.
There was also the suggestion that Dr. Maneesh Khoba could play the cassette recording which would expose the alleged bias of Dr. KPS Malik, before the Secretary Health.
4.
We may notice here that as per the complaint filed by Dr. KPS Malik, Dr. Maneesh Khoba had an attitude problem and committed gross mis-behaviour repeatedly with him as his Head of Department.
Incident of hitting patients, mis-behaviour with colleagues.
threatening Sister-In-Charge as well as Safai Karamcharis were brought forth in the statements recorded not only of Dr. KPS Malik but other faculty members of the hospital and among those, there were medical professionals, who were presently not working at Safdarjung Hospital but in the past had interacted with Dr. Maneesh Khoba.
An advisory dated 10th September, 2004, by Dr. KPS Malik, issued to members of Ophthalmic Faculty emanating out of an incident of assault of a patient, involving the respondent No. 1 is said to have triggered the present complaint by him.
5.
The case of the petitioner UOI is that in these circumstances, it was essential to maintain harmony and peace in the Ophthalmology Department for efficient functioning of the hospital.
The daily bickering and indiscipline on account of differences or the alleged discrimination and maltreatment as claimed by Dr. Maneesh Khoba could not be permitted to affect the working of the hospital.
In these circumstances especially when the inquiry report having found prima facie that the allegations of respondent No. 1 were not substantiated, petitioner was fully justified in the exigency of service to transfer or post out respondent No. 1.
6.
Mr. AK Bhardwaj, counsel for the petitioner submitted that the Tribunal had proceeded on a wrong assumption and erroneous basis in holding that the transfer was a mala fide one.
The rationale that a Specialist could not be posted outside his specialization and he must be posted to a job commensurate to his skills was not attracted and applicable in the present case.
This is because respondent No. 1 did not belong to Specialist Sub Cadre.
There are presently three Specialists Sub Cadre.
Firstly, Non-Teaching Specialist Sub Cadre, the eligibility for which is MBBS Degree plus Graduate Degree/Diploma and three years experience for Degree Holder and five years for Diploma Holders.
Recruitment to this cadre is on the basis of interview by UPSC Secondly is the Teaching Sub Cadre where the requirement for experience is different.
Recruitment to this cadre is also on the basis of interview by the UPSC.
Thirdly, Public Health Sub Cadre.
Respondent No. 1 did not belong to any of these sub cadres.
Respondent No. 1 belonged to GDMG Sub Cadre.
These are Medical Officers in the pay scale of Rs. 8000-13500/-, who are recruited on the basis of combined medical service examination conducted by the UPSC.
Respondent No. 1 had appeared and qualified the examination aid joined in the GDMO sub-cadre rising to she post of CMO.
Though he had done his MD (Ophthalmology), he does not belong to the specialist cadre and he can be posted in any of the GDMO postings.
Mr. Bhardwaj is right in his submission that the Tribunal misdirected itself in proceeding on the basis that respondent No. 1 belongs to the Specialist Sub Cadre and thus could not be posted to Casualty.
In the given circumstances, respondent No. 1 was sought to be posted in Casualty to avoid daily bickering and to ensure the smooth functioning in the department.
Mr. Bhardwaj submitted that respondent No. 1 following an incident with a patient, when an advisory was issued, had sought to raise these complaints and make allegations of maltreatment and caste bias against the HOD.
We find merit in the submissions of Mr. Bhardwaj.
It is not disputed before us that respondent No. 1 belongs to the GDMO cadre and not the specialist cadre.
Hence the whole assumption that he could not be posted to an area outside his specialisation is an erroneous assumption.
7.
We may notice here that even during the course of hearing it was indicated by us that while consideration of administrative exigency and discipline are to be maintained, yet at the same time optimum utilization of the skills of the incumbent should be endeavoured.
Keeping these factors in mind, we had asked the petitioner to file in tabulated form the various posts available where the Ophthalmological skills of the respondent No. 1 could be used.
Respondent No. 1, however, was not interested in a solution on these lines and wanted to challenge the Tribunal's order to be disposed of on merits.
8.
In support of the impugned order of the Tribunal, Dr. Raju, counsel for the respondent submitted that the order of transfer was punitive and stigmatic.
He submitted that the complaint of Dr. KPS Malik was a mala fide one.
It had been found to be undated one and not properly diarized.
The very observation of Dr. KPS Malik that respondent No. 1 could not deal with patients and general public was itself derogatory.
The Inquiry Committee without any mandate from the Commission has enlarged its scope.
He urged that the Tribunal in these circumstances had rightly found the order of transfer to be stigmatic and mala fide.
The transfer order was not the result of an independent application of mind but had been passed by the Medical Superintendent on the dictates of higher authorities, which was apparent from the order of 25th August, which refers to the decision taken to post respondent No. 1 out.
The foundation of the order rests on the mis-conduct by the respondent.
It also proceeds on the basis of acceptance of the inquiry report conducted by the department.
He laid emphasis on the fact that the National Commission for SC/ST had on the contrary asked the department to carry out a detailed examination and to do justice to Dr. Maneesh Khoba to prevent the discrimination against SC/ST persons.
We find that though the SC/ST Commission expressed its views for a meticulous examination to see that grievances of Dr. Maneesh Khoba is redressed in October, 2005 it did not comment in any manner on the transfer order.
9.
Having noted the version of the respondent as also that of the petitioner, we find that the respondent No. 1 does not belong to the specialist cadre and thus cannot claim to be posted in the speciality department as a matter of right.
It is of paramount importance and in larger public interest that peace and harmony is maintained in the public Hospital which caters to the medical needs of a large section of the poor citizens.
However, with a view for optimum utilization of his skills in the Ophthalmology and to ensure peace amid harmony in the functioning of the Ophthalmology department, petitioner was asked to furnish various available postings for which respondent No. 1 was eligible.
However, as noted earlier, respondent No. 1 is not amenable to the same.
Dr. Raju in fact does not deny that in exigency of service, respondent No. 1 can be posted in the discretion of the petitioner.
However, his insistence is only to uphold the order of the Tribunal, which has struck down the order of transfer as stigmatic and punitive.
We are unable to agree with the findings of the Tribunal that the impugned order of transfer is a mala fide and a colourable exercise of power.
The finding that there was total non-application of mind on the part of the concerned authority to take a realistic and balanced view to find a posting commensurate with the job and responsibilities proceeded on the basis that he had to be posted in the Ophthalmology Department as a specialist, which assumption, as noted earlier, was incorrect.
Rather, respondent No. 1 himself was not amenable for consideration of a posting, where Ophthalmology skills could be used and only wanted his stand to be vindicated.
We find that the Tribunal has misdirected itself in reaching the conclusion that it was a mala fide exercise of power.
Dr. KPS Malik against whom the allegations have been made had no power to transfer.
The power of transfer vests with the Superintendent and higher authorities of Ministry of Health, who were seized with the entire gamut of complaint and counter-complaint.
The decision of the authorities to post respondent No. 1 out from the Ophthalmology Department after the inquiry report which had found the allegations made by Dr. Maneesh Khoba to be unsubstantiated and substance in the complaint of Dr. KPS Malik, which has been corroborated not only by numerous other members of the faculty, as also by other doctors and professionals, who presently have no connection with Safdarjung Hospital.
We have perused the inquiry report and the documents produced before the Inquiry Officer.
The Enquiry Officer observed that respondent No. 1 Dr. Maneesh Khoba's behaviour was erratic and not balanced.
It is sufficient for us to notice that sufficient material exists on record for the Inquiry Officer to have reached the conclusion which he did.
We refrain at this stage from making any comment lest it may cause prejudice to the respondent.
In these circumstances, the impugned order passed by the petitioner cannot be labelled as a mala fide exercise of power, rather it is due exercise of discretion in administrative exigency.
Accordingly, impugned order dated 19th April, 2006 of the Tribunal is set aside.
Writ petition is allowed.
Petition allowed.