Rajesh Tandon, J - Heard Sri BPS Mer, Advocate for the petitioner and Sri Deepak Rawat, Standing Counsel for the respondents.
2.
By the present writ petition, the petitioner has prayed for a writ of certiorari quashing the order dated 7-10-1999 passed by the appellate authority.
3.
Briefly stated the petitioner was employed in Indian Army on 30-8-1969 and was deputed in the Kumaon Regiment.
During his employment in the Army the petitioner suffered some ailment and he was placed in low Medical category.
The petitioner was invalidated out of service on 11-11-1977.
The petitioner applied for disability pension, but the respondents rejected his claim on the ground that the disability is not attributable to the military service.
Thereafter the petitioner preferred an appeal to the Ministry of Defence, Government of India.
The appellate authority vide order dated 7-10-1999 rejected the appeal of the petitioner reiterating the same grounds.
Feeling aggrieved the petitioner has preferred the present petition.
4.
Counter-affidavit has been filed by the respondents.
The respondents have submitted that the petitioner was enrolled in the Army on 30-8-1969.
While serving with the Unit he was placed in Medical Category 'CEE (Temporary)' for six months on 22-6-1974.
He was upgraded to medical category BEE (Temporary) for one year.
He was discharged from Army service by its commanding officer due to being placed in Medical Category lower than "AYE" and not up to the prescribed Military service from 11-11-1977.
The medical board has opined his disability up to 30% but neither attributable nor aggravated by military service.
The petitioner was invalidated out of service under Rule 13 item III(iii) of Army Rules, 1954.
The total service of the petitioner was 8 years and 187 days only.
5.
From the record it appears that the petitioner has served for more than 8 years in the Army.
At the time of his recruitment he was hale and hearty and he was not found suffering from any constitutional disease and there is nothing in his service record that at the time of his enrolment in military service he was suffering from any kind of disease.
He has undergone scrupulous training after recruitment and he also took part in games and extra curricular activities.
The ailment suffered to him during his service in the Army and as such according to the petitioner the disease is attributed to military service and he is entitled for disability pension.
6.
It has been held by the Apex Court in the case Madan Singh Shekhawat v Union of India, 1999(4) SCT 89 (SC) : (2000)1 UPLBEC 3471 : (1999 Lab IC 3266), as under :  "The grant of disability pension is governed by the various Rules found in Defence Services regulations : Rule 10 of the said Rules reads thus :  "Casual leave counts as duty except as provided for the Rule 11(a)".
As per this Rule when an army personnel is on casual leave, same is counted a duty unless he comes under any one of the exceptions under Rule 1l(a) of the Rules.
It is not the case of the respondents that the appellant comes under any such exceptions.
Therefore, as per Rule 10(a), the appellant was on duty at the time of the accident.
Rules 48 of the said Regulation contemplates admissibility of disability pension.
It has enumerated various cases under which an army personnel is entitled to the grant of disability pension.
Rule 48 reads thus :  "Disability pension when admissible - An officer who is retired from military service on account of a disability which is attributable to or aggravated by such service and is assessed at 20 per cent or over may, on retirement, be awarded a disability pension consisting of a service element and a disability pension consisting of a service element and a disability element in accordance with the regulations in this section."
The question of disability pension came up for consideration in the case Mahavir Singh Rawat v. Union of India, 2001(4) SCT 508 All.
: 2001(1) AWC 363 : (2001 All LJ 117) wherein it has been held as under :  "The case of the petitioner for disability pension is squarely covered by the provisions of Para 173 of the Pension Regulations.
It reads as follows: "173.
Unless otherwise specifically provided a disability pension may be granted to an individual who is invalidated from service on account of disability which is attributable to or aggravated by military service and is assessed at 20 per cent or over.
The question whether a disability is attributable to or aggravated by military service shall be determined under the rules in Appendix II."
This provision requires that invalidation from the military service should be on account of disability which is attributable to or aggravated by the military service and the same shall be determined under the Entitlement Rules contained in Appendix II.
The Entitlement Rules provide for the manner of award of disability pension.
Rule 2(a) provides that disablement will be accepted as due to military service provided it is certified that the disablement is due to a disease which is attributable to military service or which existed before or arose during the military service and has been and remains aggravated thereby.
This rule means that an employee who has been boarded out may suffer from a particular disease but if it is aggravated after entering service resulting in his discharge from service due to the disability, it will entitle him to claim disability pension.
It shows that even a disease contracted prior to the entry into service can be a basis to claim disability pension provided it aggravated after the entry into service.
xxx xxx xxx Now it would be appropriate to advert to the other important rule regarding awarding of the disability pension in respect of illness.
It is Rule 7, which may for the same of clarity be extracted in extenso :-  "7.
In respect of disease, the following rules will be observed : "(a) Cases, in which it is established that conditions of military service did not determine or contribute to the onset of the disease but influenced the subsequent course of the disease, will fall for acceptance on the basis of aggravation.
(b) A disease which has led to an individual's discharge or death will ordinarily be deemed to have arisen in service if no note of it was made at the time of the individual's acceptance for military service.
However, if medical opinion holds, for reasons to be stated, that the disease could not have been detected on medical examination prior to acceptance for service the disease will not be deemed to have arisen during service.
(c) If a disease is accepted as having arisen in service, it must also be established that the conditions of military service determined or contributed to the onset of the disease and that the conditions were due to the circumstances of duty in military service.
(d) In considering whether a particular disease is due to military service, it is necessary to relate the established facts, in the actiology of the disease and of its normal development, to the effect that conditions of service e.g. exposure, stress, climate etc. may have had on its manifestation.
Regard must also be had to the time factor (also see Annexure).
(i) xxx xxx xxx (ii) Common disease known to be affected by stress and strain.
This should be decided with due reference to the nature of the duties an individual has had to perform in military service.
It may be that in some cases the individual had been engaged on sedentary duties when they will normally not qualify."
An analysis of the above provisions with regard to the award of the disability pension, in true perspective, leaves no room for doubt that an employee who has been invalidated is entitled to disability pension even if he was suffering from the disease prior to his enrolment in service but it aggravated due to stress and strain of the duties while in employment.
The benefit of reasonable doubt shall always be extended in favour of the boarded out employee if a claim for disability pension is made and it is established that at the time of enrolment in service he was not having any ailment of the type for which he has been invali dated."
7.
In the instant case the petitioner was enrolled in the Army on 30-8-1969.
At the time of recruitment the petitioner had undergone vigorous, thorough and intensive medical examinations, which would certainly rule out the possibility of his suffering from any disease.
According to the petitioner he was deputed in Artillery Regiment and due to artillery blast damage was caused to his ear which reduced his hearing capacity.
The respondents have admitted that the petitioner have taken part in War and also remained posted in Artillery.
8.
Here may be confliction and contradiction on the opinion that the alleged disease to the petitioner was constitutional or attributable to the military service but there is no doubt that the said disease was borne out to the petitioner during his employment in the Army and thus the employer of the petitioner is bound to give treatment to the petitioner during service and if he was not found fit for military service, to give him disability pension.
9.
In view of above, a writ of certiorari is issued quashing the order dated 30-1-1980 and order dated 7-10-1999.
The respondents are directed to consider the payment of disability pension to the petitioner according to rules.
10.
Accordingly, writ petition is allowed.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.