MM Kumar, J - This petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution prays for issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to grant, release and continue service element of disability pension to the petitioner from the date it became due along with all the consequential relief by way of interest and exemplary damages.
2.
Facts which are necessary for disposal of the instant petition may first be noticed.
The petitioner was enrolled in the Army on 27101948.
He was invalided out of military service on 2.11.1958 due to the disease of `Contractual Right Elbow (Hysterical) 576'.
The disease of the petitioner was held to be attributable to military service and at the time of invalidation the disability was more than 20% as per assessment made by the Medical Board.
The petitioner was granted disability pension consisting of service element and disability element for 20% disability from 3111958 to 14.9.1960.
Thereafter the disability pension of the petitioner was not extended as the CCDA (P) reduced the disability percentage of the petitioner at less than 20%.
The respondents also stopped the service element of disability pension of the petitioner w.e.f.
7111949.
The petitioner represented the respondents for grant of service element of disability pension on the ground that he had rendered more than 10 years service and his original pension carried the same.
Despite a protracted correspondence the respondents have not released the service element of pension to the petitioner.
3.
In the written statement the respondents have taken the stand that since the petitioner has not completed 10 years minimum service as was required before 131968, therefore, he is not entitled for grant of service element of pension.
It has been asserted that the petitioner has served in the Army in two spells of service i.e. firstly from 27101948 to 3131951 (2 years and 155 days excluding 1 day non-qualifying service) and secondly from 23111951 to 1111958 (6 years and 297 days excluding 47 days non-qualifying service).
According to the respondents the total service in both the spells comes to 9 years and 87 days.
However, it has not been denied that the disability of the petitioner was not attributable or aggravated by military service.
4.
Controverting the assertions made in the written statement, the petitioner filed replication by reiterating the averments made in the writ petition.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner at the outset has stated at the bar that he does not press for the disability element of pension and has confined his claim to service element of disability pension.
6.
Learned counsel for the respondents at the outset very fairly conceded that the case of the petitioner is covered by the Division Bench judgment of this Court in the case of Amarjit Singh (supra).
7.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, perusing the record and the judgment cited by the learned counsel for the petitioner, I am of the considered opinion that the instant petition (sic).
8.
The question which arises for consideration in this petition is whether the petitioner is entitled to the grant of service element of disability pension after discontinuation of disability element.
Another question which would require determination is whether the claim made by the petitioner is barred by time.
9.
Both the issues have been considered in detail in two similar writ petitions namely Dalip Singh v. Union of India and others, CWP No. 2611 of 2003 : 2001(1) SCT 162 (P&H) and Kehar Singh v. Union of India and others, CWP No. 18322 of 2003) : 2007(1) SCT 164 (P&H) which have been decided today vide separate detailed orders.
Both the issues have been decided in favour of the petitioner in those cases.
The matter being similar on facts and law, the same reasoning is adopted in the present case as well.
Accordingly, the writ petition deserved to be allowed.
10.
In view of the above, the petitioner is held entitled to the service element of pension for life as per the rates fixed by the Central Government from time to time from the date it was discontinued.
The respondents shall calculate the due arrears of the petitioner till date and disburse the same to him within three months from the date of receipt of a certified copy of this judgment.
In case the arrears are not disbursed within the said period of three months, the entire arrears will carry interest at the rate of 12% from the date of expiry of three months till the date of payment.
The respondents are also directed to regularly pay service element of disability pension to the petitioner every month without any break for whole of his life.
11.
The writ petition is allowed in the above terms with no order as to costs.
The office is directed to attach copies of the orders passed in the case of Dalip Singh and Kehar Singh (supra) while issuing certified copy of this order.
Petition allowed.