SD Anand, J - During the currency of the National Emergency from 26101962 upto 1011968, the petitioner joined the Indian Army on 871963 and he continued in the military service up to 1061970.
Thereafter, he joined employment of respondent No. 1-State of Punjab, as a Constable, with effect from 1641971.
He rose to become an Inspector, a post which he held at the time of his superannuation on 3152003.
2.
As per the provisions of the Punjab Government National Emergency (Concession) Rules, 1965, an ex-serviceman is entitled to a variety of benefits/concessions.
In terms of Rule 4(iii), an ex-serviceman is entitled to count the period of military service towards seniority and pension subject to the riders quoted hereunder :-  "(iii) Pension :- The period of military service mentioned in clause (I) shall count towards pension in the case of appointments to permanent services or posts under the Government subject to the following conditions :- (1) the person concerned should not have earned a pension under military rules in respect of the military service in question.
(2) any bonus or gratuity paid in respect of military service by the defence authorities shall have to be refunded to the State Government.
(3) The period, if any, between the date of discharge from military service and the date of appointment to any service or post under the Government shall count for pension, provided such period does not exceed one year.
Any period exceeding one year but not exceeding three years may also be allowed to count for pension in exceptional cases under the orders of the Government."
In view of the military service rendered by the petitioner, respondent No. 1 by granting him the benefit of military service of 4 years 6 months and 2 days, gave advance increments at the time of joining of civil employment and also ordered that the aforesaid emergency period of 4 years 6 months and 2 days would be counted towards the civil pension also (vide clause (iv) of the letter dated 1291987).
However, the benefit of military service was not given to him towards seniority.
He filed Civil Writ Petition No. 3613 of 1995, which was allowed by this Court and the respondents were directed to grant benefit of emergency period duty towards seniority also.
Resultantly, for the seniority purpose also, respondents treated the deemed date of appointment as Constable and also granted retrospective promotion in the various cadres up to the rank of Sub Inspector.
Annexure P-2 is a copy of the promotion order reflecting deemed date of appointment for the purpose of seniority dated 571996.
3.
It transpired from a perusal of the Pension Payment Order dated 1962003 (Annexure P-3) that the benefit of the military service period of 4 years, 6 months and 2 days had not been accorded to the petitioner in terms of Rule 4(iii).
The petitioner preferred a representation which invited favourable processing at the hands of respondent Nos. 1 and 2 but which (representation) was rejected by respondent No. 3 on the plea that benefits towards increments having already been granted, that period cannot be counted towards the pension.
Copy of order is Annexure P-4.
It is that order which occasioned the filing of the present writ petition.
4.
Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 averred that, though the revised pension papers of the petitioner were sent to respondent No. 3, in the light of the representation received from the petitioner, it was respondent No. 3, which is the final authority for authorization of pension/gratuity and which declined to grant the benefit of military service to the petitioner on the plea that he (i.e. petitioner) had already been given the benefit of previous service in the form of grant of four increments.
Insofar as respondent No. 3 is concerned, it reiterated the validity of the impugned order by averring that the benefit of military service was admissible only once, and in this case, it had been given to the petitioner at the time of joining the civil employment by fixation of enhanced pay.
5.
We have heard Mr. I.D.
Singla, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. BS Chahal, Assistant Advocate General, Punjab, learned counsel for the respondents.
The records have been perused.
6.
In support of the plea that the grant of claimed benefit is in accord with the provisions of Punjab Government National Emergency (Concession) Rules, 1965, the learned counsel for the petitioner invited our attention to provisions of the relevant rule itself which stand quoted in paragraph No. 2 of this judgment.
7.
It may be noticed, in the context, that the petitioner had drawn a tabulated statement in the petition itself in order to support his entitlement to the claimed benefit.
It would be appropriate to extract hereunder the averments made by the petitioner in the relevant part of the petition :-  "10.
That for rendering the person eligible for pension by counting the period of service rendered during emergency three conditions are to be fulfilled namely :- (a) person concerned should not have earned pension under the military service rules in respect of military service in question.
Petitioner has not earned any pension from the military on account of service rendered by him during emergency.
(b) any bonus or gratuity paid in respect of military service by the defence authority shall have to be refunded to the State.
Petitioner received the gratuity to the tune of Rs. 832/- and same has been refunded and deposited on 1771996 in the Treasury Branch of the State Bank of India, Moga.
(c) There should not have any break of more than one year from the date of discharge from Army and joining of the civil service though condonable if more than that.
But in case of the petitioner, petitioner was discharged from Army on 1061970 and joined civil service with the present respondents on 1641971 within one year.
Therefore, petitioner fulfilled all the three conditions laid down in the rules which make petitioner eligible to claim pension by including the period of emergency in the civil service and consequential benefits thereof."
8.
It is beyond the pale of controversy that the petitioner did not earn any pension from the military on account of the service rendered by him during emergency.
Insofar as the gratuity received by him is concerned, the amount thereof was refunded by the petitioner by depositing the same in the Treasury Branch of the State Bank of India, Moga on 1771996.
Insofar as the Clause `C' of the relevant rule is concerned, it also stands complied with inasmuch as the petitioner had been discharged from the Army on 1061970 and he joined civil employment on 1641971 i.e. within a period of one year from the discharge from the Army.
All these averments are contained in para 10 of the petition.
In the corresponding part of the written statement, respondent Nos. 1 and 2 conceded the correctness of the averments made in that para.
The only rider indicated in the corresponding para of the written statement is that it was respondent No. 3, which had rejected the plea of the petitioner.
Insofar as respondent No. 3 is concerned, it averred in the corresponding para of the written statement that the benefit of emergency period service having once been given to the petitioner could not be again given to him for purposes of pension etc.  9.
As would be evident from a perusal of the above narration of facts, respondent Nos. 1 and 2 have not disputed the entitlement of the petitioner to the military service benefit of 4 years, 6 months and 2 days.
The stance taken up by respondent No. 3 is misconceived, as it is not in accord with the provisions of the Punjab Government National Emergency (Concession) Rules, 1965.
There is nothing at all in that rule to indicate that the grant of advance increments at the time of joining of civil employment would disentitle an ex-serviceman to the counting of military service towards pension.
10.
The learned counsel for the respondents vehemently argued that the petitioner cannot claim benefit of Rule 4 sub-rule (iii) in view of the fact that he refunded the amount of gratuity only in the year 1996.
It was further urged that it was for the petitioner to have obtained the sanction of the Competent Authority to the grant of military service benefit at the very time he joined civil employment.
Reliance, in support of the plea aforesaid, was placed upon Note 8 appended to Rule 4.3 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, which is being extracted hereunder :-  "Note 8 - The sanction regarding the counting of military service should be accorded by the competent authority at the time of appointment of the person concerned and not at the time of his retirement from civil service.
Sanctions accorded in such cases are required specially to mention the amount of gratuity or bonus recoverable, the number of monthly instalments in which the bonus or gratuity is to be recovered and the date from which the recovery is to commence.
If, in any case, the gratuity is not to be recovered, the fact will be specially stated in the sanction.
The gratuity once refunded in order to secure the benefit of counting former military service for civil pension cannot be paid back in any circumstances."
11.
Though the rule aforesaid would validate, in law, the plea advocated by the learned counsel for the respondents, it would have no application to the present case on facts.
It may be noticed that it was for the Competent Authority to accord the relevant sanction at the time the petitioner joined civil employment.
It is common ground that the petitioner got civil employment as an ex-serviceman.
The benefit of advance increments was given to him on the premise that he had rendered military service for the indicated period.
There was, thus, no confusion in the mind of the respondents that the petitioner was an ex-serviceman.
In that view of things, it was incumbent upon the competent authority itself to accord the necessary sanction regarding counting of military service.
As is evident from the pleadings, the benefit of military service for purposes other than seniority was accorded to the petitioner at the time, he joined the civil employment.
However, benefit for purposes of seniority was not extended to him.
He obtained that benefit by succeeding in Civil Writ Petition No. 3613 of 1995.
In that view of things, we have no hesitation in repelling the plea raised on behalf of the respondents to the above effect.
12.
In the light of the aforesaid discussions, this Writ Petition shall stand allowed.
However, it is made clear that the total service period, countable towards pension would be 33 years because that figure represents the maximum qualifying period of service for purposes of pension etc.  13.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.