L Narasimha Reddy, J - The petitioner is working as Line Inspector in the 1st respondent Company.
The 2nd respondent issued a show cause notice, dated 16-7-2003, to the petitioner.
Certain allegations were made against the petitioner and it was indicated that a provisional conclusion was arrived at, to award the punishment of postponement of two increments with cumulative effect against the petitioner and he was required to submit explanation.
In obedience to the same, petitioner submitted the explanation on 4-9-2003.
On 23-4-2005, the 2nd respondent passed an order imposing the punishment of postponement of one increment without cumulative effect.
The petitioner assailed the same before the 1st respondent.
The appeal was rejected on 4-8- 2005.
2.
Petitioner contends that the order of imposing the punishment of stoppage of increment against him is contrary to law, in that, it was not preceded by any enquiry.
He contends that when the respondents have indicated in the show cause notice that they propose to inflict a major punishment, it was not open to them to impose a minor punishment without conducting any enquiry.
The petitioner further submits that the matter has been dealt with by the appellate authority, even at the stage of show cause notice, and the appellate authority had in fact incurred disqualification of dealing with the appeal.
Petitioner contends that the matter was kept pending for two years and the impugned order was passed at a time when he was due to be promoted.
3.
The 2nd respondent filed counter affidavit denying the allegations of the petitioner.
It is stated that the necessity to conduct the departmental enquiry would have arisen, if only any major punishment was imposed against the petitioner.
As regards the time at which the order was passed, the 2nd respondent stated that he is the Supreme authority of the 1st respondent Company and it is in his discretion to take any steps in the matter.
4.
Heard Sri.
S Ravindranath, learned counsel for the petitioner and Sri Samineni Kishore, learned standing counsel for respondents.
5.
The short question in this writ petition is as to whether it was open and competent for the respondents to pass the impugned order, without conducting enquiry.
It hardly needs any emphasis that the necessity to conduct departmental enquiry would arise, if the employer proposes to impose a major penalty, and such a necessity does not exist, in case a minor penalty is sought to be inflicted.
6.
The disciplinary proceedings are to commence with the issuance of a show cause notice.
If the show cause notice is silent as to the nature of punishment, which the employer proposes to inflict, the decision as to whether the departmental enquiry must be conducted, can be taken by the employer, on a consideration of the explanation.
If on a consideration of the explanation the employer is of the view that the employee is to be inflicted major punishment, he must order departmental enquiry.
On the other hand, if he is of the view that the matter can be closed by imposing a minor penalty, he can straight way pass such an order, duly referring to the explanation offered by the employee.
7.
Where, however, the show cause notice itself indicates a major penalty is proposed against the employee, the employer is under obligation to conduct departmental enquiry.
The fact that at a subsequent stage, it has decided to impose only a minor penalty cannot relieve the employer, of its obligation to conduct the enquiry.
In such an event, it turns out to be a case of non- application of mind, or an act of face saving.
8.
In the instant case, the show cause notice clearly indicated that the respondents proposed to inflict the major punishment of stoppage of two increments with cumulative effect.
That being the case, the respondents were under obligation to conduct the departmental enquiry.
Though what is imposed against the petitioner, in the ultimate analysis, is a minor penalty, the entire proceedings are vitiated on account of the failure to conduct the departmental enquiry.
9.
Therefore, the impugned order cannot be sustained and is accordingly set aside.
The matter is remitted to the 2nd respondent for fresh consideration.
In case, the 2nd respondent is of the view that the minor penalty must be imposed against the petitioner, a fresh show cause notice must be issued.
On the other hand, if he intends to proceed on the basis of the show cause notice, dated 16-7-2003, he shall be under obligation to conduct departmental enquiry.
10.
Before parting with the case, this Court intends to express displeasure as regards the assertion made by the 2nd respondent in para 5 of the counter affidavit.
He stated that he is the Supreme authority in the NPCL and that he is empowered to initiate any action against any of the field staff.
Such a point of view does not have any place in public organizations.
They can exist at the most in the private organizations.
It is hoped that necessary amends would be made in this regard.
11.
Accordingly, the writ petition is allowed.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.