Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The writ petitioner is questioning the decision of the appellate authority dated November 28th, 2002 affirming the order of the disciplinary authority dated November 12th, 2001 removing him from service.
The principal ground on which the orders are questioned is that no charge-sheet was ever served on him.
At the relevant point of time he was working as deputy secretary of the respondent municipal corporation.
According to the respondents charge-sheet dated March 9th, 2000 was prepared and served.
A copy of that charge-sheet has been annexed to the opposition.
2.
It was alleged that while working as deputy assessor collector the petitioner assessed the annual valuation of the premises mentioned therein with ulterior motive to conceal the material facts regarding the under valuation.
The further allegation was that he was reluctant to co-operate with the vigilance department.
It was also alleged that he forwarded a false statement that no question had been put to him by the chief investigator about the annual valuation in question.
3.
An inquiry officer was appointed.
There is no dispute that before the inquiry officer the petitioner appeared on August 29th, 2000.
There is no dispute either that thereafter he did not participate in the inquiry proceedings.
The inquiry officer recorded in his findings dated May 11th, 2001 that summonses had been issued to the petitioner on as many as nine occasions.
He further recorded that the petitioner had allegedly remained busy on all the occasions.
4.
After appreciating the evidence adduced by the department, the inquiry officer submitted his findings that the charges brought against the petitioner had been duly proved.
By letter dated June 9th, 2001 a copy of the inquiry report was supplied to the petitioner.
He was given an opportunity to submit representation against the findings of the inquiry officer.
There is no dispute that he did not submit any representation.
5.
By the second show-cause notice dated September 3rd, 2001 the disciplinary authority gave opportunity to the petitioner to show-cause against the proposed punishment of removal from service.
It was mentioned in the show-cause notice (it was also recorded in the findings of the inquiry officer) that charges had been framed against him by memo dated March 9th, 2000.
The disciplinary authority further mentioned that the petitioner had not participated in the inquiry proceedings.
6.
The petitioner submitted a reply to the second show-cause notice.
In the reply dated September 29th, 2001 he did not say that the charge-sheet dated March 9th, 2000 had not been served on him.
He stated that it was not correct to say that he had not appeared before the inquiry officer at the appointed dates.
In corroboration, he referred to certain letters stated to be written by him in 1998.
He contended (in the reply) that the pieces of evidence brought on record were not sufficient to hold that charges brought against him had been proved.
7.
After considering his reply to the second show-cause notice, the disciplinary authority made the final order imposing the penalty of removal from service.
Feeling aggrieved, he submitted an appeal on December 4th, 2001.
For the first time, in para 18 of the appeal petition he contended that charge-sheet had not been served on him.
The appellate authority started his order saying that the proceedings had been initiated by issuing the charge- sheet dated March 9th, 2000.
He found no reason to interfere with the order of the disciplinary authority.
Hence the present writ petition dated March 11th, 2003.
8.
As I have indicated the principal ground on which the orders are questioned is that no charge-sheet was served on the petitioner.
Counsel has strenuously argued that without serving the charge-sheet the authorities were not competent to proceed with the matter.
He has read out to me the relevant paragraphs of the writ petition, opposition, and the reply.
He says that on the basis of the case and counter-case made out by the parties in their pleadings, I should conclude that the charge-sheet was not served on the petitioner.
He wants me to record a finding of fact.
I do not see any reason at all why I should enter into the disputed question of fact whether the charge-sheet was actually served on the petitioner.
9.
In my view, on the facts of the case, there is absolutely no reason to permit the petitioner to raise the issue before the writ Court.
He did not raise the matter before the inquiry officer.
He chose not to submit any representation against finding of the inquiry officer, who mentioned in his report the charges framed by the charge-sheet dated March 9th, 2000.
In his reply to the second show cause notice also he did not say that the charge- sheet had not been served on him.
Just a sentence was inserted in para 18 of the appeal petition alleging that the charge-sheet had not been served on him.
That sentence is the foundation of the present, contention, virtually argued for the whole time by his counsel.
10.
On these facts, I find no reason to permit the petitioner to say that the charge-sheet was not served on him.
There is no reason for me to believe or disbelieve one case of the other.
Conduct of the petitioner show that he was fully aware of the charge-sheet.
There is absolutely nothing to say that having remained ignorant of the charge-sheet he could not defend himself or that he suffered any real prejudice.
Nothing prevented him from pointing out the fact, if the allegation made by him is correct, before the inquiry officer and the disciplinary authority.
11.
The other contentions of counsel are that witnesses were examined behind the back of the petitioner, and that the appellate authority did not give an opportunity of hearing.
Once again, I do not find any merit in the contentions.
Since the petitioner chose not to participate in the proceedings, it goes without saying that the witness, if any, was to be examined behind his back.
The inquiry officer noted that summonses were issued on as many as nine occasions.
There is nothing to say that such fact recorded by the inquiry officer is not correct.
There is nothing either from which it can be said that after August 29th, 2000 the petitioner made any attempt to ascertain the fate of the proceedings in which he appeared on August 29th, 2000.
The facts stated by the inquiry officer were not disputed by him categorically and with supporting materials even when he was making a reference to them in his reply to the second show-cause notice.
The 1998 letters stated to be written by him, had no relevance to the issue of his appearing before the inquiry officer after August 29th, 2000.
It is therefore clear that he permitted the proceedings to continue behind his back.
12.
There was no statutory requirement of giving an opportunity of hearing to the petitioner by the appellate authority.
The facts and circumstances of the case do not call for interference with the order of that authority on the ground that it was made without giving opportunity of hearing to the petitioner.
When he had chosen not to avail of the opportunities given to him to defend himself and to make representation against findings of the inquiry officer, there is no reason to say that for not getting opportunity of hearing before the appellate authority he suffered a real prejudice; at least nothing has been demonstrated before me except raising a bald contention.
13.
For these reasons I dismiss the writ petition.
There shall be no order for costs in it.
14.
Copy of this order duly countersigned by the AR(C) or ACO shall be supplied to advocates for the parties, on usual undertakings.
Petition dismissed.