Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The petitioner is praying for a mandamus directing the school service commission to recommend her for the post of assistant teacher of English in any school close to her place of residence.
2.
She took the requisite examination conducted by the commission in the year 1999.
She was selected and empanelled.
The selected candidates were to be recommended according to their panel positions that indicated their merit positions as well.
According to her merit position she was recommended by the commission on January 8th, 2001.
The school concerned declined to offer the appointment on the ground that the vacancy existing there was a reserved one.
Since the panel concerned was current at that time, the commission revoked the recommendation dated January 8th, 2001 and issued fresh recommendation dated February 23rd, 2001.
The school for which this recommendation was made was not close to the petitioner's place of residence.
3.
Seeking revocation of the recommendation dated February 23rd, 2001 and requesting the commission to recommend her to a school close to her place of residence, she submitted a representation dated March 1st, 2001.
The commission did not take any action.
In the meantime the school concerned offered the appointment and she accepted it and joined the school on March 8th, 2001.
Thereupon she took the 2001 examination held by the commission for recruiting and selecting assistant teachers.
She was again selected and empanelled.
This time also according to her merit position in the panel she was recommended by the commission on January 11, 2003.
She however chose not to join the school for which the commission had recommended her.
Long thereafter only on February 9th, 2005 she took out this writ petition.
Before that she had submitted a representation dated March 12th, 2004 requesting the commission to transfer her to a school close to her residence.
4.
Counsel for the petitioner argues that while issuing, the recommendation dated February 23rd, 2001 the commission did not follow the provisions of the West Bengal School Service Commission (Procedure for Selection of Persons for Appointment to the Posts of Teachers including Headmasters/Headmistresses/Superintendents of Senior Madrasahs in Recognised Non Government Aided Schools and Procedure for Conduct of Business of the Commission) Regulations, 1998, regn.
9 (3), which is : "the areawise preference of the candidate shall be taken into account as far as possible, depending on his/her position in the panel, by the regional commission having jurisdiction."
5.
His contention is that for the school which was close to the place or residence of the petitioner a candidate below the petitioner in merit position was recommended.
He argues that when the commission committed wrong while issuing the first recommendation dated January 8th, 2001, it was the obligation of the commission to set the wrong right.
His contention is that since before joining the school for which the second recommendation was issued the petitioner had submitted representation dated March 1st, 2001, she is still entitled to question the recommendation dated February 23rd, 2001 issued by the commission.
He says that even today the writ of mandamus can be issued directing the commission to recommend the petitioner for a school close to her place of residence.
In support of his argument he places reliance on a single Bench decision of this Court given in Writ Petition No. 16175 (W) of 2005.
6.
The position is strongly disputed by counsel for the respondents.
According to him while issuing the second recommendation the commission did not commit any wrong.
His further submission is that once the petitioner accepted the appointment in terms of the second recommendation, she lost her rights, if any, to questions the validity of the recommendation issued by the commission.
He says that there is absolutely no scope to consider the case for transferring the petitioner to a school close to her place of residence.
7.
I fully agree with counsel for the respondents according to provisions in regn.
9(3) of the above-noted regulations the commission was to consider areawise preference of the candidates only to the extent it was possible.
True it is that for the purpose of recommendation panel position of the candidate concerned was to be the principal consideration.
In this case, the first recommendation was issued by the commission according to the panel position and areawise preference of the petitioner.
For reasons beyond control of the commission that recommendation had to be revoked.
At the time the commission was issuing the second recommendation, it was not possible for it to recommend the petitioner for a school close to her place of residence, since by then the candidates below her had already been recommended according to their areawise preferences and panel positions.
Hence it cannot be said that there was a conscious violation of the provisions of the regn.
9 (3) in so far as the commission was concerned.
8.
Even otherwise, I find that the case of the petitioner does not merit any consideration whatsoever.
Though she made a representation dated March 1st, 2001 requesting the commission to consider her case for recommendation to a school close to her place of residence, she chose to accept the offer of appointment made by the school mentioned in the second recommendation dated February 23rd, 2001, and she actually joined that school on March 8th, 2001.
According to existing provisions of law, the moment she accepted the appointment, a purely school specific appointment, she became the employee of the school and her panel position, and consequent recommendation, just merged into the order of appointment.
Her appointment was duly approved by the competent authority on May 24th, 2001.
This being the legal position, there was absolutely no scope for the commission to revoke the recommendation dated February 23rd, 2001 for issuing another recommendation.
9.
As to representation dated May 12th, 2004, I have no hesitation in saying that it was a totally misconceived approach.
The petitioner was not an employee of the commission which was only the recommending authority.
Hence there was no scope for the commission to consider her request for transferring her to a school close to the place of her residence.
Since the relationship of employer-employee was existing only between the school and the petitioner, there was no authority that could lawfully consider the question of transferring her to another school.
Even the school that she joined was not competent to take the examination conducted by the commission, and only on securing a fairly top position in the panel concerned she would have been in a position to stake her claim for recommendation to a school close to her place of residence against available vacancy.
Admittedly she took that chance by taking the requisite examination conducted by the commission in 2001.
She chose not to join the school for which she was recommended by the commission.
I do not see how the decision relied on is of any assistance in the present case.
That order was made on the basis of submissions made by counsel for the commission that his client had committed a mistake while issuing the order of recommendation.
That is not the case here.
10.
For these reasons I dismiss the writ petition.
There shall be no order for costs in it.
11.
Copy of this order duly countersigned by the AR (C) or ACO shall be supplied to advocates for the parties, on usual undertakings.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this order shall be supplied to the parties, if applied for.
Petition dismissed.