Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The petitioner is aggrieved by the award of the Ninth Industrial Tribunal, Durgapur, West Bengal dated March 27, 1998 holding that there was nothing wrong with the steps taken by the management for superannuating him with effect from May 31, 1987.
2.
In 1960 the petitioner joined the Durgapur Steel Plant.
In his pre- employment application dated June 06, 1960, duly signed by him, it was stated that his date of birth was December 18, 1928.
He further stated that in the year 1945 he had passed the class VIII examination from a school in the then Pakistan.
It was also stated that during the periods from 1951 to 1957 and 1957 to 1960 he had worked in BES Company Limited and Texmaco Limited respectively.
3.
On the basis of the recorded date of birth (i.e. December 18, 1928) the management superannuated him with effect from May 31, 1987.
He was superannuated on the ground that he reached the age of superannuation.
Feeling aggrieved he raised an industrial dispute, and by order dated August 05, 1989 the appropriate government referred the dispute to the tribunal.
The issue referred was whether the superannuation of the petitioner on May 31, 1987 effected by the management was justified.
4.
The petitioner contended that he was actually born on December 18, 1935.
He further contended that an affidavit affirmed by his mother on March 22, 1971 had been produced before the management together with the request for recording his correct date of birth, and that the management had never raised any objection.
He raised the further contention that with permission of the management he took the school final examination in 1974, and that in the pass certificate his date of birth was recorded as December 18, 1935.
5.
The tribunal after recording evidence of the parties held that there was nothing, wrong with the action taken by the management.
Before me only two points have been argued : (i) the provisions in s. 73 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 were not applied by the tribunal, though the petitioner contended that the pre-employment application signed by him on June 06, 1960 had not been filed in by him in his own hand writing; (ii) there was no reason for the tribunal to disbelieve the affidavit affirmed by the petitioner's mother, simply because it was not recorded that statements in the affidavit had been read over and explained to the dependent thereof.
In support of his contentions counsel relies on the decisions in O Bharathan VK Sudhakaran & Anr, JT 1996 (2) SC 384 and Tarak Nath Sha v. Bhutoria Brothers Pvt. Ltd., AIR 1998 Cal 31.
6.
I do not find any merits in either of the contentions.
There is no dispute that though the provisions of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 do not apply to proceedings, before the industrial tribunal, principles of that statute can be applied for the purpose of recording and appreciating the evidence by the tribunal.
But, it is only in a fit and proper case that the principles of the provisions in s. 73 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 can be used for comparison of signature, writing or seal with others admitted or proved.
I do see how, in this case by not applying those provisions the tribunal has committed an error.
7.
Admittedly the pre-employment application was signed by the petitioner.
Even assuming that the date of birth mentioned therein had not been written by the petitioner himself, in my view, he was not entitled to disown the correctness thereof, when there was no dispute that the application was signed by him and that too in clear English.
I do not see either how it can be said that the tribunal committed any error by declining to give benefit for the affidavit dated March 22, 1971.
Admittedly the deponent of that affidavit had put her left thumb impression.
The further admitted position was that nothing appeared from the affidavit to show that statements made therein had been read over and explained to the deponent thereof.
Hence, in my view, the tribunal was fully justified in declining to reply on that affidavit.
8.
The two authorities cited to me do not improve the situation.
It is not the case that the award is not supported by any evidence; that is to say, it is not a case of any evidence.
Admittedly there was evidence before the tribunal in support of the conclusion reached by it.
As is known, insufficiency of evidence in support of an award of the tribunal is not a ground for exercising the power to judicial review.
9.
For these reasons I hold that there is no warrant for interfering with the award of the tribunal.
The writ petition is accordingly dismissed.
There shall be no order for costs in it.
10.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this order, if applied for, is supplied to the parties.
Copy of this order duly authenticated by Assistant Registrar (Court) or ACO shall be supplied to advocates for the parties on the usual undertakings.
Petition dismissed.