Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The twenty-three writ petitioners are questioning the selection process initiated by the District Primary School Council, North 24-Parganas for appointing primary school teachers in the schools within its jurisdiction.
Their case is that though the employment exchanges, to which the council had sent the requisitions for sponsoring names of eligible candidates, did not sponsor their names, in view of provisions of the Constitution of India, arts.
12, 14, 16, 19 and 21, they were entitled to participate in the selection process in which the date of interview was fixed by the council for June 16th, 2006.
2.
Counsel argues that in view of the apex court decision in NS Mehta & Ors. v. Union of India & Ors., AIR 1977 SC 1673, the council was under the obligation to permit the petitioners to participate in the selection process, since they were entitled to get equal opportunity of employment with the candidates sponsored by the employment exchanges.
His further argument is that provisions in r. 8 of the West Bengal Primary School Teachers Recruitment Rules, 2001 are ultra vires the provisions in s. 4 of the Employment Exchanges (Compulsory Notification of Vacancies) Act, 1959.
3.
In the writ petition no challenge has been thrown to the selection process initiated by the council.
It is not the case of the petitioners that the employment officers committed any wrong by not sponsoring their names.
It is not either the case of the petitioners that the selection process has been initiated by the council in violation of any provision of law.
In terms of the mandate of the statute, as was given by the provisions in r. 8 of the above- noted rules, the council was to requisition the names of the eligible candidates from the employment exchanges, and candidates sponsored by the employment exchanges were only to be considered in the selection process.
4.
The statutory rules having provided the source from which the candidates were to be requisitioned, and those rules having been remained unchallenged in the present case (though at the time of argument counsel has sought to throw a challenge), in my view, there is no scope to say that even though names of the petitioners had not been sponsored by the employment exchanges, they were entitled to participate in the selection process.
In terms of provision in arts 14 and 16 of the constitution they would have been entitled to be treated equally with the candidates sponsored by the employment exchanges provided as eligible candidates their names had been sponsored by the exchanges.
5.
I am unable to see how the authority cited to me is of any assistance in the present case.
The petitioners are not equally situated with the candidates whose names were duly sponsored by the employment exchanges in terms of the requisition put in by the council in compliance with the provisions of the recruitment rules.
The question regarding vires of r. 8 of the above-noted rules does not call for any examination at all, since no such case has been made out in the writ petition.
Hence I am unable to give any relief to the petitioners.
6.
The writ petition is accordingly dismissed.
There shall be no order for costs in it.
7.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this order and also copy authenticated by AR(C) or ACO shall be supplied to the parties, if applied for.
Petition dismissed.