Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - Both the petitioner and the ninth respondent participated in the selection process initiated by Birsingha Vidyasagar Balika Vidyapityh Midnapore for appointing a peon in the school.
The interview took place on December 10, 2000.
According to the petitioner, while the selection committee placed the ninth respondent at the first position of the panel of three selected candidates, he was placed at the third position.
2.
In the writ petition he alleged that he heard a rumour that havoc malpractice and manipulation had taken place in the matter of preparation of the panel.
His further allegation is that the public agitation compelled the local police administration to intervene in the matter.
He further alleged that the panel prepared to favour the ninth respondent was accepted by the managing committee which sent it to the district inspector of schools for approval after the prescribed period.
3.
Counsel argues that in the face of the report of the president of the managing committee that a huge amount had been accepted by someone as bribe, the district inspector of schools should have examined the allegations made by the petitioner regarding malpractice indulged in during the course of preparation of the panel.
Counsel for the ninth respondent submits that the allegations were considered by the district inspector of schools who found no illegality in the preparation of the panel.
The fact remains that the panel is yet to be approved.
4.
In my view by making wild and speculative allegations the petitioner took out this writ petition.
He started making allegations on the basis of rumour.
This is his own case stated in para 7 of the writ petition.
His case is principally based on the alleged report of the president of the managing committee.
That gentleman had no authority to submit any report, when the selection committee duly constituted was to conclude the selection process by preparing the panel.
5.
The admitted positions are : (a) the selection committee prepared the panel, and (b) the panel was accepted by the managing committee.
It is also on record that the district inspector of schools after going through the various allegations found nothing wrong with the process followed for preparation of the panel.
The allegation that the panel was prepared after accepting bribe, in any case, does not call for any consideration by the writ court since it is based essentially on highly disputed questions of fact.
There is no material to hold that the selection committee indulged in favouritism.
6.
For these reasons, I dismiss the writ petition without any order for costs in it.
The rule is discharged.
7.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this order and also copy authenticated by AR (C) or A.C.O.
shall be supplied to the parties, if applied for.
Petition dismissed.