Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The petitioner is the second wife of the deceased retired primary school teacher.
The gentleman retired on December 31, 1987.
He was enjoying pension.
His first wife died on March 09, 2000.
He married for the second time on July 25, 2003.
He, however, died on April 13, 2004.
On June 29, 2004 the petitioner requested the district inspector of schools concerned to take steps for releasing family pension to her.
No step was taken.
Feeling aggrieved she has taken out the present writ petition.
2.
Counsel submits that as the legally married second wife the petitioner was entitled to get family pension.
Counsel for the state submits that the deceased teacher married the petitioner long after his retirement.
I do not find any merit in the contention.
The question is no longer res Integra.
It was decided by the apex court (see.
Smt. Bhagwanti v. UOI, AIR 1989 SC 2088) that a retired person marrying for the second time would not commit any wrong, and that such fact would not disentitle the second wife to family pension and other benefits.
Hence I hold that the district inspector of schools ought to have taken immediate steps for examining the claim of the petitioner.
3.
For these reasons, I dispose of the writ petition ordering that in the light of the observations made hereinbefore the District Inspector of Schools, Paschim Medinipur shall give the requisite decision regarding the petitioner's entitlement to get family pension and other benefits as the legally married second wife of the deceased retired teacher.
He will be free to examine if the deceased retired teacher married the petitioner.
The benefits to which the petitioner may be found entitled, shall be released and actually paid to her within four weeks from the date of receipt of a copy of this order by the authority.
4.
There shall be no order for costs in the writ petition.
5.
Copy of this order duly authenticated by AR (C) or ACO shall be supplied to the parties, on usual undertakings.
Order accordingly.