Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The petitioner is praying for a mandamus directing the school authority to appoint him permanently to the post of clerk in the school.
His case is that on being appointed on a temporary basis he started working as a clerk in the school from December 7th, 2004.
Counsel says that though vacancies existed the school authority did not consider the question of giving permanent appointment to the petitioner.
His further contention is that the petitioner was not given regular scale of pay.
2.
I do not find any reason to interfere in the matter.
The petitioner has no right to seek permanent appointment as a clerk in the school.
His appointment was made by the school authority without any prior permission or approval from the district as inspector of schools.
At the relevant point of time the appointment was to be made according to the recruitment procedure framed and notified by the director of school education.
Without prior permission of the district inspector of schools and without there being any sanctioned post, the school authority was not empowered to make any appointment, even if it was given, did not create any right in favour of the petitioner to get a permanent appointment.
3.
At the present moment the question of appointment of a non-teaching member of the staff in the school is to be considered in the context of provisions in the West Bengal Schools (Recruitment of Non-teaching Staff) Rules, 2005 framed under the West Bengal Schools (Control of Expenditure) Act, 2005.
The petitioner can be appointed only if he is duly selected according to the recruitment rules.
That there is no scope to give permanent appointment to temporary employees has recently been said by the constitution bench of the apex court in the case of Secy.
State of Karnataka & Ors. v. Umadebi & Ors., reported at AIR 2006 SC 1806.
4.
For these reasons I am unable to give any relief to the petitioner.
The writ petition is accordingly dismissed.
There shall be no order for costs in it.
5.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this order and also copy duly authenticated by A-R-(C) or A.C.O.
shall be supplied to the parties, applied for.
Petition dismissed.