Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The petitioner is questioning the vires of provisions in r. 8 of the West Bengal Primary School Teachers Recruitment Rules, 2001.
His case is that because of the provisions in the rule he is deprived of the opportunity of participating in the selection process initiated by the district primary school council concerned for recruiting, selecting the appointing primary school teachers.
2.
Counsel for the petitioner submits that provisions in r. 8 of the above-noted rules are ultra vires the provisions in s. 4(4) of the Employment Exchange (Compulsory Notification of Vacancies) Act, 1959, since they are repugnant to the provisions in that s. 4(4).
His contention is that the provisions in r. 8 of the above-noted rules are hit by the doctrine of occupied filed in that the markers thereof encroached upon the same filed of law that had already been covered by the provisions of the 1959 central legislation.
3.
It is his contention that while in view of s. 4(4) of the central legislation an employer is not under the obligation to appoint any person sponsored by the employment exchanges, merely because the vacancy concerned has been notified to the exchanges, by provisions of the impugned r. 8, a part of a state legislation, the district primary school councils could not have been subjected to a mandatory statutory obligation to recruit, select and appoint primary school teachers only from the candidates sponsored by the employment exchanges.
He argues that in the absence of the provisions in r. 8, the petitioner would have been in a position to call upon the councils to publish employment notice inviting applications from all eligible candidates.
He says that r. 8 of the above-noted rules should be struck down.
4.
I do not see how the doctrine of occupied filed can be of any relevance to the present case.
The central legislation did not provide that an employer would not possess the power to make statutory recruitment rules making the employment exchanges as the sole source of the eligible candidates for a post.
The above-noted recruitment rules were made by the appropriate authority under the state legislation.
The mandatory statutory obligation to obtain names of eligible candidates from the employment exchanges for recruiting, selecting the appointing primary school teachers was cast upon the district primary school councils by the provisions in r. 8 of those rules.
5.
I do not find any reason to say that provisions in that rule are repugnant to the provisions in s. 4(4) of the 1959 Act.
The makers of the rules, in my considered view, were empowered to cast the mandatory statutory obligation on the district primary school councils to requisition the names of the eligible candidates for the post of primary school teachers only from the employment exchanges.
There is no reason to say that the provisions in the rule violate any provisions of any law covering the same field.
I therefore do not find any reason to entertain the contention regarding vires of r. 8 of the above-noted recruitment rules.
6.
For these reasons I dismiss the writ petition.
There shall be no order for costs in it.
7.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this order and also copy authenticated by Assistant Registrar (Court) or ACO shall be supplied to the parties, if applied for.
Petition dismissed.