Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - In re: CAN 1134 of 2006.This interlocutory application has been taken out by the petitioner in connection with his pending writ petition.
He prays for several interlocutory orders including an order setting aside the decision of the company (his employer) dated February 6, 2006 declining to renew his contract for service beyond December 31, 2005.
2.
The writ petition dated July 27, 2005 was filed, inter alia, for an order directing the respondents therein to regularize his service.
He prayed for an interim order restraining the respondents from interfering with his service.
By order dated September 27, 2005 the writ petition was admitted, but no interim order was made.
Hence the respondents were free to take decision regarding renewal of the contract for service.
3.
On December 1, 2005 the petitioner took out an interlocutory application (CAN 10498 of 2005) for an order directing the respondents to keep him in service even after December 31, 2005, when the existing contract was to expire.
No interim order was made and by order dated December 16, 2005 that interlocutory application was directed to be heard along with the main writ petition.
4.
Feeling aggrieved the petitioner preferred an appeal.
By order dated December 27, 2005 such appeal was disposed of, inter alia, directing the single judge to dispose of the writ petition within two months.
Their Lordships gave liberty to the company to take decision regarding further renewal of the contract for service, but directed the company not to disturb service of the petitioner till the decision was taken.
It was made clear that if the decision was adverse against the petitioner, then that should not be enforced unless the petitioner was given ten days' notice.
The petitioner was given liberty to take an appropriate step, if any adverse decision was taken.
Thereupon the company took the decision dated February 6, 2006.
5.
Counsel for the petitioner submits that on the facts of the case the respondents should be directed to keep the petitioner in service.
In my view, such an order cannot be made.
The order of the company declining to renew the contract for service is not the subject matter.of the writ petition.
At this stage it is not necessary for me to decide whether in the face of the decision dated February 6, 2006 the issue involved in the writ petitions till requires adjudication.
In the writ petition the petitioner prayed for regularization.
6.
In the absence of any interim order, in my view, and moreover when the division bench gave liberty, the company was free to take the decision whether to renew the contract for service.
Once it has decided not to renew the contract, in my view, such decision cannot be brought within the scope of the pending writ petition, though the petitioner is at liberty to question it by initiating original proceedings before the appropriate forum.
Hence there is no reason to make an order as prayed for in this interlocutory application.
7.
The petitioner cannot ask the writ court to set aside the decision dated February 6, 2006 by merely filing an interlocutory application in the pending writ petition.
The relief prayed for cannot also be considered one needed in aid of the final reliefs prayed for in the writ petition.
Besides, a mandatory order compelling the company to take service of the petitioner cannot be made.
The company cannot be forced to take service of the petitioner when it is not willing to take.
If the petitioner has any right, that is to get compensation, not reinstatement.
8.
For these reasons I dismiss this interlocutory application.
There shall be no order for costs in it.
9.
It is put on record that in view of order of the division bench, advocates for the parties were called upon to argue the writ petition itself.
They expressed their inconvenience.
10.
Copy of this order duly authenticated by AR (C) or A.C.O.
shall be given to advocates for the parties, on usual undertakings.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this order shall be supplied to the parties, if applied for.
Order accordingly.