S S Sudhakar, J - Order Annexure P-12 dated 17.8.1993 passed by the respondent Bank terminating the service of the petitioner from the post of Head Clerk-cum-Cashier-Typist has been made the subject-matter of challenge in this writ petition.
The petitioner has prayed for the quashing of this order and for his reinstatement and consequential benefits.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he has passed BA examination conducted by the Varanasey Sanskrit Vishwavidyala, Varanasey, in the year 1988.
He applied for selection and appointment on the post of Clerk-cum- Cashier in the service of the respondent-Bank.
He had produced all his documents at the time of interview.
He was found suitable and was then appointed in the service of the respondent-Bank as Clerk-cum-Cashier-cum- Typist vide Memo dated 331992.
Due to some change in the composition of the respondent-Bank a notice was issued to him to show as to how he was qualified for the post of Clerk-cum-Cashier.
The petitioner has stated that he produced various documents to satisfy the respondent-Bank that he possessed the requisite qualification for recruitment to the post of Clerk-cum-Cashier and that his appointment was fully justified, but the authorities of the Bank insisted on taking action against him.
This compelled him to file a civil suit in the Court of Additional Senior Sub Judge, Nawanshahr, who passed an order of injunction in the petitioner's favour.
Against the order of injunction passed by the Additional Senior Sub Judge, the Bank filed a revision petition before the High Court.
In Civil Revision No. 2316 of 1993 the High Court passed a stay order in favour of the Bank on 16.8.1993.
According to the petitioner, the Bank persuaded the High Court to pass stay order in its favour by concealing material facts.
Subsequently, the suit filed by the petitioner was dismissed as withdrawn.
Consequently, the revision petition filed by respondent No. 1 was also dismissed as withdrawn.
The petitioner has stated that during the currency of the stay order passed by the High Court the respondent-Bank passed the impugned order and dismissed him from service.
3.
The petitioner has challenged the impugned order on the ground that the degree possessed by him was genuine inasmuch as it was awarded by the Varanasey Sanskrit Vishwavidyala, Varanasey, and that no material was available with the respondent to conclude that the degree produced by the petitioner was fake or bogus.
The petitioner has also pleaded that without holding an enquiry into the matter and without giving an opportunity of hearing to the petitioner the respondent-Bank could not have passed the impugned order of dismissal.
4.
In its reply, the respondent-Bank has raised an objection to the entertainability of the writ by asserting that after having availed the remedy of civil writ, the petitioner should not be given relief in the extraordinary jurisdiction of the High Court under Article 226.
The respondent-Bank has also stated that the degree produced by the petitioner from the Varanasey Sanskrit Vishwavidyala, Varanasey, is not a genuine one.
It has been further stated by the respondent-Bank that the Joint Registrar, Co-operative Societies had addressed the letter Annexure R. I to the Managers of all the Central Co- operative Banks in the matter of recruitment of employees on the basis of the degrees issued by the bogus universities.
Thereafter, the Manager of the respondent-Bank wrote letter Annexure R 2 dated 14.4.1993 to the Vice- Chancellor, Varanasey Sanskrit Vishwavidyala degree possessed by the petitioner.
A similar communication was sent to the University Grants Commission (for short `the UGC').
The UGC replied vide letter Annexure R. 3 dated 2271991 that Varanasey Sanskrit Vishwavidyala, Varanasey, is a fake institution.
Thereafter, the respondent-Bank called upon the petitioner to produce evidence showing that he was having a genuine degree.
The petitioner failed to do so.
Consequently, the impugned order was passed by the respondent-Bank.
In para 3 of its reply the Bank has highlighted the bogus character of the degree possessed by the petitioner by pointing out that as per his own showing the petitioner had passed the Matriculation examination in March, 1984 and 10+2 examination on 661986.
Thereafter, he is shown to have passed three years degree course (BA) on 771988 and this according to the respondent-Bank was impossible.
5.
Arguments were heard and orders were reserved on 921995.
Learned counsel for the petitioner was permitted to file additional documents.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has filed CM No. 1804 of 1995 on 1221995.
Along with this CM he has filed an affidavit of the petitioner together with Annexure P-15 which is a letter written by one Dr. R V Sapra, Research Officer in the Hindi Academic Delhi to Dr. Ravi Kaushik of New Delhi.
He has also filed Annexure P-16 showing recognition of some of the examinations conducted by the Varanasey Sanskrit Vishwavidyala Varanasey.
Annexure P-17 has been filed to show that the Director, Education Department (Colleges), Punjab, Chandigarh, has vide his letter dated 28.8.1992 conveyed that the B.Ed.
degree conferred by the Varanasey Sanskrit Mahavidyala and Anamalai University is recognised by the Panjab University.
6.
Having carefully perused the pleadings and after considering the contentions of the learned counsel for the parties, we are fully convinced that the writ petition is wholly without substance and is liable to be dismissed.
Reasons for this conclusion are set out hereunder.
7.
Petitioner's assertion is that he was appointed in the service of the respondent-Bank on the strength of his qualification of BA He had produced the BA degree awarded by the Varanasey Sanskrit Vishwavidyala, Varanasey.
If we were to accept the case set up by the petitioner that the degree possessed by him is a genuine one, the impugned action taken by the respondent-Bank is liable to be nullified.
In order to decide as to whether the degree possessed by the petitioner is a genuine one or not, we have to find out the status of the Varanasey Sanskrit Vishwavidyala, Varanasey.
While the petitioner claims that this Vishwavidyala is a university established as defined in the UGC Act, 1956, the respondent-Bank has come out with the case that the Varanasey Sanskrit Vishwavidyala, Varanasey is not a university.
Section 2 of the UGC Act defines the `university' in the following words :-  ``2(f): `University' means a University established or incorporated by or under a Central Act, Provincial Act or a State Act, and includes any such institution as may, in consultation with the University concerned, be recognised by the Commission in accordance with the regulations made in this behalf under this Act.''
A plain reading of the above quoted definition of the term `University' shows that it takes within its fold an institution called University which is established by law in India or an institution which is a Deemed University.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has not been able to place any material before us to show that Varanasey Sanskrit Vishwavidyala Varanasey, has been established by any Act of the Parliament or the State Legislature, nor has he been able to produce any document to show that the said Vishwavidyala has been declared as a Deemed University by the Central Government in consultation with the UGC At the same time, from Annexure R. 3 it is clearly revealed that UGC has treated the aforesaid Vishwavidyala to be a fake institution and the degrees awarded/conferred by it are not recognised by the UGC or any other agency for any purpose.
Annexure R 4 also shows that as early as on 17.2.1989 the Government had clarified that Varanasey Sanskrit Vishwavidyala, Varanasey, is one of the institutions which is giving degrees in violation of the UGC Act.
This being the position, it is not possible to accept the submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner that the petitioner had acquired a right to hold the post because he was appointed by the respondent- Bank after due selection.
In our opinion, a person, like the petitioner, who has secured employment on the basis of a fake degree awarded by a bogus University cannot claim to hold the post and he can have no right to continue in service.
In addition to what the UGC and the Government of India have clarified vide Annexures R. 3 and R. 4, there is no explanation by the petition as to how he could secure degree in the year 1988 when he had passed the 10+2 examination in the year 1986.
It is not his case that the said Vishwavidyala conducts a degree course of two years' duration.
In fact, it is a three years course all over the country and, therefore, it was impossible for the petitioner to have successfully secured degree of BA in the year 1988.
8.
The status of degrees awarded by the Varanasey Sanskrit Vishwavidyala, Varanasey, has been examined by this Court in C.W.P.
No. 15480 of 1993 (Madan Lal v. Municipal Committee, Panipat), C.W.P.
No. 11884 of 1993 (Pawan Kumar v. Haryana State Electricity Board), and C.W.P.
No. 5894 of 1994 (Harinder Kaur v. Guru Nanak Devi University, Amritsar), decided on 1711995.
In all these cases different Division Benches of this Court have held that the said Vishwavidyala is a bogus institution and the degrees/certificates awarded by it are fake and that on the strength of such degrees/certificates a candidate is neither entitled to employment nor he/she is entitled to admission to the higher courses.
In view of these three decisions, it must be held that the action taken by the respondent-Bank for terminating the service of the petitioner is neither arbitrary nor unjust.
The respondent-Bank notice on the petitioner and (sic) entitled to contend that he has been condemned unheard.
9.
Annexures P. 15, P. 16 and P. 17 on which reliance has been placed by the learned counsel for the petitioner are of no help to the petitioner's case.
Annexure P. 15 is a letter written by an official of Hindi Academic New Delhi.
This letter cannot be treated as a proof of the status of Varanasey Sanskrit Vishwavidyala, Varanasey, is a University established by law or a Deemed University.
Annexure P. 16 is a letter written by the Government of India in 1969.
It refers to recognition of certain examinations of Varanasey Sanskrit Vishwavidyala.
In our opinion, this letter also does not help the petitioner's case because in the year 1989 the UGC clarified that the Varanasey Sanskrit Vishwavidyala, Varanasey, is not a University as defined under the UGC Act and its degrees cannot be used for any purpose.
Annexure P 17 no doubt suggests that B.Ed.
degrees conferred by some institutions have been recognised by the Government of Punjab.
However, a careful reading of that document shows that B.Ed.
degrees conferred by the Varanasi Sanskrit Mahavidyala and Anamalai University is recognised by the Panjab University.
There is no reference to the degrees awarded by the Varanasey Sanskrit Vishwavidyala, Varanasey.
Therefore, on the strength of Annexure P 17 also the petitioner is not entitled to claim that the qualification possessed by him could justify his appointment in the service of the respondent-Bank.
10.
The decisions of this Court to which a reference has been made in the application filed on behalf of the petitioner on 1221995 do not have any bearing on the question involved in this case.
Only in Raj Bala v. State of Haryana, 1992(3) R.S.J.
83, the Court took the view that when the Haryana Government has recognised the qualification of Purva Madhyama (English) from the Sanskrit Vishwavidyala, Varanasi, as equivalent to High School examination for the purpose of employment then the same qualification shall have to be recognised as equivalent for the purpose of acquiring the requisite training for employment.
It is clear from that judgment that the attention of Court was not drawn to the letter written by the Government of India in the year 1989 (Annexure R 4) and the Court did not examine the status of the Varanasey Sanskrit Vishwavidyala, Varanasey.
Therefore, that decision cannot be read as laying down law about the status of the said Vishwavidyala.
In Tripta Dhir v. State of Punjab and others, 1982(2) S.L.R.
258; Harnesh Kumar and others v. Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, 1990(1) RSJ 657; Kamal Masil v. Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, 1992(1) SCT 455 (P&H)(DB) : 1992(1) 550; Nathu Ram Sharma v. State of Haryana and others, 1993(3) SCT 683 (P&H) : 1993(1) RSJ 645; and Miss Ranjana Sharma v. Panjab University, 1993(3) SCT 227 (P&H) : 1993(3) RSJ 606, are decisions relating to the effect of de-recognition of certain examinations/degrees etc.
The Court has taken the view that de- recognition cannot apply retrospectively and cannot take away the rights already accrued in favour of those possessing the requisite qualification at a time when such qualification was recognised.
None of these decisions can be relied upon by the petitioner in support of his case because the degree secured by him is not a genuine one.
11.
For the reasons mentioned above, the merit petition is held to be without merit and is dismissed.
Since the petitioner secured employment by producing a fake degree and he has made an attempt in the civil Court and also before this Court to get an order of injunction and had in fact succeeded in persuading learned Additional Senior Sub Judge to pass an order of injunction in his favour, he shall pay costs of this petition which are assessed at Rs. 3,000/-.
12.
Before parting with the case, we would like express our dismay that despite the directives issued by the Government of India on the basis of the decision taken by the UGC regarding the bogus Universities and fake degrees, various departments of the Governments have not taken prompt steps to bring it to the notice of the appointing authorities that persons possessing such degrees/other qualifications should not be given employment in the Government as well as its agencies and instrumentalities.
We, therefore, direct that copy of this order be sent to the Chief Secretaries to the Governments of Punjab and Haryana so that they may issue necessary instructions to all concerned to refrain from giving appointments to persons possessing degrees and other qualifications awarded by the institutions which have been declared to be bogus by the UGC