SS Nijjar, J. (Oral) - The petitioner took admission in Bachelor of Technology (Civil Engineering) in the Sessions 1998-99.
It is four years degree course.
Examinations are held semester-wise.
In May, 2002, the petitioner appeared in VIIIth Semester Examination after completion of VIIth Semester.
On the declaration of result, he was declared passed.
Provisional Certificate of Bachelor of Technology was also issued by the Punjab Technical University, Jalandhar.
Respondent No. 4 was also a student in the same paper.
He had failed in the 5th Semester paper of Structural Analysis-II of BTech.
The petitioner appeared in place of respondent No. 4 in the 5th Semester Examination on 2662002 under Roll No. 97010133 in Supplementary Exam.
Subsequently, a complaint was made to the University alleging that the petitioner had impersonated respondent No. 4 and appeared in the examination on his behalf.
The petitioner was issued notice by the Unfair Means Committee.
After complying with rules of natural justice, Unfair Means Committee had passed an order on 27.5.2003.
It was held that respondent No. 4 had been impersonated by the petitioner.
Consequently, both the petitioner and respondent No. 2 have been held guilty of having contravened Rule 10(u) of "Prevention, Punishment and Procedure Concerning Cases of misconduct and Use of Unfair Means in or in Relation to Examination".
The petitioner as well as respondent No. 2 have been punished under Rule 11.1(v) which is as under :-  "11.1(v).
For offences under Clauses (s) and (u) :  Disqualification for a period of not less than five years".
On the basis of the above Clause, the petitioner and respondent No. 4 had been disqualified for a period of five years for appearing in any examination.
It is also ordered that they shall be deemed to be failure in the examination and all consequences of failure shall follow.
In view of the above, the petitioner has not been granted the degree till date on the ground that the petitioner would be required to appear in the VIIIth Semester Examination again.
2.
On notice motion being issued, the respondents have filed a written statement.
It is stated that the action against the petitioner has been taken for impersonation under Rule 11.1(v).
Since the petitioner has been declared to be failure in the examination and all consequences of failure shall follow, the petitioner would be required to sit in the VIIIth Semester Examination before the degree can be granted.
3.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length and perused the paper-book.
4.
Mr. PK Gupta, learned counsel for the petitioner submits that he is not challenging the findings of the Unfair Means Committee on merits.
He, however, submits that admittedly, the petitioner himself did not cheat or commit any unfair means while sitting in the 8th Semester Examination.
His examination had been cancelled for impersonating respondent No. 4.
Therefore, the requirement of the petitioner for appearing in the 8th Semester Examination again is wholly unjustified.
The petitioner has already suffered the disqualification for five years in that he has not been granted the Degree till date.
5.
Mr. Anupam Gupta, learned counsel appearing for the respondents, however, submits that any student who indulges in unfair means cannot be shown any leniency by the Court.
The petitioner will have to sit in the 8th Semester Examination before he can be granted the degree.
6.
I have considered the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties.
Admittedly, the petitioner has not indulged in any unfair means in completing his own 8th Semester.
He had perhaps acted out of misplaced sympathy towards respondent No. 4 by impersonating him in the 5th Semester Examination.
For that lapse, the petitioner has suffered the delay in release of the degree for a period of five years.
Since the petitioner was disqualified on 1592003, Mr. Gupta was asked to explain how five years had completed.
Learned counsel has referred to the order dated 1592003 in which it is stated that the candidates can appear in any examination in December, 2004.
I am of the considered opinion that the petitioner has suffered enough punishment in that the degree has not been released till date.
Consequently, the writ petition is partly allowed.
The proceedings in the Unfair Meas Committee as well as the punishment imposed on the petitioner are upheld.
It is, however, directed that the degree of the petitioner be granted to him forthwith, without having to appear in the 8th Semester Examination.
Petition allowed as indicated above.
No costs.
Petition partly allowed.