S Parvatha Rao, J - The petitioner states that his date of birth was entered in his Higher Secondary Certificate as 1021937 and on that basis his age was entered in his Service Book as 1021937 when he joined service of the respondent-Andhra Pradesh State Electricity Board (for short `the Board') on 781961.
He states that he was born, in fact, on 1021939 and that he was admitted in the Primary School, Kothapet, Shadnagar taluk, Mahaboobnagar district on 171951 in IV Class and that, afterwards, the said Primary School, Kothapet, was upgraded as High School and the records relating to his age were transferred to the Middle School in Shadnagar.
He states that though in the Primary School register his date of birth was entered as 1021939, when the records were transferred to the Middle School, Shadnagar, his date of birth was wrongly entered in the School register of Shadnagar as 1021937 instead of 1021939, and, on that basis, his Higher Secondary Certificate showed his date of birth as 1021937 instead of 1021939.
He states that Zilla Praja Parishad High School at Kothapet gave a certificate to him on 16121992 stating his date of birth, as per school records, as 1021939 and only then he realised that he was born two years later ie on 1021939 and not on 1021937.
The petitioner does not state how the School Authorities suddenly realised and altered the date of birth in the School Register from 1021937 to 1021939.
The petitioner further states that on the basis of the said realisation prompted by the Certificate, dated 16121992, issued by the Zilla Praja Parishad High School, he made a representation on 18.8.1994 to the Board i.e. about six months before his retirement as per the date of birth entered in the Service Register.
His grievance is that the said representation is not considered and, therefore, now he seeks a Writ of Mandamus directing the respondents to dispose of his representation within time.
2.
The petitioner does not state on what basis he is entitled to make a representation of this nature six months before his retirement as per the date entered into the Service Register.
He has not referred to any rule allowing him to make such a representation before his retirement.
Prima facie there is nothing credible in the story trotted out by the petitioner because he has not explained how and on what basis the School Authorities corrected the date of birth in their registers.
He has not filed any material to establish that his actual date of birth is 1021939, like his birth certificate etc.  3.
In Secretary and Commissioner, Home Deptt.
v. R Kirubakaran, 1993(4) SCT 803 (SC) : AIR 1993 SC 2647, the Supreme Court held as follows :-  "An application for correction of the date of birth should not be dealt with by the Tribunal or the High Court keeping in view only the public servant concerned.
It need not be pointed out that any such direction for correction of the date of birth of the public servant concerned has a chain reaction, inasmuch as other waiting for years, below him for their respective promotions are affected in this process.
Some are likely to suffer irreparable injury, inasmuch as, because of the correction of the date of birth, the officer concerned, continues in office in some cases for years, within which time many officers who are below him in seniority waiting for their promotion, may lose the promotion for ever.
Cases are not unknown when a person accepts appointment keeping in view the date of retirement of his immediate senior.
According to us, this is an important aspect, which cannot be lost sight of by the Court or Tribunal while examining the grievance of a public servant in respect of correction of his date of birth.
As such, unless a clear case on the basis of materials which can be held to be conclusive in nature, is made out by the respondents, the Court or the Tribunal should not issue a direction, on the basis of materials which make such claim only plausible.
Before any such direction is issued, the Court or the Tribunal must be fully satisfied that there has been real injustice to the person concerned and his claim for correction of date of birth has been made in accordance with the procedure prescribed, and within the time fixed by any rule or order.
If no rule or order has been framed or made prescribing the period within which such application has to be filed, then such application must be filed within the time, which can be held to be reasonable.
The application has to produce the evidence in support of such claim, which may amount to irrefutable proof relating to his date of birth.
Whenever, any such question arises, the onus is on the applicant, to prove about the wrong recording of his date of birth, in his service book.
In many cases it is a part of the strategy on the part of such public servants to approach the Court or the Tribunal on the eve of their retirement, questioning the correctness of the entries in respect of their dates of birth in the service books.
By this process, it has come to the notice of this Court that in many cases, even if ultimately their applications are dismissed, by virtue of interim order, they continue for months, after the date of superannuation.
The Court or the Tribunal must, therefore, be slow in granting an interim relief for continuation in service, unless prima facie evidence of unimpeachable character is produced because if the public servant succeeds, he can always be compensated, but if he fails, he would have enjoyed undeserved benefit of extended service and merely caused injustice to his immediate junior."
I have referred to the judgment of the Supreme Court in extenso because the learned counsel for the petitioner refers to the spirit behind Article 226 of the Constitution of India and a certain concept of `justice to be meted'.
But this Court does justice according to law and not in the abstract.
4.
Reference has also to be made to the judgment of the Supreme Court in Executive Engineer v. Rangadhar Mallik, 1992(3) SCT 518 (SC) : 1993 Supp.
(1) SCC 763.
That was also a case where a representation was made by a Government Servant for alteration of his date of birth.
Rule 65 of the Orissa General Finance Rules stipulates that representations made for correction of date of birth near about the time of superannuation shall not be admitted.
The representation made by the Government servant was rejected by the Governor of Orissa and the order of rejection was communicated.
Though the Rules did not provide for any personal hearing, the Government servant questioned the order of rejection on the ground that no personal hearing was given to him before rejecting his representation.
The Supreme Court observed therein that ``there was no requirement of any law to give any personal hearing to the respondent before dismissing his representation."
5.
In the circumstances, there cannot be a direction from this Court to dispose of the petitioner's representation dated 18.8.1994 when the petitioner has not stated under what provision of law or rule he made such a representation hardly 6 months before his date of retirement as per his date of birth entered in his service register at the time of his joining service way back in 1961 on the basis of the High School Certificate produced by him.
Unless, the petitioner shows that the respondents are bound to consider such a representation made by him and he has a right to have it considered, this Court cannot issue a writ of mandamus.
The petitioner has not placed anything before me in that regard.
6.
The writ petition is, therefore, dismissed.
However, it is made clear that it is upto the authorities to consider the representation of the petitioner, if it is made, as per the rules applicable.
Petition dismissed.