VK Jhanji, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was enrolled in the Indian Army as Sepoy in Rajput Regiment, Fatehgarh, UP, on 341979.
On 7121987, he was invalidated from Army Service as he was found to be suffering from "Generalized Tonic Clonic Seizure".
The petitioner prays for the issue of writ in the nature of certiorari quashing order dated 20.4.2004, whereby his case for grant of disability pension has been rejected.
Petitioner has also prayed for issuance of writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondent to grant him disability pension with effect from the date of discharge, i.e. 7121987.
2.
The respondent has contested the petitioner's claim on the ground that the disability was not attributable to the military service, but was constitutional in nature.
Admittedly, disability was 20%.
3.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties.
4.
The grant of disability pension is governed by Regulation 173 of the Pension Regulation, 1961.
The Regulation inter alia provides that "the disability pension may be granted to an individual who is invalidated from service on account of disability which is attributable to or aggravated by military service and is assessed at 20 per cent or over".
5.
The question whether disability is attributable to or aggravated by military service has to be decided in accordance with Rule 7(b) of Appendix II.
In Appendix II it has been inter alia provided that "a disease which has led to an individual's discharge or death will ordinarily be deemed to have arisen in service if no note of it was made at the time of individual's acceptance for military service.
However, if medical opinion holds, for reasons to be stated that the disease could not have been detected on medical examination prior to acceptance for service the disease will not be deemed to have arisen during service".
6.
It is not in dispute that the petitioner was found physically fit at the time of his enrolment on 341979.
On 7121987, when the petitioner was invalidated from service, he was suffering from Generalized Tonic Clonic Seizure.
It is not the case of the respondent that medical board had found that the disease existed at the time of entering into service by the petitioner or that it was such as it could not have been detected on medical examination.
The record shows that onset of illness was in July, 1985 with two episodes of generalized seizures.
Lt. Col. MK Mahapatha, AMC, Classified Specialist (Medicine) of Medical Hospital, Gwalior, in his summary and opinion dated 11th December, 1986 recorded that the case of the petitioner is of FITS NYD IN MEDICAL CATEGORY `CEE' w.e.f.
September, 1985.
Further according to him, onset of illness was in July, 1985 with two episodes of generalized seizures.
Petitioner's case was reviewed twice at neurological center CH (CC) and Army Hospital Delhi Cantt.
EEG had revealed borderline abnormality and he was put on anticonvulsant therapy since April, 1986.
Petitioner had two doubts of generalized seizures in spite of taking anticonvulsant drugs.
The disease of the petitioner was diagnosed for the first time as generalized seizures only on 11121986.
By that time, petitioner had already served for more than 7 years.
The medical board too has not recorded any finding that neurological disorder from which the petitioner suffered could not have occurred on account of stress and strain of military service.
In such circumstances, it has to be presumed that the disease the petitioner suffered from and which had led to his discharge, had arisen during his service and as such, the same was attributable to military service.
It is also an admitted fact that disability has been assessed at 20%.
We, therefore, do not find any merit in the submission made on behalf of the respondent that the disease from which the petitioner suffered, on account of which he was invalidated from service, was constitutional in nature.
7.
Faced with this situation, learned counsel appearing for the respondent, contended that appeal of the petitioner against the order rejecting his case for disability pension was dismissed and communicated vide letter dated 20121989, whereas writ petition has been filed on 2982004 after a lapse of 15 years and as such, the same deserves to be dismissed on the ground of delay and laches.
It is true that petitioner has filed writ petition after a lapse of 15 years.
However, the record shows that the petitioner had been regularly representing to the authorities and his claim was declined only on the ground that the disability was not attributable to military service.
We having found that the disability was attributable to the military service, there is no alternative but to quash the orders rejecting the case of the petitioner for disability pension.
Moreover, delay in approaching the Court, by itself is not enough to defeat the claim of the petitioner for disability pension.
However, on account of delay, we decline the petitioner's prayer for the payment of interest.
8.
Accordingly, writ petition is allowed and Annexures P-1, dated 1651988, P-2, dated 20121989 and P-4, dated 20.4.2004, rejecting the claim of the petitioner for disability pension are quashed.
The respondent is directed to compute the disability pension of the petitioner with effect from the date of his discharge i.e. 721987 and pay it to him within three months from the date of the receipt of copy of this order.
The prayer for interest as made in the writ petition is declined.
No costs.
Petition allowed.