Dr. Mukundakam Sharma, J - This appeal is directed against the judgment and order dated 5th March, 2004 passed by the learned Single Judge in WP (C) No. 790/2004 allowing the writ petition of the respondent.
The respondent herein is working as the Secretary of the Delhi Sanskrit Academy, respondent No. 2 herein.
The said respondent No. 2 was brought into existence by virtue of a registration effected on 17th June, 1987 under the Societies Registration Act, 1860.
The management and functions of the respondent No. 2 is governed as per the Memorandum of Association and the rules and the regulations made thereunder.
Rule 13 of the Rules speaks of the powers of the executive committee.
Under the said provision, one of the power vested in the executive council is to lay down conditions of service for the employees with the approval of the Academy (13-D).
2.
On 17th December, 1990, the executive council of the academy and the Finance Sub-Committee had a meeting wherein it was resolved that the respondent No. 1 be appointed as Secretary of the academy.
The essential qualifications for the said post of Secretary were also decided in the said meeting.
Pursuant to the said decision, the Lieutenant Governor of Delhi, who as per Rule 4 was to appoint a Secretary, issued an order permanently absorbing the respondent No. 1 as Secretary in the Academy as he was on deputation with the respondent No. 2.
3.
On 31st October, 2002 a meeting of the Executive Council of respondent No. 2 was held wherein service rules of the employees of the academy were formulated.
The said rules are called "Employees Service Rules, 2002".
The said rules were framed in exercise of the powers vested on the society empowering the Executive Council to lay down the conditions of service of the employees with the approval of the Academy.
The aforesaid rules were approved by the Chief Minister.
Rule 38 of the Employees Service Rules, 2002 stipulates that every employee of the Academy would retire on attaining the age of 62 years.
By virtue of the proviso added thereto, power has been vested in the Executive Committee to extend the age of superannuation but not beyond 65 years of age.
On 5th January, 2003 the academy passed a resolution affirming the rules framed by the Executive Council, which is also approved by the Chief Minister, as stated hereinabove.
4.
Respondent No. 1 herein is to attain the age of 62 years on 5th January, 2006 and he attained the age of 60 years only on 5th January, 2004.
However, in terms of the service rules, the respondent No. 1 would superannuate from service on 4th January, 2006 as he would be attaining the age of 62 years on the said date.
However, the appellant herein issued an advertisement on 19th December, 2003 inviting applications to fill up the post of Secretary of the respondent No. 2.
Immediately after the publication of the aforesaid advertisement, the respondent No. 1 filed a writ petition in this Court, which was registered as WP (C) No. 790/2004 wherein challenge was made to the issuance of the aforesaid advertisement on the ground that the respondent No. 1 has still two more years of service to be rendered with the respondent No. 2 and, therefore, the said advertisement issued is not only premature but also against the aforesaid rules of the academy.
The said writ petition was opposed by the appellant herein mainly on the ground that the academy receives 100 per cent grant-in-aid from the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi and, therefore, it is bound by a direction issued by the Government of NCT, particularly when the same relates to the finances of the respondent No. 2.
It was also contended that in terms of Rule 149, the sanctioning authority is empowered to prescribe conditions regarding quantum of periodicity for release of grant-in-aid and that it was also obliged to formulate terms and conditions of service of their employees at par with the terms and conditions of employees under the Central Government.
Another plea, which was raised in the counter affidavit filed, was that under the Central Government the age of superannuation being 60 years, rules framed by the academy/respondent No. 2 laying down the superannuation age of its employees as 62 years is against the powers and jurisdiction of the academy.
5.
The aforesaid pleas taken were considered by the learned Single Judge, who upon going through the records and upon referring to the provisions of Rule 13 as also Rule 149(4) of the General Financial Rules held that the aforesaid Rule 149 does not and cannot mandate that the employees of the autonomous bodies or the grant-in-aid institutions are bound to follow the rules meant for the employees of the Central Government and that the only requirement is that the rules framed by them (academy) be broadly comparable to those applicable to similar employees in Central Government.
It was also held that the service rules, which have been framed by the academy, are in exercise of power vested by in respondent No. 4 as per its memorandum and rules duly registered with the Registrar of Societies and that if any change is necessary in the said rules, action is to be taken in accordance with law to get the service rules of the employees of the respondent No. 2 academy amended.
6.
The aforesaid findings and the conclusions arrived at by the learned Single Judge were challenged before us by Mrs. Avnish Ahlawat, Counsel for the Govt. of NCT of Delhi.
Having gone through the records and upon looking to the provisions, referred to in the judgment, we agree with the findings and the conclusions arrived at by the learned Single Judge.
The respondent No. 2 is a society registered under the Societies Registration Act and, therefore, it has its own legal entity.
The constitution, management and all other functions of the society are to be governed and managed in accordance with the memorandum of association and the rules and regulations framed under it.
Such rules have already been framed by the Executive Council of the respondent No. 2, which are approved by the Society.
Rule 13(D) of the Rules categorically provides that the Executive Council can lay down conditions of service for the employees with the approval of the academy.
In exercise of the said powers the Executive Council of the academy prescribed conditions of service for the employees of respondent No. 2 and the said rules stand approved by the academy.
The rules of the academy were also approved by the Chief Minister of the Government of NCT of Delhi, who is the Chairperson of the Society.
Rule 38-A of the Employees Service Rules, 2002 provides that every employee would retire on attaining the age of 62 years.
Therefore, so long the said rule is not declared ultra vires or bad in law, the same would continue to hold the field and till the same is not amended, every employee of the society would stand retired on attaining the age of 62 years.
The present Secretary/respondent No. 1 is yet to complete the age of 62 years.
He would be completing the said superannuation age of 62 years on 5th January, 2006.
Therefore, issuance of an advertisement by the appellant calling for applications for filling up the post of Secretary, which is yet to fall vacant, was rightly declared illegal by the learned Single Judge.
If the said rule does not in any manner meet the requirement, the same is required to be amended in accordance with law.
But without resorting to such a procedure, as prescribed under the law, no advertisement can be issued and a person cannot be declared to have superannuated before completion of the of age of 62 years as prescribed in the extant rules.
The action of the appellant was unknown to known process of law and, therefore, the same was rightly set aside by the learned Single Judge.
We find no merit in this appeal and the same, along with pending application, stands dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.