Lokeshwar Singh Panta, J - Two petitioners, namely, Jai Singh and Manohar Singh have filed this writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, for an appropriate order and direction to the respondents to consider and promote the petitioners as Office Superintendents in (S2) Grade with effect from 1-7-1990 as per the Promotion Policy mark Annexure P-3, from the date their juniors were promoted and for the grant of consequential benefits.
2.
National Hydroelectric Power Corporation Limited (for short `NHPC') respondent No. 1 herein, Government of India's enterprise has undertaken the construction of Baira Siul Project (hereinafter referred to as the `BS Project'), Surangani in District Chamba.
The petitioners are borne on the ministerial cadre of the NHPC.
They were promoted as Assistant Grade-II (W-5 Grade) in the pay scale of Rs. 330-580 (pre-revised) by office order No. 1009 dated 28-2-1981, copy thereof is annexed with the writ petition as Annexure P- 1.
According to the petitioners, as per Promotion Policy of the NHPC, after completion of five years service in W-5 Grade, the employees are further promoted as Assistant Grade-I in W-6 Grade in the pay scale of Rs. 425-800 (pre-revised) with effect from 1-7-1986 in terms of office order dated 18-11- 1986, copy mark Annexure P-2.
After completion of four years service in W-6 Grade, the petitioners and other employees of BS Project are entitled to be promoted as Office Superintendents Grade-II (S2 Grade) with effect from 1-7- 1990 as per the Promotion Policy mark Annexure P-3,  3.
The petitioners stated that as per the promotion Policy, persons working as Assistant Grade-I in BS Project on the basis of their seniority were being promoted as Superintendent Grade-II (S-2) against the post in Chamera Hydroelectric Power Project, Phase-I and Phase-II, respondent No. 2 herein.
This practice of the respondents was sought to be departed and, therefore, various meetings of the Joint Action Committee of the BS Project and Rashtriya Jal Vidyut Sangh, Baira Siul were held with the representatives of NHPC and BS Project.
As per petitioners, in the meetings held on 10-2-1988, 7-3-1988, 15- 10-1990, 8-3-1991, 7-2-1992 and 13-8-1992, it was agreed by the Management of BS Project, respondent No. 3 herein, the then Executive Director/Chief Personnel and Administration of respondent No. 2 and Chief Executive Personnel of NHPC that if vacancies were not available in BS Project but were available in Chamera Hydroelectric Power Project, Phase-I or in any other projects, then the seniormost Assistant Grade-I of the BS Project would be promoted against the said vacancy in Chamera Hydroelectric Power Project, Phase-I or in any other project undertaken by NHPC as had earlier been done when seniormost Assistants Grade-I of BS Project had been promoted against the vacant posts in the Chamera Hydroelectric Power Project, Phase-I and Phase-II.
The petitioners have placed on record copies of the representations and minutes of the meetings mark Annexures P-4, P-4/1, P-4/2, P-4/3, P-4/4, P-4/5 and P-4/6, respectively.
The petitioners stated that Parveen Kumar, Gurmel Ram and Rajinder Singh, who were working as Assistants Grade-I in BS Project, juniors to them in the seniority list mark Annexure P-6 were promoted as Office Superintendents Grade-II with effect from 1-7-1990, whereas the petitioners being seniors were ignored.
4.
The petitioners, however, were promoted as Superintendents Grade-II vide office order dated 3-4-1991 and they were asked to join at Uri Hydroelectric Power Project (J & K) on or before 30-4-1991 and their promotion orders were made effective from the date of their respective joining at the new place of posting.
The petitioners submitted representations against their order of posting and promotion at different place contending that Parveen Kumar, Gurmel Ram and Rajinder Singh who are juniors to them were promoted as Office Superintendent Grade-II on and with effect from 1-7-1990 whereas the petitioners were not given promotion with effect from 1-7-1990 but from the date of their joining at Uri Hydroelectric Power Project in pursuance to the order dated 3-4-1991.
In their subsequent representations, the petitioners stated that the order of their promotion be made effective as there were no vacancies against which they could be appointed in Uri Hydroelectric Power Project had intimated the Chief Engineer of BS Project as also Chief (Personnel and Administration), New Delhi that the officials had been promoted and transferred to Uri when there was no vacancy in the said Division.
Thus, order dated 3-4-1991, mark Annexure P-7 promoting the petitioners as Office Superintendents Grade-II and posting them at Uri Hydroelectric Power Project in Jammu & Kashmir could not be given effect to even if they had to be shifted to Uri Project.
5.
Again, on 17-1-1.992, vide promotion order, mark Annexure P-13, the petitioners were promoted as Office Superintendents Grade-II in the pre- revised scale of Rs. 550-900 from the date of their joining at Dhauli Ganga Hydroelectric Power Project (UP).
The petitioners stated that as their promotion orders to Dhauli Ganga Hydroelectric Power Project were again from the date of their joining, and they were being debarred the promotion from the earlier date when their juniors had been promoted, the petitioners made representations mark Annexures P-14 and P-14/1 to the respondents requesting them that petitioners should be promoted with effect from 1-7-1990 when their promotion as per the Promotion Policy was due.
When the petitioners did not accept the promotion order to Dhauli Ganga Project, the respondents promoted their juniors, namely, Tek Chand, Neena Raina, Khanku Ram and Amar Chand Garg, as Office Superintendents Grade-II and they were transferred to Dhauli Ganga.
The Chief Engineer, Dhauli Ganga Project informed BS Project authorities that as there were no vacancies of Office Superintendents Grade-II in the Project, the promotion orders of the said employees were accordingly cancelled by the Management of BS Project.
6.
The NHPC later on revised this Promotion Policy for workmen; teaching and para-medical staff in the year 1997, copy of the Revised Promotion Policy is placed on record as Annexure P-15.
The Revised Promotion Policy, however, provided as a special dispensation that workmen in W-6 and W-7 Grade working in the projects on 9-4-1997, who are matriculate, would also be considered for promotion in supervisory grade (S-2) after completion of four years service in W-6 and W-7 Grades.
They stated that on the specified date, the petitioners were working in W-7 Grade and they had completed more than four years service on and with effect from 1-7-1990.
They were to be given promotion without holding any interview on the same analogy as their juniors were promoted prior to them with effect from 1-7-1990.
The petitioners accordingly made representations and requested to exempt them from passing the examination and appearing in the interview and they did not choose to appear in the examination and interview fixed vide communication dated 25-3-1998 as special dispensation has to be granted to them exempting the petitioners from undertaking the other formalities.
The respondents vide communications dated 4-8-1999, mark Annexures P-21 and P-21/1 were informed by Deputy Manager (P&A) of BS Project that for becoming Supervisors they were required to appear in the Supervisory test as per Revised Promotion Policy.
Thus, according to the petitioners, the action of the respondents in denying them promotion with effect from 1-7-1990 to the post of Office Superintendents Grade-II (S2 Grade) when their Juniors were promoted and also not giving them special dispensation, exempting them from appearing in the written test and interview in terms of Revised Promotion Policy are arbitrary, discriminatory and in violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
7.
In the joint reply filed by respondents to the Writ petition, Shri AP Chawla, Administrative Officer, BS Project stated that all the construction activities of BS Project were completed long back and the Project was commissioned in the year 1982 and its generation started with effect from 23rd January, 1982.
The requirement of staff at completed Projects of the NHPC has become surplus after the completion of the Project and the surplus employees were rehabilitated in other ongoing Projects.
The petitioners being Project cadre employees of BS Project were considered for promotion during July, 1990 along with other eligible persons, but they could not be promoted as there was no vacancy of Office Superintendents Grade-II in BS Project.
The BS Project being O&M Project, only three posts of Office Superintendents Grade-II were sanctioned in O&M strength, but keeping in view the facts that sizeable number of Assistants Grade-I had become eligible for promotion as Superintendents Grade-II at BS Projects, it was decided by the Corporate Office of NHPC to consider the promotion of the eligible employees for promotion and posting them against the existing four vacancies at Uri Project and one each at Ranjeet Sagar and Teesta Projects subject to the condition that their promotion would take effect from the date they join at the new place of posting.
Accordingly, the petitioners along with two other Assistants Grade-I, namely, Suresh Kumar Awasthi and Bhagat Ram were promoted as Office Superintendents Grade-II against the vacancies available at Uri Project vide office order No. BS/PNE-4(2)/92-251 dated 17-1-1992 but they did not accept the promotion and chose to continue as Assistant Grade-I at BS Project The respondents have stated that no employee of BS Project was offered promotion as Office Superintendent Grade-II with posting at BS Project against the strength of Chamera-I and Chamera-II Project.
The decision contained in letter dated 26-3-1991 of Corporate Office (Annexure R-1) was the result of the various meetings held between the representatives of the Management and employees of BS Project to accommodate the Assistant Grade-I of BS Project in other Projects subject to their joining but not to accommodate in BS Project against the vacancy of other Projects.
They had stated that under the pre- revised Promotion Policy, which was in vogue prior to 1-7-1997, the post of Office Superintendent was the Project cadre post and employee in each Project was being considered and promoted to the post of Office Superintendent Grade- II by individual Projects based on the availability of the vacancies.
Accordingly, Chamera Project promoted its employees based upon the availability of vacancies at its Project and, as such, the petitioners, who are admittedly the employees of BS Project, which is a separate and independent establishment, have no relation whatsoever with the employees in Chamera Project, Phase-I Accordingly, after the completion of BS Project on 21-3-1982, Parveen Kumar, Gurmel Ram and Rajinder Singh, who were juniors to the petitioners were declared surplus to the requirement of BS Project and were transferred as Assistant Grade-II during 1984-85 to Chamera Project, which was under, construction at that time.
The petitioners being seniors were retained against the O&A strength of the BS Project as per the settled procedure which, inter alia, provides that seniormost employees in each cadre of each Project would be retained against the operation and Maintenance strength of the completed Project and the remaining employes would be declared as surplus, and would be re-engaged in other ongoing Projects.
According to the respondents, if the petitioners were not desirous to continue in O&M strength of BS Project, they were at liberty for transfer to other Project, but they decided to avail the opportunity and stayed in their home town adjacent to BS Project.
The respondents also stated that the reference of message by the Chief Engineer, Uri Project to Chief P&A Corporate Office and Chief Engineer, BS Project as contained in Annexure R-II was the result of some communication-gap as the decision contained in Corporate Office letter dated 26-3-1991 (Annexure R-1) could not be made available to Uri Project.
However, based upon the communication from Chief Engineer, Uri Project, the competent authority of NHPC conveyed its decision to Uri Project through an express telegram dated 8-5-1991 and accordingly the Uri Project accepted the joining report of Suresh Kumar Awasthi, who was promoted along with the petitioners vide order dated 03-04-1991 (Annexure P-7).
8.
The respondents also stated that the petitioners along with other eligible employees were promoted strictly in accordance with the decision of the competent authority as contained in letter dated 26-3-1991 (Annexure R-1), with clear stipulation that promotion would take effect from the date they join at the new place of posting subsequent to issuance of letters of promotion.
The petitioners did not join at Uri Project despite another opportunity given to them on 17-1-1992 as they wanted to have their promotion with effect from 1-7-1990 at BS Project which was not possible as there was no vacancy in the BS Project in July, 1990.
9.
The respondents further stated that the petitioners along with Bhagat Ram were offered the posts of Office Superintendents with posting at Dhauli Ganga Project where the vacancies were available and Bhagat Ram had joined the Project against the availability of post and the requirement at Dhauli Ganga Project.
Both the petitioners along with Bhagat Ram were promoted as Office Superintendent subject to their joining at Dhauli Ganga, Project vide order dated 17-1-1992 (Annexure P-13) with clear stipulation that second opportunity was being offered to the petitioners and in the event of non-acceptance of the offer, they would be liable to forfeit the chances of promotion thereafter.
The petitioners still declined to join at Dhauli Ganga though Shri Bhagat Ram, who was junior, accepted the promotion and joined at the new place of posting.
When the petitioners refused to accept the promotion, the next senior employees in the cadre of Assistant Grade-I were promoted as Office Superintendents subject to joining at Dhauli Ganga Project.
The orders of promotion of the petitioners were cancelled due to obvious reason that they were reluctant to join at Dhauli Ganga and also in view of the changing requirement of Dhauli Ganga Project.
10.
The respondents have stated that the petitioners have wrongly stated that they were exempted from passing the examination and appearing in the interview in terms of Revised Promotion Policy.
As per the Revised Promotion Policy, the employees, who are/were in W-6 and W-7 Grade as on 9-4-1997 have been given special dispensation in two conditions, namely qualification of Matriculation instead of intermediate/10+2 and four years service in W-6 instead of 5 years out of the five conditions contained there.
The Revised Promotion Policy has been made effective from 1-7-1997 in all the Projects of the NHPC including BS Project and Chamera Hydroelectric Power Project Phase-I and Phase-II.
Under the Revised Promotion Policy, number of employee of different Projects of NHPC including 8 employees of BS Project, who passed the written examination and appeared in the interview, were promoted as Office Superintendents with effect from 1-7-1997, but as the petitioners did not choose to appear in the written test examination, they could not be considered for promotion.
The claim of the petitioners for promotion to the post of Office Superintendents with effect from 1-7-1990 in terms of the Revised Promotion Policy which was made effective only from 1-7-1997 without taking the written test and appearing in the interview cannot be accepted as they cannot be given different treatment in the matter of promotion.
The respondents stated that the petitioners cannot claim any parity with the employees of other Projects against the available vacancies, as claimed by them in the writ petition.
11.
In rejoinder to the reply, petitioners stated that they have to be promoted as per the Promotion Policy Annexure P-3 and P-15 without interview or test and they had declined promotion because they were not promoted from the due date when their juniors were promoted.
They further stated that the Management of the BS Project has failed to consider the cases of employees of its Project for promotion whereas Chamera Hydroelectric Power Project Phase-I promoted the persons in its Project against the vacant posts in the said Project with effect from 1-7-1990, 1-7-1991 and 1-7-1992 respectively.
Petitioners represented against the condition contained in the promotion orders that they had been promoted from the date of their joining whereas they ought to have been promoted from the date their juniors had been so promoted.
They further stated that Bhagat Ram was promoted as Office Superintendent Grade-II and joined at Dhauli Ganga Project on conditional promotion order.
He was again transferred from Dhauli Ganga Project to BS Project as Assistant Administrative Officer being junior to the petitioners.
The petitioners have again reiterated their averments made in the writ petition.
12.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and perused the entire material on record.
13.
It is not in the dispute that the petitioners were promoted as Assistants Grade-II (Upper Division Clerks) from Assistants Grade-III (Lower Division Clerks) vide office order dated 28-2-1981 mark Annexure P-1 along with other employees including Bhagat Ram, Parveen Kumar, Gurmel Ram, Rajinder Singh and Tek Chand.
Both the petitioners and Bhagat Ram Thakur along with other nine employees were promoted as Assistant Grade-I with effect from 1-7-1986 vide order dated 18-11-1986, mark Annexure P-2.
In the meeting of the Management of BS Project and the Rashtria Jal Vidyut Nigarn Karamchari Sangh held on 15-10- 1990 in the office Chamber of Executive Director, Dhalhousie, the Executive Director assured the Members that he would take up the matter with the Corporate Office relating to the demand of the Sangh that all persons working as Assistants Grade-I in the Project shall be promoted to the post of Office Superintendent Grade-II.
The minutes of meetings mark Annexure P-4 reveals that it was decided in the meeting that Chief (P&A) will intimate the vacant posts of Office Superintendents Grade-II in other Projects and BS Project will contact all the Projects.
It was also intimated that all the Assistants Grade-I should ready to go on transfer and the Sangh suggested that if the persons are promoted as Office Superintendent Grade-II then they would be ready to perform duties of Assistant Grade-I In its next meeting held on 8-3-1991 between the Management representatives and Joint Action Committee of BS Project Union, regarding promotion of Assistants Grade-I to the post Office Superintendent Grade-II, Management informed the Committee Members that there were six vacancies available at other Projects for which the offer to the eligible candidates of BS Projects as per the seniority shall be issued and the promotions will be effected from 1-1-1991 subject to their joining at place of posting.
It was desired by the Union's representatives in the said meeting as reflected in minutes mark Annexure P-4/4 that the promotion should be effected from 1-1-1991 instead of 1-7-1990.
The minutes of the meeting would reveal that Chief (P&A) would check up with Corporate Office on that issue.
In its meeting held on 13-8-1992 between NHPC Staff Association and BS Project and the Management, it was intimated to the representatives of the Association by the representatives of the Management that one letter had already been sent to the Corporate Office for the approval of three additional posts of Office Superintendents Grade-II for promoting Assistants Grade-I from the old date and the action would be taken after receiving the reply from the competent authority as contained in minutes, copy mark Annexure P-4/6.
On perusal of final seniority list of Assistant Grade-II (BS Project) as on 31st December, 1982, copy Annexure P-6, names of Jai Singh Thakur, petitioner No. 1 and Manohar Singh, petitioner No. 2 appear at serial Nos. 17 and 26 respectively and the names of Parveen Kumar, Gurmel Ram and Rajinder Singh are given at serial Nos. 27, 28 and 29 respectively.
14.
Admittedly, both the petitioners are seniors to Parveen Kumar, Gurmel Ram and Rajinder Singh as Assistants Grade-I Both the petitioners along with Suresh Kumar Awasthi and Bhagat Ram were promoted as Office Superintendents Grade-II vide office order dated 3-4-1991, copy Annexure P-7 passed by Deputy Manager (P&A) of BS Project subject to their joining in Uri HE Project (J&K) on or before 30-4-1991 (AN).
15.
It appears from the representations dated 18-4-1991 and 23-4-1991. respectively made by the petitioners to the Chief Engineer, BS Project through proper channel against their conditional promotion orders that they were due for promotion as Office Superintendents Grade-II with effect from 1-7-1990 as per Promotion Policy of the NHP as their juniors, namely, Parveen Kumar, Gurmel Ram and Rajinder Singh had already been promoted in the Chamera HE Project, Stage-I as Office Superintendents Grade-II with effect from 1-7-1990, therefore, their promotion orders may be reviewed.
In the representation the petitioner No. 1 also requested that he may be promoted as Office Superintendent Grade-II with effect from 1-7-1990 against the vacant post in Chamera Hydroelectric Power Project, Phase-I and transferred to the said project being senior to all those promoted as Office Superintendents Grade-I against the vacant post available on 1-7-1990.
Petitioner No. 2 stated that the conditional orders of promotion were against the existing Rules of the Corporation and the same was not acceptable to him.
In reply to the representations of the petitioners, Personnel Officer, BS Project vide communication dated 25-4-1991, copies placed on record as Annexures P-9 and P-9/1, informed them that the detailed reply to their representations will be given in due course since the matter would need several clarifications to be sought for.
The petitioners were given second opportunity to move on promotion on transfer in the next ten days time.
By subsequent communications dated 25/26-4-1991 addressed by Personnel Officer, BS Project to both the petitioners (Annexures P-10 and P-10/1) they were given chance to join at Uri HE Project within ten days i.e. 6-5-1991 failing which the offer of promotion as Office Superintendent Grade-II against the vacancy made available in Uri HE Project will be withdrawn and given to the next senior on the panel and they will forfeit their rights to promotion.
Both the petitioners submitted their representations (Annexures P-II & P-II/1) to the Personnel Officer, BS Project requesting the latter to settle the issue raised by them in their earlier representations made to Chief Engineer, BS Project, Chief Engineer, BS Project, by special telegram dated 1-5-1991 informed Chief Engineer, Uri Project that the promotion and transfer of four numbers of Assistant Grade-I as Office Superintendents Grade-II has been ordered in consultation with Corporate Office and as out of four Assistant Grade-I only Suresh Kumar Awasthi has joined the Uri Project, his joining report be accepted and he be retained at Uri Project.
16.
Again vide office order dated 17-11-992 (Annexure P-13) Manager (P&A) of BS Project promoted both the petitioners along with Bhagat Ram as Office Superintendents Grade-II with effect from the date of joining in Dhauli Ganga Hydroelectric Power Project (UP).
This office order reveals that if the terms and conditions were acceptable to the petitioners and Bhagat Ram, Assistants Grade-I working in BS Project, they shall be relieved on 31-1-1992 and in case their non-acceptance, intimation be furnished by 25-1-1992 so that next senior official will be provided with an opportunity and further that as the second opportunity was offered to the said persons, in case of non- acceptance, their chance of promotion in future shall be forfeited.
Both the petitioners represented against their transfer from BS Project to Dhauli Ganga HE Project, copies of their representations are placed on record as Annexures P-14 and P-14/1.
They have again reasserted that they should be promoted as Office Superintendents from 1-7-1990 from the date their juniors were promoted and the promotion orders made effective from subsequent date were not acceptable to them.
It is the clear case of the respondents in their reply- affidavit that the petitioners being Project cadre employees of BS Project were considered for promotion during July.
1990 along with others but could not be promoted as there was no vacancy of Office Superintendent Grade-II in the Project.
BS Project being O&M Project, only three posts of Office Superintendents Grade-II were sanctioned on the strength of the Project, but in view of the fact that sizable number of Assistants Grade-I had become eligible for promotion as Office Superintendents Grade-II at BS Project, it was decided by the Corporate Office and conveyed to the Executive Director, Region-II, NHPC, Dalhousie vide communication dated (Annexure R-1) to consider the promotion and posting of three Assistants Grade-I against the existing four vacancies of Officer Superintendents Grade-I/II at Uri Project and one each at Ranjeet and Teesta Project subject to the condition that their promotion would take effect from the date they join at the new place of posting of their orders of promotion.
Vide express telegram dated 8-5-1991, copy Annexure R-2, sent by the Chief (P&A) of NHPC, New Delhi requesting Chief Engineer, Uri Project to accept the joining reports of four number of Office Superintendents Grade-II at Uri Project as the matter was discussed with the Director (Projects) who had agreed to accept the joining reports of the transferees on promotion.
17.
As noticed above, both the petitioners were first promoted as Office Superintendents Grade-II along with Suresh Kumar Awasthi and Bhagat Ram vide order dated 3-4-1991 and they were requested to join at Uri HE Project on or before 31-4-1991.
Out of the said four persons, only Suresh Kumar Awasthi joined at Uri Project.
Later on another chance was given to the petitioners and Bhagat Ram to join at Dhauli Ganga HE Project on promotion as Office Superintendents Grade-II as per office order dated 17-1-1992 (Annexure P-13).
Bhagat Ram obeyed the order of promotion and joined at the new place of posting whereas both the petitioners had not accepted the conditional orders of promotion and transfer on both the occasions.
In communication dated 25/26-4-1991 (Annexures P-10 and P-10/1) Personnel Officer of BS Project categorically informed both the petitioners that they were given chance to join Uri HE Project upto 6-5-1991 failing which offer of promotion will be withdrawn and given to the next senior on the panel and both the petitioners would forfeit their right of promotion as Office Superintendents Grade-II.
Similar condition was imposed in office order dated 17-1-1992 (Annexure P-13) whereby both the petitioners were asked to furnish their acceptance of promotion and posting at Dhauli Ganga HE Project by 25-1-1992, but again both the petitioners did not accept the office order of transfer and the authority was left with no option but to promote the Assistants Grade-I as Office Superintendents Grade-II, juniors to the petitioners, who had accepted the conditional orders of promotion and transfer.
In that view of the matter, the claim of the petitioners that their juniors have been promoted as Office Superintendents Grade-II superseding them being senior cannot be accepted.
The petitioners could have accepted the conditional orders of their promotion & transfer and subsequently, they could have raised their grievances, if any, in regard to their promotions from 1-7-1996, but instead of obeying the orders of their promotions and posting at the other Projects where the vacancies were available, they had started making repeated representations to the respondents.
Thus, the contention of the petitioners that the orders promoting the juniors to the post of Office Superintendents Grade-II were arbitrary, unreasonable and in violation to Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India cannot be accepted and sustained.
18.
The contention of the petitioners that in terms of the Revised Promotion Policy for workmen (copy Annexure P-15), petitioners should have been promoted to the post of Office Superintendents Grade-II by giving them exemption from passing the examination and appearing in the interview, is also unsustainable and untenable.
On bare perusal of Para 5-A(i) of the Revised Promotion Policy Annexure P-15, there are five conditions incorporated therein for considering the ministerial office staff for Supervisory post (S2) to which category the petitioners admittedly belong viz (i) qualification of intermediate/10+2, (ii) five years service in W8 Grade, (iii) passing of supervisory test, (iv) passing of interview and (v) availability of vacancy.
The employees who are/were in W6 and W-7 Grade as on 9-4-1997 have been given special dispensation in two conditions, namely, qualification of Matriculation, instead of intermediate/10+2 and four years service instead of five years.
There is no dispensation for remaining three conditions.
Thus, the petitioners in terms of Revised Promotion Policy were required to appear in the supervisory test and passing of the interview.
They were given option by the respondents, but they did not choose to take the examinations and appear in the interview.
This was the third chance given to the petitioners to get promotion to the posts of Office Superintendents Grade-II, but they have lost this chance as well.
The Revised Promotion Policy has been made effective with effect from 1-7-1997 in all the Projects of the NHPC including BS Project and Chamera Hydroelectric Power Project.
The respondents have categorically stated in the reply that under the Revised Promotion Policy, number of employees of different Projects of the NHPC including eight employees of BS Project, who passed the written examination and appeared in the interview, were promoted as Office Superintendents Grade-II with effect from 1-7-1998.
Thus, the petitioners cannot take any benefit under the Revised Promotion Policy save and except of qualification and period of four years service.
19.
The learned counsel for the petitioners has relied upon decision of the learned Single Judge of this Court in titled Krishna Devi v. National Hydroelectric Power Corporation Limited and others, Civil Writ Petition No. 1083 of 1996, dated 3-6-2003 to contend that the parity in the service conditions of the petitioners with their juniors cannot be changed by the respondents by ignoring their promotion to the post of Office Superintendents Grade-II.
I have gone through the ratio of the said decision.
I find that the facts involved in the said case were entirely different than the facts of the present case.
In that case the reliefs sought for by the petitioners were for the grant of benefit of revised pay scale as Draftsman Grade-III Grade-II Grade-I and Senior Draftsman Grade-II and Grade-I as per the orders of the respondents and to pay the arrears of revised pay scale along with interests as also to grant the promotion according to the revised scales and pay on completion of the qualifying service from one grade to next higher grade in terms of the Promotion Policy and the Rules formulated by the respondents- Corporation in that case.
Thus, the ratio of this decision is of no help or assistance to the peculiar facts of this case.
20.
No other point is urged by the learned counsel for the parties.
21.
In the result, for the reasons above stated, there is no merit in this writ petition and it is accordingly dismissed.
22.
Parties to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.