MB Shah, J - The only question which requires determination in this reference to the Full Bench is whether the relief undertakings carried out by the State Government to provide sustenance to the persons affected by famine, flood, earthquake or scarcity is an 'industry'.
Common parlance reply would be : It is not an 'industry'.
Still, the question is a vexed one as it is required to be dealt with after considering the definition of the word 'industry' under Section 2(j) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, as interpreted by various Courts.
2.
The Division Bench consisting of AH Ahmadi, J (as he then was) and R.J Shah, J, in the case of JJ Shrimali v. District Development Officer, 1989(2) GLH 12, held that when a State Government during famine and drought undertakes relief works intended to provide the much needed relief to scarcity affected people living in the affected areas, it is not embarking upon any industrial or commercial enterprise but is merely trying to fulfil its obligation towards its people who are hit by nature's wrath.
There is no desire or intention to launch a drab industrial or commercial enterprise but the paramount idea or consideration is to provide relief to the scarcity affected people who have been deprived of livelihood because of the failure of the monsoon.
In such cases the State Government is merely fulfilling its governmental duty towards the scarcity affected people and is not operating in the field of commerce or industry for the production or distribution of goods or services.
The Court, therefore, held that such activity is not an industry within the meaning of Section 2(j) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 as the State was merely performing its sovereign function as distinguished from a commercial adventure.
3.
The Division Bench consisting of SB Majumdar, J (as he then was) and IC Bhatt, J, for the elaborate reasons stated in the referring judgment and order dated 29th September, 1988 arrived at the conclusion that prima facie the aforesaid decision in the case of Shrimali requires reconsideration.
Hence, referred the following questions to a larger Bench :  "(1) Whether the employment offered to persons on the scarcity relief works as undertaken by the State can be said to be employment in 'Industry' as defined by Section 2(j) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 ?
(2) Whether the decision of the Division Bench of this Court in Special Civil Application No. 341 of 1988 and group, decided on 8th August, 1988, to the effect that the scarcity relief work undertaken by the State by way of drought relief is not an industry within the meaning of Section 2(j) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, is well sustained ?"
4.
Therefore, in this judgment, the short question which would require consideration is -  Whether the relief works undertaken by the State Government to provide relief to the persons who are affected by the nature calamities such as famine, earthquake, epidemic, flood, scarcity, etc. would be considered as 'industry' as defined by Section 2(j) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 ?
For determining this question, following three aspects would be required to be considered, namely -  (i) While giving such type of relief to the affected people, whether the State is discharging its sovereign or real function or is disc primarily its inalienable duty; (ii) even assuming that granting of relief to the persons affected by natural calamities (such as famine, earthquake, epidemic, flood, scarcity, etc.) is not discharge of a sovereign function or inalienable duty of the State, yet, whether relief undertakings would be covered by the word 'industry', as interpreted by the Supreme Court in the case of Bangalore Water Supply v. A Rajappa, AIR 1978 SC 548; and (iii) as noted by the Division Bench whether the interpretation given by the Court in the case of JJ Shrimali (supra) requires reconsideration because of the decisions rendered by the Supreme Court in the case of Sanjit Roy v. State of Rajasthan, AIR 1983 SC 328, and in the case of Des Raj v. State of Punjab, AIR 1998 SC 1182, or the decision rendered by the Patna High Court in the case of Bihar Relief Committee v. State of Bihar, 54 FJR 385, and of the Kerala High Court in the case of Umayammal v. State of Kerala, 1983(1) LLJ 267.
5.
Meaning of the word 'industry' as interpreted by the majority judgment in the case of Bangalore Water Supply.
For appreciating the contentions, we would first refer to the definition of the word 'industry' and its interpretation given by the Supreme Court in the case of Bangalore Water Supply (majority judgment of Krishna Iyer, J) (supra).
Section 2(j) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 defines 'industry' to mean "any business, trade, undertaking, manufacture or calling of employers and includes any calling, service, employment, handicraft, or industrial occupation or avocation of workmen".
This definition is interpreted by the Supreme Court on numerous occasions.
It is accepted that the words used in the definition clause are of wide import and, to some extent, vague.
Therefore, to find out its our scope, various Courts have considered it from time to time.
On occasions it is contended that the definition is limited to those activities systematically or habitually undertaken on commercial lines by private entrepreneurs with the co-operation of employees for the production or distribution of goods or for the rendering of material services to the community at large or a party of such community.
As against this, by a majority view in the case of Bangalore Water Supply, it is held that even the activities which are charitable activities or activities which are philanthropic would also be covered by the definition of the word 'industry' in certain set of circumstances.
After considering the various decisions in the case of Bangalore Water Supply, Krishna Iyer, J who delivered the majority judgment, arrived at the conclusion in paragraph 161 as under :  "161.
'Industry' as defined in Section 2(j) and explained in Bannerji (AIR 1953 SC 58) has a wide import.
1.
(a) Where (i) systematic activity, (ii) organized by co-operation between employer and employee (the direct and substantial element is chimerical (iii) for the production and or distribution of goods and services calculated to satisfy human wants and wishes (not spiritual or religious but inclusive of material things or services geared to celestial bliss, i.e., making, on a large scale prasad or food prima facie, there is an 'Industry' in that enterprise.
(b) Absence of profit motive or gainful objective is irrelevant, be the venture in the public, joint, private or other sector.
(c) The true focus in functional and the decisive test is the nature of the activity with special emphasis on the employer-employee relations.
(d) If the organization is a trade or business it does not cease to be one because of philanthropy animating the undertaking.
II.
Although Section 2(j) use words of widest amplitude in its two limbs, their meaning cannot be magnified to overreach itself.
(a) "Undertaking" must suffer a contextual and associational shrinkage as explained in Banerji and in this judgment : so also, service calling and the like.
This yields the inference that all organized activity possessing the triple elements in (supra), although not trade or business, may still be 'Industry' provided the nature of the activity, viz., the employer-employee basis, bear resemblance to what we find in trade or business.
This takes into the fold 'Industry' undertakings, callings and services, adventures 'analogous to the carrying on a trade or business'.
All features, other than the methodology of carrying on the activity, viz., in organizing the co-operation between employer a employee, may be dissimilar.
It does not an matter, if on the employment terms there is analogy.
III.
Application of these guidelines should not stop short of their logical reach by invocation of creeds, cults or inner sense of incongruity or outer sense of notification for or resultant of the economic operations.
The ideology of the Act being Industrial peace, regulation and resolution of industrial dispute between employer and workmen, range of this statutory ideology must inform the reach of the statutory definition.
Nothing less nothing more.
(a) The consequences are (i) professions, (ii) clubs, (iii) educational institutions, (iv) co-operative, (v) research institutes, (vi) charitable projects, and (vii) other kindred adventures, if they fulfil the triple tests listed in I (supra), cannot be exempted from the scope of Section 2(j).
(b) a restricted category of professions, clubs, co-operatives and even gurukuls and little research labs, may qualify for exemption if, in simple ventures, substantially and, going by the dominant nature criterion, substantively, no employees are entertained but in minimal matters, marginal employees are hired without destroying the non-employee character of the unit.
(c) If, in a pious or altruistic mission many employ themselves, free or for small honoraria or like return, mainly drawn by sharing in the purpose or cause, such as lawyers volunteering to run a free legal services clinic or doctors serving in their spare hours in a free Medical centre or ashramites working at the bidding of the holiness, divinity or like central personality, and the services are supplied free or at nominal cost and those who serve are not engaged for remuneration or on the basis of master and servant relationship, then, the institution is not an Industry even if stray servants, mandal or technical are hired.
Such eleemosynary of like undertakings alone are exempt - not other generosity, compassion, developmental passion or project.
IV.
The dominant nature test : (a) Where a complex of activities, some of which qualify for exemption, others not, involves employees on the total undertaking, some of whom are not 'workmen' as in the University of Delhi case (AIR 1963 SC 1873) or some departments are not productive of goods and service if isolated, even then, the predominant nature of the services and the integrated nature of the departments as explained in the Corporation of Nagpur (AIR 1960 SC 675) will be the true test.
The whole undertaking will be 'Industry', although those who are not 'workman' by definition may not benefit by the status.
(b) Notwithstanding the previous clauses, sovereign functions, strictly understood, (alone) qualify for exemption, not the welfare activities or economic adventures undertaken by Government or statutory bodies.
(c) Even in departments discharging sovereign functions, if there are units which are Industries and they are substantially severable, then they can be considered to come within Section 2(j).
(d) Constitutional and competently enacted legislative provisions may well remove from the scope of the Act categories which otherwise may be covered thereby.
V. We overrule Safdarjung (AIR 1970 SC 1407), Solicitors' case (AIR 1962 SC 1080), Gymkhana (AIR 1968 SC 554), Delhi University (AIR 1963 SC 1873), Dhanrajgiri Hospital (AIR 1973 SC 2032) and other rulings whose ratio runs counter to the principles enunciated above, and Hospital Mazdoor Sabha (AIR 1960 SC 610) is hereby rehabilitated."
(Emphasis supplied) 6.
However, we emphasise that before laying down the aforesaid principles or deciding whether a particular activity is an industry or not, the Court has cautioned as under :  "We speak, not exhaustively, but to the extent covered by the debate at the bar and, to that extent authoritatively, until overruled by a larger bench or superseded by "the legislative branch."
Further, in the beginning before considering the various decisions the Court has cautioned as under :  "In a world of relativity where law and life interlace, a search for absolute is a self-condemned exercise.
Legal concepts, ergo, are relativist, and to miss this rule of change and developmental stage is to interpret oneself into error."
At this stage, we may further not that with regard to the concept of sovereign of regal functions of the State, different opinion was expressed by the learned Chief Justice Beg in his concurring judgment.
The learned Chief Justice observed :  "18.
I would also like to make a few observations about the so-called 'sovereign' functions which have been placed outside the field of Industry ...
I think that the term 'sovereign' should be reserved, technically and more correctly, for the sphere of ultimate decisions.
Sovereignty operates on a sovereign plane of its own as I suggested in Keshavananda Bharati's case, AIR 1972 SC 1461, supported by a quotation from Ernest Barker's "Social and Political Theory."
The learned Chief Justice further observed as under :  "What is meant by the use of term "sovereign", in relation to the activities of the State, is more accurately brought out by using the term 'Governmental' functions although there are difficulties here also inasmuch as the Government has entered largely now field of Industry.
Therefore, only those services which are governed by separate rules and constitutional provisions, such as Articles 310 and 311 should, strictly speaking, be excluded from the sphere of Industry by necessary implication."
This observation specifically means that, while discharging Governmental functions, if services are rendered which are governed by separate rules and constitutional provisions, those services, strictly speaking, require to be excluded from the sphere of industry by necessary implication.
Finally, the Court observed that the question was one which can only be solved by more satisfactory legislation on it.
Otherwise, the Judges could only speculate and formulate tests of 'industry' which cannot satisfy all.
As against this, Chandrachud, C.J expressed a contrary opinion on the aforesaid aspect as under :  "172.
One of the exceptions carved out by the Court is in favour of the activities undertaken by the Government in the exercise of its inalienable functions under the Constitution, call it regal, sovereign or by any other name.
I see no justification for excepting these categories of public utility activities from the definition of 'Industry'.
If it be true that one must have regard to the nature of the activity and not to who engages in it, it seems to be beside the point to enquire whether the activity is undertaken by the State, and further, if so whether it is undertaken in fulfilment of the State's constitution obligations or in discharge of its constitutional functions.
In fact, to concede the benefit of an exception to the State's activities which are in the nature of sovereign functions is really to have regard not so much to the nature of the activity as to the consideration who engages in that activity, for, sovereign functions can only be discharged by the State and not by a private person."
As against this, Jaswant Singh, J and Tulzapukar, J have observed as under :  "......we are of the view that despite the width of the definition it could not be the intention of the legislature that categories 2 and 3 of the charities alluded to by our learned brother Krishna Iyer in his judgment, hospitals run on charitable basis or as a part of the functions of the Government or local bodies like Municipalities and educational and research institutions whether run by private entities or by Government and liberal and learned professions like that of doctors lawyers and teachers, the pursuit of which is dependent upon an individual's own education, intellectual attainments and special expertise should fall within the pale of the definition.
We are inclined to think that the definition is limited to those activities systematically or habitually undertaken on commercial lines by private entrepreneurs with the co-operation of employees for the production or distribution of goods or for the rendering of material services to the community at large or a part of such community."
The learned Judges further stated that it was high time that the Legislature steps in with a comprehensive bill to clear up the feg and remove the doubts and set at rest once for all the controversy which crops up from time to time a relation to the meaning of the aforesaid term rendering it necessary for larger benches to be constituted which are driven to the necessity of revolving a working formula to cover particular case.
In this view of the matter and in view of a working formula adopted by the majority judgment rendered by Krishna Iyer, J and the caution expressed by him in his judgment as indicated above, it would not be proper to pick up one sentence or a word from the judgment as if the statutory definition is given of the word 'industry' and interpret that the famine relief work undertaken by the State or Central Government is 'industry'.
As indicated above, the learned Judge himself has stated that in a world of relativity where law and life interlace, a search for absolute is a self-condemned exercise.
Further, the learned, Judge himself has stated that the word 'industry' was explained not exhaustively but to the extent covered by the debate at the bar.
7.
Relevant discussion by the Supreme Court in the case of Delhi Development Horticulture Employees' Union :  In this context, before discussing the reasons recorded for referring the matter to the larger Bench, we would refer to the subsequent judgment rendered by the Supreme Court in the case of Delhi, Development Horticulture Employees' Union v. Delhi Administration, Delhi, 1992(4) SCC 99, wherein a view similar to the view taken in the case of JJ Shrimali (supra), is expressed.
In that case, it was contended by the workmen who were employed on daily wages for a period of 240 days or more that they should be absorbed as regular employees in the Development Department of the Delhi Administration and for a injunction prohibiting the termination of their services and also for the difference in wages paid to them and those paid to the regular employees.
The workmen were employed as daily wages workers under 'Jawahar Rozgar Yajna' by the District Rural Development Agency ('DRDA' for short) under various schemes.
One such scheme was "Food for Work".
Under this scheme, employment was given to the poorer sections or the population in the rural areas partly for food and partly for cash payment.
Subsequent scheme was called "Rural Landless Employment Guarantee Programme" with the objective of generating additional employment in the rural areas particularly for the landless workers.
Under these programmes, works in the rural areas resulting in durable community assets, social forestry, village roads, etc., were taken up.
The entire work was done by providing daily wage employment to rural workers and the labourers were employed at these sites depending upon their availability in rural areas and without reference to any Employment Exchanges.
In the background of the aforesaid facts and after considering various contentions, the Court observed that there is no doubt that broadly interpreted and as a necessary logical corollary, right to life would include the right to livelihood and, therefore, right to work.
The Court observed that this country has so far not found it feasible to incorporate the right to livelihood as a fundamental right in the Constitution.
This is because the country has so far not attained the capacity to guarantee it and not because it considers it anytheless fundamental to life.
Advisedly, therefore, it has been placed in the Chapter on Directive Principles, Article 41 of which enjoins upon the State to make effective provision for securing the same 'within the limits of its economic capacity and development'.
Thus even while giving the direction to the State to ensure the right to work, the Constitution makers thought it prudent not to do so without qualifying it.
The Court further observed :  "21.
Viewed in the context of the facts of the present case it is apparent that the schemes under which the petitioners were given employment have been evolved to provide income for those who are below the poverty line and particularly during the periods when they are without any source of livelihood and therefore, without any income whatsoever.
The schemes where further meant for the rural poor, for the object of the schemes was to start tackling the problem of poverty from that end.
The object was not to provide the right to work as such even to the rural poor much less to the unemployed in general.
As has been pointed out by the Union of India in their additional affidavit, in 1987-88.
33 per cent of the total rural population was below the poverty line.
This meant about 35 million families.
To eliminate property and to generate full employment 2500-3000 million man-days of work in a year, was necessary.
As against that, the Jawahar Rozgar Yojna could provide only 870 million man-days of employment on intermittent basis in neighbourhood projects.
Within the available resources of Rs. 2600 crores, in all 310 million people alone could be provided with permanent employment, if they were to be provided work for 273 days in a year on minimum wages.
However, under the scheme meant for providing work only 80-90 days work could be provided to 9-30 million people."
Thereafter, the Court pertinently held that to get an employment under such scheme and to claim on the basis of the said employment, a right to regularisation, is to frustrate the scheme itself and no Court can be a party to such exercise.
It is wrong to approach the problems of those employed under such schemes with a view to providing them with full employment and guaranteeing equal pay for equal work.
The relevant observations are as under :  22.
The above figures show that if the resources used for the Jawahar Rozgar Yojna were in their entirety to be used for providing full employment throughout the year, they would have given employment only to a small percentage of the population in need of income, the remaining vast majority being left with no income whatsoever.
No fault could, therefore, be found with the limited object of the scheme given the limited resources at the disposal of the State.
Those employed under the scheme, therefore, could not ask for more than what the scheme intended to give them.
To get an employment under such scheme and to claim on the basis of the said employment, a right to regularisation, is to frustrate the scheme itself.
No Court can be a party to such exercise.
It is wrong to approach the problems of those employed under such schemes with a view to providing them with full employment and guaranteeing equal pay for equal work.
These concepts, in the context of such schemes are both unwarranted and misplaced.
They will do more harm than good by depriving the many of the little income that they may get to keep them from starvation.
They would benefit a few at the cost of the many starving poor for whom the schemes are meant.
That would also force the State to wind up the existing schemes and forbid them from introducing the new ones, for want of resources.
This is not to say that the problems of the unemployed deserve no consideration or sympathy.
This is only to emphasise that even among the unemployed a distinction exists between those who live below and above the poverty fine, those in need of partial and those in need of full employment, the educated and uneducated, the rural and urban unemployed, etc." (Emphasis supplied) Thereafter, the Court finally rejected the prayer of the workmen for regularisation on the ground that they have put in work for 240 days or more and dismissed the petition.
8.
In our view, same would be the position for the persons employed by the State Government under the schemes framed for providing reliefs to the persons affected by famine, flood, earthquake, scarcity, etc.
It would be wrong to approach the problems of those employed under such schemes with a view to providing them with some livelihood with full employment and guaranteeing equal pay for equal work.
As observed by the Supreme Court, to get an employment under such a scheme and to claim on the basis of the said employment, a right to regularisation, is to frustrate the scheme itself.
In the present case, in our view, providing for some Work under the scheme for providing sustenance would not amount to providing employment as such.
As observed in the case of JJ Shrimali (supra), one reason for taking work is 'not to hurt the dignity by distributing the doles, the State Government starts relief work or projects in such gesture'.
It can be stated that the work on schemes for relief undertakings is taken not to produce something but to provide income or sustenance as would help in improving the capability of the affected arms and the people to withstand drought conditions better in future.
Mainly, as observed by the Supreme Court in the case of Delhi Development Horticulture Employees' Union (supra), it is to provide income for those who are below the poverty line and particularly during the periods when they are without any source of livelihood.
The object in such case was not to provide right to work as such even to the rural poor much less to the unemployed in general.
This would be clear from the fact that the period of work in such case is not related to completion of work but is connected with the case of the monsoon, that is to say, when the vigour of adverse effect of the drought or scarcity is substantially reduced.
9.
Programmes of Relief Undertaking as per the guidelines provided in the Gujarat Relief Manual :  It would be appropriate to refer to the relevant part of the Gujarat Relief Manual, which provides exhaustively what type of programmes is required to be carried out during the relief works and when it is required to be carried out and other details with regard to payment of wages.
The introductory part of the Gujarat Relief Manual provides that during famine, scarcity, floods, fire, riots, earthquakes, accidents, etc., the Government provides relief and assistance for rehabilitation; such relief, assistance is given the form of foodgrains, clothing, temporary shelter free of charge cash doles, construction and repair of houses and hutments for rehabilitation, by providing loans, financial assistance, etc., for commencing agricultural operations and normal avocations in life.
The Manual, inter alias, further provides that : (i) As far as possible, only such relief works need to be selected for assistance as would help in improving the capability of the affected areas and the people to withstand drought conditions better in future.
The State Government should also endeavour to have lists of relief works which could be taken on short notice in the drought prone districts and completed within the period envisaged.
Works which cannot possibly be completed within the period of relief operations should not normally be selected for relief assistance.
(ii) It is specifically stated that in the preparation of the programmes the works included therein shall be such as can suitably offer employment to large numbers of unskilled labourers.
In selecting works, preference shall be given, as far as possible to such of the works as are productive and likely to serve as anti-scarcity measures.
(iii) The programmes of relief works shall make provision for the employment normally of about 10 per cent of the population of the regions liable to scarcity within each district.
The periods for which they will need employment will depend on the intensity of distress and the onset of monsoon and will vary from districts to districts.
Generally the programme of relief works should take into account the necessity to provide employment to the scarcity affected population till at least the onset of the next monsoon.
(iv) It also provides as to what should be considered as scarcity.
Scarcity to a marked deterioration of the agricultural season due to the failure of rains or floods or damages to crops from insects resulting in severe unemployment and consequent distress among agricultural labour and small cultivators.
It also provides as to when the relief work can be sanctioned and that relief work should be productive as far as possible and that relief work should spread over the affected tract, each serving a group of villages on the basis that every person who may be in need of work is provided work within a distance of 5 km.
of his village as far as practicable.
(v) For payment of wages, the principle of the relief wages scale is that the wage should be the lowest amount sufficient to maintain healthy person in health.
Persons not in health not arriving for a work shall be specially be treated and the grain wages-scale is provided.
Even when the work is suspended, the allowances for dependents shall be given to workers as provided therein.
It also provides that in cases where the earning of the workers in a family are not sufficient to maintain themselves, additional amount is required to be paid.
(vi) In addition, it provides for relief in certain villages to the aged and infirm, the blind, crippled and insane, pregnant women and young children whose relatives will not or cannot support them and the like, those whose attendance on incapable adults or young children in their own homes is absolutely necessary, women of respectable birth, who by custom are unable to appear in public and are in danger of starvation and men of respectable birth who are in danger of starvation and for whom no suitable employment can be found on relief works.
It further provides that in such circumstances gratuitous relief will ordinarily bee given in the form of a monthly cash dole and for special reasons the Collector may grant relief partly in cash and partly in kind."
10.
The question is : Whether such undertaking carried out by the State Government is in discharge of its primary or inalienable duty.
This question would be required to be considered in the background of the aforesaid purpose of relief undertaking.
The dominant purpose of these relief schemes is to see that there is no starvation death because of drought or scarcity and the affected persons should as far as possible be rehabilitated.
In our view, it would be difficult to accept the contention that in a situation of natural calamity, etc., it is not the inalienable and/or primary duty of the State to provide such reliefs to the affected persons.
It has been rightly pointed out by learned Advocate Mr. Shah appearing for the respondents that since ages, this is considered to be an inalienable duty of the State.
For this purpose, he relied upon the following passage from the Book "The Laws of Manu", by Wendy Doniger with Brain K Smith, at page 139, wherein it is stated that :  "If a king is so deluded and unthinking as to starve his own kingdom, he together with his relatives, will soon lose his kingdom and his life."
Apart from this ancient principle, a combined reading of Articles 21, 39(a) and 41 of the Constitution would certainly mean that it is inalienable duty of the State to provide adequate means of livelihood to the persons affected by natural calamities.
Articles 39(a) and 41 are as under : "39(a) - The State shall, in particular, direct its policy towards securing that the citizen, men and women equally, have the right to an adequate means of livelihood.
41 - Right to work, to education and to public assistance in certain cases - The State shall, within the limits of its economic capacity and development, make effective provision for securing the right to work, to education and to public assistance in cases of unemployment, old age, sickness and disablement, and in other cases of undeserved want."
(Emphasis added) In this context, we would refer to paragraph 33 of the judgment rendered by the Supreme Court in the case of Olga Tellis v. Bombay Municipal Corporation, AIR 1986 SC 180, which is as under :  "33.
Article 39(a) of the Constitution, which is a Directive Principle of State Policy, provides that the State shall, in particular, direct its policy, towards securing that the citizens, men and women equally, have the right to an adequate means of livelihood Article 41, which is another Directive Principles, provides, inter alia, that the State shall, within the limits of the economic capacity and development, make effective provision for securing the right to work in case of unemployment and of undeserved want.
Article 37 provides that the Directive Principles, though not enforceable by any court, are nevertheless fundamental in the governance of the country.
The principles contained in Articles 39(a) and 41 must be regarded as equally fundamental in the understanding and interpretation of the meaning and content of fundamental rights.
If there is an obligation upon the State to secure to the citizens an adequate means of livelihood and the right to work, it would be sheer pedantry to exclude the right to livelihood from the content of the right to life.
The State may not, by affirmative action, be compellable to provide adequate means of livelihood or work to the citizens.
But, any person, who is deprived of his right to livelihood except according to just and fair procedure established by law, can challenge the deprivation as offending the right to fife conferred by Article 21."
Considering the aforesaid aspect, the Supreme Court in the case of Delhi Development Horticulture Employees' Union (supra) has observed that there is no doubt that broadly interpreted and as a necessary logical corollary, the right to life would include the right to livelihood and, therefore, a right to work.
But this country has so far not attained the capacity to guarantee it, and not because it considers it anytheless fundamental to life.
It is, therefore, held that the Directive Principles (Article 41) provide that within the limits of its economic capacity and development, the State shall make effective provision for securing the right to work and for other things.
It is, therefore, apparent that in a situation arising because of natural calamities such as flood, famine and earthquake, it is the primary and inalienable function of the State to provide means of livelihood to the persons affected.
In the referring judgment, the Court has observed that the finding given by the Division Bench in the case of JJ Shrimali (supra) is contradicted by the observation in paragraph 23 of the judgment rendered by Beg, C.J in the case of Bangalore Water Supply (supra), wherein it is stated that it was not correct to exclude State run industries from the sphere of the Act unless statutory provisions, expressly or by a necessary implication have that effect.
The observation would have no bearing because it implies that if that State is running an industry, in such a case it should be included in the sphere of the Act unless it is excluded by the statute.
In the present case, there is no question of running an industry by the State, and the question is whether the relief undertaking would be deemed to be an industry as defined under Section 2(j) of the Industrial Disputes Act.
Apart from this, in the case of Bangalore Water Supply (supra), divergent views are expressed by MH Beg, C.J and YV Chandrachud, C.J As stated earlier, Chandrachud, C.J arrived at the conclusion that there was no justification for excepting these categories of public utility activities from the definition of 'industry'.
That is to say, there was no justification for carving out an exception in favour of the activities undertaken by the Government in exercise of inalienable functions under the Constitution - call it regal, sovereign or by any other name.
As against this, Jaswant Singh, J and Tulzapurkar, J have expressed the view that the definition of the word 'industry' is limited to those activities systematically or habitually undertaken on commercial lines by private entrepreneurs with the co-operation of employees for the production or distribution of goods or for rendering the material services to the community at large or a part of such community.
In this set of circumstances, in our view, at present we are bound by the majority view expressed by Krishna Iyer, J in the aforesaid case wherein after discussing various authorities and considering the contentions, it is held in item IV(b) of paragraph 161 that notwithstanding the previous clauses, the sovereign functions as strictly understood alone qualify for exemption, and not the welfare activities or economic adventures undertaken by Government or statutory bodies; and even in departments discharging sovereign functions, if there are units which are industries and they are substantially severable, then they can be considered to come within Section 2(j).
Discussing this aspect, in the paragraph 73 (Krishna Iyer, J) it is observed that notwithstanding the literal width of the language of the definition, it must, for other compelling reasons, be kept out of the scope of industry.
The Court pertinently observed that, for instance, sovereign functions of the State cannot be included although what such functions are has been aptly termed "the primary and inalienable functions of a constitutional Government".
The Court finally held that in limited way, this head of exclusion has been recognised throughout.
The Court thereafter, referred to the Corporation of the City of Nagpur v. Its Employees, AIR 1960 SC 675 and held that the nature of actual function and of the pattern of organised activity is decisive.
The relevant observations are as under : "75.
The Court proceeded in the Corporation of Nagpur case (AIR 1960 SC 675) to pose for itself the import of the words 'analogous to the carrying out of a trade of business' and took the view that the emphasis was more on the nature of the organised activity implicit in trade or business than to equate the other activities with trade or business.
Obviously, non-trade operations were in many cases 'Industry'.
Relying on the Fabricated Engine Drivers, 1913 (16) CLR 245 (Aus) Sublia Rao, J observed (at pp. 682, 683 of AIR) : It is manifest from this decision that even activities of a Municipality which cannot be described as trading activities can be the subject matter of an industrial dispute.
76.
The true test, according to the learned Judge, was concisely expressed by Issac, J, in his dissenting judgment in the Federated State School Teachers' Association of Australia v. State of Victoria, 1929(41) CLR 569 (Aus) (at 683 of AIR) : "The material question is : What is the nature of the actual function assumed - is it a service that the State could have left to private enterprise, and if so fulfilled, could such a dispute be 'Industrial' ?"
Thus the nature of actual function and of the pattern of organised activity is decisive."
These observations would meet the contentions raised by the learned Advocates for the petitioner that during scarcity, the relief works would be a welfare activity of the State and that apart from the State, some voluntary organisations can also render such services.
In out, view, no responsible Government can say that even though there is scarcity or a large number of people are affected by the natural calamities, the State would not undertake the relief works for assisting the rehabilitating the affected people and transfer its constitutional obligations to a voluntary organisation.
No voluntary organisation would have resources, the funds of the personnel for such type of programme as on number of occasion, relief undertaking are required to be carried out in various ions parts of the State.
It would be unthinkable that the State would leave such activities entirely to the voluntary organisations.
Further, it would be difficult to hold that the voluntary organisations can be forced to render such services, as it depends entirely on their volition.
Hence the undertaking carried out by the State for relief works because of the natural calamities such as famine flood, earthquake, scarcity etc., would be the primary and inalienable functions of the State as held by the Supreme Court in the case of Bangalore Water Supply (supra).
We, therefore entirely agree with the reasons given in the case of JJ Shrimali (supra) that such relief undertaking, would not be covered by the definition of the word 'industry' as interpreted by the Supreme Court in the Case of Bangalore Water Supply (supra).
11.
Whether such relief undertakings would be covered by the word 'industry' as defined by Section 2(j) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 and as interpreted by the Supreme Court in the case of Bangalore Water Supply.
In the referring judgment, the Division Bench found prima facie considerable force in the contention of the learned Advocate for the petitioner that the purpose of the project was absolutely irrelevant and the parity of work is to be found in the modus operandi in the working and it was organisation of the venture, including the relations between the two limbs that was material; that analysis must be activity oriented and not motive based; motive is irrelevant as held by the Supreme Court in Paragraph 61 in the case of Bangalore Water Supply.
The Court further observed that in the case of Sanjit Roy, (AIR 1983 SC 328), while dealing with the famine relief work, it was accented by the Supreme Court that the said activity undertaken by the State was an industrial activity and the workmen employed therein were entitled to minimum wages because the work undertaken is useful to the society and is creation of assets or goods and material service beneficial to the society.
The aforesaid question is required to be considered firstly by considering the scope and object of the Industrial Disputes Act.
The scope and object of the Industrial Disputes Act is, as held by VR Krishna Iyer, J in the case of L.I.C.
of India v. D.J Bahadur, AIR 1980 SC 2181, as under :-  "The soul of the statute is not contract of employment, uniformity of service conditions or recruitment rules, but conscionable negotiations, conciliations and adjudication of disputes and differences animated by Industrial justice, to avoid a collusion which may spell choas imperil national efforts at increasing the tempo of production."
The question of industrial peace or question of avoiding a collusion which may spell choas and imperil national effort at increasing the tempo of production, would not arise in such type of relief undertaking where there is no question of increasing production.
The question in such schemes is only how after provide sustenance to the affected persons.
Further there is no question of avoiding collusion because the employment is offered to all, who are seriously affected by the natural calamities.
In such a situation, no question of relation or industrial dispute would arise.
Now we would refer to relevant paragraphs 37 and 38 of the judgment in the case of Bangalore Water Supply (supra).
They read as under :  "37.
A look at the definition, directory in hand decisions in head and Constitution, at heart, leads to some sure characteristics of an 'Industry', narrowing down the twili Zone of turbid controversy.
An Industry is a continuity, is an organized activity, is a purposeful pursuit - not any isolated adventure, desultory excursion or casual, fleeting engagement motivelessly undertaken.
Such is the common feature of a trade, business, calling, manufacture-mechanical or handicraft - based-service, employment, Industrial occupation or avocation.
For those who know English and are not given to the luxury of splitting semantic hairs, this conclusion argues itself.
The expression 'undertaking' cannot be torn off the words whose company it keeps.
If birds of a feather flock together and noscitur a sociis is a commonsense guide to construction, 'undertaking' must be read down to conform to the restrictive characteristic shared by the society of words before and after.
Nobody will torture 'undertaking in Section 2(j) to mean meditation or musheira which are spiritual and aesthetic undertaking.
Wide meanings must fall in line and discordance must be excluded from a sound system.
From Banerjee (AIR 1965 SC 58) to Safdarjang (AIR 1970 SC 1467) and beyond, this limited criterion has passed muster and we see no reason, after all the marathon of argument to shift from this position.
38.
Likewise, an 'Industry' cannot exist without co-operative endeavour between employer and employee.
No employer, no industry, no employee, no industry - not as a dogmatic proposition in economics but as an articulate major premise of the definition and the scheme of the Act, and as a necessary postulate of Industrial disputes and statutory resolution thereof.
After discussing various judgments, the Court further observed in paragraph 59 as under :  "59.
All the indicia of 'Industry' are packed into the judgment which condenses the conclusion tersely to hold that 'Industries' will cover 'branches of work that can be said to be analogous to the carrying out of a trade or business'.
The case, read as a whole contributes to Industrial jurisprudence, with special reference to the Act, a few positive facets and knocks down a few negative fixation.
Governments and Municipal and statutory bodies may run enterprises which do not for that reason ceases to be industries.
xxx xxx xxx xxx Any operation carried on in a manner analogous to trade or business may legitimately be statutory 'Industry'.
The popular limitations on the concept of industry do not amputate the ambit of legislative generosity in Section 2(j).
Industrial peace and the smooth supply to the community are among the aims and objects the legislature had in view, as also the nature, variety, range and areas of disputes between employers and employees.
These factors must inform the construction of the provision."
(Emphasis supplied) Applying the aforesaid ratio and considering relief undertakings, it is apparent that :  (a) it cannot be said to be continuing activity as it is casual activity arising because of some unforeseeable calamities.
Therefore, it cannot be said to be a systematic activity carried out for production or distribution of goods; (b) it cannot also be considered as an 'industry' because the said phrase is to be understood as analogous to the carrying out of a trade or business.
As held by the Supreme Court, the undertaking must be read down to conform to the restrictive characteristic shared by the society of words before and after.
Applying the said principles, it cannot be said to be having any characteristic of trade or business; and (c) even the employer-employee relations would not bear any resemblance to what is found in trade or business.
In the relief undertakings, there is no question of appointing employees by following any procedure of recruitment rules.
They are not appointed as such.
They are called on the site to work so that they could be provided livelihood.
Further, even if a person so physically handicapped and is not in a position to do the work, yet he would get the wages prescribed for the relief work while in a trade or business, reverse would be the position.
Unless the person is fit and competent, he would not be employed.
Further, in relief undertaking, the employees would come for work at their own sweet will.
Therefore, it would be difficult to hold that the relief undertakings bear any resemblance to what is found in trade or business with regard to employer-employee relations."
Lastly, while laying down triple elements for holding a particular activity, as an industry, the Court has emphasised in paragraph 161, item I(c), that the true focus is functional and the decisive test is the nature of the activity with special emphasis on the employer-employees relations.
Applying the aforesaid test also, in our view, the relief undertakings carried on by the State would not be covered by the word 'industry'.
The relief work is undertaken not to construct a road or a bridge but is undertaken to see that within a span of 5 kms.
of the affected area, the labourers would get something in cash or kind for their survival.
Instead of giving them doles, they are provided work and wages.
The reason is, as stated by the Division Bench in the case of JJ Shrimali (supra), not to hurt the dignity, self- respect and sentiments of those receiving the same.
This would be clear from the following observations :  "When a State Government during famine and drought undertakes relief works intended to provide the much needed relief to scarcity affected people living in affected areas, it is not embarking upon any Industrial or commercial enterprise but is merely trying to fulfil its obligation towards its people who are hit by nature's wrath.
If, instead of distributing doles which may hurt the dignity, self respect and sentiments of those receiving the same, the State Government introduces schemes which would provide temporary work to the affected people and pays for the same."
Further, in paragraph 161, item II, the Court has clarified that, although Section 2(j) uses words of widest amplitude, their meaning cannot be magnified to overreach itself and that 'undertaking' must suffer a contextual shrinkage.
Therefore, all organized activity, possessing the triple elements in Item I (i) systematic activity, (ii) organized by co-operation between employer and employee, and (iii) for the production and/or distribution of goods and services)' although not trade or business, may still be 'industry', provided the nature of the activity, namely, the employer-employee basis, bears resemblance to what we find in trade or business.
As discussed above, in relief undertaking employer-employee relations would not bear resemblance to what we find in trade or business.
In any set of circumstances, the Court in the very judgment, as emphasised above, made it clear that the discussion in the aforesaid judgment was not exhaustive but to the extent covered by the debate at the Bar and that in a world of relativity where law and life interlace, a search for absolutes is a self-condemned exercise.
Hence also the relief undertaking as discussed above would not be covered by the word 'industry', as interpreted by the Supreme Court, in the case of Bangalore Water Supply (supra).
12.
Whether judgment in the case of JJ Shrimali requires reconsideration because of the decisions in the case of Sanjit Roy (AIR 1983 SC 328) and in the case of Des Raj, (AIR 1988 SC 1182) :  Before considering this contention it would be appropriate to quote observations from the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of CIT v. Sun Engineering Works (P) Ltd., 1992(4) SCC 363, wherein the Court has held that the judgment of the Supreme Court must be read as a whole and the observations from the judgment have to be considered in the light of the questions which were before the Court and that it is not proper to regard a word, a clause or a sentence occurring in a judgment as containing a full exposition of the law on a question when question did not even fall to be answered in that judgment.
The relevant observations are as under : "It is neither desirable nor permissible to pick out a word or a sentence from the judgment of this Court, divorced from the context of the question under consideration and treat it to be the complete 'law' declared by the Court.
The judgment must be read as a whole and the observations from the judgment have to be considered in the light of the questions which were before the Court.
A decision of the Court takes its colour from the questions involved in the case in which it is rendered and while applying the decision to a later case, the Courts must carefully try to ascertain the true principle laid down by the decision of this Court and not to pick out words or sentences from the judgment, divorced from the context of the questions under consideration by this Court, to support their reasonings.
In Madhav Rao Scindia v. Union of India, 1971(1) SCC 85, this Court cautioned : It is not proper to regard a word, a clause or a sentence occurring in a judgment of the Supreme Court, divorced from its context, as containing a full exposition of the law on a question when the question did not even fall to be answered in that judgment."
Keeping this aforesaid principle in mind, we would consider the decision rendered by the Supreme Court in the case of Sanjit Roy (AIR 1983 SC 328).
In that case, the Court considered wither the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 is applicable to the workmen employed in the famine relief works.
For deciding the said question, the Court mainly relied upon Article 23 of the Constitution of India and held that where a person provides labour or service to another for remuneration which is less than the minimum wage, the labour or service provided by him clearly falls within the meaning of the words 'forced labour' and attracts the condemnation of Article 23.
Every person who provides labour or service to another is entitled at least to the minimum wages and if anything less than the minimum wage is paid to him he can complain of violation of his fundamental right under Article 23.
No doubt, in that case, the Court has observed that the relief work undertaken by the State by way of famine relief is useful to the society and productive in terms of creation of some asset or wealth and when the State exacts labour or service from the affected persons for carrying out such work, for example, a bridge or a road which has utility for the society and which is going to augment the wealth of the State, there ran be no justification for the State not to pay the minimum wages to the affected persons.
As stated earlier, in the aforesaid case, the Court has not at all considered the provisions of Section 2(j) of the Industrial Disputes Act or the definition of the word 'industry'.
Therefore, in our view, the aforesaid decision would not have any bearing in deciding the question as to whether the relief work undertaken by the State Government would be 'industry' or not.
At this stage, we should not lose sight of the subsequent judgment rendered by the Supreme Court in the case of Delhi Development Horticulture Employees' Union, 1992(4) SCC 99.
In that case, the Court has specifically observed that in the context of such schemes, it is wrong to approach the problems of those employed under such schemes with a view to providing them with full employment and guaranteeing equal pay for equal work, and if such interpretation is given, it would benefit a few at the cost of the many starving poor for whom the schemes are meant.
It may force the State to wind up the existing schemes and forbid them from introducing the new ones, for want of sources.
In our view, these observations would aptly apply to such type of relief undertakings during such calamities.
Even if the State intends to give full-fledged benefits to a few at the cost of the many starving poor the probable result may be divesting and/or riotous.
Similarly, in case of Des Raj (supra), in one appeal the appellant before the Supreme Court was working as a foreman in the Mechanical Construction Division under the Irrigation Department and in another appeal, the appellant was working as T. Mate in the PWD Drainage Division.
Before the Court, the question was whether the Irrigation Department of the Government is 'industry' or not.
The Court observed that, as the amended statutory definition is not yet in force, the parent definition and judicial pronouncements have to be referred to for finding the law.
The Court thereafter referred to various decisions including the decision in the ease of Bangalore Water Supply (supra) and observed that the main functions of the Irrigation Department when subjected to the Dominant Nature Test clearly ?
come within the ambit of industry.
In our view, in the judgment, the Court was not required to consider the question which is posed in this matter.
The question was altogether different and was based upon the projects carried out by the Irrigation Department of the concerned State and the said judgment would have no bearing on the question which is required to be dealt with in this matter.
Similarly, in our view, the decision of the Patna High Court in the case of Bihar Relief Committee (54 FJR 385), would not require much consideration because in that case the petitioner, Bihar Relief Committee, was established as a society under the Societies Registration Act with the sole object rendering relief to the suffering caused by natural calamities like flood, drought, epidemic etc. to humanity.
After considering various facts, the Court observed :  "The petitioner has undertaken minor irrigation schemes in the State for which it opened various centres for constructing open bore wells, tanks and tube wells after obtaining the advice of technical experts.
It stores articles for such works and maintains plants and machineries for which depreciation, wear and tear and running charges are charged.
In supplying pipes to the farmers it charges them the costs incurred in transportation and storage.
All these establish that the activities of the petitioner are systematic."
The Court has finally held that the Bihar Relief Committee is an industry within the meaning of Industrial Disputes Act.
In the present case, in our view, the work is not organised by a society but it is organised by the State in discharge of its inalienable duty.
Further, the relief undertaking as stated, are casual and not continuing one.
Lastly, in the case of Umayammal v. State of Kerala, 1983(1) LLJ 267, the Kerala High Court considered the question whether the provisional or temporary employees working in Government Departments, Government Companies, Statutory Corporation and Local Bodies were governed by the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act.
There also, the Court relied upon the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Bangalore Water Supply (supra) and it is made clear that the sovereign functions of the State cannot be included in industry, but if there are industrial units severable from the essential functions and possess and entity of their own, it may be plausible to hold that the employees of those units are workmen and those undertakings are industries.
In our view, the aforesaid decision of the Kerala High Court would not advance the contentions raised by the learned Advocates for the petitioners.
Conclusions : In the result, we entirely agree with the decision rendered by this Court in the case of JJ Shrimali, 1989(2) GLH 12, and it does not call for any reconsideration.
For the reasons recorded above, we answer the questions referred to us, as under : Re : Question No. 1 The employment offered to the persons on the scarcity relief works as undertaken by the State cannot be said to be employment in 'industry' as defined by section 2(j) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 mainly because, (a) it is the primary and inalienable function of the State to provide livelihood to the persons who are affected by the natural calamities such as famine, earthquake, epidemic, flood, scarcity, etc., and (b) admittedly, the relief work is not a 'business' or 'trade' and with regard to the 'undertaking', the activity is not analogous to trade or business or that it is not a systematic activity but is carried out casually at different places depending on the calamities in a particular area.
Re : Question No. 2 The decision of the Division Bench of this Court in the case of JJ Shrimali, 1989(2) GLH 12, that scarcity relief work undertaken by the State is not 'industry' as defined by Section 2(j) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, is well sustained.
Questions answered.