Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The writ petitioner is aggrieved by the enlistment of the 5th respondent by the Andaman & Nicobar Islands Administration for her nomination against the seat reserved by the Directorate of Medical Education, Government of Kerala, for admission to MBBS course of the academic session 2004-2005.
2.
The relevant facts are these.
On June 9, 2004 the competent authority published a notice inviting applications from several categories of candidates mentioned in the notice.
One of the categories of candidates was of Malayalee origin for whom one seat of MBBS course was kept reserved by the Government of Kerala for the academic session 2004-2005.
Both the petitioner and the 5th respondent applied for their selection as candidates of Malayalee origin.
A provisional merit list was prepared and published; while the 5th respondent secured the second merit position, the petitioner secured the third position.
The petitioner collected information that the 5th respondent, though not a person of Malayalee origin, fraudulently collected the origin certificate and local certificate by putting her father's influence into use.
Contending that because of the fraudulently obtained certificates the petitioner was not eligible to be considered for placement in the merit list, the petitioner took out the present writ petition dated July 29, 2004.
3.
By order dated July 29, 2004 the parties were directed to maintain status quo till today, and direction was given for hearing of the writ petition today.
4.
Submissions made by the learned advocate for the petitioner are the following.
Admittedly, the father of the 5th respondent is not a person of Malayalee origin, though her mother in such a person.
She is only 50% Malayalee; hence she cannot be considered a person of Malayalee origin.
Her father holds a position, and by putting such position into use he obtained origin certificate and local certificate for her from the competent authorities.
The origin certificate was obtained after July 13, 2004 and such certificate was also cancelled by the competent authority by an order dated July 14, 2004.
Hence the application filed by her on or before June 30, 2004 was simply not in form.
The provisions contained in the prospectus issued by the Government of Kerala for admission to MBBS course, and on which learned advocates for the respondents place reliance, have no manner of application to the present case.
5.
None appears for the first respondent (Union of India).
6.
Learned advocate for respondents 2 to 4 submits that in view of the provisions contained in the prospectus issued by the Government of Kerala, there can be no doubt about the fact that a person would be considered a person of Malayalee origin, if his or her mother is a person of Malayalee origin.
His contention is that in view of the provisions contained in the prospectus, both the father and the mother of a person need not be of Malayalee origin for the purpose of determining whether the person concerned is a person of Malayalee origin for getting the benefits of reservation in the MBBS course of the Government of Kerala.
7.
Submissions made by learned advocate for respondents 5 and 6 are these.
In terms of the notice inviting applications, a candidate was to submit three certificates :- (i) a certificate of origin; (ii) a certificate regarding continuous study for a period of 10 years; (iii) a local certificate.
The certificate of origin was issued by the competent authority in favour of the 5th respondent on June 14, 2004 and the documents at Annexure P-6 and P-7 to the writ petition have no connection at all with the certificate of origin.
They are related to the question of grant of local certificate by the competent authority to the 5th respondent.
The pre-42 category local certificate was issued in favour of the 5th respondent on August 28, 2002, and on the basis thereof she submitted her application.
Dispute arose regarding her entitlement to get a pre-42 category local certificate.
So she applied for ordinary local certificate on July 13, 2004.
Such certificate was issued by the competent authority on July 13, 2004.
She produced it before the authority concerned at once.
Her pre-42 category local certificate was, however, cancelled by the authority by order dated July 14, 2004.
8.
After hearing the learned advocates for the parties and after going through the materials on record, I find that there is no scope to give any relief to the writ petitioner.
9.
I am unable to agree with the learned advocate for the petitioner that unless both the father and the mother of a person are persons of Malayalee origin, the person cannot be considered a candidate of Malayalee origin.
The position is absolutely clear from the provisions contained in the prospectus issued by the Government of Kerala.
In clause B(a) of paragraph 1 of the prospectus it has been specifically mentioned that in order to prove that a candidate is an Indian citizen of Kerala origin (for the limited purpose of proving eligibility under the relevant clause regarding nativity), the candidate has to produce a certificate from the competent authority to show that he/she or his/her mother/father was born in Kerala.
So there is no room to contend she would not be considered a candidate of Malayalee origin (of Kerala origin).
In the instant case, admittedly, the mother of the 5th respondent is a person of Kerala origin i.e. Malayalee origin.
I am unable to appreciate the contention that the 5th respondent should be regarded as a Malayalee origin only to the extent of 50% since her father apparently is not a person of Malayalee origin.
Hence I fund that for the purpose in question the 5th respondent is a candidate of Malayalee origin.
10.
As to the question of maintainability of the application filed by the 5th respondent.
I find that the application was filed by her within the date specified in the notice and such application was accompanied by the origin certificate dated June 14, 2004 issued by the Tehasildar, Port Blair (a competent authority in terms of the notification) and the local certificate that had been issued by the Revenue Authority on August 28, 2002.
On the basis of these certificates the 5th respondent was selected and placed in the merit list.
The local certificate produced by the 5th respondent was, however, subsequently cancelled by the competent authority on the ground that she was not entitled to be considered a pre-42 local person of these Islands.
Admittedly, before such cancellation the competent authority had issued another local certificate in favour of the 5th respondent, and it was produced by her before the competent authority in connection with her empanelment for the course.
The further admitted position is that the local certificate produced by the 5th respondent subsequently was accepted by the competent authority, and it has been found to be proper.
11.
In view of the facts stated in the preceding paragraph.
I find absolutely no merit in the contention that the origin and local certificates were obtained by the 5th respondent by exercising fraud or by making misrepresentation of facts.
The validity of the origin certificate and the subsequently obtained local certificate has not been questioned in this writ petition and I am of the view that there is also no scope to question their validity in a writ proceeding.
12.
In view of the above facts and circumstances, I find that respondents 1 to 4 did not act illegally in selecting and placing the 5th respondent in the merit list.
So I find no reason to admit the writ petition, and call upon the respondents to file affidavits; it is accordingly hereby dismissed.
In the facts and circumstances of the case, I am not inclined to make any order for costs in favour of the respondents.
Hence there will be no order for costs in this writ petition.
Urgent certified xerox copies of this judgment and order shall be supplied to the parties if applied for.
Xerox copies of this judgment and order, duly countersigned by the Assistant Registrar (Court), shall also be supplied to the learned advocates for the parties, on usual undertakings.
Order accordingly.