Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The writ petitioner is aggrieved by the decision dated October 29th, 1999, whereby her request for revoking the decision taken by her employer to accept her offer for voluntary retirement was rejected by the competent authority.
2.
She joined Damodar Valley Corporation as medical officer on April 30th, 1979.
In 1995 she was promoted to the post of senior medical officer.
On February 7th, 1997 the corporation invited options for switching over from existing contributory provident fund scheme to general provident fund scheme.
Such steps were taken in the wake of introduction of the pension scheme.
She did not exercise her option.
3.
On May 7th, 1999 she applied for an opportunity to switch over to general provident fund scheme.
On June 14th, 1999 she applied for voluntary retirement in terms of the scheme floated by the corporation in the meantime.
She renewed her request to permit her to switch over to general provident fund scheme.
On July 23rd, 1999 her offer for voluntary retirement was accepted by the corporation; in terms of the decision she was to retire on October 31st, 1999.
4.
Then by letter dated August 2nd, 1999 the corporation informed her about rejection of her request to permit her to switch over to general provident fund scheme.
In such circumstances on October 13th, 1999 she applied for withdrawing her offer to take voluntary retirement.
As already mentioned, by the decision dated October, 29th, 1999 the corporation rejected her such request.
5.
The only question that has arisen for decision is whether the petitioner had an enforceable right to ask her employer to rescind the decision dated July 23rd, 1999.
6.
Admittedly, under the scheme she did not have aright to ask her employer to rescind its decision whereby it had accepted her offer for voluntary retirement.
The decision brought into existence a concluded contract between the parties.
In the absence of any legal right she was not entitled to ask the corporation to waive its rights that accrued to it from such contract.
7.
Her counsel contends that the right accrued from the obligation cast on the corporation by the Constitution of India, art. 14, to act without discrimination while treating its employees.
He points out that in as many as four cases the corporation rescinded the acceptance decisions after considering similar requests.
Refusal to act by the corporation in the same manner has been criticized by him on the strength of the decisions reported at AIR 1971 SC 1650 (State of Gujarat and Anr. v M/s. Krishna Cinema & Ors.), AIR.
1978 SC 1457 (PN Kaushal etc. v. Union of India & Ors.), 1979(1) LLJ 156 (SC) (Manager, Government Branch Press v. DB Belliappa), and 1983 Lab IC 1670 (SC), (Sengara Singh & Ors. v. The State of Punjab & Ors.).
Counsel for the respondents contends (a) that once accepted there was no scope to withdraw the offer, and (b) that there were good reasons for not accepting her request, though in some cases similar requests were accepted.
He cited as many as eight authorities including the one in State of Haryana & Ors. v. Ram Kumar Mann, 1997 AIR SCW 1574.
8.
I shall not be thought disrespectful to the authorities cited if I forbear from reference to all of them, because the propositions explained in them regarding (a) obligation of employer to act without discrimination, as required by the Constitution of India, art. 14, and (b) scope of withdrawal of offer to go on voluntary retirement, are accepted by both the counsel.
I think, on the facts of this case reference only to Ram Kumar Mann case (1997 AIR SCW 1574), cited by counsel for the respondents, will be sufficient.
In that case their Lordships of the Supreme Court held that the doctrine of discrimination is founded upon existence of an the manner demand by the petitioner gave her an enforceable right.
9.
It is undisputed that similar requests made by four employees were allowed by the corporation.
I find no reason to appreciate the submission of counsel for the respondents that by mistake wrong decisions were taken, because this is not the case of the corporation in its affidavit Its case rather is that while vigilance aspect of the orders was clean, it was not so in the petitioner's case.
I think more discussion to compare the petitioner's case with the cases of the cited four will lead the issue to a wrong direction; for the foundation of the petitioner's demand was her employer's obligation or duty, if any, to waive its already accrued absolute contractual right, and not her any existing right or privilege.
To my mind, it will be an extreme proposition to say that as to waiver of its contractual rights also the corporation is under the same obligations as are generally cast on it by the Constitution of India, art. 14.
I can see it as an obligation or duty, only when the petitioner shows her corresponding right or privilege; she fails to show a 14 to may put it, she claims it in the reserve way.
In my judgment, putting art. such an use will be equivalent to its misuse.
Even otherwise, I do not feel persuaded into accepting her case as one of discrimination without valid reason.
Given the nature of the right claimed, and the obligation visualized, by the petitioner, I am inclined to hold that the vigilance aspect was a good ground not to treat her in the same manner as was adopted for the named four.
10.
For the foregoing reasons the writ petition fails, and it is hereby dismissed.
There will be no order for costs.
11.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this judgment and order may be supplied to the parties, if applied for.
Petition dismissed.