MM Aggarwal, J - As per the petitioner, he was appointed as Constable on 2851973 in Haryana Armed Police.
He was a good hockey player.
He was promoted as Head Constable on adhoc basis vide order dated 5121980 being a good hockey player.
The promotion was against the quota fixed and against 10% posts which are required to be filled by the Constables who are considered suitable.
The petitioner claims that he is entitled to the seniority from the date he was promoted as Head Constable to which the respondent State did not agree, therefore, this writ petition was filed for direction to the respondents determining the seniority of the petitioner as Head Constable and to consider his case for confirmation under Rule 1318 of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934 and to depute him to join intermediate school course.
2.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the State, the facts were not denied.
On the asking of the Court, an affidavit had been filed by the Superintendent of Police, And District And- respondent No. 4 to the effect that the petitioner had been promoted to the rank of Head Constable w.e.f.
5121980 being a good hockey player.
However, it was purely on ad hoc basis.
In this affidavit, it as however, admitted that he was within 10% quota on the day he was promoted as Head Constable but it was averred in the affidavit that his case was approved for confirmation in the rank of Head Constable w.e.f.
3111985 i.e. the date from which his junior/senior were so confirmed.
In this affidavit it was further averred that adhoc services had been regularised in the rank of Head Constable w.e.f.
5121980 whereas confirmation in the rank of Head Constable had been w.e.f.
3111985.
3.
Annexure P-1 and P-2 show that promotion of Jaswant Singh as Head Constable was purely temporary with no right of seniority.
Rule 1318 of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934 as applicable wherein it has been provided as under :-  1318.
Probationary period of promotion :- All Police Officers promoted in the rank shall be on probation for two years, provided that the appointing authority may by a special order in each, permit periods of officiating service to count towards the period of probation.
On the conclusion of the probationary period, the competent authority may either confirm the probationer or revert him or, if so thinks fit, extend the period of probation by one year in the aggregate and on the conclusion of the extended period of probation.
While on probation officers may be reverted or their period of probation may be extended without departmental proceedings.
Such reversion shall not be considered reduction in rank for the purposes of rule 164.
This rule shall not apply to constables and Sub-Inspectors promoted to the selection grade whose cases are governed by rules 135 and 13.14)."
In the present case, the petitioner was promoted as Head Constable on 5121980.
He was never reverted.
He had been promoted within 10% quota under Rule 138 (2) as such he shall be entitled to seniority as Head Constable from the date he was promoted as Head Constable.
4.
No arguments have been addressed as far as deputing the petitioner to join intermediate school course was concerned.
5.
From the admitted position which has been further clarified by affidavit of SP And dated 872002, this writ petition is allowed to the extent that the petitioner shall be entitled to the seniority as Head Constable from 511980.
Petition allowed.