HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner is a Group based in Jalandhar and running several vernacular newspapers.
On 5101985, it served a notice under Section 25N of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred to as the `Act') on respondents 4 to 8, informing them that their services were no longer required after the expiry of three months as they had been declared surplus and that they should collect their dues.
A copy of one such notice issued to respondent No. 4 is appended as Annexure P-1.
The petitioner also filled form PA (Annexure P-2) provided under Rule 75-A of the Industrial Disputes (Punjab) Rules, 1958 before the appropriate Government that as it proposed to retrench the services of five workmen, a direction was being solicited under Section 25N of the Act as the total strength of the workers on the Establishment was 93.
This notice was served on the appropriate Government on 8101985.
It appears that a reply to this notice was received vide telegram, Annexure P-3, dated 3121985 from the appropriate Government, informing the petitioner that as the number of workers employed on the establishment were less than 100, the provisions of Section 25 N of the Act were not attracted.
The petitioner thereafter submitted a letter dated 5121985, Annexure P-4 to the Additional Labour Commissioner, Punjab that as a matter of fact, the workers' strength on the establishment was 304, as such the matter with regard to the applicability of Section 25N of the Act was required to be reconsidered.
It appears that without waiting for any reply from the appropriate Government, five workers were retrenched after the expiry of three months from the date of notice, Annexure P-1.
The retrenched workmen thereafter raised an Industrial Dispute, which was referred to the Labour Court vide Annexures P-6 to P-10.
The reference orders, Annexures P-6 to P-10 have been impugned in the present proceedings.
2.
A reply has been filed by the respondent-appropriate Government and it has been highlighted that the provisions of Section 25N of the Act were not applicable in the light of the fact that the petitioner itself had in Form PA given the strength of its employees as 13 and that accepting the strength to be the correct one, it had been pointed out by the appropriate Government that the aforesaid provision was not applicable.
3.
On these admitted facts, the learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that the respondent-workmen were the employees of the Punjab Kesri Printing Press and as this was one unit of the larger establishment consisting of 304 employees in all, the provisions of Section 25N of the Act were applicable.
He has in this connection contended that the Hind Samachar Group had 304 employees and as such the provisions of Section 25 N of the Act were applicable.
4.
As against this, Ms. Rita Kohli, has argued that from the reading of Annexure P-2, i.e. form PA and the particulars annexed therewith, it was clear that it was the case of the petitioner itself that the printing press was one industrial unit having 93 employees and as such accepting the case of the petitioner as it was, the Appropriate Government had pointed out to the petitioner that the provisions of Section 25 N of the Act were not applicable as the workers strength was less than 100.
She has accordingly urged that had the petitioners committed a mistake in notifying its workers strength, it ought to have filled in another form PA so that the matter could be reconsidered in the light of the new facts that the petitioner might bring before the Appropriate Government.
5.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the record very carefully.
6.
The facts stated above have not been denied.
The petitioner had itself submitted that form PA (Annexure P-2) with a large number of annexures appended therewith to show the strength of workers being 93.
It is also the conceded position that the deeming Clause in Section 25 N of the Act with regard to the presumed sanction given by the Appropriate Government, would not be applicable in the present case as the application Annexure P-2, had been filed on 5101985 and the telegram, Annexure P-3, had been received on 3121985 i.e. within sixty days.
I am, therefore, of the opinion, as has been contended by Ms. Rita Kohli, that had the petitioner felt that a mistake had been committed, the proper procedure would have been to file an amended form PA, giving the correct strength of the unit.
Annexure P-4, on which the reliance has been placed to contend that the total strength had been conveyed to the Government as noted in form PA (Annexure P-2) does not meet with the particulars envisaged under Form PA.
It is relevant that in Form PA, a great deal of information has to be provided.
Annexure P-4 does not meet these requirement.
7.
In this view of the matter, it is clear that the provisions of Section 25N of the Act were not applicable to the petitioner's case.
8.
There is thus no merit in the writ petition.
It is accordingly dismissed.
Petition dismissed.