Ashutosh Mohunta, J - Challenge in this writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India is to the order dated 1012001 (Annexure P-8) by which the petitioner has been retired from service on medical grounds.
2.
The petitioner was employed as a J.B.T.
Teacher and she joined the service as a PTPS Teacher at Senior Secondary School, Thermal Colony, Panipat (for short `the School') on 22.2.1986.
Her services were regularised on 2371988.
While in service she suffered infection in her eyes and was medically treated at P.G.I., Chandigarh.
Ultimately, she was declared 100 percent physically handicapped in relation to her vision on 2172000.
On account of this handicap, Smt. Shashi, Kiran Verma was retired from service vide letter dated 1012001 (Annexure P-8).
This order has been impugned by the petitioner in the present writ petition.
3.
It has been contended on behalf of the petitioner that the impugned order (Annexure P-8) is illegal in view of the contents of the letter dated 1822000 (Annexure P-9), issued by the Deputy Director, State Employment Office, Haryana, wherein the posts of Teachers of all categories have been identified for the blind.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has also placed reliance on the decision dated 1122004 of this Court in C.W.P.
No. 13730 of 1998 (Bani Singh v. State of Haryana and others) wherein the State of Haryana was directed to adjust the petitioner therein, on his having become disabled, against any suitable post or create a supernumerary post for him until a suitable post is made available in view of the provisions of Section 47(1) of the Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995 (for short `the Act')  4.
The respondents filed written statement to controvert the contentions raised in the writ petition.
It has been contended on behalf of the respondents that as per Rule 5.8 of the Punjab Civil Service Rules (Vol. II) (for short `the Rules') a Government employee, who has submitted a medical certificate of incapacity for further service, shall be invalidated from service.
Attention has also been drawn to the provisions of Rule 11 in order to contend that such employee will be entitled for invalid pension.
On this ground, it has been argued on behalf of the respondents that the petitioner is not entitled to continue in service but she is eligible for invalidity pension as per rules.
5.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and on going through the case file, I find merit in the contention raised on behalf of the petitioner.
6.
Section 47(1) of the Act is reproduced hereunder for ready reference :-  "47.
Non-discrimination in Government employees :  (1) No establishment shall dispense with or reduce in rank, an employee who acquires a disability during his service :  Provided that, if an employee, after acquiring disability is not suitable for the post he was holding, could be shifted to some other post with the same pay scale and service benefits :- Provided further that if it is not possible to adjust the employee against any post, he may be.
kept on a supernumerary post until a suitable post is available or he attains the age of superannuation, whichever is earlier."
7.
As per the afore-quoted provision of the Act, a suitable post to an employee, who becomes disabled during his service tenure, is to be provided.
In case a suitable post is not available, then a supernumerary is required to be created for him/her.
As already mentioned in the earlier part of the judgment, as per letter dated 1822000 (Annexure P-9) issued by the Deputy Director, State Employment Office, Haryana (Handicapped Section), Chandigarh, the posts of teachers of all categories have been identified to be suitable for the blind/deaf dumb and physically disabled.
In the present case the petitioner was working as a Teacher prior to her premature superannuation from service.
In view of the contents of the said letter, she could easily be allowed to continue in service on her becoming blind.
8.
Consequently, I allow the writ petition and set aside the order dated 1012001 (Annexure P-8) whereby the petitioner has been retired from service on medical grounds.
It is ordered that the petitioner be allowed to continue on the post of Teacher, which she was holding prior to her superannuation.
In case suitable post of Teacher is not available for the time-being, then a supernumerary post for her be created with effect from the date she was retired from service until she is adjusted against a suitable regular post.
Petition allowed.