JS Sekhon, J - The petitioner seeks quashing of order Annexure P.8 of the General Manager, Union Bank of India cancelling offer of his appointment as Probation Officer in terms of award of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal, Chandigarh due to his failure to join the post on or before 17th November, 1986 on the ground of arbitrariness and against rules and regulation is governing his service conditions.
2.
Brief facts relevant for the disposal of this writ petition are that the petitioner is working as a Clerk-cum-Cashier since the last more than 15 years ie since 1976 under the respondent-Bank.
The Bank invited applications from eligible candidates for the post of Probation Officer vide advertisement/publication in the Indian Express, Delhi Edition dated 10th March, 1976.
At the relevant time there existed promotion agreement between the respondent-Bank and its employees represented by All India Union Bank Employees Federation signed on 22nd October, 1975 in terms of which the bank has codified the practice, procedure and understanding regarding appointments to certain posts carrying higher status in the same cadre and promotion from subordinate cadre to clerical cadre or from clerical cadre to officer cadre.
Chapter IV of this agreement contains the policy of promotion and direct recruitment.
Thereafter on 7th September, 1976 the respondent-Bank in terms of the promotion agreement and with reference to the above referred advertisement dated 10th March 1976 for recruitment of the Probation Officer issued Staff Circular.
The relevant portion of the staff circular reads as under :  "As per clause 4.2(c) of our Promotion Agreement 25% of the estimated total number of vacancies of Officer Grade II cadre will have to be filled in accordance with the provisions of Banking Service Commission Act, 1975.
Till the time the Act comes into force the aforesaid 25% of the estimated total number of vacancies in Officer Grade II Cadre will be filled up by direct recruitment from outsider.
The management wishes to clarify that even insiders can appear for the test for this 25% of vacancies.
This is apart from 50% by way of promotion as per clause 4.2(a) of our Promotion Agreement and 25% of appointment as per Clause 4.2(b) of our Promotion Agreement.
The insiders who conform to the norms as applicable to outsiders should forward their applications to Recruitment Cell through the Regional Manager of the respective Region.
No weightage will be given for the banking experience".
3.
The petitioner applied for the post of Probation Officer and was placed at serial No. 41 in the merit list.
The validity period of this merit list was extended upto 2931980 by the respondent-Bank vide its staff circular No. 2134 (Annexure P.3) addressed to all its branches.
The petitioner thus contends that vacancies to be filled in accordance with the Promotion Agreement from amongst the employees who were eligible to compete for direct recruitment quota was 25% of 386 i.e. 96, therefore, he was entitled to be promoted as Probation Officer having secured position at serial No. 41 on the merit list.
The management of the respondent-Bank, however, did not promote the petitioner and the successfully raised a dispute under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
The Industrial Tribunal gave the award dated 7th April, 1986 Annexure P4 in favour of the petitioner and directed the management to offer the petitioner the next available vacancy in the cadre of Officer Grade II.
After award of the Tribunal the respondent-Bank vide its letter dated 8.10.1986 offered the appointment as Probation Officer to the petitioner with the stipulation that he should resign from the bank before accepting this offer and his basic salary was fixed at Rs. 1175/-, which was less by Rs. 175/- than the salary drawn by the petitioner in the year 1986.
The petitioner was shocked at this offer as there was no Rules and regulations to resign from the first post while accepting the promotion post by direct recruitment at the relevant time.
The petitioner made various representations direct to the Bank as also through the Asstt.
Labour Commissioner, Central, Chandigarh, pointing out the harassment meted out to him, but of no avail.
The matter was again referred to the Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Chandigarh on 23rd September, 1989 for clarification/modification of the terms next available vacancy dated 7th April, 1986 figuring in the award.
The Industrial Tribunal vide its order dated 4th March, 1988 (Annexure P.7) declined the reference holding that it has no power of review.
The petitioner again approached the bank directly as well as through the Asstt.
Labour Commissioner for implementation of the award but the bank persisted in its unjust and unfair attitude and vide order Annexure P.8 it withdrew the offer already made vide Annexure P5.
As the respondent-Bank was not implementing the award of the Tribunal, the petitioner again approached the Assistant Labour Commissioner vide letter dated 11101989 (Annexure P.9).
The Assistant Labour Commissioner through letter dated 21101988 called, the Regional Manger of the Bank for implementing the award but nothing fruitful came out of his efforts.
The Asstt.
Labour Commissioner then requested the Ministry of Labour to launch prosecution against the Bank for harassing the petitioner and refusing to implement the award.
The petitioner inter alia challenged the said office order Annexure P.8 on the following grounds :  (a) That the action of the respondent-Bank in asking the petitioner to first resign and then join as Probationary Officer is discriminatory and hit by Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
(b) That the action of the respondent of withdrawing the offer made to the petitioner by letter Annexure P.8 is again without authority and discriminatory.
(c) That the respondent-Bank is bound to implement the award of the Central Tribunal.
The Bank being a State cannot be unfair and unjust its employees.
(d) That the award did not envisage that the petitioner should resign first before accepting the offer.
The demand of resignation is, therefore, contradictory to the award and thus is unjust and invalid.
(e) That the non-appointment of the petitioner as a Probationary Officer in the year 1978 and as having been side track from the merit list is without any basis criteria or qualification or logics.
This denial of appointment is against the Agreement enforced between the management of the respondent-Bank and its employees.
(f) That the award, Annexure P4, in so far as it directs that the petitioner be offered appointment against the next available vacancy in the Cadre of Officer II is unjust.
The petitioner had been, wrongfully denied the appointment.
The stand of the petitioner has beern found as correct by the Industrial Tribunal.
The petitioner was entitled to be appointed with effect from the date other candidates on the same merit list were appointed.
(g) That at any rate there were vacancies in existence in 1978 which had not been filled even till the date of making of the award, Annexure P4.
The petitioner was entitled to be appointed against one of the existing vacancies.
4.
In the return filed on behalf of respondents 1 and 2 by Shri Gursharan Singh, Chief Manager (Personnel) Union Batik of India, Zonal Officer (North), the respondents challenged the maintainability of this petition on the ground of laches contending that the petitioner had approached this Court after lapse of about eleven years.
It was also pointed out that Writ Petition No. 23 of 1987 of Shri Sunil Kumar Chopra whose name in the selection list figured at serial No. 21 was dismissed by the Delhi High Court vide Annexure R 1 on the ground of laches.
The respondents also pointed out the dismissal of Writ Petitions 2762 of 1987 and 1852 of 1988 filed by Shri BN Gupta and Shri TR Sahni respectively seeking the same relief by the Delhi High Court vide orders copy of which are Annexures R.3 and R.4.
Maintainability of the writ petition was also challenged on the ground that no legal issue is involved but it rests on the factual matrix.
It was also maintained that the petitioner had not challenged the original award or subsequent award of 1986 and is thus estopped from going out of the purview of these awards.
On merits it was explained that in the year 1978 promotion to the post of Probation Officer from clerical cadre was made from two sources in terms of Promotion Agreement.
50% of these posts were filled on the basis of the seniority in terms of para No. 4.2(a) of the Agreement, 25% vacancies filled up on the basis of departmental test and interview in terms of para 42(b) of the Agreement and the remaining 25% vacancies were filled by direct recruitment as Probationer Officer from outside.
It was admitted that insider serving clerical employees could also apply for direct quota of 25% in case they conform to the norms of direct recruit-Probationary Officer.
It was explained that the promotions were made divisionwise.
The break-up of the vacancies available regionwise for the posts is given as under :  Northern Region, No of vacancies to be filled in  Total 50% *(s) 4.2(a) 25% *(m) 4.2(b) 25% *(DR) 4.2(c) Delhi 44 22 11 11 Punjab 14 7 4 3, Haryana 9 5 2 2 H.P.
5 3 1 1 J&K 2 1 1 - Total 74 38 19 17 *(s) Seniority (m) Merit (DR) Direct Recruitment It was further averred that against the above mentioned 17 vacancies of Direct Recruitment, 12 candidates from the reserved category list of 51 were offered appointments.
Out of these 17 candidates belonging to both the categories, four persons did not report for appointment orders.
List of reserved categories and general categories was attached as Annexure R1 It was also submitted that offer for appointment to the posts of Probationary Officer from the above mentioned list were also sent from serial Nos. 6 to 31 of the list excluding four lady candidates mentioned against serial Nos. 18, 23, 25 and 27 and four other male candidates mentioned against serial Nos. 7, 16, 21 and 30 who were in the employment of the bank as clerks in the year 1978.
The offer to the candidates mentioned against serial Nos. 8 to 14 were given for posting in UP which is not a part of Northern Region and offers to candidates mentioned at serial Nos. 15, 17, 19, 20, 22, 24, 26, 28, 29 and 31 were made for posting in Bombay Region, which is also not a part of Northern Region.
No offer was given to any candidates whose names appear after serial No. 31.
It was further explained that offer for appointment of the above referred four male persons and four ladies were not given in the year 1978 and the respondent-Bank wanted to accommodate these persons against the vacancies to be identified in early 1979 in Northern Region but in view of setting up of Bank Service Recruitment Board in January, 1979, the existing panel including the above mentioned eight candidates and also the candidates beyond serial No. 31 could not be utilised.
Under these circumstances the remaining candidates although on the merit list could not be offered appointments.
The respondents, however, admitted that the petitioner did raise industrial dispute against the respondent-Bank which was referred to the Tribunal who returned award in favour of the petitioner workman with a direction to offer next available vacancy in the cadre of Officer Grade II but maintained that offer was given to the petitioner vide Annexure P5 on 8.10.1986 to join this promotion post in the next available vacancy accrued after 741986 but he deliberately failed to join the petitioner and thus is not entitled to any relief but to laches and that the bank had fully complied with the award of the Tribunal.
5.
The petitioner was allowed to place additional affidavit on record through CM No. 6729 of 1993 wherein he reiterated its own stand while controverting that of the respondents contending that since there were 17 posts in the Northern Region 12 could not be given to reserved category people especially in the absence of any such reservation policy under the relevant Rules.
It was also appointed out that before the Labour Court, the respondent-Bank took the stand that 54 appointments were made under category 4.2(b) while 39 appointments were made under category 4.2(c), and, therefore, the respondents are estopped from taking different stand in this writ petition under the garb of regionwise selection.
6.
During the pendency of this writ petition, the petitioner was allowed to place on record copy Annexure R.6 of the judgment of the Single Bench quashing the proceedings against the Regional Manager for offences under Sections 29, 17 and 18 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 holding that the employees of the Bank had complied with the award of the Tribunal by offering post of officer-Junior Management Grade II to the present petitioner.
7.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties besides perusing the record.
No doubt the Delhi High Court had dismissed the writ petitions involving similar controversy of Sunil Kumar Chopra vide order Annexure R1 and of Shri BN Gupta and Shri TR Sahni vide Annexures R.3 and R.4 on the ground of laches yet under the circumstances of the case the above referred orders of Delhi High Court are of no help to the respondents because herein the petitioner had specifically averred that he continued knocking the door of the Bank, Asstt.
Labour Commissioner as well as the Tribunal for getting redressal.
Offer Annexure P5 dated 8th October, 1986 by the Bank to the petitioner to join as Probation Officer on promotion was rightly not accepted by the petitioner because he was asked to resign and his basic pay was fixed less by Rs. 175/- than the pay which he was already drawing.
It is admitted by the respondent-Bank in para No. 15 of the return that at the time of recruitment rule regarding resigning from the previous post was not in force which became operative in the year 1981 only.
Consequently, the Bank could not ask the petitioner to resign from his previous post as clerk in the respondent-Bank itself especially when that would amount to not protecting the pay of the petitioner which he was already drawing.
Under these circumstances, the petitioner was legally justified in not accepting the offer Annexure P5 dated 8th October, 1986.
Thereafter he continued knocking the door of the respondent-Bank as well as the Labour Department and the application for clarification filed by the petitioner under Section 36-A of the Industrial Disputes Act was decided on 4.5.1988 vide award copy whereof is Annexure P.7.
His earlier application under Section 33(c) (2) of the Industrial Disputes Act was dismissed by the Tribunal as withdrawn with permissible to file fresh one in the year 1986.
The petitioner again wrote a letter annexure P.9 dated 11th October 1988 to the Asstt.
Labour Commissioner for implementing the award of the Tribunal.
It appears that on the basis of this letter when the Asstt.
Labour Commissioner became helpless to persuade the respondent-Bank to implement the award of the Tribunal he referred to the appropriate authority for registration of a criminal case against the Bank.
A perusal of the judgment Annexure R.6 of the Single Bench of this Court reveals that the said complaint was filed on 10.9.1990 whereas the present writ petition has been filed by the petitioner on 1561989.
Thus it cannot be said that the petitioner had filed the writ petition after undue long time especially when he had resorted to the last remedy when his efforts to get the award of the Labour Tribunal implemented failed.
8.
The mere factum that a Single Bench of this Court had quashed the complaint for offences under Sections 29, 17 read with Section 18 of the Industrial Disputes Act against the employees of the Bank by holding that it has complied with the award by offering the post of Officer Junior Management Grade Class I which is equivalent to the post Officer Grade II and thus complied with the order of the Tribunal is of no consequence as the respondent had not taken any such stand in the present writ petition having offered any such post of the petitioner whereas the post of Probation Officer earlier offered vide Annexure P5 on 8.10.1986 being conditional was rightly not accepted by the petitioner workman.
9.
Faced with the above situation, Mr. Amarjit Singh, learned counsel for the respondent-Bank took shelter of the legal position that an employee can simply ask for his name being considered for promotion but he has no right to claim promotion against anticipated vacancy on the basis of existing merit list by relying upon the Judgment of the Division Bench of this Court in Union of India v. Gurkirpal Singh, reported as 1990(1) Recent Service Judgments 151.
There is no dispute about the above referred legal position but in the present writ petition the only controversy involved is non-implementation of the award of the Labour Tribunal especially when the petitioner had not challenged the parent as well as supplementary award.
10.
There is no force in the contention of the learned counsel for the respondents that the writ Petition only involves the disputed question of acts and thus not maintainable because under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, the High Court has wide powers to give redress to the aggrieved Party where the employer is not even prepared to implement the award of the Labour Tribunal because otherwise it will reduce the decision of the award of the Tribunal to mere waste paper and in turn result in shattering the confidence of the workmen in semi-judicial institutions which will have serious repercussions on the administration of justice.
11.
There is, however, no force in the contention of Mr. Deepak Sibal, learned counsel for the petitioner, that the petitioner is entitled to promotion from the date his junior officers were offered promotion posts because the petitioner has based his relief on the non-implementation of the award of the Tribunal, in the present writ petition.
It is not disputed by the petitioner that first vacancy of Probation Officer according to award dated 741986 of the Tribunal, was offered to the petitioner vide letter dated 8th August, 1986.
Thus the petitioner is entitled to the promotion post of Junior Management Grade II with effect from 8.10.1986 with protection of his pay which he was already drawing on 8.10.1986.
He shall be paid pay etc. i.e. arrears of salary against this post within three months.
The respondents shall also consider the eligibility of the petitioner for promotion to the next higher post by considering his seniority on the basis of his deemed promotion to the Junior Management Grade II with effect from 8.10.1986 under the relevant Rules and regulations.
This judgment is being given on the peculiar facts and circumstances of this case and should not be treated as precedent.
Consequently the impugned Annexure P.8 is quashed by accepting this writ petition to the extent referred above.
In view of peculiar circumstances there is no order as to costs.
Ordered accordingly.