Nirmal Yadav, J - Petitioner had joined service of the respondents, earlier known as Haryana State Electricity Board, as Store Mate, on 2791972, on work-charge basis.
The services of the petitioner were regularised on 27101980.
On 3042001, petitioner took voluntary retirement.
However, the pension of the petitioner was sanctioned on 20.7.2001 without counting work charge service rendered by him.
On 11112003 petitioner served legal not6ice on the respondents claiming benefit of the service rendered by him on work- charge basis towards the computation of retiral benefits.
As the respondents failed to take any action on the said legal notice, petitioner has filed this writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for issuance of a writ of Mandamus directing the respondents to re-determine his pension after counting the service rendered on work-charge basis and for payment of consequential arrears.
2.
In their written statement, the respondents have come up with the submissions that the petitioner was called upon to exercise his option in accordance with the circular issued on 681993.
Since the petitioner had not exercised his option, he was not entitled to claim benefit of the service rendered on work-charge basis, towards the grant of pension.
It has further been pointed out that if the petitioner had exercised his option for the benefit of the service towards pension, he would have been required to surrender the amount of the contribution made by the respondent-department towards EPF with interest.
3.
We have heard counsel for the parties and have perused the records.
4.
Both the learned counsel for the parties have very fairly conceded that the present case is squarely covered by the Full Bench decision of this Court in Kesar Chand v. State of Punjab, 1988(5) SLR 25 and a Division Bench judgment in Darshan Singh v. Chief Accounts Officer, HSEB, CWP No. 2402 of 1997, decided on 2781997.
Nothing has been brought on record to show that circular dated 681993 was ever brought to the notice of the petitioner.
There is not even an averment in the written statement that this circular was ever got noted from him.
In this situation, the relief admissible to the petitioner cannot be denied.
Therefore, the petitioner's claim that the benefit of the service should be given to him towards the determination of the amount of pension, has to be sustained.
However, this shall be subject to the condition that the petitioner does not claim the benefit of that period of service towards the Provident Fund.
The amount deposited by the employer from the date of his appointment till his retirement alongwith interest shall be refunded by the petitioner.
If the petitioner deposits this amount alongwith interest thereon up-to-date within two months from today, the respondents shall re- determine his pension and pay the arrears to him which may become due within two months thereafter.
Consequently the writ petition is allowed in the above terms.
Petition allowed.