Ashutosh Mohunta, J - The CCS Haryana Agricultural University, Hisar has filed this appeal against the judgments of both the Courts below by which suit filed by the plaintiff-respondent was decreed and the plaintiff was held entitled to get the benefit of two advance increments with effect from 111992 in the existing pay scale.
2.
Briefly stated, the facts of this case are that the plaintiff was appointed as a Sectional Officer/Junior Engineer on regular basis vide dated 2791984 in the Haryana Agricultural University.
The University revised the pay scales of Junior Engineers with effect from 111992 on the pattern of Government of Haryana.
In view of the said decision, a Junior Engineer who acquired AMIC or an equivalent degree and had completed 5 years of regular satisfactory service, was entitled to get the benefit of two advance increments with effect from 111992 in the existing pay-scale.
It was averred by the plaintiff that he had completed 5 years regular service on 111992 and also possessed a degree of Bachelor of Engineering since 1982 which is equivalent to AMIC and, therefore, he was fully entitled to get the benefit of two advance increments.
It was further averred by the plaintiff that the decision of the University declining the benefit of two advance increments vide Memo dated 1651995 was totally arbitrary and unconstitutional.
3.
The defendant-appellant filed reply and averred that the suit is barred by limitation.
It was further averred that only those Junior Engineers who has passed AMIC after 111992, were entitled to get the benefit of two advance increments and the plaintiff having acquired the degree prior to 111992, was not entitled to the said benefit.
4.
The Civil Judge (Junior Division), Hisar vide his judgment dated 1322003 held that as the plaintiff had the requisite qualification and, therefore, was entitled to get the benefit of two advance increments.
It was also held that the Memo dated 1651995 issued by the University to the plaintiff was illegal and discriminatory and was set aside.
The University filed an appeal which was dismissed by the Additional District Judge, Hisar vide judgment dated 1742004.
5.
It has been argued by Mr. Girish Agnihotri, counsel for the University that as the plaintiff-respondent had acquired the degree of Bachelor of Engineering which is equivalent to AMIC prior to 111992, therefore, he was not eligible and entitled to get the benefit of two advance increments.
6.
The short question that arises for consideration in the present appeal is "whether the benefit of two advance increments could be denied to the plaintiff merely because he had acquired higher qualification prior to 111992 ?"
7.
The plaintiff joined as a Junior Engineer in the University and had completed 5 years' regular satisfactory service as on 111992.
He also possessed the degree of Bachelor of Engineering which is equivalent to AMIC, therefore, a person having acquired the degree of Bachelor of Engineering after 111992 could get the benefit of two advance increments, then there is no reason why the plaintiff could be denied the benefit.
As per the notification, Exhibit P-2, there is no condition that a person who acquires the requisite degree prior to 111992, will not be granted the advance increments.
The only condition was that he person should have AMIC or equivalent degree and 5 years of regular satisfactory service which the plaintiff possessed.
8.
In Santosh Kumari v. State of Haryana, 1996(4) SCT 337 (P&H) : 1997(1) RSJ 419, a Division Bench of this Court has held that the benefit of higher pay scale granted to the petitioner could not be withdrawn merely because she had acquired higher qualification before joining service.
In the present case also, as the plaintiff-respondent already possessed he degree of Bachelor of Engineering, therefore, there is no reason why the benefit of two advance increments should have been denied to him.
9.
In view of the above, both the Courts below have rightly held that withholding of advance increments which was justifiably due to the plaintiff, was arbitrary as there was no condition in the notification regarding acquiring of the AMIE degree after 1992.
Resultantly, there is no merit in the present appeal and the same is dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.