Surya Kant, J. (Oral) - The petitioner has come up with a prayer to issue a writ in the nature of mandamus to command the official respondent Nos. 1 to 4 to consider his case for promotion to the post of Lineman as according to the petitioner he is matriculate with an ITI certificate and the persons junior to him have been promoted since the year 1979-80.
2.
Briefly stated, the facts are that the petitioner joined the erstwhile Haryana State Electricity Board as Key Mate on 1101970 on the basis of qualifications of Matriculate with an ITI Certificate in Turner trade.
He was promoted as Assistant Lineman on 821972 on ad hoc basis and was made regular on 581972.
The petitioner was thereafter promoted on 1081980 as Lineman vide order No. 345 issued by the office of the Superintending Engineer, Rohtak Circle.
However, before he could join the promotional post of Lineman, he was reverted to the post of Assistant Lineman vide subsequent order dated 5.12.1980 on the premise that he did not possess the requisite qualification of Matriculation with ITI in the trade of Electrician/Wireman/Lineman.
The petitioner thereafter represented to the authorities pointing out that firstly, in terms of the policy decision of the Board, it was not expressly required that the ITI qualification has to be in a particular trade and secondly, the persons having ITI certificate in the trade other than Electrician/Wireman have already been promoted as Lineman, therefore, he ought not to have been discriminated against.
The representation sent by the petitioner did not find favour with the authorities thereby prompting him to approach this Court.
In the writ petition also the claim of the petitioner is founded upon the facts that there was no requirement of ITI certificate in a specified trade for promotion to the post of Lineman and that action of the respondents in reverting him and/or not promoting on the basis of his qualification of Matriculation with an ITI certificate was discriminatory in nature as the persons, whose particulars are mentioned in paragraph 3(a) of the writ petition, having qualifications of ITI certificate in the trades other than Electrician/Wireman were promoted as Linemen.
These persons have been impleaded by the petitioner as respondent Nos. 5 to 7.
3.
In response to the notice of motion, written statement has been filed on behalf of the Board, inter alia, stating that respondent Nos. 5 to 7 were still working as Assistant Lineman and were not promoted as Lineman and that the petitioner was erroneously promoted by over-looking the fact that ITI certificate passed by him was not in the trade of Electrician/Wireman and since the order of reversion was passed even before he could join the promotional post, there was no violation of the principles of natural justice.
It has been denied that any person possessing the qualification of Matriculation with an ITI certificate in a trade other than Electrician/Wireman, has been promoted as Lineman.
A positive stand has been taken that no Assistant Lineman can be considered for promotion from the quota of Matriculate with ITI unless he possesses the ITI certificate in Electrician/Wireman trade.
4.
I have heard Shri Kinra, learned counsel for the petitioner and Shri Lamba, learned counsel for the official respondents and have gone through the record of this case.
5.
Mr. Kinra has made two fold submissions.
Firstly, he contends that the petitioner having been promoted as Assistant Lineman, acquired a legally vested right to hold the promotional post and even if he had not joined the said post, the promotion order could not have been rescinded, resulting into petitioner's reversion without issuing him a show-cause notice.
It has further been contended that there is no policy decision and/or requirement in the service rules that an Assistant Lineman for his promotion against 15% quota meant for Matriculation with an ITI certificate should possess the ITI certificate in the trade of Electrician/Wireman only.
Lastly, he has placed reliance upon the policy decision taken by the Board as contained in office order No. 40/NGE/G-1079 dated 721980 (Annexure P-8), according to which the posts in the cadre of Linemen are required to be filled up 100% by promotion only, though separate quota has been provided for the persons with different qualifications.
Shri Kinra points out that even if the petitioner is assumed to be ineligible against 15% quota meant for matriculates with ITI, he is certainly eligible for promotion against the remaining 80% quota specified in sub-clauses (c) and (d) of Clause (2) of the police decision (Annexure P-8) and, thus, his case for promotion ought to have been considered against 80% quota meant for ordinary matriculates or remainders.
6.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the record.
So as the cancellation of promotion order and/or consequential reversion of the petitioner is concerned, no fault can be found with the same.
It is the categoric stand of the respondents that no Assistant Lineman without having the qualification of matriculation with an ITI certificate in the trade of Electrical/Wireman, has been promoted as Lineman in Rohtak Circle.
The petitioner undisputedly possesses the ITI certificate in the trade of Turner (Fitter) only, therefore, as per the stand taken by the respondents, he is ineligible for promotion to the post of Lineman so far as 15% quota meant for Matriculates with ITI is concerned.
Similarly, petitioner is not a diploma holder.
Therefore, his case cannot be considered against 5% quota as provided in Clause 2(a) of the policy (Annexure P-8).
7.
The plea of discrimination put forth by the petitioner vis-a-vis respondent Nos. 5 to 7 also cannot be accepted for the reason that it is the Board's stand that respondent Nos. 5 to 7 are still working as Assistant Lineman only.
Learned counsel for the petitioner, however, points out that he has given certain instances from other Circles, namely, other than Rohtak Circle wherein persons possessing qualifications similar to the petitioner have been promoted as Lineman.
Reference has been made to para 3(a) of the written statement in which it has not been specifically denied that the persons having qualifications similar to that of the petitioner have been promoted in other circles.
It is also contended by learned counsel for the petitioner that the respondents have no where taken the plea that the petitioner is not entitled to be considered for promotion against 80% quota meant for the categories of ordinary matriculates and remainders as specified in Clauses (c) and (d) of the policy (Annexure P-8).
8.
There appears to be some merit in the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner that the policy decision taken by the Board needs to be applied uniformly in all the circles and different yard sticks cannot be adopted either in the matter of eligibility for promotion and/or quota meant for different categories for such promotions.
If it is a fact that persons having qualification of matriculation with ITI in the trades other than Electrical/Wireman have been promoted as Linemen in other circles by taking a conscious decision and they have been allowed to continue on their promotional posts, there appears to be no basis for denying the same benefit in Rohtak circle as well.
Similarly, merely because the petitioner has been found ineligible against 15% quota meant for matriculates with ITI as provided in Clause 2(b) of the policy decision (Annexure P-8), does not deprive him from being considered for promotion under clauses 2(c) and (d) of the policy.
The written statement is totally silent as to whether the promotioner's claim in the said quota has been considered or not.
9.
For the reasons stated above, this writ petition is disposed of with the following directions :-  (i) if a policy decision has been taken by the Board prescribing qualification of Matriculation with an ITI certificate in the trade of Electrician/Wireman/Lineman for promotion to the post of Lineman, it shall have uniform applicability in all the circles.
(ii) if the Assistant Linemen with qualification of Matriculation with ITI in the trades other than Electrician/Wireman have been promoted as Linemen against 15% quota specified in Clause 2(b) of the policy decision (Annexure P-8) in other circles, the authorities of Rohtak Circle shall also consider the persons, like the petitioner, eligible for such promotions and/or take other necessary corrective steps to maintain uniformity with other circles; (iii) In addition, the respondents shall also consider the claim of the petitioner for promotion as Lineman in the quota specified under Clause 2(c) and (d) as per his seniority and eligibility and in case he is entitled for promotion against the said quota, the same shall be granted to him with all consequential benefits, if any.
10.
Let the directions aforementioned be carried out within a period of four months from the date a certified copy of this order is received by the respondents.
No costs.
Petition allowed.