Viney Mittal, J - This order shall dispose of two writ petitions being CWP No. 18376 of 2002 and CWP No. 12223 of 2004 as both the petitions are directed against the selection dated October 9, 2002 conducted by the University.
2.
For the sake of convenience, the facts are taken from CWP No. 18376 of 2002.
3.
Punjabi University, Patiala respondent No. 1 through its Registrar respondent No. 2 issued an advertisement in the newspaper on July 25, 2002 vide which various posts of Readers as well as Lecturers in the different departments were advertised.
Three posts of Lecturers in the department of Defence & Strategic Studies were also advertised.
The last date for receipt of applications from eligible persons was indicated as August 12, 2002.
A copy of the aforesaid advertisement has been appended as Annexure P-1 with the present petition.
Through a corrigendum later on, the last date for receipt of the applications was extended upto September 16, 2002.
The petitioner has averred that as per the rules and regulations of the respondent-University, the eligibilitye conditions for applying to the post of Lecturer in the University are as follows :  "(a) The basic qualification for the post of Lecturer is MA in Defence Strategic Studies and eligibility test for the Lecturership conducted/accredited by UGC.
(b) The candidates who are completed MPhil.
degree by 31st Dec 1993 or have submitted PhD Thesis to the University in the concerned subject before 31st December, 2002 are exempted from appearing the NET/SET examination conducted by the UGC.
(c) As per the advertisement the candidate must have passed Punjabi in Matriculation examination or have passed Punjab Prabodh or Punjabi Praveshika Examination.
Candidates belonging to States other than Punjab or Union Territory Chandigarh, who have not passed Punjabi at Matric level are required to pass Punjabi Prabodh examination from Language Department, Punjab Patiala before appearing for interview."
4.
The petitioner has claimed that being an eligible candidate and fulfilling all the terms and conditions, he applied for the post of a Lecturer in Defence and Strategic Studies before the last date of submission of the applications.
It is claimed by him that he is MA in Defence and Strategic Studies with distinction and had also qualified eligibility test for Lecturership in University and Colleges, conducted by University Grants Commission.
It is further specifically pleaded by the petitioner that he had studied Punjabi in matriculation also.
5.
As a consequence of the selection process conducted by the respondent University, respondent Nos. 3 to 5 were selected as Lecturers.
The petitioner has made a grievance that the respondent Nos. 3 and 4, who had applied for the post of Lecturers, were not eligible and qualified.
It has been claimed that respondent No. 3 had not qualified the eligibility test for the lecturership in Universities and colleges, as required by the University Grants Commission and was not even exempted from the aforesaid test since he had submitted his PhD thesis on September 23, 2002 only i.e. after the last date of receipt of the applications.
Similarly it has been claimed that respondent No. 4 was not eligible since he had not passed his matriculation examination with Punjabi language.
Accordingly, it has been claimed that the election of the aforesaid respondent Nos. 3 and 4 was totally contrary to the University rules and regulations and also contrary to the advertisement.
The petitioner has, thus, approached this Court through the present writ petition praying for a writ in the nature of certiorari for quashing the entire selection dated October 9, 2002.
6.
The claim of the petitioner has been contested by the respondents.
A separate written statement has been filed by the University and its Registrar (respondent Nos. 1 and 2).
Similarly, respondent Nos. 3 to 5 have chosen to file independent and separate written statements.
The claim of the petitioner has been contested by all the respondents.
7.
The respondent University in its written statement has stated that respondent No. 3 had submitted his thesis for evaluation on September 16, 2002 and not on September 23, 2002 and as such was eligible.
A further reliance has been placed upon by the University on a decision dated January 10, 2003 whereby the Syndicate had decided that period of two years would be given to the recruits/selectees for passing Punjabi upto matriculation examination and the condition of Punjabi upto matric at the time of recruitment shall not be implemented and that the aforesaid examination would be conducted by the University itself later on.
A copy of the aforesaid proceedings dated January 10, 2003 has been appended as Annexure R-1 with the written statement of the University.
On the basis of the aforesaid proceedings, the respondent University has claimed that even respondent No. 4 was eligible at the time of selection.
To the similar effect are the pleas raised by the private respondents.
8.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have also gone through the records of the case.
9.
It is not in dispute that as per the original advertisement Annexure P-1, the last date of submission of the applications was indicated as August 12, 2002.
However, through the corrigendum Annexure P-2, the last date was extended upto September 16, 2002.
On the aforesaid dates, respondent Nos. 3 and 4 were both not eligible for consideration, inasmuch as, respondent No. 3 had not passed any eligibility test conduct by the University Grants Commission, nor he had submitted thesis for his PhD entitling him for exemption from the said test.
Similarly, respondent No. 4 was not eligible since he had not qualified his matriculation examination in Punjabi language, as was provided in the advertisement itself.
The reliance placed by the respondents on the Syndicate decision dated January 10, 2003 which is much after the date of advertisement and the corrigendum, cannot come to the aid and help of the respondent No. 4 in any manner, inasmuch as, the eligibility of a person was liable to be adjudged and considered on the date of the application itself.
Any subsequent change in the eligibility conditions or relaxation thereof could not have been taken into consideration making certain persons eligible, though not eligible originally.
If the contention of the respondents were to be accepted then the same would be absolutely arbitrary and discriminatory, inasmuch as, there was no public notice of the aforesaid decision nor any fresh applications were invited by the University.
Annexure R-1 apparently has made certain ineligible persons as eligible.
When the original advertisement Annexure P-1 was issued, a large number of persons, who were not eligible could not have applied.
Subsequently if the aforesaid eligibility conditions were relaxed, persons who were treated as ineligible were also liable to be given an opportunity.
In these circumstances, it does appear that the pleas raised by the petitioner that the aforesaid corrigendum had been issued and a decision by the Syndicate taken only with a view to help the respondents stands corroborated.
10.
It is well settled that in the matters of public appointment, not only a fair process has to be adopted but the aforesaid process has to be transparent and above all suspicion.
The transparency in a selection process adds to the public confidence.
The present case raises certain doubts, which have not been explained.
11.
Accordingly, the present writ petitions are allowed.
The selection dated October 9, 2002 vide which respondent Nos. 3 to 5 were selected as Lecturers are quashed.
The respondent University will carry out a fresh selection process from amongst the persons who were eligible on the last day of receipt of applications, which shall be completed within a period of four months from the date a certified copy of this order is received.
12.
During the course of arguments, the learned counsel for the respondent University has prayed that in order to safeguard the interest of the students, the respondent Nos. 3 to 5 be permitted to continue till the fresh selection process is completed.
We find that the request made by the learned counsel is fair and reasonable.
Accordingly, respondent Nos. 3 to 5 would be permitted to be continued as Lecturers till the fresh selection process is completed and appointments are made.
A copy of this order be given dasti on payment of usual charges.
Petitions allowed.