GS Singhvi, J - The petitioner has filed this writ petition with a prayer to quash order Annexure P-13 and also to order regularisation of his service in accordance with the policy decision contained in Annexure P-8 dated 2821991 and Annexure P-10 dated 161993.
2.
Facts narrated in the writ petition show that the petitioner was appointed as Cluster Supervisor on purely ad hoc basis for a period of six months by an order dated 22.10.1982 of Milk Commissioner, Haryana.
The petitioner continued in service on ad hoc basis till the issue of order dated 721994 (Annexure P-13) whereby his service has been terminated as per terms and conditions of the appointment letter.
The petitioner has pleaded that he was conveyed with advisory type of remarks in the annual confidential reports for the year 1982-83, 1983-84, 1985-86, 1986-87, 1989-90 and 1990-91 (Annexures P-2 to P-7).
In para 4 of the writ petition, he has given a pen picture of the remarks made in his annual confidential reports and has pleaded that on the basis of his confidential reports, he has acquired a legal right to be regularised in service in accordance with the policy decisions of the Government of Haryana which contemplate regularisation of services of all those employees who had completed two years' service as on 30th of September, 1988, as on 3th December, 1990 and as on 31st March, 1993.
On the basis of Annexures P-9 and P-11, the petitioner has stated that a large number of Cluster Supervisors have been given the benefit of regularisation of service in accordance with the policy decisions of the Government of Haryana.
He has asserted that although a number of persons appointed after him as ad hoc Cluster Supervisors have been regularised similar benefit has not been conferred upon him and his service has been terminated after he has worked for over eleven years'.
The petitioner has relied on judgment dated April 26, 1994, rendered in Civil Writ Petition No. 712 of 1994 (Suraj Bhan v. The State of Haryana and another) whereby a similar situated person is said to have been ordered to be regularised in service.
3.
Shri RK Malik, learned counsel for the petitioner, has strenuously argued that in the light of the policy decision of the Government of Haryana as contained in Annexures P-8 and P-10, the petitioner has acquired a legal as well as constitutional right to be regularised in service and by denying him benefit of regularisation, respondents have infringed his right of equality in the matter of employment as guaranteed by Article 16 of the Constitution of India.
Shri Malik argued that a person who has earned reports cannot be denied regularisation because average reports cannot be termed as adverse.
Learned counsel argued that average reports have to be treated as satisfactory and a person like the petitioner who has rendered satisfactory service for eleven years' has acquired a vested right to be declared as regular employee.
He further submitted that during past three years' nothing adverse has been reported in his annual confidential reports and, therefore, there is no justification for termination of his service.
Shri Malik further argued that even if a person was to join service in 1991, he will acquire a right to be regularised in service and if that is so, a person like the petitioner who has served for over eleven years' cannot be declared unsuitable and removed from service.
He lastly argued that on compassionate grounds also, the petitioner should be ordered to be regularised.
4.
We have given our thoughtful consideration to the arguments of the learned counsel in the light of the documents which have been placed on record.
5.
A look at the first order of appointment issued in favour of the petitioner shows that his appointment was subject to the following terms and conditions :  "1.
Their appointment is purely on ad hoc basis for a period of 6 months.
2.
Their services are liable to be terminated at any time without any notice and ascertaining any reason.
3.
Their extension in appointment will be considered on basis of their work and conduct and subject to the condition that it is approved by the SSS Board.
4.
They will go under medical examination at their own expenses before joining the duty for which medical docket is enclosed.
5.
Their services are liable to be terminated on arrival of the approved candidates by the SSS Board, Haryana irrespective of the above mentioned terms and conditions.
6.
They should produce certificates in respect of their antecedents and conduct from two responsible persons.
7.
No TA and DA is admissible for joining the duty.
8.
They should produce a certificate of one living wife, if married.
9.
They will be entitled for salary after satisfactory verification of their antecedents."
6.
The petitioner continued to work in the capacity of an ad hoc employee till the passing of order of termination of his service on 721994.
The Government of Haryana has from time to time issued Notification containing - policy decisions for regularisation of service of ad hoc appointees.
Annexure P-8 is a Notification dated 2821991 and it provides for regularisation of services of ad hoc employees who have held Class III posts for a minimum period of two years as on 31121990.
This Notification says that the services of such employees shall be regularised on fulfilment of the conditions enumerated in that Notification.
Condition No. 4 enumerated in the said Notification reads thus :  "that the work and conduct of such employees shall be of over all good category and no disciplinary proceedings are pending against them."
Notification dated 161993 has been issued by the Government of Haryana for regularisation of the services of ad hoc employees holding Class III Posts with minimum period of two years' of service as on 313993.
Conditions on the fulfilment of which ad hoc appointee could be regularised are identical to those contained in Notification dated 2821991.
Annexure P-11 is an order issued by the Milk Commissioner in pursuance of the Notification issued by the Government of Haryana on 161993.
This order also contemplates regularisation of those Cluster Supervisors who have completed two years' service with good record.
7.
From the above it is clear that initial appointment of the petitioner was a purely ad hoc appointment and continuance of the petitioner in service depended on his satisfactory work and conduct and approval be the Subordinate Services Selection Board.
Ordinarily for the purpose of regular appointment, the petitioner was required to be selected by the Subordinate Services Selection Board.
However, in the light of the policy decisions taken by the Government of Haryana, which is reflected in Annexures P-8 and P-10, he acquired eligibility to be considered for regularisation in service being an ad hoc appointee, who had completed two years' service as on 31121990 as also on 3131993.
However, regularisation of the service of the petitioner was dependent on fulfilment of the conditions enumerated in Annexure P-8 and P-10, one of which has been reproduced above, namely, that the employee shall be of over all good category and no disciplinary proceedings are pending against him.
If the petitioner could possibly be categorised as a person who falls in the category of "over all good."
He would have certainly become entitled to be regularised in service.
However, what we find from the record is that for the year 1983-84, the petitioner has been classified as below average.
For the years' 1985-86 and 1986-87, he has been classified as below average.
For the year 1989-90, adverse remark has been made in his annual confidential report to the effect that "his achievement of target is low."
For the year 1990-91 he has been described as "irresponsible in discharging duty."
For regularisation of the service of an ad hoc appointee, who had completed two years' service as on 31121990 his confidential reports upto the year 1989-90 could have been made available to the competent authority.
Similarly in respect of an ad hoc appointee who had completed two years' service as on 3131993, confidential reports upto the year 1992-93 could have been available before the competent authority.
With reference to Notification dated 2821991, the petitioner had earned three "below average" confidential reports and adverse remarks in another confidential report (year 1989-90).
With reference to Notification dated 161993, he earned yet another report with adverse remark (year 1990-91).
It can thus be said that for major part of the service rendered by him, the petitioner has earned adverse reports.
In the face of these adverse entries, it cannot but be said that the petitioner has made a tall claim by asserting that he has earned good reports during his service career and on the basis of such reports he has acquired a legal as well as constitutional right to be regularised in service.
In our considered opinion, the respondents have not committed any illegality nor have they acted arbitrary in not ordering regularisation of the services of the petitioner.
The competent departmental authority had a right and we would say a duty of taking into consideration the over all record of the petitioner while considering his case for regularisation.
If by taking note of the adverse reports in the record of the petitioner, the competent authority has arrived at a bona fide decision not to regularise the service of the petitioner, it is not possible to find any fault with the decision of the competent authority.
We are further of the view that when the respondents did not find the petitioner suitable for regularisation of service, they had every legal justification to dispense with his service in the light of the adverse annual confidential reports, which the petitioner had earned consistently.
8.
Argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner that by mere dint of long service, the petitioner should have been regularised is wholly untenable.
The claim of regularisation of service of ad hoc appointees is an exception to the regular mode of recruitment which is required to be made by a properly constituted selection agency after due consideration of candidature of all eligible persons.
Public services are required to be manned by the most meritorious persons.
However, the methodology of ad hoc appointment has been devised as a mode to scuttle the methods of regular selection and on purely compassionate grounds the Governments have been allowed to introduce schemes for regularisation of services of ad hoc appointees.
However, granting of benefit of regularisation to persons who are inefficient, whose service record is full of adverse remarks would be putting a premium over minimum requirement of efficiency in the public service.
Regularisation of services of such inefficient persons would be great injury to public interest as well as the nation.
The nation will pay heavy price if inefficient, disobedient and irresponsible employees are recruited to the public services or are allowed to continue.
The Courts cannot become a party to the denigration of public service by ordering regularisation of service of persons like the petitioner who has consistently earned adverse reports.
Therefore, the submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner that the Court should order regularisation of service or should quash the termination of service of the petitioner merely because the petitioner has served for long is rejected.
9.
There is an additional and a very cogent ground for not giving any relief to the petitioner.
We are constrained to observe that the petitioner has made an attempt to mislead the Court by giving an incorrect picture of the remarks made in his annual confidential reports.
In para 4 of the writ petition, the petitioner has made a statement regarding the remarks in his annual confidential reports.
However, this statement is contrary to the remarks actually made in his Annual Confidential Reports for the years' 1983-84, 1989-90 and 1990-91.
This is evident from the reproduction of remarks as mentioned in para 4 together with the actual entries which are borne out from Annexures P-2 to P-7 which we reproduce below :  Year Classification Actual remarks  1982-83 Average Average 1983-84 Average Below Average 1984-85 Good -  1985-86 Below Average Below Average 1986-87 Below Average Below Average 1987-88 Good -  1988-89 Good -  1989-90 Average Average (Achievement of target is low) 1990-91 Average Average (Irresponsible in discharging duty) 1991-92 Good -  1992-93 Good -  1993-94 Good -  The petitioner has not shown as to how he has described entries in his confidential reports and classification thereof as good for the years' 1984-85, 1987-88, 1988-89, 1991-92, 1992-93 and 1993-94.
He has not come out with a case that he presumed entries in his confidential reports for these years' to be good because nothing has been communicated to him.
It is thus clear that the petitioner has deliberately made an attempt to mislead the Court by painting a rosy picture about the entries in his annual confidential reports.
In our opinion, a person who makes an attempt to mislead the Court by mis- statement of facts or by deliberate twisting of facts has no right to get any relief from the Court in exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
Writ jurisdiction of the Court can be exercised only in favour of those who come with clean hands and a person who approaches the Court with tainted hands has no right to be heard on the merits of his case.
10.
In Rex.
v. Kensinghton, 1917(1) KB 486.
Cozens Hardy M.R.
observed :  On an ex parte application uberrima fides is required, and unless that can be established if there is anything like deception practised on the Court, the court ought not to go into the merits of the case, but simply says we will not listen to your application because of what you have done."
Lord Scrutton L.J.
observed :  "It has been for many years' the rule of the Court and one which it is of the greatest importance to maintain, that when any applicant comes to the court to obtain relief on an ex parte statement he should make a full and fair disclosure of all the material facts, facts not law ... ... ...
The applicant must state fully and fairly the facts and the penalty by which the Court enforces that obligation is that if it finds out that the facts have been fully and fairly stated to it the court will set aside any action which it has taken on the faith of the imperfect statement."
In Reg v. Garland, (1870) 39 LJ QB 86, it has been held :  "Where a process is ex debito justiae the Court would refuse to exercise its discretion in favour of the applicant where the application is found to be wanting in bona fides."
In Asiatic Engineering Co v. Achhru Ram, AIR 1951 All 746 (FB), a Full Bench of Allahabad High Court stated the principles of law in these words :  "A person obtaining an ex parte order or rule nisi by means of a petition for exercise of the extraordinary powers under Article 226 of the Constitution must come with clear hands, must not suppress any relevant fact from the court, must refrain from making misleading statements and from giving incorrect information to the court.
Court should insist that persons invoking the extraordinary jurisdiction of the High Court should not attempt in any manner to misuse a valuable right by obtaining ex parte orders by suppression, misrepresentation or misstatement of facts."
In Nand Lal v. State of Jammu & Kashmir, AIR 1960 J & K 19, it has been held :  "Where the petitioners under Article 226 have not stated the relevant facts correctly and candidly either in their petition or in the affidavit in support of their petition, this is by itself sufficient to entail an outright dismissal of the writ petition without going into its merits.
It has further been held in his case that even if the petitioners have a good case on merits the court will be entitled to decline to go into the merits and dismiss their petition because the conduct of the petitioners has been such as to mislead the Court."
Similar propositions of law have been laid down in M Hali Mohammad Ismail Sahib and Co v. The Deputy Commercial Tax Officer, Gudiyathen, AIR 1970 Madras 422 (FB); Abdul Gafoor v. State of MP, AIR 1968 MP 29, G Appukkutan Pillai v. Government of India, AIR 1970 Kerala 110 (FB); S.H.
Motor Transport Co v. Moti Lal, AIR 1965 Bombay 24; and Om Parkash v. State of Rajasthan, AIR 1977 Rajasthan 52.
11.
The principle which can be deduced from the above referred decisions is that the party who seek relief from the High Court in exercise of its equitable jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India must come with all bona fides, must make true, candid and full disclosure of all the relevant facts.
Its conduct must be above board.
There should be no attempt by a party to mislead the Court.
The petitioner is under an obligation to collect all material facts with due care and attention and he will not be heard to say that facts were not within his knowledge although the same could have come to his knowledge had he taken due care and had made efforts to find them out.
The High Court will be fully justified in declining exercise of extra-ordinary jurisdiction in favour of a party who is guilty of suppression veri and suggesto falsi or who makes an attempt to mislead the Court.
12.
In this case the petitioner has made a deceitful attempt to mislead the Court and, therefore, we find little justification to give relief to him.
13.
For the reasons stated above, the writ petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.