Ajay Kumar Mittal, J - These appeals are directed against order dated 29.7.1997 passed by the learned Single Judge in CW.P.
No. 6557 of 1993 - Rajinder Singh Redhu and others v. Haryana State Electricity Board and others, whereby he quashed the promotions of Junior Engineers (respondent Nos. 17 to 31 in L.P.A. No. 657 of 1997) to the posts of Assistant Engineers and directed the Haryana State Electricity Board (for short, `the Board') to consider the claim of the writ petitioners for promotion on these posts.
2.
For the sake of convenience, we have taken the facts from L.P.A. No. 657 of 1997.
3.
In response to advertisement No. CRA-104 dated 1381988 issued by the Board, the respondents including the writ petitioners applied for recruitment as Trainee Junior Engineers (Electrical, Mechanical and Electronics).
The relevant extract of the advertisement is reproduced below :-  "The candidates will have to undergo training for one year at a fixed pay of Rs. Rs. 1400/- per month.
The period of training can be extended further at the discretion of the Board.
On successful completion of training they will be absorbed in the regular service of HSEB as Junior Engineer in the pay scale of Rs. 1640/2900 plus allowances as may be sanctioned by the Board from time to time and they can either be posted in any Thermal/Generation Project within the jurisdiction of HSEB including BBMB/BCB or outside Haryana State or in the field cadre at the discretion of the Board.
An undertaking showing their willingness to this effect should be furnished by the prospective applicants alongwith their application."
4.
On being recommended by the Selection Committee constituted by the Board, respondent Nos. 1 to 16 were appointed in the Generation Projects (Generation Cadre) and respondent Nos. 17 to 31 were posted in General Cadre (Field Cadre).
In the course of service, the respondents passed B.E./A.M.I.E.
Thereafter, vide orders dated 18121991, 13.1.1992 and 331992 (Annexures P2 to P4 in CW.P.
No. 6557 of 1993), respondent Nos. 17 to 31 were promoted as Assistant Engineers on ad hoc basis against the vacancies of direct recruitment quota.
Note Nos. 2, 3 and 4 incorporated in these orders, which have bearing on the decision of the appeals, read as under :-  "2.
The above promotion on ad hoc basis over and above the share quota have been ordered in terms of Regulation 9 of PSEB Service of Engineers (Elect.)
Recruitment Regulations, 1965 amended vide order No. 21/Reg-18, dated 19288 read with Notification No. 89 dated 1321991.
3.
The above promotions on ad hoc basis will not confer upon them any right of seniority and regular promotion in the capacity of Assistant Engineer.
4.
The earlier ad hoc promotions in respect of the above named officials will not give them any right of seniority over those who may otherwise be senior to them and whose cases are pending for one reason or the other."
5.
Respondent Nos. 1 to 16 represented against the promotion of respondent Nos. 17 to 31 by asserting that the action of the Board was discriminatory and violative of the Punjab State Electricity Board Service of Engineers (Electrical) Recruitment Regulations, 1965 (for short, `the Regulations'), as applicable to the Board.
They claimed that being senior in the cadre of Junior Engineers from the point of view of the merit determined by the Selection Committee and the date of passing of B.E./A.M.I.E., they were entitled to be considered for promotion before their juniors could be promoted.
Having failed to evoke response from the concerned authorities of the Board, respondent Nos. 1 to 16 failed CW,P.
No. 6557 of 1993 for quashing orders Annexures P-2 to P-4 with the direction to the Board and its functionaries to promote them as Assistant Engineers.
6.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the Board, it was not disputed that respondent Nos. 1 to 16 were placed higher in the merit list prepared by the Selection Committee and that they had passed B.E./A.M.I.E.
before respondent Nos. 17 to 31.
However, their claim of being considered for promotion to the posts of Assistant Engineers was contested on the premise that there were two cadres of Junior Engineers, namely, Generation Cadre and Field Cadre and respondent Nos. 17 to 31, who belong to Field Cadre, were promoted against the post earmarked for that cadre in the direct recruitment quota.
7.
On a consideration of the rival pleadings and arguments of the counsel for the parties, the learned Single Judge allowed the writ petition by observing as under :-  "From the advertisement, Annexure P-1, it is clear that the candidates selected pursuant to said advertisement could either be posted in Thermal/General projects or in the field cadre (General Cadre) at the discretion of the Board.
Admittedly, all the writ petitioners were higher in the merit list in comparison to all the private respondents and all the writ petitioners were posted in Generation Cadre not because they had opted for posting in that cadre but only because of the orders passed by the respondent-Board.
As stated herein above, the Junior Engineers working in Generation cadre can be transferred to the General Cadre and vice versa.
From the facts on record, it is also clear that the promotions made to the posts of Assistant Engineers vide impugned order, Annexures P-2, P-3 and P-4, were made against the posts meant for direct recruits and for those posts, the private respondents have got no preferential right to be considered qua the writ petitioners.
As a matter of fact, the writ petitioners had qualified the examination of AMIE/BE prior in time than all the private respondents and in terms of Regulation 9, they were entitled to be considered and promoted to the post of Assistant Engineer prior in time than the private respondents.
There is no stipulation in the statutory rules that in case vacancies arise in the General Cadre, then only persons working in the General Cadre could be promoted as Assistant Engineers.
On the contrary, the cadre of Assistant Engineers is only one cadre and as such persons working in the Generation Cadre could not be discriminated qua the persons working in the General Cadre while making promotions to the posts of Assistant Engineers."
8.
Shri Mukul Aggarwal, learned counsel for the Board and Shri Sanjiv Bansal, learned counsel for appellant-Manoj Kumar assailed the order of the learned Single Judge by arguing that the view taken by him on the issue of eligibility and entitlement of respondent Nos. 1 to 16 for promotion to the posts of Assistant Engineers is clearly erroneous.
Shri Aggarwal pointed out that as per the Punjab Public Works Department (Electricity Branch) State Service Class-III (Subordinate Posts) Rules, 1952 (for short, `the 1952 Rules') which were adopted by the Board, there were two separate and distinct cadres of Junior Engineers i.e. General and Generation Cadres and argued that the learned Single Judge committed a serious illegality by quashing the promotion of respondent Nos. 17 to 31 on the ground of non-consideration of the cases of respondent Nos. 1 to 16 ignoring the fact that the posts of Assistant Engineers against which respondent Nos. 17 to 31 had been promoted belonged to the General Cadre and respondent Nos. 1 to 16, who were members of Generation Cadre, were not entitled to be considered for promotion against those posts.
Shri Aggarwal and Shri Bansal emphasized that promotions of the Junior Engineers to the posts of Assistant Engineers were required to be made from amongst the persons belonging to their own cadres and the findings of the learned Single Judge that there was only one cadre of Assistant Engineers and the persons working in the Generation Cadre could not be discriminated qua the persons working in the General Cadre, while making promotions to the posts of Assistant Engineers were erroneous.
Learned counsel referred the amendment made in the Regulations vide notification dated 1921998 and argued that promotions to the posts of Assistant Engineers is required to be made separately against the prescribed quota from amongst the Junior Engineers belonging to the Field Cadre and Generation Cadre.
9.
Shri Rajiv Atma Ram, learned Senior Counsel appearing for respondent Nos. 1 to 16 supported the order of the learned Single Judge and argued that the 1952 Rules do not envisage separate cadres for Junior Engineers and in the absence of any amendment in those rules or the Regulations, the Board could not bifurcate the cadre of Junior Engineers into Generation Cadre and the Field or General Cadre.
Referring to orders Annexures A-1 to A-3 filed along with Civil Miscellaneous Application No. 6353 of 1997, Shri Rajiv Ram submitted that the posts of Junior Engineers are inter-transferable and thus all the Junior Engineers constitute a common cadre.
He further argued that even if, the theory of separate cadres of Junior Engineers is accepted, the denial of consideration for promotion to respondent Nos. 1 to 16 cannot be sustained because there is a common cadre of Assistant Engineers.
Learned counsel referred to the advertisement issued by the Board for appointment of Assistant Engineers against the direct recruitment quota and the orders issued for appointment of selected candidates to show that the cadre of Assistant Engineers is common and submitted that the concerned authorities of the Board committed a serious illegality by promoting junior persons ignoring the claim of respondent Nos. 1 to 16.
10.
We have given serious thought to the respective arguments.
Undisputedly, all the respondents were appointed as Junior Engineers in the service of the Board in pursuance of advertisement dated 1381988 (Annexure P-1).
It is also not in dispute that respondent Nos. 1 to 16 were higher in the merit list than respondent Nos. 17 to 31, prepared for appointment as Junior Engineers.
It is further the undisputed position that respondents Nos. 1 to 16 were posted in the General cadre whereas respondent Nos. 17 to 31 were posted in the Field Cadre (General Cadre) by the Board.
The next cadre of promotion of the Junior Engineers is to the post of Assistant Engineers, which, according to respondent Nos. 1 to 16, was governed by the Regulations.
As per Regulation 9(1) of the said Regulations, 65% posts were required to be filled up be making direct recruitment and the remaining 35% by means of promotion from amongst the persons holding posts of Junior Engineers in Generation and the General Cadre.
The promotees quota had been bifurcated into two categories i.e. 125% of the posts of this quota were to be filled up by way of seniority from amongst the persons having experience of five years in the cadre of Junior Engineers and the remaining 125% were to be filled up from amongst those possessing the degree of A.M.I.E./B.E.
and having experience of two years as Junior Engineers.
In terms of the aforesaid Regulations, eligibility for consideration for promotion from the persons possessing the degree of B.E./A.M.I.E.
against 12-1/2% quota has to be determined from the date of qualifying the said examination.
A perusal of orders Annexures P-2 to P-4 which were impugned in the writ petition reveals that the promotions to the posts of Assistant Engineers were made from amongst the persons working in the General Cadre and the said promotions were made against the quota meant for direct recruitment.
Learned Single Judge accepted the claim of respondent Nos. 1 to 16 and held that they could not have been discriminated in the matter of promotion to the posts of Assistant Engineers and the action of the Board to promote junior persons was discriminatory.
In our opinion, the view taken by the learned Single Judge does not suffer from any legal infirmity.
Admittedly, the services of the Junior Engineers is governed by the 1952 Rules and the perusal of the same would clearly indicate that the Junior Engineers constituted one cadre.
Even if it be taken that any amendment was brought about in the Regulations whereby the cadre of the Junior Engineers was bifurcated, nothing has been shown to this Court by producing any notification or otherwise, whether such bifurcation could be made by simply issuing an office order upon which the Board has remained totally silent.
However, we find that as per Section 79 of the Electricity Act, 1948 the conditions of service for the employees could only be prescribed by the regulations which could only be made by issuing a notification in the official gazette.
In so far as the submission of the appellant's counsel that options were invited from the employees including the Junior Engineers to opt for a particular cadre is concerned, it is the specific case of respondent Nos. 1 to 16, that no such option was ever invited from them.
On the other hand, the orders Annexures A-1 to A-3 appended with Civil Miscellaneous Application No. 6353 of 1997 clearly depict that the posts of the Junior Engineers were inter- transferable, which in other words, further shows that all the Junior Engineers constituted a common cadre.
It is not in dispute that the Board has made promotions from amongst the Junior Engineers who had qualified the BE/AMIE Examination, on ad hoc basis against the vacancies of direct recruits.
The primary grievance of respondent Nos. 1 to 16 in their writ petition was that at the time of making these ad hoc appointments, the Board considered the claim of only Junior Engineers working in the General Cadre and totally ignored the claim of those working in the Generation Cadre despite the fact the Junior Engineers in the Generation Cadre were senior to those working in the General Cadre, in the order of merit at the time of initial recruitment and had even qualified the A.M.I.E./B.E.
examination prior to them.
In reply to these averments in the writ petition, the stand of the Board was not comprehensive.
It has not been specifically denied on behalf of the Board that respondent Nos. 1 to 16 had not qualified the BE/AMIE prior to respondent Nos. 17 to 31 and thus, had a right for being considered for promotion to the post of Assistant Engineers, even on a date prior to the date of consideration of their cases.
11.
Though the Board has taken a categoric stand that the promotions made vide orders Annexures P-2 to P-4 were against the quota of 125% meant for B.E./A.M.I.E.
and the same stand has also now been taken in appeal by the appellant in Letters Patent Appeal No. 641 of 1997, but a perusal of the Notes appended to the promotion orders impugned in the writ petition clearly shows that the promotions made by virtue of those orders to the posts of Assistant Engineers were made against the quota meant for direct recruits and once that is so, respondent Nos. 17 to 31 would certainly have no preferential right for being considered for promotion qua respondent Nos. 1 to 16.
12.
The argument of Shri Sanjiv Bansal that respondent Nos. 1 to 16 are estopped from challenging the promotions of respondent Nos. 17 to 31 because they had not questioned the bifurcation of the cadre of Engineering Subordinates/Junior Engineers is clearly misconceived.
It is an uncontroverted fact that the posts of Junior Engineers as well as Assistant Engineers were inter-transferable and no order bifurcating that cadre was issued by the competent authority.
That apart, once it is found that the cadre of Assistant Engineers is one, there could be no justification to deny consideration for promotion to respondent Nos. 1 to 16, who were admittedly senior to respondent Nos. 17 to 31.
No other point has been argued.
In the result, the appeals are dismissed.
Appeals dismissed.