ML Bhat, J - Through the medium of this writ petition the petitioner challenges the order of his dismissal dated 411982 and the decision on his appeal dated 30121982.
The facts giving rise to this petition are set out briefly.
The petitioner was promoted as officer in the year 1908 and was posted as a Branch Manager of the Bank.
He is said to have been confirmed on 9101969.
The confirmation order is passed by the Executive Committee of the Central Board at its meeting held on 30.9.1969.
In the year 1976 the petitioner was posted as Branch Manager, Dhanaura Mandi Branch of the State Bank of India in district Moradabad.
The petitioner submits that at the time of his joining at the said branch there was shortage of staff to assist him in the discharge of this enormous duties.
He is Said to have made several requests for increasing the staff to cope up with the increased activities of the Bank.
However, his request was not considered.
At the relevant time the Prime Minister's 20 Point Programme was being implemented and financial assistance was to be provided to the weaker section of the society in the rural areas and to small scale industries.
The officers of the Bank also had reported about the inadequacy and inefficiency of the staff.
One Sri CK Gupta, who was interested to join at the petitioner's Branch, managed to get himself transferred to the petitioner's Branch and the petitioner was transferred to another Branch where Sri CK Gupta was posted.
2.
In respect of some cash credit accounts irregularities were detected.
One such account was in the name of one firm of which the petitioner's son was a partner.
The petitioner is said to have agreed to pay the balance debt of his son at the rate of Rs. 400/- per month from his salary.
According to the petitioner opening of cash credit account of his son in the Bank was not against the rules.
The said Sri CK Gupta is said to have made complaint against the petitioner in which it was alleged that the petitioner was making alterations in the documents.
The Bank directed the said Sri CK Gupta not to allow access to the petitioner to the documents of the Bank.
Some enquiry is said to have been made against the petitioner by four officers of the Bank on the complaint of the said Sri CK Gupta.
As a result of this preliminary enquiry the petitioner is said to have received a charge-sheet on 1931980, which is Annexure 6 to the writ petition.
The petitioner's case is that he had desired to see and examine the records so as to file reply to the charge-sheet, which was not allowed to him.
The petitioner had written a letter also in this regard which was replied by the Bank.
Copies of the letter and the reply are placed on the record.
The petitioner, therefore, is said to have filed a brief reply to the charges.
Thereafter, the enquiry authority was appointed by the Bank and one Sri R.P.
Sinha was appointed as Presiding Officer for the Bank, who is said to have been conversant with the procedure and legal matters and in respect of domestic enquiries he was considered to be an expert.
The petitioner is said to have requested for being allowed to engage a lawyer in the domestic enquiry, which request was rejected.
On the basis of the enquiry report the impugned order of dismissal, was passed against the petitioner.
The enquiry officer has given a finding on the charges in a most cryptic manner.
After giving narration of facts he has held the articles of charge proved.
This type of finding is said to be without application of mind and not supported by any reason.
Without giving show-cause notice to the petitioner about the proposed punishment he was arbitrarily punished and dismissed from service, which according to the petitioner was an extreme penalty.
The appeal also had met the same fate.
It was decided without affording an opportunity of being heard to the petitioner.
3.
The petitioner's case is that he could not be dismissed from service by the respondent No. 2, who was not his appointing authority.
His appointing authority was a higher authority to the respondent No. 2.
In this regard, the petitioner has relied on Regulation 55 applicable to the Bank.
The said Regulation prescribed that no officer or employee of the Bank shall be dismissed from service of the State Bank of India by an authority lower than the appointing authority.
The said Regulation reads as under :  55(1).
Save as provided in sub-regulation (2) and as may be directed by the Central Board a Local Board may exercise all the powers of the State Bank in respect of the staff serving in the areas in its jurisdiction.
(2)(a).
The initial appointments and promotions to various categories of employees in the Bank shall be made.
(i) In the case of officers and employees starting on a pay lower than the starting pay in the scale applicable for the time being to officers Grade II, by such authorities in the State Bank as may be specified where the appointment or promotion is for service in the Circle, by the Chief General Manager concerned and where the appointment or promotion is for service in or under Central Officer, by the Managing Director.
(ii) In the case of Officers Grade II and Grade I and of other employees of whom the Rules of Service applicable to officers Grade II or Grade I generally apply with or without modifications, the Chief General Manager concerned or the Managing Director according as the appointment or promotion is for service in the Circle or in or under Central office.
(iii) In the case of staff officer of various grades and of other employees to whom rules of service applicable to senior staff appointment generally apply with or without modifications, by the Managing Director.
(iv) In the case of senior staff appointment and the employees to whom Rules of service applicable to Senior Staff appointments generally apply with or without modifications by the Executive Committee.
Such officers or employees shall not be dismissed from service of the State Bank by an authority lower than the appointing authority."
4.
Relying on this Regulation the petitioner states that he was appointed by the Executive Committee of the Central Board, therefore, he could be dismissed by the said Board and not by the respondent No. 2.
The dismissal order is said to be without jurisdiction.
The petitioner has stated that the proceedings against him were initiated at the instance of Sri CK Gupta, who had malice against the petitioner.
It is further stated that the report of the ex parte preliminary enquiry was not given to the petitioner in spite of several requests.
The charges given against the petitioner are said to be vague, uncertain and indefinite and he was not allowed to file an effective reply to the said charges.
The charges were not accompanied by a list of documents on which the charges were based.
The petitioner's case is that he was not allowed to see the documents to enable him to file the reply.
It is submitted by the petitioner that the Central Vigilance Commission was not consulted by the respondents though there is a provision for consulting the Central Vigilance Commission under Rule 52 of the State Bank Supervision Staff Rules, hereinafter called as 'the Service Rules'.
5.
It is submitted that the Bank had not suspended the petitioner initially which would indicate that the Bank did not think the charges so serious as would merit dismissal or any major punishment against the petitioner, therefore, he was allowed to work till the issuance of the impugned order.
The petitioner has also levelled allegations against the enquiry officer, who is said to have misconducted himself.
On the question of punishment the petitioner was not heard.
He was awarded major punishment without hearing him and the charges levelled against the petitioner would not warrant punishment of dismissal.
The appellate authority also did not afford any opportunity to the petitioner before deciding the appeal, therefore, the appellate order is also vitiated.
The petitioner could have explained that he had not violated any Service Rules and it was the case of the petitioner throughout that he had not violated any rules.
The petitioner's service record was clean and unblemished.
If any irregularity was found against the petitioner, minor punishment could have been awarded to him, which would satisfy the ends of justice.
No charge was proved against the petitioner and he had not committed any irregularity.
6.
In their counter-affidavit the respondents have stated that the appointing authority is defined in Rule 3(f)(i) of the Service Rules, which reads as under :  "3(f) Appointing Authority means :  (i) in the case of Officers Grade II and Grade I and of other employees to whom the salary scales applicable to Officers Grade II and Grade I generally apply with or without modification, the Chief General Manager concerned or the Managing Director according as the employee is serving in the Circle in or under Central office."
6-A.
The petitioner belongs to a category of officers whose appointing authority is the respondent No. 2.
It is stated that the respondent No. 2, therefore, had the complete jurisdiction to dismiss the petitioner.
It is also stated that the charges were proved against the petitioner on enquiry and the charges were of such nature which amounted to misconduct of a serious nature.
After the financial irregularities were found out against the petitioner, he is said to have raised the demand for more staff at the Branch.
The allegations made against one Sri CK Gupta are also denied as being false.
It is submitted that the benefit was given to the son of the petitioner, who was a partner in a firm named and styled as Kumar and Brothers and this benefit was in clear violation of Rule 34(6)(ii).
This provision of the Rule does not permit an employee to grant loan on behalf of the Bank to his relative, to an individual in respect of whom a relative is a partner or guarantor, to a Joint Hindu Family in which a relative is a member, to a firm in which a relative is a partner, Manager or guarantor and to a company in which a relative holds substantial interested or is interest as director, manager or guarantor.
7.
Under Rules the petitioner was not entitled to receive a report of the fact finding enquiry before initiation of the disciplinary proceedings.
The report of the fact finding enquiry was not, however, relied upon by the departmental enquiry committee.
They had conducted a separate enquiry.
Therefore, furnishing of a report of fact finding preliminary enquiry was not necessary.
In respect of the petitioner's letter to inspect the documents before filing of the reply the respondents have relied on Annexure 9 to the writ petition.
In this letter the petitioner is said to have been informed that his request could not be acceded to as he had failed to specify the documents/records that had to be perused for preparation of reply to the charge-sheet.
The presenting officer appointed by the Bank was neither a lawyer nor legally trained nor is Rule 10(2)(vii) discriminatory.
8.
The Service Rules do not require giving of second show-cause notice about the proposed punishment.
In this respect Rule 50 is referred which gives detailed procedure for conduct of the enquiry and the manner in which it should be concluded.
The appeal also is said to have been decided in accordance with law.
There is no provision for personal hearing under the rules.
At the time of passing of the impugned order the respondent No. 2 was the appointing authority of the petitioner, therefore, by virtue of Regulation 55 of the Regulations and by virtue of Rule 3(f) of the Service Rules the respondent No. 2 had the competence to award the punishment to the petitioner.
The petitioner belonged to erstwhile Officer Grade I and he is equivalent to MMGS Grade II.
Therefore, his grievance with regard to awarding of punishment by the respondent No. 2 is absolutely untenable.
The allegations against Sri CK Gupta are completely denied.
About the charges it is stated that the petitioner had committed grave financial irregularities and misconducted himself under the rules, violated the mandate of the rules, therefore, he could be dismissed and the order of dismissal is commensurate with the gravity of the charges.
Reference is made to Rule 48 of the Service Rules, which says that 'a breach of any of the provisions of' these rules shall be deemed to constitute misconduct punishable under Rule 49, which provides punishment for misconduct.
Dismissal is a major punishment.
9.
The petitioner has filed rejoinder affidavit also.
He has reiterated the same pleas which are asserted by him in the writ petition.
He challenges the competence of the respondent No. 2 to punish him and complains that the principles of natural justice were violated by the respondents, inasmuch as no report was given to him.
He had to be given a fair opportunity to defend himself, which was not given to him.
10.
The charge-sheet and substance of imputation of misconduct in respect of these charges are also placed on record.
11.
The petitioner has relied on some case law.
In case of the Krishna Kumar v. Divisional Assistant Electrical Engineer, Central Railway, reported in AIR 1979 SC 1912, it was held that the petitioner's removal from service was ordered by an authority subordinate to the appointing authority, such a removal was bad.
The same principle is reiterated in AIR 1976 SC 1899, Baradkanta Misra v. High Court of Orissa.
12.
Mr. AN Tripathi, appearing for the petitioner, has submitted that the irregularities alleged to have been committed by the petitioner were of trivial nature, therefore, he should not have been given the punishment of dismissal.
He relies on the case of Rama Kant Misra v. State of UP, reported in AIR 1982 SC 1552.
This was a case in which indiscreet language disclosing threatening posture was used by the workman against his co-workman.
The order of dismissal was reversed because the dismissal was not commensurate with the gravity of offence.
No misconduct of any grave nature was committed by the workman.
In respect of necessity of supply of copy of the enquiry report to the petitioner reliance is placed on AIR 1988 SC 1000, Union of India v. E Bashyan.
This question was referred to the larger Bench in view of the 42nd Amendment, which has dispensed with the second show-cause notice.
With regard to the effect of non-supply of statement of witnesses examined during investigation of preliminary enquiry reliance is placed on the case of State of Punjab v. Bhagat Ram, reported in AIR 1974 SC 2335.
It was held that the statement of witnesses recorded during investigation should be given to the delinquent officer so as to give him reasonable opportunity of defending himself.
The same principle was upheld by the Supreme Court in State of Gujarat v. Ramesh Chandra Mashruwala, reported in AIR 1977 SC 1619.
In the case of State of Madhya Pradesh v. Chintaman Sadashiva, reported in AIR 1961 SC 1623 the same principle was reiterated by the Supreme Court.
13.
Mr. SN Verma, learned counsel appearing for the respondents, has referred to Annexure 7 to the writ petition in which the petitioner has sought one month's time to file his reply to the charge-sheet.
Annexure 8 to the writ petition also is a request by the petitioner to permit him to see the documents/records relating to the charge-sheet in the office.
Annexure CA 2 to the counter-affidavit is minutes of the enquiry proceedings on 1321981.
It is recorded that the petitioner had stated before the enquiry officer that he had already completed inspection of the listed documents and had also inspected the documents given in the additional list by him.
He was permitted to inspect further documents by the inquiry officer and complete the inspection by 2621981.
The regular enquiry was fixed on 24th to 26th March, 1981.
The minutes of the enquiry proceedings have not been denied by the petitioner.
Therefore, it is stated that the petitioner cannot complain that he was not given opportunity to examine the documents or see the records.
He was given full opportunity to examine the documents and had examined the same before filing the reply.
14.
As to whether the documents were permitted to be inspected by the petitioner or not is a question of fact.
Whether the petitioner had examined the documents or not is also a question of fact, Annexure CA 2 to the counter-affidavit would establish that the petitioner had requested for inspection of the documents and records and he was given ample opportunity to have inspection and examination of the documents which he had desired to inspect.
Therefore, the fact that the petitioner had inspected the documents and had been given opportunity of inspecting the documents is not in doubt.
In view of this factual position it cannot be said that the petitioner was denied reasonable opportunity of inspection of documents as desired by him.
There is no violation of principles of natural justice, as urged by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
In our opinion, the principles of natural justice seem to have been fully satisfied and there is ample proof for that on the record.
15.
It was not necessary to associate the petitioner in the fact finding enquiry.
That was in the nature of preliminary enquiry.
No rule or regulation was placed before us which would mandate the respondents to associate the petitioner with the preliminary enquiry.
Preliminary enquiry is a fact finding enquiry to find out as to whether regular enquiry in presence of the petitioner was required in the case or not.
If in the preliminary enquiry there was no material against the petitioner, no further enquiry would have been required.
In fact the object of the preliminary enquiry was whether there was necessity for holding a detailed probe in the alleged financial irregularities committed by the petitioner.
Therefore, the petitioner cannot complain that he was not associated with the preliminary enquiry.
16.
The petitioner's grievance is that there is a Vigilance Cell, which could have gone into these facts because the charges against the petitioner were of a criminal nature.
That provision is only directory and it does not preclude the respondents to hold departmental enquiry without referring the matter to the Central Vigilance.
The provision regarding enquiry through Central Vigilance is an enabling provision.
In addition to the powers vested in the Bank to hold an enquiry it enables the Bank to get vigilance enquiry completed in appropriate cases in which the respondent-Bank is of the opinion that such an enquiry is necessary.
The provision for having vigilance enquiry does not preclude the Bank from holding regular domestic enquiry of its own Therefore, no right is infringed if a domestic enquiry of its own.
Therefore, no right is infringed if a domestic enquiry is held by the respondents against the petitioner without there being any vigilance enquiry against the petitioner in be first place.
17.
It is stated by the respondents in the counter-affidavit that the report of the fact finding enquiry i.e. preliminary enquiry was not relied upon by the enquiry officer in the regular enquiry.
The inquiry officer had conducted the enquiry independently of the preliminary enquiry report and had come to his own findings.
Therefore also the petitioner cannot raise any doubt about the conduct of the preliminary enquiry.
18.
It was argued that the imputations would reveal that the petitioner had committed misconduct of a serious nature and as Manager of the Bank he had abused his position by granting financial assistance to his son and to the relatives of other employees of the Bank and had granted loan to certain persons, which was beyond his competence, therefore, the charges against the petitioner are grave and he cannot be retained by the Bank.
His misconduct has the effect of eroding the credibility of the Bank and shaking the faith of the people in the Banking system.
The punishment, therefore, is commensurate with the gravity of the charges.
19.
With regard to the powers of the respondent No. 2 to dismiss the petitioner it is submitted that the respondent No. 2 is the appointing authority and he was the appointing authority at the relevant time.
Therefore, there is no jurisdictional defect in the order of dismissal.
Reliance is placed on the case of State Bank of India v. S Vijaya Kumar, reported in AIR 1991 SC 79.
20.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties on the factual as well as legal aspects of the matter.
21.
There is no violation of principles of natural justice.
The petitioner had demanded inspection of certain documents, which was allowed to him, which is reflected by Annexure CA 2 to the counter-affidavit.
This fact is recorded by the enquiry officer in the minutes dated 1321981.
Therefore, the petitioner cannot be said to have been prejudiced on this count.
Consequently, the authorities relied upon by the petitioner would not come to his rescue because factually it is proved that the petitioner was given opportunity to inspect the documents and he had participated in that enquiry.
That being so, he cannot complain that the principles of natural justice have been violated.
22.
For appointing of the Presenting Officer Rule 50(2)(vii) of the Rules does not make any discrimination between the employees and the Bank in seeking the assistance.
It is incorrect to suggest that the Bank under rules can appoint an expert and that facility is denied to the delinquent officer.
From reading the rule no such discrimination was found by us.
Therefore, the petitioner's contention in this behalf is misplaced.
23.
About the competence of the respondent No. 2 to award the punishment, the petitioner has stated that he was appointed by the Executive Committee of the Central Board initially.
That may be true but subsequently with the change in the rules and in view of Rule 3(f) of he rules his appointing authority is the respondent No. 2.
Therefore, the respondent No. 2 had the competence to dismiss him from service.
This matter is, now clinched by the judgment reported in AIR 1991 SC 9 (supra).
24.
It is proved from the record that the petitioner had committed irregularities of grave nature.
The charge-sheet, which was given to the petitioner, would show that the charges of serious financial irregularities were framed against the petitioner and he had violated the rules, inasmuch as he had granted cash credit facility to a firm in which his son was a partner and he had advanced cash credit facility to the relatives of the employees of the Bank and had also given financial assistance, which was not within his powers.
Therefore, for violation of the rules he has committed misconduct under Rule 49 of the Rules.
It is provided under Rule 48 that any violation of the rules would also amount to misconduct punishable under Rule 49.
Therefore, there is no doubt that the petitioner had committed misconduct, which is punishable under Rule 49.
Being an officer he had an onerous duty to comply with the rules and not to indulge in financial irregularities.
Therefore, the punishment awarded to the petitioner does not appear to be excessive.
25.
The learned counsel for the petitioner in reply has produced an authority of the Supreme Court, Ex. Naik Sardar Singh v. Union of India, reported in AIR 1992 SC 417 : 1992(1) R.C.R.
(Criminal) 583 : 1992(2) S.C.T.
688.
In this case an Army Jawan was found to have extra seven bottles of Rum within an area under prohibition while going to his home town.
He had permit to carry five bottles of Rum but he had carried 12 bottles of Rum in violation of the permit.
On this ground he was dismissed by Court Martial.
The Supreme Court held that the punishment of dismissal was not commensurate with the gravity of the offence, which was committed by the Army Jawan.
This is an authority, which would not apply to the present case, inasmuch as the Army Jawan had permit to carry five bottles.
Carrying 12 bottles on the said permit was not a serious offence.
It was held to be a trivial matter by the Supreme Court.
Another authority, Laxmi Shankar Pandey v Union of India, reported in AIR 1991 SC 1070 : 1992(1) SCT 342 (SC) would also not come to the petitioner's help though that authority has distinguishing facts.
26.
The appellate authority was not bound to give a right of hearing to the petitioner.
It had to consider the appeal on merits.
The rules, with regard to consideration of appeal, had been followed.
Therefore, there is no error committed by the appellate authority also.
27.
With regard to the domestic enquiry the rule is well settled that in writ jurisdiction the High Court cannot re-appreciate the evidence recorded during enquiry nor can it make repraisal of the evidence.
It can interfere only if there is no evidence or if appreciation of evidence is perverse.
Otherwise with the factual matters the High Court would not interfere in its writ jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution.
28.
For the reasons stated above, we are of the opinion that there is no error in the record of the respondents or in the impugned order which could be corrected by this Court in its writ jurisdiction.
The petitioner has failed to make out a case for intemperance in the impugned orders by this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
29.
The writ petition is accordingly dismissed.
However, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.