The petitioner is aggrieved allegedly against frequent transfers made by the respondents due to likes and dis-likes of his superiors.
The petitioner had already filed Civil Writ Petition No. 9068 of 2003 which was disposed of by this Court vide order dated August 14, 2003 with the following observations :-  "We have heard the petitioner in person and the learned counsel for the respondents.
The petitioner has alleged mala fides against respondent No. 4-Dr. OP Chhikara.
We accordingly dispose of this writ petition with a direction that the Vice-Chancellor shall himself examine the petitioner's case and make such order as he deems proper in the circumstances."
2.
Pursuant to the aforesaid order, the petitioner was actually heard by the Vice-Chancellor.
During personal hearing, the petitioner re-iterated the entire cause of action as pleaded in the writ petition.
The Vice-Chancellor examined the entire record and came to the conclusion that the petitioner was transferred from village Kasala to Matlauda (Panipat) as his work was not satisfactory and thereafter he has been transferred on a number of occasions on his own request to a station near Delhi.
The Vice-Chancellor has also observed that Agricultural Inspectors/Fieldman are working under the supervision of a Supervisor.
The Vice-Chancellor even obtained the report from the supervisor of the petitioner as well as from the Head of Department of Agriculture Economics.
It was reported that the petitioner had been posted at the place of his choice on a number of occasions.
He misbehaved with ex-Head of the Department, Scheme Incharge and Cluster Incharge.
He even tried to attack him with a weapon.
He was rarely available at his headquarters.
A number of complaints were pending about his work and conduct which have been sent to the Head of Department.
In fact, the respondents have even come to the conclusion that disciplinary action ought to be initiated against the petitioner.
The petitioner has submitted that the action of the respondents is mala fide.
3.
Undoubtedly, some reference has been made in the order passed by the Vice- Chancellor to the alleged misconduct committed by the petitioner.
The same cannot, however, be said to be foundation of the order of transfer.
Unless the order is founded on misconduct, it cannot be said to be actuated by malice.
The order of transfer has been clearly passed in the exigencies of service.
In the light of above discussion, we find no reason to interfere.
Dismissed.
Petition dismissed.