SS Nijjar, J. (Oral) - In this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner is seeking issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to grant 100% pension to him w.e.f.
the date he retired.
2.
It is not disputed that having completed satisfactory service, the petitioner retired on superannuation on 3152002.
75% of the pension of the petitioner has been released on 2522003.
25% of the pension and other retiral benefits are said to be withheld on the ground that a show-cause notice dated 7.12.1998 has been issued to the petitioner with regard to certain material which was handed over to him while he was in service.
The petitioner submitted reply dated 12121998.
The respondents have not taken any final decision on the show cause notice.
The petitioner has submitted representation dated 2722003 seeking release of remaining pensionary benefits.
Even the representation has not been decided till date.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the departmental enquiry will only begin with the issuance of the charge-sheet.
Till date, no charge sheet has been issued.
He, therefore, submits that there is no justification which would enable the respondents to withhold the pension.
4.
Having considered the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties, we are of the considered opinion that the claim made by the petitioner is fully justified.
5.
It has been settled by the Supreme Court in case of PR Nayak v Union of India, AIR 1972 SC 554 that issuance of a charge-sheet is sine-qua-non for initiation of departmental enquiry.
Till date, no charge-sheet has been issued.
There is no justification for withholding the pension of the petitioner.
6.
In view of the above, the petition is allowed.
A writ of mandamus is issued directing the respondents to release the remaining pension and other retiral benefits to the petitioner.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to interest @ 9% pa. on the delayed release of the pension and other retiral benefits till payment.
In other words, the petitioner shall be paid interest on 75% of the pension from the date of retirement till the amount was released on 2522003 and further 9% interest on 25% of the pension from the date of retirement till payment.
The petitioner shall also be paid interest on any of the unpaid amounts on account of GP Fund, gratuity etc. Let the entire benefits alongwith interest be released to the petitioner within a period of two months from today.
Petition allowed.