Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - Civil Writ Petition Nos. 333, 334, 1505 and 1507 of 1992 filed by the Punjab State Cooperative Supply and Marketing Federation Limited (hereinafter referred to as 'the Federation') are being disposed of by a common judgment, as in all these petitions common questions of law and fact are involved.
2.
For the purpose of this judgment, the facts are being collected from Civil Writ Petition No. 333 of 1992 (The Punjab State Cooperative Supply and Marketing Federation Limited v. Uttam Singh and another, 1994(3) SCT.
239).
3.
In all the petitions, the law point canvassed by the petitioner is that the Additional Registrar (Administration) of Cooperative Societies, Punjab, exercising the powers of Registrar, Co-operative Societies Punjab, Chandigarh had neither the jurisdiction nor the power to reduce the punishment awarded to the respondents who were dismissed by the Managing Director exercising the powers of Administrative Committee vide order dated 381988 copy of which is Annexure P-1 to the writ petition :  4.
Shorn of unnecessary details, the relevant history of the case is that Uttam Singh respondent and Anokh Singh were served with a charge-sheet No. 3971 dated 1451987.
Uttam Singh respondent and Anokh Singh submitted their respective replies to the charge-sheet.
However, the same was not found satisfactory by the authorities.
Consequently, regular departmental inquiry was initiated and the Inquiry Officer returned a finding that the charge of mis-appropriation stood proved against Uttam Singh respondent and Anokh Singh.
Thereafter, the management served a second show cause notice.
Uttam Singh and Anokh Singh submitted replies, but the same were not found satisfactory.
The Managing Director of the Federation exercising the powers of Administrative Committee vide his order dated 381988 ordered the dismissal of Uttam Singh respondent and Anokh Singh from the service and in addition ordered loss to be recovered from the delinquent officials i.e. Uttam Singh, respondent and Anokh Singh as also Amar Singh and Bua Ditta (respondents in other writ petitions).
The delinquent officials filed appeals before the Administrator, exercising the powers of Board of Directors of the Federation.
The same were, however, rejected vide order dated 11.5.1990 copy of which is Annexure P-2 to the writ petition.
The respondents thereafter against the order of the Punishing Authority and the Appellate Authority filed revision petition before the Registrar, Co-operative Societies, Punjab, Chandigarh who assigned the same to the Additional Registrar (Administration) Co-operative Societies, Punjab, Chandigarh exercising the powers of Registrar, Co-operative Societies, Punjab, who vide his order dated 1691991 reduced the punishment of dismissal to that of stoppage of three annual grade (sic) with cumulative effect.
The Revisional Authority also waived the recovery of loss.
Copy of the order of the Revisional Authority is Annexure P-3 to this writ petition.
5.
Dissatisfied with the order of the Revisional Authority, the Federation has filed these writ petitions under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution for quashing the said order.
6.
The challenge to the impugned order is that the Inquiry Officer had found the delinquent officials guilty of the charges consequent to which the dismissal orders were passed by the Punishing Authority and the same was confirmed by the Appellate Authority and as such the Revisional Authority had no power to reduce the punishment in the matter.
7.
Counsel appearing for the Federation argued that the scope of revision is limited.
The Revisional Authority can look into the matter only if there is irregularity or impropriety in the order and not otherwise.
In order to substantiate his argument, the counsel has invited attention of the Court to Section 115 of the Code of Civil Procedure to show that while exercising powers under Section 115 of the Code of Civil Procedure, the scope is very limited.
He has placed reliance on State of Orissa and others v. Bidyabhushan Mohapatra, AIR 1963 SC 779, K Balasubramania Chetty v. NM Sambandamoorthy Chetty, A.I.R. 1975 SC 818, Manick Chandra Nandy v. Debdas Nandy and others, AIR 1986 SC 446 and Union of India v. Parma Nanda, AIR 1989 Supreme Court 1185.
8.
Mr. HS Gill, learned counsel appearing for the respondents has contended with vehemence that the Revisional Authority had exercised the powers with restraint and the said power has been exercised as conferred by the Punjab State Supply and Marketing Co-operative Services (Common Cadre) Rules, 1967 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Rules').
The counsel has invited this Court's attention to Rule 217(e) of the Rules to say that orders of the Registrar Co-operative Societies Punjab ate binding on both the parties and they are not amenable to challenge.
9.
On the consideration of the matter and perusing the law points on the issue as also the relevant Rules, I find no substance in the submissions of the learned counsel for the Federation.
10.
What is the scope of revisional jurisdiction ?
This question may have to be answered in the context of language used in the different statutes.
The strict limitations prescribed in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 for exercising the revisional jurisdiction are not to be made applicable when the matter is being adjudicated upon in a case which does not arise under the Code.
In 1964, in Puran Chand v. Moti Lal, AIR 1964 Supreme Court 461, the Supreme Court came to the conclusion that the power of the High Court under Section 35 of the Delhi and Ajmer Rent Control Act is wider than that under Section 115 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908.
As a matter of fact, the preponderance of the judicial view is that where the statute uses the word 'Legal or propriety' then the authority exercising power can deal with questions of law as also facts.
In Rai Chand Jain v. Miss Chandra Kanta Khosla, A.I.R. 1991 SC 744 : 1991(1) R.C.R.
(Rent) 128, the Supreme Court held that the High Court while exercising its powers under Section 15(6) of the Rent Act is within its jurisdiction to reverse the findings of fact if these are improper and illegal.
The relevant part of the judgment reads :-  "The High Court in exercising its power under Section 15(6) of the said Act is within its jurisdiction to reverse the findings of fact as the same were improper and also illegal.
It is appropriate to refer in this connection to the decision in the case of Ram Dass v. Ishwar Chander, (1988) 3 SCC 131 : (AIR 1988 SC 1422 : 1988(1) R.C.R.
(Rent) 625) where it has been held that Section 15(5) of the Act enables the High Court to satisfy itself as to the 'legality and propriety' of the order under revision which is, quite obviously, a much wider jurisdiction.
That jurisdiction enables the Court of revision, in appropriate cases, to examine the correctness of the findings of facts also, though the revisional Court is not a 'a second court of first appeal (see Dattopant Gopalrao Devakate v. Vithalrao Marutirao, A.I.R. 1975 SC 1111).
Therefore, this content is without any substance.
It is appropriate to mention in this connection the decision rendered by this Court in the case of Vinod Kumar Arora v. Smt. Surjit Kaur, (1987) 3 SCR.
552 : (AIR 1987 SC 2179 : 1987(2) R.C.R.
(Rent) 156) where it was held that the findings of the Rent Controller and the Appellate Authority are vitiated by inherent defects.
The High Court was, therefore, justified in taking the view that those findings have no binding force on the revisional Court."
While dealing with the scope of revisional jurisdiction under the Punjab Co-operative Societies Act, this Court in Thoru Ram v. The Under Secretary Development, (1986) 1 Punjab Legal Reports and Statutes 269 : 1984 R.R.R.
255 concluded that the revisional authority can look into the legality as also the propriety of the order under revision and go into facts also.
In Vinod Kumar Arora v. Smt. Surjit Kaur, (1987) 3 SCR.
552, it was held that the findings of the Rent Controller and the Appellate Authority are vitiated by inherent defects.
The High Court was, therefore, justified in taking the view that those findings have no binding force on the revisional Court.
11.
In the instant case, the Revisional Authority had exercised power under Rule 217(e) of the Rules of 1967 which reads as under :-  "The decision of the appellate authority shall be final, except in case of permanent employee of the Federation, Societies, as the case maybe in which case a revision petition against the decision of the Board of Directors shall be to the Registrar Co-operative Societies, Punjab within 30 days of such decision.
The orders of the Registrar, Co-operative Societies Punjab on such revision petition shall be final and binding on both the parties."
12.
The order of the Appellate Authority in the case in hand cannot be deemed to be final for the reasons that the delinquents were employees of the Federation and they had a right to file a revision petition by virtue of Rule 217(e) against the decision of the Board of Directors before the Registrar, Co-operative Societies, Punjab, Chandigarh.
The order of the Registrar, Co- operative Societies Punjab on such revision, per provision of Rule 217(e) is binding on the parties.
In view of the statutory provisions, the Federation as well as delinquent employees were bound to honour the order of the Revisional Authority.
13.
In view of the aforesaid discussion, it becomes clear that the scope of revisional jurisdiction is not restricted and it is exercisable by the Registrar Co-operative Societies Punjab.
It is more so, when revisional jurisdiction is exercised by the Revisional Authority while dealing with service matter.
With a view to do justice, the authority is to look into the propriety and legality of the order and while doing so, the authority would not even hesitate to reverse the finding of fact.
Thus, the scope of revision under Service Jurisprudence cannot be curtailed.
14.
Thus, it becomes patent that the scope of revisional jurisdiction which is exercised under the Code of Civil Procedure is not relevant when revisional jurisdiction is exercised by other authorities.
It is more so in the case of revisional jurisdiction exercised by the disciplinary authorities while dealing with service matter.
With a view to do justice if the authority exercising power has to look into the facts and if the decision of the subordinate authorities is not based on facts, it is under a duty to do justice and while doing so, can reverse even a finding of fact.
Thus, the scope of revision under the Service Jurisprudence cannot be curtailed by the limitation which are imposed by the Courts on the exercise of revisional jurisdiction under the Code of Civil Procedure.
In view of what has been discussed above, no case for interference in the well reasoned order of the Revisional Authority is made out.
As a consequence all the writ petitions are dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.