NK Kapoor, J - Dr SK Mehta, Professor and Head of Department of Gastroenterology, Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research (for short 'PGIMER') Chandigarh, has sought quashing of the appointment of respondent No. 4 - Dr. BK Sharma, Head of Department of Internal Medicines, PGIMER, as Dean of the Institute and also sought writ of prohibition against respondent Nos. 1 to 3 from appointing Sh. BK Sharma as Dean of the PGIMER, Chandigarh, and further restraining respondent No. 4 - Dr. BK Sharma from functioning as Dean of the Institute during the pendency of the writ petition.
In support of his plea the petitioner has relied upon various provisions of the Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education & Research, Chandigarh Act, 1966 (No. 51 of 1966), Rules of 1967 as amended upto-date and Regulations framed in exercise of powers under sub-section (2) read with sub-section (1) of Section 32 of the Act as well as the past practice with regard to the appointment of the Dean of the Institute wherein seniority, suitability and such other factors were invariably taken into consideration while choosing an incumbent.
2.
Claiming the appointment on the basis of the seniority, the petitioner relied upon the seniority list, Annexure P-2, as per which the petitioner is shown at serial No. 9.
The petitioner further averred that except for Dr. B N S Walia, Director of the Institute, other persons whose names find mention in the seniority list have since retired and this way for all intents and purposes the petitioner is to be considered as senior most Professor as on April 1, 1993.
Respondent No. 4 - Dr. BK Sharma in the seniority list, Annexure P-2, is at serial No. 10.
In addition to his claim to the post of Dean being seniormost, the petitioner highlighted his unblemished record of service, i.e., there is no adverse annual confidential report against the name of the petitioner nor the petitioner has been punished in any departmental proceedings ever conducted.
According to the petitioner, he is head of the division of Gastroenterology since the year 1966 and Head of the Department of Gastroenterology since 1978 and over the years has shouldered administrative functions of high responsibility without any blemish.
As recently as on May 1, 1988, he was nominated as member of the governing body of the Institute Body.
The petitioner has been a member of the Purchase Committee as well as Academic Committee of the Institute The petitioner is also solely responsible for the development of the department of the Gastroenterology as a 'Super Speciality' and is a top class Clinical and Diagnostic Centre in the said speciality in the country.
The Department of Gastroenterology in the PGIMER has also been helping other universities in the development of the particular speciality.
In fact, the petitioner has rendered official assistance to the Study Groups from Benaras University, Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Institute, Lucknow, Indira Gandhi Institute of Medical Sciences, Patna.
Presently, the petitioner has been associated as an expert by the Union Public Service Commission as well as by the Public Service Commission for the States of UP, Rajasthan and Himachal Pradesh for selection of Gastroenterology specialists of various cadres.
The petitioner is also an expert for the selection of Professor of him Gastroenterology at the All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, as well as for selection of Director, Rohtak Medical College, Haryana.
The petitioner is recipient of 'Hari Om Ashram, Alembic Award'.
In addition thereto, the petitioner has been given the following awards by the Indian society of Gastroenterology :-  (a) Warners,  (b) Pfizer,  (c) Amir Chand Trophy for the best run department in the country.
This being the achievements/merit of the petitioner, his case has been greatly prejudiced by totally mala fide action of the Director who has been inimical to the petitioner from the beginning.
The inimical attitude of Dr. BNS Walia, Director of the Institute is writ large as is clear from the various acts/omissions even before the impugned appointment.
For instance, the post of Sub-Dean was created to assist and advise the Dean incharge of his duties and ever since the creation of the post of Sub-Dean the senior-most professor next to the Dean had invariably been appointed as Sub-Dean by an unbroken practice prevalent in the PGIMER.
Appointment to the post of Sub-Dean has been made by the Director of the PGIMER right from the year 1977 to April, 1992 and senior-most professor next to the Dean held this post.
The appointments which were made by Dr. Walia as Director of the Institute of Dr JS Gujral, Dr. BN Dutta and Dr. KS Chugh, Annexures P-8/A to P-8/C, prove the assertion made above.
It is on retirement of Dr. KS Chugh on December 31, 1992, that the petitioner made a representation to respondent No. 2 seeking appointment to the post of Sub-Dean on the basis of the seniority amongst the Professors and other representation of respondent No. 3 in this regard, whereupon respondent No. 2 while replying to the communication indicated that the appointment of the Sub-Dean would be considered by the governing body.
This stand of respondent No. 2 was per se contrary to the provisions of the Act/Rules.
As a matter of fact, the appointment to the post of Sub-Dean is not within the jurisdiction of the governing body and it has never been referred to the governing body for any earlier appointment to the said post.
This way, Dr. BNS Walia by not appointing the petitioner despite he being the senior most amongst Professors exhibited a clear bias.
Not only this, the petitioner was deprived of his rightful appointment as Chairman of Group B Department.
Though Dr. BNS Walia was appointed as Director of the Institute on February 25, 1991, and so vested with the responsibility of writing of annual confidential report of Professors and Heads of Department, he chose to record the annual confidential report of the petitioner from April 1, 1990 to March 31, 1991.
In fact, he had no jurisdiction to record the annual confidential report.
On representation made by the petitioner, the adverse remarks in the annual confidential report of the petitioner for the year 1991 were expunged by the President of the Institute Mala fide is writ large upon the action of respondent No. 2 as he intentionally prepared the agenda in respect of item No. 51 in a manner so as to prejudice the other members of the governing body.
On these averments the petitioner states that animosity of respondent No. 2 qua the petitioner is writ large.
Be it an appointment as Sub-Dean or as Chairman of Group B Department or recording of annual confidential report, respondent No. 2 has designedly been giving an impression to the other concerned that petitioner is unworthy of these posts.
With a view to achieve his aim in depriving the petitioner of his eligible right, respondent No. 2, though not authorised, chose to appoint Dr. BK Sharma to the post of Dean of the PGIMER on temporary basis.
This appointment was challenged by the petitioner by means of a writ petition and this Court was pleased to order stay of the operation of order dated April 2, 1993.
Vide order dated April 6, 1993, Dr. BK Sharma was restrained from functioning as Dean till further orders by the Court.
Subsequently, stay order was vacated on the statement of Sh. J N Kaushal to the effect that the governing body of the Institute will meet on May 15, 1993 and decide as to the permanent appointment of the Dean of the Institute Though respondent No. 2 being Secretary Member of the governing body was expected to place before the members the bare essentials mentioning length of service, achievements, confidential reports and other such relevant material, yet with a view to prejudice the members of the governing body respondent No. 2 purposely made reference to various extraneous matters.
Besides highlighting that seniority, suitability and other facts are to be kept in view while making this appointment, agenda referred to the pre- eminent role of the Director and his overall administrative control over various departments of the Institute Thus thereby suggesting as if the Dean of the Institute is to carry out the direction of the Director which insertion in the agenda item No. 12 is contrary to the provisions of the Act and the Rules.
This agenda item also suggests that the Dean has a pivotal post and has to maintain cordial relations with the colleagues, good rapport with student community and harmonious relations with the Director of the Institute In addition thereto, unwarranted reference was made to the earlier appointment of Dr. B K Sharma as temporary Dean of the faculty, filing of the writ petition challenging his appointment by the petitioner, interim orders passed by the Court and all these matters were inserted by the Secretary Member-Director of the Institute - with a mala fide intention and to prejudice the other members of the governing body.
The petitioner also assailed the selection of respondent No. 4 as Dean of the Faculty on the ground seniority, suitability and other factors referred to in Rule 7(4) of the Rules stood revealed and in this way the criteria adopted by the governing body was contrary to the Act and the Rules.
Thus, in the absence of any adverse report against the petitioner who admittedly is senior and suitable deserves to be appointed as Dean of the PGIMER as per practice prevalent.
On these premises, the petitioner sought the quashing of the appointment of respondent No. 4.
3.
Pursuance to the notice of motion issued by the Court, the respondents put in appearance.
Respondents No. 1 to 3 have filed joint written statement controverting the various averments made by the petitioner.
By means of preliminary objection, it has been averred that there is no rule providing for the appointment of a person as Dean of the Institute solely on the basis of the seniority.
It is further averred that in compliance with the order of the Court dated April 21, 1993, governing body of the Institute in its meeting held on May 13, 1993, considered the matter regarding the selection/appointment of the Dean - a selection post in a dispassionate manner and after thorough consideration, selected Dr. BK Sharma as Dean of the Faculty.
The selection made by the governing body cannot be challenged, On merits, the petitioner's achievements in the academic field or his appointment as Member etc. were admitted as correct.
The respondents denied the assertion of the petitioner that in view of the amendment of Rule 7 Schedule A to the Rule is no longer applicable.
On the contrary, it was asserted that recruitment rules were approved by the governing body on 961982 and by the Institute Body on 1061982.
The rules have been amended by the Institute Body from time to time in regard to the method of recruitment, qualification/experience etc. for various posts of the Institute Not only this, these rules have been followed and applied invariably while making recruitment/appointment to various posts and the same have been referred, considered, applied and upheld by the Courts in various cases.
Besides these rules, there are no other rules which provide for the method of recruitment, qualification and experience etc. to the various posts.
Referring to amended Rule 7(5) of the Rules, the same provides for the method of recruitment, age limit, educational qualification and other method relating to the appointment to various posts in the Institute which is to be determined in the manner provided for by the Regulation.
Regulation 32(1) empowers the Institute to lay down the age, experience and other qualifications for appointment to any post and this way the criteria for appointment to the post of Dean is neither contrary to the Rule or Regulation framed under the PGIMER Act of 1966.
In any case, in the absence of Rules, the criteria so adopted is preferably legal and just.
Referring to the various instances cited by the petitioner for the view that invariably the senior most person has held the office of Dean, the respondents have urged that it is a mere coincidence that in all those appointments senior most Professor was found suitable for the post on all those occasions.
In fact, the same method/procedure has been followed in the case of appointment of Dr. BK Sharma, respondent No. 4, as Dean of the Institute Further controverting the assertion of the petitioner that he being the senior most and in view of his unblemished record of service was, in fact, entitled to the appointment as Dean, the respondents asserted that the post of Dean is selection post and for such appointment merit is the main consideration.
Challenging the assertion of the petitioner that he had unblemished record, reference was made to the annual confidential report of the petitioner for the year 1975-76,76-77, when adverse remarks were conveyed to the petitioner and even on his representation those adverse remarks were not expunged.
Mention was also made to the names of Dr. PN Chhuttani, Dr. JS Neki and Dr. PL Wahi who had reported adversely on the petitioner's performance and otherwise also pointed out serious shortcomings in his nature and personal relationship with the members of the Department of Gastroenterology.
Reference was also made to the petitioner's relation with his immediate junior faculty member of the department of Gastroenterology which immediately led to vertical bifurcation of the Department of Gastroenterology into two functional administrative units by the President of the Institute Further denying the assertion of the petitioner that on account of mala fide and ill-will respondent No. 2 did not appoint him as Sub-Dean, it was urged that the petitioner was not a suitable person for appointment to the post of Sub-Dean.
Defending the agenda deliberation and the final conclusion arrived at by the governing body, the respondents averred that the governing body considered the matter dispassionately, objectively and impartially.
Respondent No. 2 as a Member Secretary of the governing body was duty bound to present the agenda before the governing body and participate in the discussion wherever required and afford clarification or supply information, if any, required by any member.
Thus, mere presence of respondent No. 2 cannot be, in any manner, construed as prejudicing other nine Hon'ble Members of the governing body.
As a matter of fact, the governing body dispassionately deliberated over the matter for over one hour and it is only thereafter decided to select Dr. BK Sharma, respondent No. 4 for the post of Dean of the Institute It is wrong to suggest that the members of the governing body examined the matter with a bias against the petitioner.
It is also wrong to suggest that any recommendation was made by respondent No. 2 in favour of respondent No. 4 as is clear from the agenda item.
The matter concerning the appointment of Dean detailing bare essentials as per rules along with the summary of orders passed in the earlier writ petition filed by the petitioner was placed before the governing body.
Reference to earlier writ petition and the interim order passed by the Court was necessitated as undertaking had been given by the counsel for the Institute that the matter with regard to the appointment/selection of the Dean will be considered by the governing body at its meeting to be held on 1351993.
Further refuting assertion of the petitioner that the role of the Dean is neither sub-servient nor complementary to that of the Director of the Institute, it was asserted that the Director of the Institute is the Chief Executive Officer of the Institute of all the departments i.e. he has an overall administrative control.
To assist the Director in the matters relating to training in various Courses, appointment of Examiner, holding of entrance and other examinations, the Dean of the Faculty takes care of these and this way his role is complementary.
In fact, Dean aids and advises the Director in academic matters.
The averment made by the petitioner that the Dean holds an office independent of the Director is wrong.
The respondents further denied the averment of the petitioner that there is no question of any coordination for the purpose of discharge of the duties of the Dean either with the Heads of the Department or the Director of the Institute Referring to Regulation 25(2) the respondents averred that the Director is the overall incharge of the administration of all wings of the Institute and can allocate duties to officers and employees of the Institute and exercise such supervision and executive control as is deemed necessary.
Thus, there is no escape from the conclusion that the Dean works under the Director and performs such duties as are allocated to him by the Director.
4.
The respondents specifically denied the assertion of the petitioner that the governing body acted at the behest of respondent No. 2.
According to the respondents, such like imputations against eminent persons who constitute the governing body of this premier Institute of the country is too wild to be believed.
Members of the Governing Body deliberated upon the matter dispassionately for over an hour and thereafter came to the conclusion that Dr. BK Sharma deserves to be appointed as Dean of the Institute Appointments so made are according to the approved Rules and Regulations and otherwise too just and proper.
Accordingly, it was prayed that the writ petition is liable to be dismissed with costs.
5.
Sh. Jagdish Singh Khehar, counsel for the petitioner, before adverting to the point in issue, i.e. the appointment of respondent No. 4 as Dean of the PGIMER, Chandigarh, dilated upon the relevant provisions of the Act, Rules and Regulations, notably Section 31(1), 31(3), 32(1), 32(1)(f), 32(1)(h), 32(2) of the Act, Rule 7(3), 7(4) before the amendment of 1984, Rule 7(3) and (5) after the amendment, Section 25, 32 and 32(1) of the Regulations, 1967.
To appreciate the submission of the learned counsel, it would be appropriate to reproduce the above-mentioned provisions :-  "31.
Power to make rules : (1) The Central Government, after consultation with the Institute, may by notification in the official Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.
Provided that consultation with the Institute, shall not be necessary on the first occasion of the making of rules under this section, but the Central Government shall take into consideration any suggestion which the Institute may make in relation to the amendment of such rules after they are made.
(2) xx xx xx xx  (3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately following, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule."
"32.
Power to make regulations : (1) The Institute may, with the previous approval of the Central Government, make regulations consistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder to carry out the purposes of this Act, and without prejudice to the generality of this power, such regulations may provide for  (a) to (e) xx xx xx xx  (f) the tenure of office, salaries and allowances and other conditions of service of the Directors and other officers and employees of the Institute including teachers appointed by the Institute;  (9) xx xx xx xx  (h) the powers and duties of the Director and other officers and employees of the Institute;  (i) to (n) xx xx xx  (o) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the first regulations under this Act shall be made by the Central Government; and any regulations so made may be altered or rescinded by the Institute in exercise of its powers under sub-section (1)".
"Rule 7.
Creation of Posts and Appointments thereto :  (As before Amendment dt. 24.3.84)  (1) & (2) xx xxxx xx  (3) Appointment to the post of Director shall be made by the Institute with the prior approval of the Central Government.
(4) The scales of pay, the method of recruitment, the age limit, the educational qualifications and other matters relating to the appointment to various posts in the Institute shall be as specified in the schedule annexed to these rules."
Rule  "7.
Creation of Posts and Appointments thereto :  (As amended vide notification dt. 2451984)  (1) & (2) xxxxxx xx  (3) Appointment to the post of Director shall be made by the Institute with prior approval of the Central Government;  (4) xxxxxx xx  (5) The method of recruitment, the age limit, the educational qualifications and other matters relating to the appointments to various posts in the Institute shall be determined in the manner provided for by regulations."
"Regulation 25.
Powers and Duties of Director :  (1) The Director shall be the Chief Executive Officer of the Institute and shall exercise such powers and discharge such functions as are specified in the Schedule I.
(2) The Director shall be incharge of the administration of the Institute and shall allocate duties to officers and employees of the Institute and exercise such supervision and executive control as are necessary.
(3) For the proper administration of the Institute the Director shall have powers to delegate any of his powers conferred on him under the Act, the Rules and these regulations to any officer of the Institute subject to such limitations as may be imposed by the Governing Body."
"Regulation 32.
Qualification for appointment :  (1) Age, experience and other qualifications for appointment to a post shall be as specified by the Institute keeping in view the qualifications and experience prescribed by the Central Government for similar posts before applications of candidates are called for subject to the condition that non-medical personnel shall not be appointed to the posts of Director and Medical Superintendent.
"Referring to the Rule 7, the counsel urged that power/authority which earlier vested in the Director has now been specifically withdrawn.
The purpose of the amendment appears to be to vest the authority in effecting appointment to the post of Dean in the President of the Institute Since original Rule has been amended, in fact, no qualifications have been prescribed for appointment to the post of Dean after amendment in the year 1984.
Since the post of Dean falls in Group A, the President of the Institute can make ad hoc/temporary appointment whereas permanent appointment to Group A can be made by the Governing Body alone.
In the context of this provision, Director of the Institute has been divested of all his powers with regard to temporary/permanent appointment in respect of Group 'A' posts.
In the present case, the criteria as stipulated under Rule 7(4) (since repealed) appears to have been kept in view.
Thus, the choice of the Governing Body in selecting respondent No. 4 is vitiated.
The appointment so made is liable to be set aside on this ground alone.
Further arguing, the counsel urged that the criteria adopted by the Governing Body i.e. seniority, suitability and other factors, the claim of the petitioner is far more meritorious and could not be brushed aside on this criteria as well.
Elaborating he urged that the petitioner is admittedly the senior most Professor next to Dr. Walia in the Institute who otherwise too has unblemished record.
The Governing Body has not found him unsuitable to the post of Dean.
This being the accepted position, there was no legitimate ground available to the Governing Body to discard the meritorious claim of the petitioner except the bias which was created by respondent No. 2 by burdening the agenda with wholly extraneous material and otherwise prejudicing the President and other members of the Governing Body by constant malicious campaign as reflected in the communication addressed by him even before this post fell vacant on the retirement of earlier incumbent.
Construed this way, the action of the Government Body can be termed as mala fide in law.
Elaborating the counsel urged that seniority, in fact, is the sole factor in the appointment of the Dean as well as of the Director.
Specific reference was made to the earlier appointees who held this post on the basis of seniority alone ever since creation of the post of Dean.
By way of illustration, he named the persons who were appointed as Dean in between the year 1963 to the last incumbent Dr. B N Dutta who retired in March 31, 1993.
In all these appointments, the senior most person was appointed as Dean of the faculty.
This being the practice and not contrary to the rules ought to have been adhered to in the case of the petitioner as well.
Reliance was placed on the following observations of the apex Court in case reported as State of Kerala and another v. MM Thomas and others, AIR 1976 SC 490 which reads as under :  "The principle of equality is applicable to employment at all stages and in all respects' namely, initial recruitment promotion, retirement, payment of pension and gratuity.
With regard to promotion the normal principles are either merit-cum-seniority or seniority-cum-merit.
Seniority-cum-merit means that given the minimum necessary merit requisite for efficiency of administration, the senior though the less meritorious shall have priority.
This will not violate Articles 14, 16(1) and 16(2).
A rule which provides that given the necessary requisite merit, a member of the backward class shall get priority to ensure adequate representation will not similarly violate Article 14 or Article 16(1) and (2).
The relevant touch stone of validity is to find out whether the rule of preference secures adequate representation for the unrepresented backward community or goes beyond it."
To the similar effect are the observations in the case reported as Shadi Lal v. The Deputy Commissioner, Gurgaon and others, 1974(1) S.L.R.
217 i.e. if the selection is to be made on the basis of seniority and the seniormost eligible person has merit, he shall be selected irrespective of better merit of his junior.
In case reported as The State of Mysore and others v. Syed Mahmood and others etc., 1968 S.L.R.
738, it was held that if promotion is based on seniority-cum-merit, a senior can be passed over if he is found to be unfit to discharge the duties of the higher post.
Relying upon these judicial pronouncements, the counsel urged that the petitioner has not only been found to be senior but suitable as well (as admitted by respondents in para 26 of the written statement) and this way petitioner's claim to be appointed as Dean of the Institute could not be brushed aside on account of other extraneous factors like incompatibility of the petitioner, i.e. of the Dean with the Director of the Institute in carrying out other respective functions.
According to the petitioner, in fact, duties of the Director have been detailed in Regulation 25.
No academic duty is to be performed by the Director which squarely lies within the power and ambit of the duties of the Dean.
Both these independent functionaries have totally independent function to perform.
Highlighting the incompatibility factor by the Member Secretary was only to prejudice the members of the Governing Body in which he appears to have succeeded.
Bereft of these extraneous consideration which find mention in the agenda as well, case of the petitioner when examined on the basis of criteria laid and past practice, the claim of the petitioner becomes far more meritorious.
6.
Dilating upon the mala fide action of respondent No. 2, the counsel read in extenso the various communications made by him to the President of the Institute when the case of the petitioner for appointment as Sub-Dean was under consideration, contents of the affidavit submitted by respondent No. 2 in the earlier writ petition, wherein the petitioner was painted as a non-co- operative person, which allegations were not only untrue but motivated on reading of which any reasonable person would form a view that the petitioner is unworthy to be appointed as Dean of the faculty.
With this in view, respondent No. 2 knowingly made reference to the alleged adverse remarks in the confidential report for the year 1990-91 which to the respondents knowledge already stood expunged.
With this and other unrebutted assertion proved on record leave no manner of doubt that respondent No. 2 with a mala fide intention tried to prejudice the other members of the Governing Body and succeeded as well.
This Hon'ble Court in the circumstances of the case can lift the veil and examine the matter on its own by brushing aside the extraneous material and thereafter form an independent view in this regard.
Reliance was placed upon the decision in case reported as CS Rowjee v. The State of Andhra Pradesh & others, AIR 1964 SC 962; S Parthasarthi v. State of Andhra Pradesh, 1974 SLJ 286; Smt. Swaran Lata and another v. Union of India etc., 1976 S.L.J.
325.
Concluding the counsel urged that keeping in view the seniority and meritorious service rendered by the petitioner and the fact that members examined the whole matter on the basis of repealed Rules coupled with bias created on account of participation by respondent No. 2, who is inimical to the petitioner, the appointment so made by the Governing Body is liable to be set aside.
The petitioner being the senior most and found suitable is entitled to be appointed as Dean.
7.
On behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2, Mr. DS Nehra, Senior Advocate, before adverting to the merit of the controversy raised in this petition dilated upon the various provisions of the Act Rules and Regulations governing this Institute i.e. PGIMER, Chandigarh.
This Institute as declared to be an Institute of National importance by Act No. 51 of 1966.
It is a body corporate.
The composition of the Institute as per Section 5 of the Act consists of Vice Chancellor of the Panjab University; Director-General of Health Services, Government of India; Director of the Institute; three members one each from the Ministry of Finance, Education and Health as representatives of the Central Government, seven persons of whom one shall be a non-medical scientist representing the Indian Science Congress Association; four representatives of the medical faculties of Indian Universities; and three members of the Parliament.
The manner of their appointment is given in Section 5 of the Act.
The Institute has a President, a Director and the governing body is the Executive Committee of the Institute and exercise such powers and such functions as the Institute may, by regulations in this behalf, confer or impose upon it.
The Governing Body so constituted presently consists of 10 members who are persons of eminance in various walks of life.
It is the action of the Governing Body vide which they happen to unanimously come to a conclusion that Dr. BK Sharma respondent No. 4 is the most suitable person to be appointed as Dean of the Institute which is being assailed by the petitioner in this writ petition.
The decision of the governing body is being challenged on variety of grounds; (a) that with the repeal of Rule 7(4) of the Rules the criteria adopted by the Governing Body i.e. seniority, suitability and other factor was not justified; (b) reference in the agenda that the Director is the overall Incharge of the Institute and that the Dean is to carry out instructions so issued by him was quite extraneous, to the matter and was solely inserted with a view to prejudice members of the Governing Body.
The Director and the Dean have separate functions to perform and thus there is no requirement that both should have cordial relations for the smooth working of the Institute The reference made in the agenda with regard to the earlier writ petition challenging the action of the Director whereby respondent No. 4 was temporarily appointed as Dean was extraneous and purposely inserted by the Secretary Member with the sole aim of prejudicing the members of the Governing Body.
Defending the agenda, the counsel urged that the Director as Secretary Member was duty bound to prepare the agenda which was to be considered by the Governing Body.
The criteria accepted for appointment to the post of Dean i.e. seniority, suitability and other factors, was the same which was being followed by the Institute over a number of years.
As a matter of fact, even after the amendment of Rule in the year 1984, the Institute continued to follow the same recruitment Rules.
Not only this, the appointments made pursuant to this very criteria were subject matter of adjudication before the Courts and were upheld.
Refuting the assertion of the petitioner that the Director and the Dean of the Institute perform different functions and in no manner the former control the latter, the counsel referred to Regulation 25 which deals with the powers and duties of the Director.
According to Regulation 25, the Director is the Chief Executive Officer of the Institute and is incharge of the administration of the Institute He has power to allocate duties to officers and employees of the Institute and exercise such supervision and executive control as he deems necessary.
The counsel further submitted that function of the Dean has not been specified in the Rules.
There is no specific provision in the Act or the Rules vide which the academic powers have been vested in the Dean.
It appears to be by mere convention.
Referring to other Regulations, namely, 26, 27, 28 and 29, the counsel stressed that be it the distribution of prizes, scholarships, admission to various courses of studies conducting of examinations and awarding of degrees, the Director as Chief Executive Officer has an overall control.
In fact, the Dean is, a conduit between various Heads of the Departments and the Director.
Viewed thus, there is no escape from the conclusion that the Director is overall Executive Officer of the Institute and the Dean who is the academic Head of the Institute has to carry out various directions which the Director may issue from time to time.
Even otherwise, the role of these two officers is complementary and for smooth working both are expected to have harmonious relations inter se.
The counsel further submitted that reference to the earlier writ petition was necessitated as the petitioner happen to challenge the temporary appointment of respondent No. 4 as Dean which was stayed by the Court.
Since the same had created uncertainty, the Governing Body decided to consider the matter finally and so statement was made by the counsel before the Court in this regard.
Respondent No. 2 in all fairness supplied complete data in respect of first 8 incumbents in the order of seniority along with their A.C.R.
folder.
In addition thereto, other relevant service record of the two senior Professors, namely that of the petitioner and of respondent No. 4, was placed fore the Governing Body for perusal and consideration.
This way no fault can be found with the preparation of the agenda as alleged by the petitioner.
The counsel further submitted that no allegations have been levelled against the members of the Governing Body.
Mala fide imputed against the Director, though without foundation, cannot be construed amounting to mala fide action on behalf of all the members of the Governing Body.
Even the allegations against the Director are without substance.
As per material on record, there is no allegation of animosity between the petitioner and the present Director before the latter became Director of the Institute i.e. 24.2.1991.
The Director being the Executive Head of the Institute happen to record adversely against the petitioner in his annual confidential report for the year 1990-91 which remarks have since been expunged.
In any case, this can hardly be construed as a mala fide act especially when the earlier Directors of the Institute have not commented favourably to the petitioner as is clear from the annual confidential reports for the year 1972-73 to 1980-81.
(Annexures R-8 to R-17).
8.
Defending the criteria adopted by the Governing Body, the counsel urged that it is in the nature of selection post where question of seniority is not the only governing factor.
Merit in such like cases takes precedence.
In the present case, the Governing Body examined the record of eight senior Professors/Heads of the Departments of the Institute and perused the other relevant record of the two most senior Professors.
It is after carefully considering the various aspects of the matter that the Governing Body decided to appoint Professor BK Sharma as Dean of the Institute This decision was taken in the best interest of the Institute Such like appointments to the higher posts are invariably finalised keeping in view the larger public interest - the welfare of the Institute In support of his assertion the counsel relied upon the following observations of the apex court in case reported as Dr. Jai Narain Misra v. State of Bihar and others, 1970 S.L.R.
923, which reads as under :  "It was not disputed before us that the post of Director of Agriculture is a selection post.
Therefore the question of seniority was not relevant in making the selection.
It is for the State Government to select such officer as it considers as most suitable.
In this view we think that the High Court was not justified in going into the question of seniority nor will we be justified in going into that question.........  "So far as the question of suitability is concerned, the decision, entirely rested with the Government.
In other words the Government is the sole judge to decide as to who is the most suitable candidate for being appointed as the Director of Agriculture.
For discharging that responsibility it was open to the Government to seek the assistance of the Public Service Commission.
In our judgment, the High Court was not justified in calling for the records of the Public Service Commission and going through the notings made by various officers in the Commission as well as the correspondence that passed between the Commission and the Government.
The High Court overlooked the fact that the Government sought the assistance of the Commission and not that of the High Court for finding out the most suitable candidate...."  9.
Mr. HL Sibal, Senior Advocate, appearing on behalf of respondent No. 4 adopted the arguments of Mr. Nehra and further supplemented making reference to the object of the enactment, eminent persons constituting the Governing Body and overall role of the Chief Executive Office-Director-in running the Institute The Governing Body had no animus against the petitioner, who, keeping in view the past record of the contenders, came to the conclusion that for smooth working of the Institute it would be more appropriate to appoint Dr. B K Sharma as Dean of the Institute Appointment to the higher echelon of the Institute is in the nature of selection post where merit takes precedence over seniority.
May be, at a given time seniormost person was found suitable and hence appointed, but all the same it does not clothe a person with a right to such an appointment only on account of his seniority.
Perhaps with this in view the criteria of seniority, suitability and other factors were incorporated in the agenda.
Other factors in the circumstances of the present case necessarily mean the annual confidential record of the incumbent during the preceding years.
The counsel referred to the annual confidential reports of the petitioner for the period from 1972-73 to 1980-81 during which period various Directors of the Institute happen to record their assessment during the particular period.
Referring to the remarks of Professor PL Wahi in the annual confidential report for the year 1973-74 (Annexure R-9) the counsel highlighted the following :  "....He needs to improve his relations with his colleagues and superiors...".
Again, Prof. BK Aikat remarked, "He has many undesirable qualities which is avoidable as a faculty member.
In the confidential report for the year 1974-75, Dr. PL Wahi remarked as under :-  "....as a senior teacher, he needs to win the confidence and faithfulness of his junior faculty colleagues."
Again Professors PN Chuttani chose to observe as under :  "....Dr. Mehta has given ample (and consistent) evidence to cast severe doubts on his capacity to rise and become a good leader.
He is disloyal to the Institute and is in the habit of running down his colleagues as well as the Institute"  Similarly, in the annual confidential report for the year 1980-81, Prof. JS Neki remarked adversely about the loyalty of the petitioner to the Institute He further remarked that the petitioner is "a person of dubious reliability at best."
The counsel thus urged that these confidential reports though not wholly relevant being earlier in time nevertheless give a clear picture as to the nature of the personality of person.
He appears to be of obdurate nature and incompatible with his colleagues.
The comparative annual confidential reports of the petitioner and respondent No. 4 for the year 1987-88 to 1991-92 clearly prove that Prof. SK Sharma is more meritorious.
During these years ie from 1981-82 to 1991-92 the petitioner has earned from average to above average and good whereas respondent No. 4 during this very period has been adjudged from very good to outstanding.
Reliance has been placed upon the judgment of the apex Court in case reported as Parvez Qadir v. Union of India, AIR 1975 Supreme Court 446, that adjudgment of the suitability on the basis of the confidential entry and other records cannot be said to be arbitrary.
The past performance of an officer being one of the criteria for making selection, the only way to adjudge his suitability is only by perusal of the confidential record.
The counsel further submitted that mala fide alleged against one of the members of the Governing Body cannot vitiate the selection.
The decision of the Governing Body was unanimous.
Even otherwise, there is nothing to infer that the agenda item prepared by the Director as Secretary Member was drafted in a manner painting the petitioner unfairly as sought to be contended by the petitioner.
The Governing Body dispassionately has examined the matter and after comparing the respective merits of the two contenders came to the conclusion that respondent No. 4 deserved to be appointed.
Such an action is not open to scrutiny unless it is mala fide.
The apex Court in decision in the case reported as Dalpat Abasaheb & Solunke etc. etc. v. Dr. BS Mahajan etc. etc., AIR 1990 SC 434, has held that it is not the function of the Court to hear appeals over the decisions of the Selection Committees and to scrutinize the relative merits of the candidates.
Whether a candidate is fit for a particular post or not has to be decided by the duly constituted Selection Committee which has the expertise on the subject.
The decision of the Selection Committee can be interfered with only on limited grounds, such as illegality or patent material irregularity in the constitution of the Committee or its procedure vitiating the selection or proved mala fide affecting the selection etc.  10.
Sh. J N Kaushal, Senior Advocate, appearing on behalf of the Governing Body, defended the appointment made.
The counsel highlighted the composition of the Governing Body which consists of a Member of Parliament, Chief Secretaries of Punjab & Haryana, Vice Chancellor of Panjab University and eminent persons like Dr. PN Chuttani, Professor RJ Dash, Professor Verma, Joint Secretary of the Health Ministry headed by Chairman Sh. B Shankaranand.
The decision of the Governing Body was unanimous.
No mala fide has been alleged against the governing body.
The Governing Body, keeping in view the respective merit of the two contenders to the post of the Dean of the Institute, namely, petitioner and respondent No. 4, came to the conclusion that the appointment of Professor BK Sharma, Head of the Internal Medicines, as Dean of the Institute would be in the best interest of the Institute This being selection post, seniority alone could not be governing factor.
In such like cases, it is primarily based on merit.
Reliance was placed upon the decision in case reported as Sant Ram Sharma v. State of Rajasthan and others, Dr. Jai Narain Mishra v. State of Bihar and others, 1970 S.L.R.
923 and Kamal Kumar Gupta v. State of Haryana and others, 1991(1) S.L.R.
91 : 1991(1) SCT 57 (P&H)(FB).
11.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties, perused the documents referred to as well as the provisions of the Act, Rules and Regulations governing the PGIMER.
With a view to fill up the vacancy which accrued on the superannuation of Professor BN Dutta, meeting of the Governing Body was held to select a person to be appointed as Dean of the Institute amongst Professors and Heads of the Departments, keeping in view the seniority, suitability and other factors.
The first objection of the petitioner is that the Governing Body has considered the appointment on the basis of repealed provisions.
The precise objection raised is that Rule 7(4) of the Rules stood repealed and as per amended provisions 7(5) of the Rules, no such criteria as stipulated in agenda item No. 12 i.e. seniority, suitability and other factors find mention therein; this way the whole process stands vitiated.
12.
We do no find much substance in this plea of the petitioner.
Rule 7(5) of the Rules provides that the method of recruitment, age limits, educational qualification and other matters relating to the appointment to the various posts is to be determined in the manner laid down in the Regulations.
Regulation 32(1) deals with qualification, age, experience etc. keeping this in view, the Institute had absolute power to lay down age, experience and other qualifications for appointment to any post.
Even if it be taken that no criteria as such finds mention in Rule 7(5) of the Rules in view of the repeal of Rule 7(4) of the Rules along with Schedule A, yet the criteria so adopted can be termed as fair to fill the vacancy of the post of Dean of Institute.
As stated by Sh. Nehra, this criteria has been adopted for the years despite repeal of Rule 7(4) of the Rules and the appointments so made have been upheld by the Courts.
No prejudice has accrued to the petitioner, whose case has been examined keeping in view his seniority, suitability and other relevant factors.
As per Schedule I, Governing Body is given power to make appointment to the posts falling in Group 'A'.
The post of Dean falls in Group 'A'.
The appointment is in the nature of selection in which the merit takes precedence over other considerations like length of service.
Seniority in such like cases at best takes a second place.
Can it be said that consideration of the case of petitioner on the basis of criteria i.e. seniority, suitability and other relevant factors, has prejudiced him in any manner ?
In fact, if this criteria is ignored; the case of the petitioner becomes far less meritorious vis-a-vis respondent No. 4 in view of the annual confidential reports for the preceding five years.
During all these years from 1987-88 to 1991-92, petitioner has been rated as average, above average and good whereas respondent No. 4 as very good to outstanding.
Even earlier annual confidential reports of the petitioner for the period from 1972-73 to 1980-81 (briefly referred by Sh. Sibal) do not in any, manner enhance the merit of the petitioner.
The Institute had been selecting the persons on the basis of the criteria i.e. seniority, suitability and other factors; either on account of ignorance or knowingly adhered to it as a matter of past practice and thereafter has examined the case of two contenders.
With a view to assess the merit of each of the eight persons whose name find mention in agenda, the A.C.Rs folders of each of the officers and other relevant record of two senior professors was placed before the Governing Body.
It is thus apparent that whereas merit was primary consideration; seniority factor was also kept in view.
This selection was made on the basis of merit-cum-seniority.
Besides this, it appears to have been kept in view that Director and Dean of the Faculty work in unison so that the Institute functions smoothly.
Decision of the apex Court in NM Thomas's case (supra) is not applicable on the facts of the present case.
It is not a promotional post; rather it is an appointment.
Appointment essentially envisages selection and hence merit factor has pre-eminence.
Similarly decision in Syed Mahmood's case (supra) deals with a case where promotion was to be made on the basis of seniority-cum-merit and in that context it was held that senior eligible person having merit is to be preferred even when a junior has better merit.
Thus the observations of the apex Court in Syed Mahmood's case (supra) are attracted in case when selection is being made on the basis of seniority-cum-merit.
Whether in the past persons were selected on the basis of seniority alone has not been conclusively established.
As observed earlier, it can be a coincidence that during earlier selections, senior persons were meritorious too.
13.
We also do not find much substance in the next submission of the counsel that in view of the seniority of the petitioner and the fact that he has not been found unsuitable by the Governing Body, the petitioner ought to have been selected as Dean of the Institute As per petitioner's own assertion, it is a selection post.
Thus, besides seniority and suitability, other relevant factors like compatibility of the incumbent with his fellow colleagues in day to day dealing with the Director as Executive Head of the Institute are also very essential factors to be kept in view while making selection to the post of the Dean of the Institute The Governing Body after examining the annual confidential reports and other relevant material placed before them came to the conclusion that respondent No. 4 deserves to be appointed to this post.
As held by various judicial pronouncements by this Court as well as apex Court, the Courts normally refrain from substituting their own opinion in place of the authority making such a selection unless such a selection is mala fide or otherwise vitiated on the ground of illegality or irregularity.
On examining the record of the present case, we find no such infirmity and thus refrain from substituting our own opinion.
Admittedly, no mala fide has been alleged against the Governing Body members except the Director.
It is too Much to infer that one member of the Governing Body was instrumental in arriving at the impugned decision of the Governing Body.
The petitioner has alleged mala fide against respondent No. 2.
Respondent No. 2 was appointed as Director in February, 1991 and being the Executive Head happened to record the adverse remarks in the annual confidential report which were subsequently expunged by the President of the Institute May be as Executive Head of the Institute, he had been addressing communication to the President and the Governing Body with regard to the functioning of various departments including that headed by the petitioner and in the course of such correspondence happen to apprise the concerned persons as to its malfunctioning.
Such fair comments by the Director as Executive Officer cannot be construed as mala fide.
Similarly, the impression given by respondent No. 2 as to the obdurate nature of the petitioner and his otherwise, in comply with his fellow colleagues or with himself is merely expression of his personal views.
It is a different matter that the Governing Body while appointing respondent No. 4 happens to state that he enjoys the confidence of the Director and so would be helpful in running the Institute more coherently.
Even otherwise, for any smooth working of the Institute, it is desirable that senior person holding various posts act in a harmonious manner.
It appears that the Governing Body too has kept this in view while appointing respondent No. 4.
We find no infirmity in the selection so made.
Brief reference to the judgments cited by the counsel for the petitioner would be appropriate.
In CS Rowjee's case (supra), the Court has held that when mala fide or some improper motive is alleged on the part of person in authority it is incumbent upon such authority to place on record their version or denial.
It is also the duty of the Court to scrutinize these allegations.
In that case, some allegations were levelled against the Chief Minister and no affidavit is reply was filed by the Chief Minister.
It is in these circumstance that the Court held that the allegations stand unrebutted.
In the present case, no mala fide has been alleged against members of the Governing Body except the Director and the latter has emphatically denied the same.
S Parthasarthi's case (supra) gives broad outline as to how test of likelihood of bias is to be applied in a given case.
Delhi High Court in Smt. Swaran Lata's case (supra), has held that since one of the members of the Selection Board was biased against the candidates, such a selection is vitiated.
This judgment has also no applicability on the facts of the present case.
Except for mere assertion no material has been placed on record to prove bias of respondent No. 2.
As a matter of fact, there was no ill-feeling between the two before respondent No. 2 became Director of the Institute The solitary instance i.e. recording of A.C.R.
for the year 1990-91 and expunging of remarks by the President cannot be construed that Director had any bias.
Even otherwise, choice of respondent No. 4 has been made by 10 eminent persons from different walks of life.
Since the appointment of respondent No. 4 made by the Governing Body has been held to be not vitiated in any manner, this writ petition is dismissed but with no orders as to costs.