Ashok Bhan, J - This writ petition has been filed by the petitioners seeking mandamus directing the respondents to fill the vacant posts from amongst candidates borne on Register A-II of Punjab Civil Services (Executive Branch) (Class I) in accordance with the Govt. instructions dated 2231957 Annex.
P-4 and further directing the respondents to appoint the petitioners to the Punjab Civil Services (Executive Branch) (Class I) to such posts in accordance with the merit prepared by the Punjab Public Service Commission (hereinafter referred to as the Commission) respondent No.2 or any other relief to which the petitioners are found entitled.
2.
Shortly stated, the facts are as under :-  The Punjab Civil Services (Executive Branch) (Class-I) Rules, 1976 (hereinafter referred to as the 1976 Rules), regulate the recruitment and conditions of service of persons appointed to Punjab Civil Services (Executive Branch) (Class-I) (hereinafter referred to as PCS (EB) (Class-I) posts.
Rule 8 of the said rules reads as under -  "8.
The following Registers of accepted candidates shall be maintained by the Chief Secretary to Government Punjab, namely :-  (1) Registers A-I in which shall be entered the names of Tehsildars and Naib-Tehsildars accepted as candidates.
(2) Register A-II in which shall be entered the names of temporary members of Class-II and the members of Class-III services serving in connection with the affairs of the State of Punjab and holding ministerial appointments accepted as candidates.
(3) Register A-III in which shall be entered the names of persons accepted as candidates from amongst Excise and Taxation Officers, Block Development and Panchayat Officers serving in connection with the affairs of the State of Punjab.
(4) Register-B in which shall be entered the names of persons accepted as candidates as a result of competitive examination and  (5) Register-C in which shall be entered the names of persons accepted as candidates from amongst officers or officials serving in connection with the affairs of the State of Punjab, who are not covered by any of the categories of officers or officials hereinbefore mentioned in this rule."
Rule 10 of the aforesaid Rules provides is for selection of candidates from Registers A-III which reads as under :-  "10.
(1) Each of the authorities specified in the first column of the table below may submit to the Government in From I attached to these rules the nomination rolls of such number of persons as is specified in each case in the second column of the said table from amongst the temporary members of Class-II Services and members of Class-III services holding ministerial appointments and working in its office or in the offices subordinate to it :-  Sl.
No.
Nominating Authority Number of Nominations 1 2 1.
Chief Minister 2 2.
Speaker, Punjab Vidhan Sabha 2 3.
Chief Justice of the High Court of Punjab and Haryana of State 1(each) 4.
Ministers and Ministers of State 1(each) 5.
Deputy Ministers 1(each) 6.
Chief Parliamentary Secretary and Parliamentary Secretary 2(each) 7.
Chief Secretary 5 8.
Financial Commissioners 1(each) (2) No nomination roll in respect of person shall be submitted under the provisions of subs-rule  (1) unless such person -  (a) is a confirmed hand and has completed 10 years' continuous service under the Government,  (b) Was under the age of forty-five years on the first day of November immediately preceding the date of submission of names by the nominating authorities and  (c) is a graduate of recognised University.
(3) The nomination rolls submitted under sub-rule (1) along with the service record of the candidates shall be forwarded to the Commission which shall consider the merits of each such candidate and recommend such of the candidates as are considered suitable for appointment to the service,  (4) The names of persons recommended by the Commission under sub-rule (3) shall be entered in Register A.II in the order in which they are recommended by the Commission."
Rule 18 of the 1976 Rules provides for appointment of accepted candidates to the service and the same reads as under :-  18.
"The Government shall make appointments to service in pursuance of Rule 8 from amongst the candidates entered on the various Registers in a slab of 100 vacancies as follows :  (i) the first vacancy and thereafter every alternative vacancy shall be filled from amongst candidates borne on Register-B  (ii) The 2nd, 8th, 14th, 20th, 26th, 32nd, 38th, 44th, 50th, 56th, 62nd, 68th, 74th, 80th, 86th, 92nd, 96th and 100th vacancy shall be filled from amongst the candidates borne on Register A-I;  (iii) the 4th, 10th, 16th, 22nd, 28th, 34th, 40th, 46th, 52nd, 58th, 64th, 70th, 76th, 82nd, 88th and 98th vacancy shall be filled from amongst candidates borne on Register A-II.
(iv) the 12th, 30th, 42nd, 54th, 66th, 78th and 90th vacancy shall be filled from amongst the Excise and Taxation Officers accepted as candidates on Register A-III;  (v) the 18th, 36th, 60th and 84th vacancy shall be filled from amongst the District Development and Panchayat Officers and Panchayat Officers or Block Development and Panchayat Officers accepted as candidates on Register A-III; and  (vi) The 6th, 24th, 48th, 72nd and 94th vacancy shall be filled from amongst the candidates on Register `C'.
3.
Petitioner No. 1 is working as Senior Assistant in the Governor House.
He joined service on 2321976.
Petitioner No. 2 is working as Senior Scale Stenographer in the Directorate of Industries, Punjab.
He joined the service on 531970.
Petitioner No. 3 joined service on 24.3.1966 and is presently working as Reader in the Punjab and Haryana High Court.
4.
State of Punjab in terms of the provisions of 1976 Rules, vide circular letter No. U03/12/90-PCS(I), dated 19121990, addressed to all the nominating authorities requesting to recommend the names of suitable and eligible candidates in the prescribed form for filling up of seven vacancies in the P.C.S(EB) (Class-I) from Register A-II in the year 1990.
In pursuance to this letter, name of petitioner No. 1 was nominated of by Governor of Punjab while petitioner No. 2 was nominated.
Financial Commissioners quota and petitioner No3 was nominated by Governor of Punjab while petitioner No. 2 was nominee by Chief Justice of the High Court of Punjab and Haryana.
The details of total nominations made in accordance with Rule 10 were as under :-  "Nominating Authority No. of Nomination 1.
Governor (as there was no Chief Minister) 2 2.
Speaker Vidhan Sabha 2 3.
Chief Justice of High Court of Punjab and Haryana 2 4.
Chief Secretary 5 5.
Financial Commissioner 5".
Thus, a total of 15 nominations were made for filling of seven vacant posts.
Accordingly, interview letters were issued to all the nominees by the Commission.
The interviews were held on 18121991.
The result of the interview was declared on 6.1.1992, which was published in the Tribune on 711992.
The following names were recommended by the Commission for selection to PCS (EB) (Class-I) from Register A-II :-  "(a) Sarvshri Surinder Kumar Sharma  (b) Pritam Singh  (c) Amarjit Singh  (d) Om Parkash  (e) Sukhvinder Singh  (f) Rakha Singh  (g) Pram Chand.
State of Punjab has issued instructions, vide UO Circular letter No. 1673- G-11-56 dated 2231957, wherein it has been provided that out of the names recommended by the Commission, additional vacancies which were not intimated to the Commission while inviting recommendations, would be filled in within a period of six months from the recommended names.
Copy of the aforesaid circular letter has been attached as Annexure P/4 to the writ petition.
Thus according to these instructions, all vacancies accruing in Register-II upto 671992 were to be filled from (sic) the candidates interviewed by the Commission on 18121991; that the cadre strength of PSC(EB) (Class-I) as per Govt. order dated 1381990 is 281.
Out of these 281 posts, the total number of posts which stood already filled was 209 as per quarterly gradation list corrected upto 1.10.1990.
The State of Punjab had requisitioned recommendations from the Commission-respondent No.2 for filling up of 39 additional vacancies from various Registers, i.e., B.A-I, A-II, A-III and C in addition to these 209 posts.
The detail of these 39 vacancies Register-wise is given below :  " No. of vacancies  (a) Register B-I, 20  (b) Register A-I, 7  (c) Register A-II, 7  (d) Register A-III, 3  (e) Register - C, 2."
It is further stated in the petition that total number of posts filled after including 39 posts which were advertised comes to 248 posts (209 already filled up plus 39 = 248).
The petitioners have prepared a draft roster as prescribed by the Rules, a copy of which has been appended as Annexure P-1 to the writ petition indicating therein the serial number in a block of 100 vacancies and the source from which each vacancy is to be filled up.
As per provisions of Rule 18 of the 1976 Rules, a total number of posts in Register A-II comes to 40 but the State of Punjab filled only 38 posts including seven candidates recommended by the Commission in the interview held on 18121991.
Thus, two more posts were available in Register A-II at the time of requisition/date of interview.
It has further been asserted in the petition that in addition to these two vacancies, one more vacancy had occurred due to death of Shri Raj Pal Gupta, District Transport Officer, Sangrur, in 1991 prior to December 1991, i.e., before the date of interview.
Apart from these three vacancies which occurred before the date of interview, two more vacancies, i.e., one on retirement of Shri Rajinder Kumar on 3041992, and the other on Retirement of Shri T.R.
Bhatia on 3151992 were available from Register A-II before 671992 i.e., within six months from the date of declaration of result of interview held by the Commission.
Petitioners have further asserted that they have excellent records and the performance of the petitioners in the interview was also excellent; that the service record of the petitioners was also unblemished throughout their career.
Petitioners have filed the present petition primarily on the ground that as per instructions issued by the State of Punjab Annexure P-4 dated 2231957, the petitioners are entitled to be considered for additional vacancies to PCS (EB) (Class-I) which became available uptill six months after the date of recommendations by the Commission on 6.1.1992; that the State of Punjab should have intimated to the Commission the number of additional vacancies which occurred before the date of interview and also those likely to occur within six months in terms of instructions dated 2231957 and further that the Commission should have recommended the names for the posts which had occurred till the date of interview and the declaration of result on 6.1.1992 including those likely to occur within six months in terms of Annexure P-4 and that the action of the respondents in not considering the petitioners against the additional vacancies was arbitrary, discriminatory and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
5.
In the written statement, it was admitted that the petitioners fulfilled all the prescribed qualifications for nomination to the PCS (EB) (Class-I) from Register A-II.
Regarding the instructions contained in Annexure P-4, it was stated that the same are applicable in the case of direct recruitment only and not in the case of nominations and as such only seven vacancies were filled up from Register A-II on the basis of recommendations of the Commission available at the relevant time.
The fact that the cadre strength of P.C.S(EB) is 281 was also admitted including 93 posts, i.e. leave/training/deputation reserves.
It was further stated that recruitment to the service is made strictly in accordance with the provisions of Rule 18 of the 1976 Rules and that too keeping in view the requirements as determined by the Govt. at the relevant time; that the leave/training/deputation reserves, which constitutes 93 posts are never fully utilised and the State of Punjab sought recommendations of the Commission for filling up 40 (not 39) vacancies from various Registers.
Fact regarding the existence of two more vacancies in Register A-II at the time when the interview was held, was not denied but it was stated that the same was of no consequence because the recruitment was required to be made strictly in accordance with the provisions as contained in Rule 18 of the Rules ibid.
Out of 40 vacancies, seven vacancies fell to Register A-II for which a requisition was sent to the Commission and the Commission interviewed all the suitable candidates on 18121991 and recommended the names of seven candidates; it was further stated that the question of filling of subsequent vacancies due to death/retirement of certain officers through Register A-II did not arise because the vacancies arose after the completion of the entire recruitment process and if such anticipated vacancies are clubbed with earlier vacancies of the same Register, it would not only adversely affect the rights of the prospective candidates but also infringe upon the statutory provisions of Rule 18 of the 1976 Rules.
6.
An additional affidavit was filed by the petitioner stating therein that the respondents on 2271992 handed over a copy of the roster Register which was being maintained by them allegedly on the basis of PCS (EB) (Class- I) Rules 1976; it was pointed out that the copy of the roster Register supplied by the respondents was a manipulated document and had been prepared to defeat the rights of the petitioners.
Petitioners pointed out ten vacancies to show that the roster register had been tried to be manipulated and was only as afterthought in order to defeat the legitimate claim of the petitioners.
In reply to the assertions in the additional affidavit, it was stated that no copy of the roster Register was handed over to the petitioners on 2271992.
Because of this specific denial, I am not inclined to go into this aspect of the matter.
7.
In paras No6 and 7 of the additional affidavit petitioners have stated that the State of Punjab has sanctioned ten more posts belonging to PCS(EB) (Class-I), vide order dated 29.6.1992.
Copy of the said sanction order has been attached as Annexure A/1 with the additional affidavit.
According to the petitioners, ten more vacancies occurred before 671992, i.e., within six months of the date of selection; that apart from these ten additional vacancies, one additional vacancy occurred on the creation of Sub- Division, Malout and three vacancies of Principal Staff Officers in the I.C.S.
(EB) and further one more vacancy occurred due to promotion of a PCS Officer to IAS cadre and one vacancy occurred due to death of one Shri Raj Pal Gupta.
According to the petitioners, a total of 16 additional vacancies occurred in the roster Register of PCS (EB), which were required to be filled in accordance with the Govt. instructions Annexure P/4 dated 2231957 and if these 16 additional vacancies are added to the roster Register of 91 points the roster Register was to be up to 107 points and in that case roster points at No. 88, 898 and 104 shall have to be filled from Register A-II; it has further been stated that out of total cadre strength of 281 posts, the State has filled only 233 posts.
Out of these 233 posts, 37 posts belong to Register A-II whereas only 34 posts of Register A-II were filled up.
Thus, there were three vacancies in Register-All.
As mentioned above 16 additional vacancies had occurred before 671992 and the share of A-II Register in these 16 additional vacancies comes to 3 posts.
According to the petitioners, six posts were required to be filed up from Register A-II.
Petitioners have staked their claim to the appointment of PCS(EB) against these unfilled vacancies which had come into existence within six months from the date of interview.
8.
Reply to this additional affidavit was also filed by the State of Punjab.
It was stated in this reply that the recruitment to the PCS (EB) is made in accordance with Rule 18 of the 1976 Rules keeping in view the requirement as determined by the Govt. at the relevant time and the plea of the petitioners regarding the availability of more vacancies in A-II Register at the time of selection had no force; fact regarding creation of ten additional seats was admitted; fact regarding existing of three vacancies in Register A-II out of the cadre strength of 281, was not denied, further fact that total 16 additional vacancies had occurred before 671992 and that the share of Register A-II came to three posts was also not denied.
The fact that six posts were available to be filled belonging to Register A-II within six months of the date of interview was also not denied.
9.
Further fact which was brought to the notice of this court and needs highlighting is that the letter issued by the Chief Secretary to Govt. of Punjab in the name of Governor of Punjab showing the names of persons accepted as candidates in Register-B in terms of provisions of Rule 14 of 1976 Rules.
In Register-B entries are made of the names of persons accepted as candidates as a result of competitive examination in PCS (EB).
Out of 39 posts (but 40 according to the respondents), number of vacancies from Register-B was 20.
A letter dated 2121992 issued by the Governor of Punjab shows that names of 27 persons have been entered in Register-B for appointment as direct recruits out of the selection made in 1990.
According to the petitioners, 7 additional vacancies have been filled from Register-B out of the selection made by the Commission result of which was declared on 30.6.1992.
That these seven vacancies from Register-B have been filled up in accordance with the instructions Annexure P/4 dated 2231957 and, therefore, petitioners should be appointed from Register A-II accordingly.
A copy of this letter was taken on record and a copy of the same was handed over to the learned counsel appearing for the respondents.
Counsel appearing for the respondents was given time to file reply explaining the stand of the State of Punjab with regard to this letter.
The judgement was reserved on 9121992.
Reply by way of additional affidavit was filed on 14121992 which has also been taken on record and is being taken into consideration while deciding the matter.
A copy of the second additional affidavit was also given to counsel for the petitioners.
10.
In the second additional affidavit filed by the respondents, it has been admitted that the Govt. of Punjab has decided to fill up seven more vacancies in PCS (EB) on the basis of examination held in the year 1990 and this decision has been taken in view of the creation of new District/Sub-Division in the State where the Govt. had to post.
P.C.S Officers, that the names of five additional candidates have been entered in Register-B and the cases of remaining two candidates were under process, that in view of the above decision the roster points from 84 to 97 were to be filled up and as per roster point up to 83 stands exhausted, from amongst roster points of 84 to 97, only point 88 falls to the share of candidates belonging to Register A-II, that the Govt. decision to fill the additional vacancies only by way of direct recruitment would only mean that points 85, 87, 89, 91, 93, 95 and 97 would go to Register-B, that in case the Govt. takes a decision to fill up the vacancies from amongst the nominations from various Registers including Register A-II based on interview held on 18121991 the result of which was declared on 6192 then point No. 88 would be filled up from Register A-II as per Govt. instructions.
11.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length.
12.
The admitted facts which are concluded from the pleadings of the Parties are, firstly, the existence of instructions contained in circular Annexure P-4 dated 22.3.1.957.
The stand taken by the respondents is that these instructions are applicable only in the case of direct recruits and not in the case of nominations.
A reading of instructions Annexure P/4 has not carried me to this conclusion.
It cannot be deciphered from the instructions dated 2231957 that they are applicable only to direct recruits and not to the appointees by nominations.
Secondly, the existence of three posts meant for the appointees from Register A-II up to 18121991, i.e., the date on which the interviews were held and creation of ten new posts in June 1992 were available.
Ten more new posts were created in June 1992 because of the creation of new districts in Punjab.
Out of these ten posts, share of appointment was to be given to the persons borne on Register A-II.
Thus, post were available which could be filled from Register A-II which were available before the expiry of six months from the date of interview held by the Commission and thirdly, the appointment of 27 direct recruits from Register-B as against the 20 posts advertised from this source from which the interviews were held on 18121991 thereby filling seven posts in excess from source-B is also admitted.
Selection of persons for appointment to PCS(EB) from various Registers was made simultaneously in pursuance to the interviews had by the Commission on 18111991.
13.
Question then arises as to whether the petitioners are entitled to the mandamus asked for by them in this writ petition or not.
14.
Interpreting those very instructions HS Rai, J in Rohtas Singh Kharub v. State of Haryana, 1989 (6) S.L.R 45 held as under :-  "Instructions dated March 22, 1957, Annexure P-4 provide that if an additional vacancy has fallen vacant within a period of six months from the date of selection made by the Commission, it should be filled up out of the approved list of candidates in order of merit ------"  Interpreting the same instructions, Jawahar Lal Gupta, J in Gursharan Singh Sandhu and another v. State of Punjab and another, 1991(3) SCT 222 (P&H) C.W.P.
11107 of 1990 decided on July 9, 1991, issued a mandamus directing the respondents to consider the claim of the writ petitioners for appointment to the posts of Deputy Superintendent of Police.
15.
Counsel appearing for the respondents relied upon a Full Bench judgment of this Court in Harjit Singh Sidhu v. State of Punjab, 1989(4) SLR 403 wherein it was held that the Commission has a distinct and distinguished status under our Constitution and should not be identified with the Government authorities.
It was further held that the powers of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitutions of India cannot be invoked to make directions to the Commission for recommending any candidate for appointment to a public service post as it would amount to interference in its working as an independent institution having a peculiar and distinct status.
It was further held that the executive instructions regarding filling up of the vacancies could not override the statutory provisions and no directions can be issued on the basis of executive instructions.
Number of writ petitions were disposed of by the decision of the Full Bench and the observations, referred to above, were made by their Lordships while dealing with C.W.P.
No 9209 of 1987 filled by Gurinderjit Singh.
The facts stated by the Full Bench in Gurjinderjit Singh's case in their own words, as spelt out in para 6 of the judgment are as under :  " ...... Civil Writ Petition No. 9209 of 1987 was filed by Gurinderjit Singh for a direction to the respondents to fill up 16 posts from the direct recruitment in the PCS(Executive Branch) according to the advertisement issued on 931985 and not to decrease the posts from 16 to 5 as per advertisement issued in September 1987 and thereby not to take any action in filling 21 more names from 1984 examination after the lapse of 6 months from the date of recommendation and seeking further directions to the respondents to fill 16 vacancies from the next examination of 1987 as per the original advertisement dated 931985 and further 32 vacancies in the category to be filled up from the Examination of 1987.
Another prayer was also made to restrain the respondents from making any recommendation/appointment to the services from 1984 Examination.
This petition was admitted vide order of the Division Bench dated 19.4.1988.
The other Civil Writ Petition No. 4029 of 1983 was filed by Varinder Pal Singh seeking a writ of mandamus to fill the vacancies meant for direct recruits on the basis of 1984 examination in the PCS(EB) and other allied services as the petitioner was entitled to the appointment on the basis of merit at prepared for the result after viva voce test.
Another prayer made was to restrain the respondents from taking action in pursuance of the subsequent advertisement dated 931985 and from making any appointment to the Service till the decision of the Civil Writ Petition.
Both these Civil Writ Petitions came up for hearing before MR Agnihotri, J and vide order dated 5101988 the learned Judge referred both the petitions to a large Bench.
Ultimately these two writ petitions, i.e., CWP 9209 of 1987 and 4029 of 1988 were referred to the Full Bench.
This is how writ petitions No. 666 of 1986, 6727 of 1986, 9209 of 1987 and 4029 of 1988 and Letters Patent Appeal 573 of 1984 are before this Full Bench and all these matters are being disposed of by a common judgment."
16.
Written statement filed on behalf of the Commission was referred to and the Punjab Public Service Commission had taken the following stand (Para 45) :-  " ......
Written statement on behalf of the Commission mentions that it had recommended 76 candidates in the first instance and later on 7 more names were sent in July 1985 and thus, the select list of Commission consisted of 83 names only.
It has been vehemently urged that the additional 16 candidates were appointed without its consultation.
1987 examination was held in December and number of posts of PCS (Executive Branch) was only 5 in accordance with the requisition received from the State Government.
The Commission had received additional demand for 16 vacancies on 24121985 but no action could be taken in the face of direction of this Court in CWP No. 4538 of 1985 to the effect that increased posts be not filled ......."  17.
While interpreting the Rules meant for Register-B (candidates by way of direct recruitments) their Lordships held that the Commission holds Competitive examination for selection of only that number of candidates as the Government determines.
This rule also indicates that the words merit determined' in Rule 14 means a selection by competition of as many candidates as Government may determine out of the qualified and eligible candidates.
The only interpretation of the rules can be that all the appointments to the Service shall be made by the Government in consultation with the Commission (Rule 4).
The Commission holds competitive examination according to the regulations contained in Appendix II and after the result of the examination, it selects as many candidates as determined by the Government and sends the name of only those candidates who have been selected and in other words whose merit is determined by the Commission.
Their names are then required to be included in Register-B Thereafter, these candidates are called accepted candidates.
The Government then makes appointments to the service from amongst candidates entered in various registers in a slab of 100 vacancies as indicated in Rule 18 and candidates whose names are entered in the said registers have to be appointed in the service in the order of merit assigned to them by the Commission while selecting as a batch for that particular register according to Rule 19.
In this view of the matter, instructions in Annexure P/2 can be held to be only for administrative convenience and of directory nature and cannot supersede the Service Rules which are statutory and of binding nature.
Moreover, annexure P/2 cannot override the Regulations framed under provision to clause(3) and clause (5) of Article 320 of the Constitution These Regulations have the approval of the Parliament or State Legislature, as the case may be, under the said clause (5) thereof.
Moreover, clause 10 of the Procedure required a reference to the Commission and number of posts to be filled have been specified.
Clause 16 `the procedure' further lays down a mandatory provision in case recommendation of the Commission is not accepted and further if non-acceptance of the recommendation of Commission is for reasons which were not before the Commission when making the recommendations the Commission has to be given an opportunity of reconsidering its recommendations.
All these clauses are statutory provisions and while observing these provisions, Government instructions Annexure P/2 can be ignored as a whole.
In any case, no writ or direction can be issued on the basis of instructions Annexure P2.
The interpretation of respondent No. 1 regarding rule 14 is misplaced and cannot be upheld.
If the rule is interpreted in that manner, the words `merit determined by the Commission' and also the words `from amongst those who have been declared as qualified' will lose all significance and will be redundant.
If that had been the intention in framing the rules the wording of the rule would have been entirely different.
18.
I do not find merit in this contention.
Firstly, in Harjit Singh Sidhu's case (supra) their lordships in Full Bench were dealing with cases of direct recruits for which competitive examination followed by interview took place while determining the merit list.
In the present case, the selection was made on the basis of interview only based on the recommendations made by various nominating authorities.
Moreover, in that case, the Commission had taken a stand that it had recommended 76 candidates in the first instance and later on seven more names were sent in July 1985 and thus select list of the candidates consisted of 83 names only and further 16 additional candidates were appointed without its consultation.
Under these circumstances, it was held by their lordships of the Full Bench that the appointment of 16 persons who were appointed without the consultation of the Commission was bad in law.
It may further be clarified that instructions Annexure P/2 are not the same as Annexure P/4 which are being interpreted in this petition.
19.
Apart from this, the action of the State Govt in appointing candidates from Register-B in excess of the posts advertised following the instructions Annexure PA dated 2231957 and denying the same benefit to the persons who were borne on A-I-II and A-III Registers as per their share is arbitrary and discriminatory on the face of it.
It is admitted case of the parties that roster as prescribed under the rules, is being maintained indicating therein the serial numbers in a block of 100 vacancies and the source from which each vacancy has to be filled as per the provisions of Rule 18 of the 1976.
Once the roster is being maintained for filling up vacancies from different sources such as Register-B (direct recruits), Registrar A-I, and A-II and Register-C, then it is not open to the State to fill the vacancies in excess to the requisition sent to he Commission following the instructions dated 2231957, Annexure P/A, and denying the same benefit to the candidates belonging to Registers A-I, A-II, A-III and Register-C It would create an imbalance in the service leading to anomalous position which would give rise to irreconcilable disputes.
State of Punjab has filled 27 posts from Register-B (direct recruits) on the basis of examination held in 1990 as against 20 posts avertised following the instructions contained in Annexure P/4 dated 2231957 whereas denying the same benefit to the persons who were to be selected from the candidates whose names had been brought on Register A-I, A-II, A-III and Register-C  20.
Relying upon The State of Haryana v. Subhash Chander Marwaha and others, AIR 1973 Supreme Court 2216, Jatinder Kumar and others v. State of Punjab and others, AIR 1984 Supreme Court 8950 and Shankarsan Dash v. Union of India, AIR 1991 Supreme Court 1612 : 1991(2) SCT 194 (SC), learned counsel appearing for the respondents contended that a successful candidate does not acquire an indefeasible right to a post.
In Jatinder Kumar's case (supra) Inspector-General of Police sent a requisition to the Subordinate Services Selection Board to select and recommend seven suitable persons for the post of Assistant Sub-Inspector of Police.
While the matter was pending consideration, 50 more posts of Assistant Sub-Inspectors of Police became available and, therefore, the Board was requested to recommend 57 suitable persons for these posts.
The applicants along with man others were interviewed and physically tested on October, 1978 to 6th of February, 1979.
Later on, after the interviews were over but before the select list could be finalised by the Board, the Inspector-General of Police, vide his letter dated 31st of August, 1979 requested the Board to recommend 170 more persons in addition to 57 already under consideration in anticipation of further vacancies likely to occur as a result of expected reorganisation of the police force.
In that connection a proposal for the disbandment of the Punjab Armed Police Battalion and instead creation of some additional posts for the District Police, had already been submitted.
Thus, in all 227 candidates were to be recruited by the Board for the post of Assistant Sub-Inspectors of Police.
The Board, however, recommended a panel of 144 candidates on 22nd of December, 1979.
Later on proposal for disbandment of the Punjab Armed Police Battalion and creation of additional posts in the districts referred to above was turned down by the Government and, therefore, the anticipated 170 temporary vacancies of Assistant Sub-Inspectors against direct recruitment quota could not be available.
Out of the earlier 57 posts, however 9 were offered to the wards of deceased police officers in accordance with the Punjab Govt. instructions dated 18.4.1973.
The remaining 48 posts were offered to be candidates recommended by the Board in order of merit determined by the Board.
Since the remaining candidates recommended by the Board pursuant to the latter requisition were not appointed as there were no vacancies, the disgruntled candidates filed two writ petitions under Article 226 of the Constitution before the High Court.
The writ petitions were dismissed and appeals were carried to the Supreme Court.
Their Lordships of the Supreme Court, under these circumstances, observed as under :  "...
If however, the vacancy is to be filled up, the Government has to make appointment strictly adhering to the order of merit as recommended by the Public Service Commission.
It cannot disturb the order of merit according to its own sweet will except for other good reasons, viz., bad conduct or character.
The Government also cannot appoint a person whose name does not appear in the list.
But it is open to the Government to decide how many appointments will be made.
The process for selection and selection for the purpose of recruitment against anticipated vacancies does not create a right to be appointed to the post which can be enforced by a mandamus."
In Shankarsan Dash's case (supra) their Lordships of the Supreme Court held as under :-  "It cannot be said that if a number of vacancies are notified for appointment and adequate number of candidates are found fit, the successful candidates acquire an indefeasible right to be appointed which cannot be legitimately denied.
Ordinarily the notification merely amounts to an invitation to qualified candidates to apply for recruitment and on their selection they do not acquire any right to the post.
Unless the relevant recruitment rules so indicate.
The State is under no legal duty to fill up all or any of the vacancies.
However, it does not mean that the State has the licence of acting in an arbitrary manner.
The decision not to fill up the vacancies has to be taken bona fide for appropriate reasons.
And if the vacancies or any of them are filled up, the State is bound to respect the comparative merit of the candidates, as reflected at the recruitment test, and no discrimination can be permitted."
(21) A reading of both these judgment would indicate that a person who is selected does not get an indefeasible right to be appointed.
It has further been held is Shandarshan Dash's case (supra) that the State cannot act in an arbitrary manner and the decision not to fill up the vacancies has to be taken bona fide for appropriate reasons.
In this case, the State Govt. has chosen to appoint persons from Register-B in excess of number of the posts advertised following the instructions Annexure P/4 dated 2231957 whereas the same benefit is not being extended to the accepted persons on Register A-I, A-II, A-III and Register-C which is arbitrary and discriminatory which would result in an imbalance in the service where vacancy has to be filled in by roster point giving rise to irreconcilable disputes such as seniority and other disputes.
In a given situation, it may be open to the appointing authority to recruit persons from one source while keeping in abeyance the appointments from the other sources if the appointments are being made to from two different sources but in case when the appointments are being made to the post from different sources in pursuance to a common examination and interviews held then to give preference of filling up anticipated vacancies to one source and denying the same to the other source would be discriminatory and arbitrary.
Action of the respondents in not following the instructions Annexure P/4 dated 2231957 in the case of accepted candidates borne on Register A-II while following the same in the case of candidates belonging to Register-B, being arbitrary, discriminatory and therefore cannot be sustained, which has to be corrected by issuing a writ of mandamus to the respondents directing them to consider the petitioners for additional vacancies of PCS(EB) (Class-I) which were available prior to the date of interview held on 18121991 and which became available up till six months after the date of recommendations by the Commission on 6.1.1992 in accordance with instructions Annexure P/4 as has been done in the case of direct recruits from Register-B  22.
The record of the result prepared by the Commission of PCS.
(EB) nominations from Register A-II service was sent for to find out as to how many names were recommended by the Commission.
The same was opened and it was found that only seven names had been recommended by the Commission.
The record was again sealed.
This record be returned to counsel for the respondents for on- award transmission of the same to the Commission for its safe custody.
Since no merit list was prepared by the Commission of candidates from Register A-II and no other candidate from Register A-III has approached this Court within six months.
Following the observations of JL.
Gupta, J in C.W.P.
No. 9908 of 1990 decided on 971991 wherein it has been held as under :-  "Since the candidates immediately above the petitioner at Sr. No. 10 of the merit list, has not chosen to approach this Court in spite of the fact that the selection was made more than three years back, I am of the opinion that the post should be offered to the petitioner."
It is directed that the claim of the petitioners for appointment to the post of PCS (EB) (Class-I) from Register A-II be considered and appointments be made.
Needful be done within a period of three months from the date of receipt of copy of this judgment.
Thus, the writ petition stands allowed.
No costs.
Petition allowed.