ML Singhal, J - Through this petition filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, one Bhupinder Singh has prayed for the issuance of writ of mandamus directing the respondents to send him to police training school, Jahankhelan for training and issue him constabulary number.
2.
Facts :  Petitioner was born on 11.3.1958.
His father was also a constable in the Police Department.
He retired on 1121981.
In the year, 1982, SSP Jalandhar (respondent No. 3) started the recruitment of police constables.
Petitioner applied for being recruited as constable.
He appeared before Sh. Birbal Nath, the then Director General of Police on 7.5.1982 who sent him for medical examination.
Petitioner appeared before the medical board.
He was found fit for recruitment sas constable by the medical board.
Report on his medical examination was sent to the office of SSP, Jalandhar vide memo No. 838/SSP, Jalandhar dated 24.8.1982 addressed to the Director General of Police.
Petitioner's name was brought on the list of constables recruited and his name appeared at Sr. No. 133 in the enlistment register of the year, 1982.
Sant Parkash Singh r/o Majitha, Gurdev Singh r/o Nawanshahr, Baldev Singh r/o Mian Bhind, PS Barowal, Distt.
Amritsar and Hardyal Singh r/o Mujri PS Majitha, Distt.
Amritsar were appointed and given constabulary numbers.
They were sent for training.
Before constabulary number could be allotted to him, there was change in the age of recruitment to the post of constable.
Advertisement issued in the year, 1984 for recruitment of 1200 constables and in the year, 1985 for recruitment of 1500 constables, shows that there were vacancies in the department.
One Jagmohan Singh shown at Sr. No. 127 was sent for training to police training school, Jahankhelan on the direction given by a Division Bench of this court in CWP No. 5346 of 1985 on 1831986.
He was given constabulary number on 3081986 and sent for training to police training school, Jahankhelan.
It is alleged that the petitioner has been discriminated vis-a-vis Sant Parkash Singh etc.
If he had been given constabulary number and sent for training alongwith Sant Parkash Singh etc. he could have completed his training.
3.
Respondents-State of Punjab contested this writ petition, urging that the petitioner was considered for recruitment as constable and was found fit by the medical authorities of Jalandhar District, for recruitment as police constable.
As there was no vacancy at that time, his name was kept on waiting list at Sr. No. 133.
One Hardyal Singh was entered at Sr. No. 92 of the waiting list and was existed as constable on 27.7.1982 against the existing vacancies.
Similarly, Vipan Kumar etc. were adjusted against the vacancies then existing up to Sr. No. 126 of this waiting list.
Thereafter, the Director General Police, Punjab issued a TP message No. 623-46/E-3 dated 411983 (Annexure R-1) scrapping waiting lists in all the Districts of Punjab.
Vacancies advertised for the years, 1984 and 1985 had accrued after 1411983, when the waiting lists existing at that timed were cancelled.
If the petitioner were desirous of becoming a constable, he should have applied for that post in response to the advertisement but he did not do so.
The maximum age for recruitment as constable in Punjab Police is now 22 years.
Petitioner is already more than 28 years of age and has thus become over-age.
The case of Jagmohan Singh in distinguishable from that of the petitioner.
No candidate whose name was entered after the name of the petitioner in the waiting list of the year, 1982 was enlisted as constable.
4.
I have heard the learned counsel for the petitioner, learned Additional AG Punjab for the State of Punjab and have gone through the record.
5.
Petitioner was shown at Sr. No. 133 in the enlistment register for the year, 1982.
Learned Additional Advocate General for the State of Punjab submitted that the petitioner was not recruited to the post of constable but he was only approved for the post of constable.
Constabulary numbers were to be given in order of merit, then depending upon the availability of the vacancies.
There was no vacancy available against which the petitioner could be recruited, given constabulary number and sent for training.
As far as Jagmohan Singh was concerned, he was within the ambit of vacancies against which recruitment could take place out of the enlistment register for the year, 1982.
Jagmohan Singh was at number 84 in the waiting list while waiting list of 99 candidates was prepared.
Persons up to Sr. No. 83 were sent for training but before he could be sent for training age limit for recruitment to constable was reduced from 27 years to 25 years.
It was held in CWP No. 5346 of 1985 that change of age could not have retrospective effect and affect the person who had already been selected.
Petitioner was in fact, not recruited as constable but was approved for recruitment and his name was brought on the waiting list.
He could not be given constabulary number as there was no vacancy lying vacant at that time.
So far as Hardyal Singh etc. are concerned, they were all ahead of him falling within the ambit of the vacancies against which they could be recruited and given constabulary numbers and sent for training.
When the constables mentioned at upto Sr. No. 126 of the waiting list had been adjusted against the available vacancies then available, the Director General of Police stopped the recruitment of constables through TP Message dated 1411983 (Annexure R1) and ordered the cancellation of the waiting lists in all the Districts of the State of Punjab.
This was done to streamline the recruitment system in the police department.
A detailed standing order (Annexure R-2) was issued by the Director General of Police, Punjab providing recruitment through the department selection committees.
In this view of the matter, there is no merit in this writ petition.
This writ petition fails and is accordingly dismissed.
No order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.