SS Nijjar, J. (Oral) - This order will dispose of CWP No. 6537 of 2001 and CWP No. 11526 of 2001 as same law points are involved in these two writ petitions.
2.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length and perused the paper books.
3.
All the petitioners were appointed as Coaches in the Punjab Panchayati Raj Sports Parishad (hereinafter referred to as the "Sports Parishad") on various dates in the years 1970-1971.
It is not disputed that the Sports Parishad was an autonomous body.
It was taken over by the Government on 141993.
It is also not disputed that there was to provision for the grant of pension to the employees of the Sports Parishad.
The petitioners are claiming that they would be entitled to add on the service rendered in the Sports Parishad to the service rendered in the State of Punjab for computation of pension.
The Sports Parishad started deducting GPF from 141981.
Therefore, the petitioners have been granted pension w.e.f.
141981.
Mr. Mittal has relied on a Division Bench Judgment of this Court in CWP No. 5661 of 1999 and contended that the petitioners are entitled to count the entire service rendered by them in the Sports Parishad for the purposes of qualifying services.
4.
We are of the considered opinion that there is no merit in the submissions made by the learned counsel for the petitioners.
We are of the opinion that the aforesaid judgment is of no assistance to the petitioners, but rather supports the case of the respondents.
The petitioners therein were employees of the Municipal Corporation.
The services of the petitioners therein had been directed to be regularised by resolution dated 2061968.
Subsequently, their representation was accepted and their services were regularised with effect from the date of their initial appointment.
However as earlier to 1968, the petitioners had not been regularly appointed, they are not directed to deposit the GPF contribution.
It was pleaded by Municipal Corporation that since the petitioners therein had not paid the GPF contribution for the period between the initial date of appointment till 28.2.1968, the benefit of the service could not be given.
This plea was rejected by the Division Bench and it was held that since the services of the petitioners therein had been regularised from the dates of initial appointment, the entire service rendered by the petitioners therein was to count for qualifying service.
This was so because regular employees of the Municipal Corporation were making contribution to the GPF.
In the present case, the service rendered by the petitioners from 1970-71 to 1481, i.e. the date from which the petitioner came under the contributory Provident Fund Account was rendered on a non-pensionable post.
Therefore, the petitioners have been rightly denied the benefit of the service rendered between 1970-71 till 1481.
5.
In view of the above, we find no merit in these two writ petitions and the same are hereby dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.