JS Khehar, J (Oral) - In July, 1998 the Public Relation Department initiated proceedings to fill up one post of Cleaner through the Employment Exchange.
The name of the petitioner was sponsored by the Employment Exchange and he was duly interviewed for the aforesaid post.
He was found to be most meritorious among the candidates which were sponsored by the Employment Exchange.
Resultantly, after conducting the interview on August 20, 1998, the petitioner was informed that he was selected against the post of Cleaner vide order dated April 15, 1999.
Consequent upon the recommendations made by respondent No. 3 in respect of the petitioner, respondent No. 2 directed the petitioner through a communication dated March 10, 1999 to fill up forms for verification of his character and antecedents.
Learned counsel for the respondents informs us that the petitioner's character and antecedents have been verified and they have been found to be satisfactory.
2.
On the completion of the formalities in respect of the appointment of the petitioner against the post of Cleaner, the State Government issued instructions dated May 9, 1999 expressing the necessity of enforcing economic measures and thereby expressing that no appointments would be made unless the same are approved by the Chief Minister, Haryana.
Learned counsel for the respondents, on instructions from Mr. Ashok Kumar, Auditor of the office of the Director Public Relations, has informed this Court that the claim of the petitioner for appointment to the post of Cleaner consequent upon his selection and verification is pending consideration with the Chief Minister, Haryana and a favourable order can only be passed after approval is granted by the Chief Minister.
3.
In view of the above, it will be just and proper and to dispose of this petition with a direction to respondent No. 1 to seek appropriate orders from the Chief Minister, Haryana in respect of the appointment of the petitioner within two months from today.
In case, the Chief Minister approves the appointment of the petitioner against the post of Cleaner, he would be issued an appointment order within one month thereafter.
In case the Chief Minister does not approve the appointment of the petitioner on account of austerity measures adopted by the State Government, the name of the petitioner would be preserved in the select list for the post of Cleaner and as and when the vacancy against which the petitioner has been selected is sought to be filled up, the petitioner would be appointed.
No costs.
Order accordingly.