RS Mongia, J (Oral) - This judgment of ours will dispose of this writ petition as well as writ petition Nos. 223, 288, 761, 860, 965, 966, 975, 1382, 2757, 3024, 3345, 3474, 3606, 3610, 3660, 4079, 4693, 4865, 5463 and 5536 of 2001 as common questions of law and fact are involved therein.
2.
The petitioners in all these writ petitions were working in one or the other Haryana Government Public Sector Undertaking or Co-operative Sector Undertaking.
They all have been retrenched from service on various grounds which we need not go into in these cases.
3.
The argument of the learned counsel for the petitioners is that the State Government as a welfare State should consider such persons like the petitioners for absorption in the corresponding available vacancies in the Government Departments/other State Public Sector Undertakings/Co-operative Sector Undertakings.
The argument has gone to the extent that even in the future vacancies which may arise, the petitioners should be considered first for appointments and, thereafter, the Government may resort to filling those vacancies by direct recruitment.
Reliance has been placed on a Division Bench judgment of this Court in CWP No. 2483 of 1999 (Pawan Kumar Datta and others v. State of Punjab and others, decided on 2891999, Haryana Tanneries Employees' Union v. State of Haryana, 1989(1) RSJ 619 and G Govinda Rajulu v. The Andhra Pradesh State Construction Corporation Ltd and another, AIR 1987 SC 1801.
It has further been argued that some of the petitioners in some writ petitions are already working on deputation with some other State Public Sector Undertakings/Co-operative Sector Undertakings and they should not be retrenched from their parent Undertakings and rather should be absorbed in the Undertakings where they are on deputation.
4.
No doubt the petitioners have worked in these Undertakings for a pretty long time.
The State Government should, as a welfare State, see that they are not thrown on the road after putting in such a long period of service in various Public Sector Undertakings.
The question still remains, is the State Government bound to absorb them in Government Departments or other State Public Sector Undertakings ?
5.
We are of the view that a person who is retrenched for a valid reason is only entitled under law to receive the retrenchment compensation and other benefits permissible under law but has no inherent right that Government must absorb him in other Government Departments/other Public Sector Undertakings.
No doubt, as a welfare State, all endeavour should be made to absorb such retrenchees but a retrenchee cannot claim absorption as a matter of right.
We have gone through the judgments cited by the learned counsel for the petitioners and we find that it has not been laid down that a retrenchee has inherent right to get absorption in Government Departments or other Public Sector Undertakings.
Sincere efforts have to be made to strike a balance in absorbing the retrenchees and fresh recruitment.
6.
The learned Advocate General, Haryana, submitted that keeping in view the aforesaid considerations, the Government had already framed a policy dated 622001, copy Annexure R2/3, wherein it has been interalia provided that whenever there is direct recruitment in the Government Departments or in the Public Sector Undertaking/Cooperative Sector Undertakings, persons like the petitioners would be given relaxation in age upto the age of 50 years for applying for the posts and if they are eligible and suitable, would be given appointments as per their merit.
It has further been provided that due weightage would be given for their past experience if relevant, for the posts being filled up, at the time of selection.
A further policy which has now been framed during the pendency of the writ petitions dated 18.5.2001 has been placed on record.
It interalia, provides as under :  "25% of future vacancies in direct recruitment in Group C & D in Government Departments and State Public Sector and Co-operative Sector Undertakings would be reserved for retrenched employees of Government Departments and State Public Sector and Co-operative Sector Undertakings.
A retrenched employee shall be eligible to apply for such vacancy within three years from the date of his retrenchment.
This provision of reservation for retrenched employees shall remain operative for a period of five years from the date of issue of the policy.
3.
The above instructions may please be brought to the notice of all concerned for strict compliance."
7.
The learned Advocate General has fairly stated that the policy dated 18.5.2001 is supplementary to the policy dated 622001.
This would mean that the retrenchees like the petitioners would have dual right of consideration.
They can apply for appointments under the policy dated 622001 and their age would be relaxed upto the age of 50 years and if they are otherwise eligible and suitable, after giving due weightage of experience (if required), they would be given appointments on the basis of merit.
They would have also a right to apply against 25% posts reserved only for the retrenchees under the policy dated 18.5.2001 as mentioned above.
The policy dated 18.5.2001 provides that the same would be operative for a period of five years.
However, we find that it is also provided that persons like the petitioners should apply within three years of retrenchment.
This clause seems to be meaningless as the policy is to last for 5 years.
Whenever there is direct recruitments, naturally an advertisement will be issued or applications will be invited in accordance with the procedure reserving 25% posts for the retrenchees.
The retrenchees can apply whenever the posts are advertised.
The Government may review the policy after 5 years to see whether it is desirable to extend the policy beyond 5 years.
8.
As a matter of abundant caution, we may observe that our reading of the policies dated 622001 and 18.5.2001 is these provide that under the policy dated 622001 a retrenchee beyond the age of 50 years would be ineligible as the age can be relaxed only upto 50 years.
However, this rigour would not be applicable qua the posts covered by the policy dated 18.5.2001 and a retrenchee who was less than 50 years on the date of retrenchment may be considered against 25% posts under the policy dated 18.5.2001 irrespective of the fact whether on the date of recruitment they have crossed the age of 50 years.
This would be in consonance with the object to be achieved by giving certain rights to the retrenchees by reserving 25 posts for them in direct recruitment.
9.
In some of these writ petitions, the petitioners have challenged that the order retrenching them is not in consonance with law on various grounds like principle of last come first go has not been adhered to ; the seniority list had not been correctly prepared ; while preparing the seniority list different categories have wrongly been clubbed etc. etc. We are not opining anything in these writ petitions as to whether retrenchment of any petitioner is wrong or not.
Wherever such points have been taken in these writ petitions the petitioners may make necessary representations in that behalf to the concerned authorities who would look into the same within a period of three months of the receipt of any such representation.
Needless to mention that if any adverse order is passed, the same may be challenged before an appropriate forum.
At the behest of repetition, it may be observed that only those petitioners would be entitled to make representation who have raised such questions in the present writ petitions.
10.
Before parting with the judgment we may also deal with the point raised in some writ petitions regarding the retrenchment of those who had been given appointments on compassionate grounds.
We are of the view that if compassionate appointment had been given long time back and now such an appointee is being retrenched, then the financial position of such an appointee would have improved and he need not be considered for compassionate appointment again.
However, we are of the view that it will be reasonable to say that if the compassionate appointment was made within five years of the retrenchment then such retrenchee may be considered again for compassionate appointment in any Government Department or other State Public Sector Undertakings subject to his fulfilling other qualifications but age may be relaxed.
This will, however, not take away their right to be considered under the policies dated 622001 and 18.5.2001.
11.
The writ petitions are disposed of in the above terms.
Petition disposed of.