Viney Mittal, J - This order shall dispose of CWP Nos. 14321 of 1993, 3875 of 1994, 3473 of 1994, 3474 of 1994, 1851 of 1994, 1852 of 1994, 13723 of 1994 and 2441 of 1994 as the common questions of law and facts are involved in the aforesaid cases.
2.
It is not in dispute that the controversy involved in these cases is squarely covered on facts as well as on law by a judgment of the Division Bench rendered by this Court in CWP No. 1402 of 1995, decided on December, 7, 1995, titled Dharamvir v. State of Haryana and another  3.
Learned counsel appearing for the parties have also agreed that in fact the aforesaid controversy in Dharamvir's case (supra) had also arisen from the same advertisement and the selection process as is involved in the present cases.
4.
The Division Bench while allowing the aforesaid writ petition has observed as follows :  "The learned counsel for the petitioner contended that as he was Graduate with Geography and also a Bachelor in Education on the date of submission of the application, he is eligible to be appointed as a Social Studies Master.
In the Punjab Education Service Class-III School Cadre Rules, 1955, the educational qualifications required for appointment to the post of SS Master is only BA or M.A./M.Sc.
SSTC or BT Senior basic Trained.
The petitioner possess the degree of BA and also Bachelor Degree in teaching.
Therefore, the petitioner fulfilled the qualifications as prescribed in the rules for appointment.
The qualifications prescribed in the advertisement issued for filling up the posts of SS Masters is contrary to the rules.
The rules do not provide that the candidate must be a graduate with any of the two subjects, namely, History, Political Science, Geography and Sanskrit.
Therefore, it is clear that the advertisement runs contrary to the rule.
The rules are statutory rules and therefore no advertisement can be issued contrary to the rules and no additional qualification not mentioned in the rules can be prescribed for appointment.
As the petitioner is a Graduate in Geography and also having a degree of Bachelor in teaching, we are of the opinion that he fulfilled the qualifications prescribed for the post under the rules.
He is eligible for being considered for the post of Social Studies Master.
The rejection of the candidature of the petitioner on the ground that he did not possess the qualifications as per the advertisement, cannot be justified under law.
We are, therefore, of the opinion that the petitioner shall be considered for appointment if he is otherwise found suitable."
In these circumstances, the present petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to issue the letters of appointment to the petitioners forthwith as per their merit.
For all intents and purposes the appointment of the petitioners shall relate back to the date with effect from which others, who had participated in the same process of selection were appointed, except their salary and emoluments to which they would be entitled to with effect from the date of decision of the present petition.
Necessary orders in this regard be issued by the respondents within a period of two months from the date a certified copy of this order is received by them.
No costs.
Petition allowed.