ML Singhal, J. (Oral) - Petitioner was earlier Chief Engineer in the Department of Public Health of the State of Punjab.
He held this post up to 811992.
He was appointed as a member of Punjab Public Service Commission by the Governor of Punjab.
He assumed the charge of the office of member of Punjab Public Service Commission on 9.2.1992.
He retired from the Commission on 811998 i.e. on attaining the age of 62 years.
Through this writ petition filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, he wants pension for the office held by him as a member of Punjab Public Service Commission in accordance with the Regulation 8(3) to (5) of the Punjab Public Service Commission (Conditions of Service) Regulations, 1958.
He wants pension and graded relief (dearness allowance) at the rates as admissible to the Punjab Pensioners with effect from 2591984 in accordance with the provisions of Clause (4) of Regulation 8 of these Regulations and other retiral benefits viz. leave encashment and leave travel concession etc.  2.
In C.W.P.
No. 16189 of 1993 (DS Chowdhary v. State of Punjab) (1996(2) SLR 704) it was held that pension is admissible to a person who served as member of the Commission.
Petitioner therein (DS Chowdhary) was earlier a member of the Indian Administrative Service but before attaining the age of superannuation, he was taken on the Commission as member.
He assumed the charge of the office of member of the Punjab Public Service Commission on 441983.
He retired from the Commission on February 19, 1988 on attaining the age of 62 years.
He applied to the State of Punjab for the grant of pension for the service rendered by him as a member of the Commission.
It was held by this Court that the petitioner was entitled to pension as member of Public Service Commission.
3.
Similar relief was given to one Sh. GIS Bhullar, who was earlier a member of the Indian Police Service but later was appointed on the Commission where he joined on 30.9.1994 as its member and remained as member till 9.9.1998 i.e. when he attained the age of 62 years.
4.
On the parity of reasoning given in 1996(2) SLR 704 (supra), I think there can be no manner of doubt that the petitioner is entitled to two pensions - one as Chief Engineer for the service which he rendered in the Public Health Department of the State of Punjab and the other member of Punjab Public Service Commission.
On the pension, he is entitled to graded relief (dearness allowances) for the service rendered by him as a member of Punjab Public Service Commission in view of Regulations 8(3) to (5) of the Punjab Public Service Commission (Conditions of Service) Regulations, 1958.
Regulation 8(4) says that the chairman or member who is entitled to pension under Clause (3) shall also be entitled to graded relief as admissible to Punjab Government Pensioners.
Petitioner is thus held entitled to two pensions, one as Chief Engineer for the service rendered by him in the Public Health Department and the other pension and graded relief for the service rendered by him as a member of the Public Service Commission.
After calculating his pension like this, if any recovery is found due from him that will be effected from him.
In addition to above, he will be entitled to leave encashment in view of Regulation 9(3) of the said Regulations, provided there was leave to his credit being a member of the Punjab Public Service Commission.
If any amount is found due to the petitioner, after adjustment in lieu of recoveries, if any due from him, he will be entitled to interest at the rate of 7% per annum on the said amount.
Petition allowed.