MM Kumar, J - The claim of the petitioner in this petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution is that he has been illegally refused the benefit of pension by order dated 2691986, Annexure P-7.
Respondent No. 2 in his order dated 2691986 has refused to count the service of the petitioner rendered by him from the year 1947 to 1976 as Ward Servant in Lady Linlithgow Sanitorium, Kasauli.
2.
Brief facts of the case unfolded in the present petition are that the petitioner was appointed as Ward Servant in the year 1947 in Lady Linlithgow Sanitorium, Kasauli and continued working on the aforementioned post till 1976.
On 391976, the services of the petitioner were transferred to Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh (for brevity, the PGI) by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government of India.
Accordingly, the petitioner joined as Ward Servant in the PGI on 4.9.1976 and superannuated on 3061985.
The petitioner has prayed that the service.
rendered by him at Lady Linlithgow Sanitorium, Kasauli be tagged with the service rendered by him at the PGI for the purposes of pension and the arrears of his pension be paid with interest at the rate of 18% per annum.
3.
The stand of respondent No. 2-PGI in its written statement is that the PGI in the letter of appointment dated 291976 has clarified that it would not bear any liability towards pension and other allied benefits of service which the petitioner might have rendered while serving at Lady Linlithgow Sanitorium, Kasauli unless otherwise approved by the competent authority.
It has further been pointed out that the instructions of Government of India issued vide office memo No. 28/10/Pension Unit dated 29101984 would not be available to the petitioner as the Lady Linlithgow Sanitorium, Kasauli was not financed wholly or substantially by the Central Government.
In this regard, reliance has been placed on letter dated 551986, Annexure R-1 by the Financial Advisor, PGI to the Chairman, Tuberculosis Association of India, New Delhi.
Reliance has also been placed on reply of the Chairman, Tuberculosis Association of India, New Delhi dated 2081986, Annexure P-2 which shows that the petitioner was paid Staff Provident Fund and Employee Gratuity Fund Dues as per rules of the Association.
It has further been averred that since the service rendered at PGI by the petitioner is less than 10 years, he cannot be given any pension.
4.
After carefully perusing the pleadings of the parties, I am of the view that this petition is liable to be dismissed because the Provident Fund retirees constitute a different class.
According to letter dated 2081986.
Annexure R-2, the petitioner was paid Staff Provident Fund and Employees Gratuity Fund Dues as per the rules of Tuberculosis Association of India.
Therefore, once the petitioner has been paid the Staff Provident Fund and Employee Gratuity Fund Dues, he does not become entitled to switch over to pensionary benefits in accordance with the rules of the PGI.
A Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court in Krishena Kumari Bhatia v. The State of Haryana, 1991(1) SCT 468 (SC) : (1990) 4 SCC 207 has taken the view that provident fund retirees constitute a separate class of employees than those who are governed by the pension rules.
The observations of their Lordships read as under :-  "...........Thus, on the retirement of an employee Government's legal obligation under the Provident Fund account ends while under the Pension Scheme it begins.
The rules governing the Provident Fund and its contribution are entirely different from the rules governing pension.
It would not, therefore, be reasonable to argue that what is applicable to the pension retirees must also equally be applicable to PF retirees.
This being the legal position the rights of each individual PF retiree finally crystallized on his retirement whereafter no continuing obligation remained while, on the other hand, as regards Pension retirees, the obligation continued till their death.
The continuing obligation of the State in respect of pension retiree is adversely affected by fall in rupees value and rising prices which, considering the corpus already received by the PF retirees they would not be so adversely affected ipso facto.
It cannot, therefore, be said that it was the ratio decidendi in Nakara that the State's obligation towards its PF retirees must be the same as that towards the pension retirees.
An imaginary definition of obligation to include all the Government retirees in a class was not decided and could not form the basis for any classification for the purposes of this case.
Nakara cannot, therefore, be an authority for this case."
The aforementioned view has been repeatedly followed and applied invarious cases like Indian Ex-services League v. Union of India, 1991(1) SCT 468 (SC) : (1991) 2 SCC 104; All India Reserve Bank Retired Officers Association v. Union of India, (1992) Suppl.
1 SCC 664 ; State of Rajasthan v. Rajasthan Pensioner Samaj, (1991) 2 Suppl.
141 and Union of India v. KG Radha Krishana Panickar, 1998(2) SCT 604 (SC) : (1998) 5 SCC 111.
5.
It is unfortunate that the petitioner would not be able to earn any pension even from respondent No. 2 as he has not rendered adequate qualifying service.
Therefore, no direction can be issued to tag the service of the petition rendered at Lady linlithgow Sanitorium, Kasauli with the service rendered by him at the PGI.
The Claim is without merit and is thus liable to be rejected.
For the reasons recorded above, this petition fails and the same is dismissed.
A copy of this order be sent to Smt. Shanti Devi widow of late Shri Lekh Ram, resident of House No. 14, Mashobra Colony, Solan (H.P.).
Petition dismissed.