Swatanter Kumar, J - In this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner prays for issuance of an appropriate writ, order or direction, particularly Mandamus, directing the respondents to give employment to the petitioner from the disabled quota after relaxing his age to the post of Tabla Player/Caner in the office of Director, Social Welfare, Punjab, Chandigarh.
The petitioner passed his 10+2 examination and also received training of Tabla player/Caner from Governing Training Institute for Adult Blind, Sonepat, Haryana.
As the petitioner belongs to Punjab, on 8101996 having attained the above educational expertise, got his name registered in the Employment Exchange, Moga for the post of Tabla Player and Caner.
Certain posts in that field were advertised and names were called from the Employment Exchange.
On 2011997 the petitioner was interviewed by the Director, Social Welfare, Punjab Chandigarh, and was selected for the post of Tabla Player and Caner.
The Director, Social Welfare, Punjab, Chandigarh is stated to have recommended the case of the petitioner for the post of Tabla Player or Class-IV post to the Deputy Commissioner, Moga.
The copy of the said letter is annexed to the writ petition as Annexure P/2.
The recommendation was against 1% reservation of visually handicapped.
The matter was kept pending for a considerable period and appointment letter was not issued to the petitioner who claimed that he was pursuing the same but of no result.
However, vide letter dated 15.2.2001 the petitioner was informed that he was not eligible for the appointment because his age was more than 45 years on that date.
Aggrieved from the said order, the petitioner served upon the respondents a notice through his counsel dated 9.4.2001, copy whereof is annexed to the petition as Annexure P/4 informing them the detailed facts and that no fault was attributable to him and as such the petitioner should be granted appointment.
Having failed to receive any appropriate reply to the said notice, the petitioner has filed this petition.
2.
Upon notice, the respondents No. 1 and 2 have filed reply.
The facts are hardly in controversy.
It is admitted that the petitioner belongs to the category of blind/low vision and 1% reservation is provided for in such employment.
The respondents have placed on record letter dated 21.4.1997 addressed to the Commissioner, Ferozepur Division, by the Director, Social Security and Women & Child Development Department, Punjab, Chandigarh recommending the name of the petitioner under that quota and requesting them to issue a letter of appointment.
This letter has been annexed to the reply as Annexure R-1/3, which reads as under :-  "Refer Govt. memo No. 10/26/95-5SW/1367, dated 8986 and this office letter No. S-27/SW)-96/17163-254, dated 9.10.96 on the subject cited above.
In this connection it was decided in the meeting dated 7111996 by the Chief Secretary that Social Security Department's Departmental Committee with-hold (will hold ?)
the interview for the post of Class-IV/Caner for blind persons sponsored by the Special Employment Exchange, Ludhiana in which a representative (Chief Secretary) Department of Coordination, Punjab will participate.
Out of the recommended persons by the committee name of the one or two persons will be sent to the departments, to whom the concerned departments will issue the appointment letters.
Copy of the proceedings of the meeting is attached.
Accordingly out of the persons recommended by the Departmental Committee, the name of the under given blind persons is sent to your department for appointment.
They may be appointed on the post of Class-IV in which the post of the caner be included.
It is requested that they may be issued appointment letters with intimation to this department."
3.
It is also not disputed in the reply that the petitioner is resident of Punjab and satisfied all the requisite qualifications at the time of his selection.
The only contention raised before us is that in furtherance to the judgment of this Court passed in the case of Harcharan Singh v. State of Punjab, Civil Writ Petition No. 14167 of 1997, the Government had issued new instructions on 3181999, copy of which is annexed to the reply as Annexure R/2, changing the recruitment policy and providing that recruitment of such posts should be made through special Employment Exchange in the News Papers by the respective departments.
4.
From the above narrated facts, it cannot be disputed that the petitioner was eligible, was selected and was recommended for appointment to the concerned authorities for the post of Tabla Player and Caner.
The petitioner was entitled to be appointed to that post in April 1997 or immediately thereafter.
Now after lapse of more than 4 years to say that the petitioner is ineligible and his appointment has to be made in furtherance to the policy of 3181999 is a stand which is unfair at the face of it.
The instructions of 3181999 can be made effective prospectively alone and cannot operate retrospectively.
This is a policy decision taken by the Government which has to operate subsequent to the date of the issuance and cannot unsettle the settled matters.
A person who has been selected and recommended for appointment/issuance of letter of appointment more than two years earlier, cannot be denied the benefit that has accrued to him under the existing policy at the relevant time.
It is nobody's case before us that the post was not available or that the petitioner was not selected and recommended for appointment.
The State cannot take advantage of the delay apparently attributable to its own actions.
The petitioner has been pursuing the respondents for issuance of the appointment letter.
But they have delayed it on what pretext from 1997 to 1999 is not even clear from the reply filed on behalf of the respondents.
Further, undue delay has been caused and now the respondents wish to deny to the petitioner appointment on the ground of over- age.
The petitioner if at all has become over-age, it is for the fault of the State and he had always been vigilant for claiming his right.
Denial of benefit specially to a visually handicapped person would be unjust and unfair and cannot be permitted in the present manner.
We may notice that in the written statement no explanation has been placed on record as to what the State was doing and why there was such a considerable delay (from the year 1997 to 2001) on the part of the State.
The reply also does not attribute or suggest any fault or delay to the petitioner.
Principles of equity would certainly tilt in favour of the petitioner as the policy of 1999 cannot be permitted to operate as an impediment to the appointment of the petitioner particularly in view of the fact that he was selected and recommended for appointment in accordance with the then instructions in force.
5.
For the reasons afore-stated we are of the considered view that this writ has to be allowed to the limited extend that respondents should be directed to consider the case of the petitioner for appointment after granting the relaxation for age in accordance with rules.
The petition is accordingly allowed, however, leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.