Viney Mittal, J - The present petition under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India has been filed by the petitioner-Krishan Kumar Sub Inspector, for the issuance of a writ of certiorari for quashing the order dated July 1, 1999, whereby the petitioner has been ordered to be reverted from the post of Sub Inspector to the post of Assistant Sub Inspector.
2.
Certain facts may be noticed.
The petitioner stated that he was enrolled in Haryana Police as Constable on April 25, 1973.
Subsequently, when he was serving in Ambala Range, then vide order dated February 28, 1976 his name was approved as Constable Clerk in Executive Clerical Cadre English Branch.
The petitioner was promoted as Head Constable in due course and in 1979 was allocated to Gurgaon Range.
It seems that there was some dispute qua the inter se seniority between the petitioner and respondent No. 4 namely Raj Singh.
The petitioner made a representation for correcting the seniority list and allotting him the due place since according to him his seniority was wrongly fixed qua respondent No. 4.
Even though the representation made by the petitioner was pending but vide order dated June 16, 1998 the Dy.
Inspector General of Police, Rohtak Range, promoted five Head Constables (Assistant Head Clerks) as Assistant Sub Inspectors.
The name of the petitioner also figured in as one of the promotees.
However, respondent No. 4 was placed at S. No. 3, whereas the petitioner was allotted S. No. 5.
Again on November 26, 1998, the petitioner as well as respondent No. 4 were promoted to the rank of Sub Inspector - Head Clerk establishment.
Here also name of respondent No. 4 was shown at S. No. 3, whereas that of petitioner was shown at S. No. 5.
The matter with regard to inter se seniority was left open since there was a civil suit filed by Raj Singh-respondent No. 4 and was stated to be pending.
According to the petitioner, the seniority position of the petitioner vis a vis respondent No. 4and others never became final.
The specific case of the petitioner is that the Dy.
Inspector General of Police issued an order dated June, 29, 1999, whereby the petitioner was ordered to be transferred from the office of DIG Rohtak Range to the office of DIG (now Inspector General) HAP Madhuban.
A copy of the aforesaid transfer order has been appended as Annexure P-13 with the petition.
Subsequently, the DIG Rohtak Range instead of relieving the petitioner from the post of Sub Inspector and allowing him to join at Madhuban, passed an order dated July 1, 1999, whereby the petitioner was ordered to be reverted.
The reversion of the petitioner from the post of Sub Inspector to that of Assistant Sub Inspector was ordered on the ground that due to upgradation of posts of Head Clerk from the rank of Sub Inspector to the rank of Inspector and allocation of two posts of Sub Inspector/Security to the Executive cadre and the adjustment of SI Hawa Singh, the petitioner had to be reverted being the junior-most official in the cadre, because of the non-availability of another post of Sub Inspector in the Executive Clerical cadre.
A copy of the aforesaid order dated July 1, 1999 has been appended as Annexure P-14 with the petition.
The petitioner is aggrieved against the aforesaid order of reversion dated July 1, 1999 and has approached this Court through the present petition.
3.
Upon a notice issued to the respondents, they have put in appearance.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of respondent No. 3.
The claim of the petitioner has been contested.
4.
Although various pleas have been raised in the present petition challenging the order of reversion Annexure P-14, as well as claiming directions to the respondents to issue/circulate seniority list of Clerical cadre working in Rohtak Range, but at the stage of arguments, Sh. IS Balhara, learned counsel for the petitioner has confined the attack only to the submission that since the petitioner had already been transferred out of the Rohtak Range vide order dated June 29, 1999 passed by the Dy.
Inspector General of Police, Haryana, to HAP Madhuban, therefore, after the aforesaid transfer order, the Dy.
Inspector General of Police, Rohtak Range had no control over the petitioner and had no jurisdiction, as such, to pass the order Annexure P-14, ordering the reversion of the petitioner.
5.
On the other hand, Sh. Amol Rattan, learned Assistant Advocate General, Haryana has submitted that the respondents had specifically submitted in para 18 of the written statement that the petitioner was reverted as Assistant Sub Inspector vide order dated July 1, 1999 and although he was transferred from Rohtak Range to the office of DIG/HAP Madhuban vide order dated June 29, 1999, but the aforesaid transfer order had been received in the office of Dy.
Inspector General, Rohtak Range only on July 2, 1999.
On the basis of the aforesaid fact, Sh. Amol Rattan submitted that the order of reversion, which had been passed prior to the receipt of the intimation of the transfer order, was legal and valid and no grievance could be made against the aforesaid order.
6.
I have given my thoughtful consideration to the entire controversy.
In my considered opinion, order Annexure P-14 cannot be legally sustained.
It is admitted position between the parties that the petitioner had been transferred vide order dated June 29, 1999 passed by the Dy.
Inspector General of Police, Haryana.
The petitioner was ordered to be transferred from Rohtak Range to the office of DIG/HAP Madhuban "with immediate effect".
As a consequence of the aforesaid transfer order, the petitioner was liable to be relieved.
Rather than being relieved, the Dy.
Inspector General, Rohtak Range-respondent No. 3 passed his reversion order Annexure P-14 on July 1, 1999.
After the orders of the transfer, respondent No. 3 seized (ceased ?)
to have any control and jurisdiction over the petitioner and as such he should not have ordered the reversion of the petitioner, who had since been ordered to be transferred, out of Rohtak Range.
The mere fact that the aforesaid transfer order had been communicated and received in the office of the Dy.
Inspector General, Rohtak Range on a date subsequent to the reversion order is of no consequence.
7.
In this view of the matter, the order Annexure P-14 dated July 1, 1999 whereby the petitioner has been ordered to be reverted from the post of Sub Inspector to the post of Assistant Sub Inspector cannot be legally sustained and as such is hereby quashed.
No other point has been urged before me.
As a consequence of the aforesaid discussion, the present petition deserves to succeed and while quashing the order Annexure P-14, I allow the petition with no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.