Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - These three petitions raise a common issue - Are the petitioners entitled to claim the salary of the post of Lecturer in the District Institute of Education and Training ?
Counsel for the parties have referred to the facts in CWP No. 5857 of 1999.
These may be briefly noticed.
2.
The petitioner was working as a Master in the Punjab Education Service Class-III (School Cadre).
On November 20, 1989, the petitioner was deputed as a Lecturer at the District Institute of Education and Training.
The petitioner was placed in the scale of Rs. 1640-2925 which was the scale for the post of a Master held by him in the Education Department.
The petitioner was specifically informed that the appointment is in his "own pay and grade on deputation till further orders."
It was also clarified that he will not be paid any deputation allowance.
The petitioner accepted this appointment which was made on ad hoc basis.
On February 17, 1993, the petitioner was promoted as a Lecturer in his parent cadre.
On receipt of this letter, the petitioner made a request that he may be granted the lecturer's scale at the Institute where he was posted instead of being shifted to the Senior Secondary School, Badshahpur in District Patiala.
This request was accepted.
Resultantly, from March 15, 1993, the petitioner was treated as a lecturer and placed in the scale of pay sanctioned for that post.
3.
After a lapse of many years, the petitioner submitted a representation dated March 18, 1998 claiming benefit of the ad hoc service rendered at the Institute from the Department.
They prayer having not been accepted, the petitioner has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
4.
The respondents contest the petitioner's claim.
It has been pointed that at the time of the posting at the Institute, the petitioners were informed that they will be paid only in their own scale of pay.
They would not be entitled to any benefit of seniority, deputation allowance or the pay scale.
Copies of the communications have been produced with the written statement.
Specifically, reference has been made to the stipulation in the order issued on August 8, 1990.
5.
Dr. ML Sachdeva, counsel for the petitioners in all the three cases has contended that on appointment to a higher post, the petitioners had a right to be granted the higher pay.
Since the petitioners have been ultimately adjusted as lecturers, the period of service rendered by them on ad hoc basis should be taken into account for the purpose of fixation of pay in the lecturer's scale.
Even a prayer for payment of arrears of salary on account of difference in pay scale for the period from 1989 to 1993 has been made.
6.
On the other hand, Mr. DV Sharma, Additional Advocate General, Punjab has pointed out that claim for the payment of salary for the period from 1989 to 1993 is highly belated.
Thus, the petitioners should not be given any benefit.
7.
It is true that the petitioners were deputed to the Training Institute at Nabha on specific conditions.
It was stipulated that they would not be entitled to any monetary benefit.
They would work in their own scale of pay.
However, it is not disputed that they had actually performed the duties of Lecturers.
They were ultimately absorbed on the posts of lecturers from different dates.
They are still continuing as such.
8.
So far as the claim for arrears of salary for the period from 1989 to 1993 on account of difference in scale of pay is concerned, it appears to be highly belated.
Even a suit for payment of salary which had accrued in the year 1989 or even in the year 1993 would be barred by limitation.
Thus, this claim cannot be sustained.
However, it is the admitted position that the petitioners had discharged the duties of the posts of Lecturers from the date of initial deputation till their absorption.
Benefit of this service for the purpose of fixation of pay in the Lecturer's grade has allegedly not been given to them.
This is a recurring cause of action.
Every month, the petitioner are being paid less on account of denial of benefit of pay of the higher post.
It would not be fair to perpetuate this wrong.
Thus, it is directed that the pay of the petitioners in the grade of Lecturers at the Institute shall be refixed by giving them the benefit of the service rendered from the date of initial appointment to the date of regularisation.
In view of the above, counsel for the petitioners does not press for the other reliefs as claimed in the writ petitions.
All the three writ petitions are disposed of in the above terms.
The needful shall be done within three months from the date of receipt of a certified copy of this order.
In the circumstances, there will be no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.