Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was appointed as a teacher vide order dated December 21, 2001.
A copy of this order is at Annexure P-8 with the writ petition.
In pursuance of this offer of appointment the petitioner joined service on December 24, 2001.
On July 15, 2002 the petitioner's services were "terminated with immediate effect during the probation period as she did not fulfil the requisite qualifications as published in the advertisement" for the post of JBT teachers.
A copy of the order has been produced as Annexure P-10 with the writ petition.
Aggrieved by this order, the petitioner has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
It is alleged that the petitioner is qualified for the post of JBT Teacher.
2.
Dr. Sachdeva, learned counsel for the petitioner, submits that she possesses the qualification of BA with three years Diploma in Physical Education.
This Diploma, according to the learned counsel, is equivalent to the degree of Bachelor of Education.
He further submits that this equivalence is recognised by the statutory rules.
Thus, the counsel contends that the respondents have erred in holding that the petitioner did not fulfil the qualification for appointment to the post of Junior Basic Trained teacher.
3.
The short question that arises for consideration is that - Does the petitioner fulfil the qualifications for appointment to the post of a JBT teacher ?
4.
Admittedly, the posts of JBT Teacher had been advertised.
The qualifications of the posts were duly mentioned.
It was laid down that the candidates must have qualified "Elementary Teacher Training Course of two years from the Punjab State."
Even others, who had passed the JBT course or BA.
B.Ed.
were also to be considered.
The qualification of Diploma in Physical Education was not mentioned in the advertisement.
It is thus clear that persons with Diploma in Physical Education were not qualified to apply.
5.
Dr. Sachdeva submits that this qualification is recognised under the statutory rules.
Thus, the petitioners were eligible to be considered for appointment, as JBT Teachers.
Is it so ?
6.
The recruitment to the post of Primary School Teachers is governed by the provision of Punjab State Education Class III (Primary School Cadre) Service Rules, 1997.
Rule 6 lays down the method of recruitment and qualifications.
It has been, inter-alia, provided that the post shall be filled up in accordance with the manner laid down in appendix B.
Clause 2 specifically provides that "no person shall be appointed to a post in the service, unless he possesses the qualifications and experience as specified against that post in appendix B."
The relevant entry in appendix B is as under :-  "4.
Junior BasicTrained Teacher/Elementary Trained Teacher 100% Direct Appointment (i) Matric/10-+2 (ii) Training/ Elementary Teachers Training two years course of Punjab State or from any other State or Union Territory declared equivalent and recognised by the Punjab Government."
7.
A perusal of the above provision would show that the posts have to be filled up by direct appointment.
Persons who possess the qualification of Matric or 10+2 with Elementary Teachers Training course of two years are eligible.
The rule does not recognise a Diploma in Physical Education as a qualification for appointment to the posts of JBT teachers.
8.
Dr. Sachdeva refers to an entry in Appendix-B of the Punjab State Education Class II (school Cadre) Service Rules, 1978, as amended in 1995, and contends that the qualification of diploma in Physical Education has been treated as equivalent to BT or B.Ed.
The relevant entry is as follows :-  "(g) Social Studies Master/Mistress B.A.
with subject Combination as approved by Government from time to time with BT or B.Ed.
OR Senior Basic Trained (including service of D.P.Ed.
and BPEd.
as Master/Mistress with at least three years actual teaching experience)."
9.
A perusal of the above provision shows that the qualifications relate to the posts of Social Studies Masters and not to those of JBT teachers.
The two posts belong to different service and are governed by separate set of Rules.
We cannot read the provision to mean that a person trained in Physical Education is qualified to teach Hindi, English and Arithmetic to tiny toddlers.
10.
The rule making authority is best equipped to know the needs of a particular job and to prescribe the qualifications therefore.
The Courts are normally reluctant to enter academic thickets.
The Courts do not have the expertise.
Thus, the Courts normally avoid a microscopic examination of the qualifications or the equivalence thereof.
In the present case, on a perusal of the rules, it is clear that the recruitment to the post of teachers in Primary Schools is governed by a separate set of statutory rules enacted by the Government.
These rules do not recognise the qualification of Diploma in Physical Education which the petitioner possesses.
Even in the advertisement this was not prescribed as one of the qualifications.
Thus, the petitioner who had applied in response to the advertisement did not actually fulfil the qualifications for the post.
Resultantly, we can find no fault with the order passed by the authorities.
No other point has been raised.
In view of the above, we find no merit in this writ petition.
It is consequently dismissed in limine.
Petition dismissed.