GS Singhvi, J - Whether the petitioners are entitled to study leave for the period during which they had undergone special degree course and whether the said period is to be counted as duty for the purpose of pay and allowances and grant of high er pay, is the main question which arises for determination in these petitions filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
An ancillary question which merits consideration is whether the petitioners are entitled to out-of-turn promotion to the post of Sub Divisional Engineer on the basis of their additional qualification.
2.
For the purpose of deciding the aforementioned questions, we may notice the facts from CWP No. 13016 of 1989.
3.
In the year 1981, the Government of Haryana approved a scheme for starting special Bachelor of Engineer degree course for in-service diploma-holder engineers.
Accordingly, the Principal, Regional Engineering College, Kurukshetra sent letter dated 551982 to the Chief Engineer/JLN, Irrigation Department, Haryana to sponsor the candidate for the course commencing from July 1, 1982.
The Engineer-in-Chief circulated information regarding the course to the in-service candidates including the petitioners.
Their names were sponsored for the course and no objection certificate was issued vide memo No. 67/E-111/82/2231/E-111 dated 2681983, subject to the following conditions :-  (1) They shall have to bear the entire expenses (direct or indirect) connected with studies for the entire period of 3 years.
(2) They shall be granted leave of the kind due for a period of 3 years.
4.
The petitioners accepted the above-mentioned conditions and joined the course after submitting applications for grant of the leave of the kind due.
They successfully completed the course and rejoined the department as Junior Engineer.
All the petitioners, except Prem Chand Aggarwal, filed writ petitions in 1989, i.e. after 4 years of the completion of the course and Prem Chand Aggarwal filed writ petition in 1991, i.e. after 6 years of the completion of course for issuance of a direction to the respondents to treat the entire duration of the course as study leave, and accordingly, grant them service benefits, like pay and allowances and consideration of their cases for promotion.
They have relied on the favourable recommendations made by the Engineer-in-Chief and the fact that other employees, who had gone for higher studies, were treated on duty with full pay and allowances.
5.
In their written statement, the respondents have averred that after having joined the course by accepting the conditions laid down by the Engineer-in- Chief, the petitioners cannot turn around and claim that the duration of the course may be treated as study leave.
They have relied on the policy decision taken by the Government of Haryana to grant the leave of the kind due to the candidates undergoing special degree course at Regional Engineering College, Kurukshetra and have averred that the petitioners cannot seek a direction for payment of salary and allowances for the said period as of right.
The respondents have also controverted the petitioners' claim for out-of-turn promotion to the post of Sub Divisional Engineer by asserting that the promotions are to be made strictly in accordance with the Haryana Service of Engineers Class-II Rules, 1965 under which the criteria of seniority-cum-merit has been prescribed for promotion to the higher post.
6.
Shri SP Laler invited our attention to memo dated 27101983 (Annexure P-4) and memo dated 1741984 (Annexure P-5) sent by the Engineer-in-Chief, Haryana, PWD B&R to the Commissioner and Secretary to Government, Haryana, PWD, B&R Branch, Chandigarh for treating the duration of special degree course as study leave and argued that the decision taken by the State Government to grant them leave of the kind due should be declared illegal, arbitrary and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India, more-so, because other candidates, who were sponsored for higher/special courses by different Government Departments, were given the benefit of full pay and allowances.
He further argued that the petitioners are entitled to be considered for out-of- turn promotion because they were sponsored for special degree course with the sole object of utilizing their services on the higher posts.
Shri Laler also stated that during the pendency of the writ petitions, the State Government has taken a policy decision in 1993 for treating the period spent during special course as study leave, but the same has been made applicable prospectively.
7.
Shri Jaswant Singh relied on Rule 8126 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Vol.
I, Part I (for short `the Rules') as applicable to the State of Haryana and argued that the petitioners cannot claim study leave as of right simply because in some other cases, the duration of special courses has been treated as study leave and momentary benefits have been given to the candidates.
He further argued that the petitioners cannot claim the benefit of study leave because they had accepted the conditions imposed by the Engineer-in-Chief and applied for grant of the leave of the kind due.
Learned Senior Deputy Advocate General controverted Shri Laler's argument on the petitioners' entitlement to be considered for out-of-turn promotion by contending that they cannot claim promotion to the post of Sub Divisional Engineer in violation of the statutory rules.
8.
We have given serious thought to the respective arguments.
There is no dispute between the parties that the Engineer-in-Chief had sponsored the names of the petitioners for special degree course subject to the conditions that they shall have to bear the entire expenses of the course and they shall be granted leave of the kind due.
The petitioners accepted those conditions without expressing any reservation.
Therefore, they are estopped from seeking a direction which would indirectly nullify the conditions imposed by the Engineer-in-Chief.
9.
There is another reason for our disinclination to entertain the petitioners' prayer.
They have neither challenged the validity of the conditions laid down by the Engineer-in-Chief nor any prayer has been made for quashing the same.
Therefore, we cannot issue a direction which would amount to indirect invalidation of those conditions.
10.
The plea of discrimination raised by the petitioners deserves to be rejected because, as mentioned above, Rule 8126 of the rules does not cast a duty on the government to grant study leave to all those employees who undergo a special course of instructions or training.
11.
The decision of the Government to grant study leave to candidates sponsored for other courses cannot be made basis for recording a finding of discrimination because the petitioners have not produced any material before the court to prove that their case is identical to those who had been granted the benefit of study leave.
12.
The petitioners' prayer for issuance of a direction to the respondents to give them out-of-turn promotion as Sub Divisional Engineer merits rejection because the rules do not contain any provision for out-of-turn promotion on acquiring higher qualification.
Rather, the rules lay down the criteria of seniority-cum-merit.
Therefore, the petitioners will have to wait in the queue and seek promotion only after their seniors are so promoted.
No other point has been argued.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petitions are dismissed.
Petitions dismissed.