Sunanda Bhandare, J - The petitioners are employees of this Court.
Petitioner No. 1 at the relevant time was working in the post of Assistant and petitioner No. 2 as Senior Stenographer.
The service of the petitioners is governed under the Delhi High Court Establishment (Appointment and Conditions of Service) Rules, 1972 (hereinafter referred to as the Rules).
Item 4 and 5 of Schedule II read with Rule 7 of the Rules provide for appointment to the posts of Superintendent and Court Master.
The extracts of the said rule at the relevant time read thus :  S.No.
Category of post Minimum qualification prescribed for appointment to the post Mode of appointment.
1. x x x 2. x x x 3. x x x 4.
Superintendent (Promotion/Selection Post) 5 years service in any of the post of categories 9, 10, 11, 13, 14 and 16 of the class III mentioned in Schedule I (a) 25% of the vacant posts by promotion on the basis of seniority-cum-suitability from joint seniority list of categories 9, 10, 11, 13, 14 and 16 of Class III mentioned in Schedule I (b) 75% of the vacant posts by selection on merits from categories 9, 10, 11, 13, 14 & 16 of Class III mentioned in Schedule I, on the basis of written test and interview.
5.
Court Master (Promotion/Selection Post) (a) For members of the Establishment of this Court 5 years service in any of the categories 9, 10, 11, 13, 14 & 16 of Class III mentioned in Schedule I (a) 25% of the vacant post by promotion on the basis of seniority-cum-suitability from joint seniority list of categories 9, 10, 11, 13, 14 and 16 of class III mentioned in Schedule I (b)(i) For members of the Establishment of this Courts and/or courts subordinate to this Court 5 years service in any of the posts of categories 9, 10, 11, 13, 14 & 16 of Class III mentioned in Schedule I and/or in a post of Assistant Head Copyist, Branch Incharge, Criminal Agency and/or Librarian in the courts subordinate to this Court (b)(i) 75% of vacant posts by selection on merit from categories specified in column 3 on the basis of written test and interview.
(b)(ii) For direct recruits-Graduate (b)(ii) By direct recruitment on the basis of written test and interview.
2.
The High Court has been making appointments to the post of Superintendent/Court Master both by way of promotion as well as by selection as provided under the said rule and for that purpose has also been holding tests for selecting candidates.
Some such tests were held in the year 1972, 1974 and 1983.
The respondent issued a Circular on 27th September, 1985 for holding a test for the purpose of selection of candidates for appointment to the post of Superintendent/Court Master and invited applications from eligible candidates desiring to take the test.
In response to the said Circular, the petitioners being eligible to take the test, applied.
The test was held and the petitioners and some others qualified in the written test.
Interviews were held by the Selection Committee appointed by the Chief Justice and 12 candidates including the petitioners qualified.
A list of these 12 candidates was laid before the Chief Justice for his approval.
The Chief Justice approved the list and, thereafter, the first three candidates from the said list were appointed to the post of Superintendent/Court Master against three leave vacancies which were available at that time vide order dated 28111985.
Thereafter the petitioners made a request that they be also appointed as Superintendent/Court Master against the vacancies arising from time to time.
A joint representation was filed on 28119185 to that effect.
It was submitted in the representation that four more appointments were still required to be made from the selected candidates before the posts could be filled in by way of promotion because under the Rules 25% of the vacancies were to be filled by promotion and 25% of the vacancies by selection.
Since there was no response to the said representation, the petitioners again made a representation on 1641986 because by then some more leave vacancies had arisen.
A similar representation was also made on 361986.
No decision was taken for a long time on these representations nor were any of the representationsists appointed till 2081987, when they were informed that their joint representations were considered and rejected by the Chief Justice.
The petitioners feeling aggrieved again filed another representation on 2681987 which was also rejected vide office memo dated 791987, however before that on 20th August 1987 the respondent issued another circular for holding fresh test on 10th October 1987.
The petitioners, therefore, filed the present writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India praying for a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to appoint the petitioners to the post of Superintendent/Court Master and restrain the respondents from making any appointment to the post of Superintendent/Court Master by promotion till at least four candidates out of the list are appointed and further for a direction that the respondents be restrained from holding any further examination for making selection for appointment to these posts.
3.
During the pendency of the writ petition in March 1988 the relevant Rule 7 was amended and the position was reversed.
Under the amended Rules, 75% of the vacancies were to be filled in by promotion on the basis of seniority-cum-suitability and only 25% of the vacancies were to be filled in by selection by merit on the basis of written test and interview from the eligible categories.
The petitioners, therefore, amended the writ petition praying that at least those vacancies which were available before the amendment of the Rules should be filled in from the selected candidates.
4.
It was contended by the learned counsel for the petitioners that under the Rules as applicable at the relevant time 75% of the posts of Superintendent/Court Master had to be filled by selection on merit from categories specified in column 3 and 25% of the vacant posts had to be filled by promotion on the basis of seniority-cum-suitability from the joint seniority list of categories 9, 10, 11, 13, 14 and 16 of Class III mentioned in Schedule I.
There is also a provision for appointment to the post of Court Master by direct recruitment.
However, no such direct recruitment was ever made.
Learned counsel submitted that when selections were made in the years 1972, 1974 and 1983 all the persons who were placed in the panel were appointed as and when vacancies arose.
However, only this time though the Selection Committee had prepared a list of 12 candidates, after appointing the first three candidates, the respondents did not appoint the other candidates from the panel despite the fact that vacancies were available.
Learned counsel submitted that once the persons were put on the panel or select list, a right accrued to them for being appointed as soon as a vacancy arose.
Learned counsel submitted that once a person is declared successful after appearing in written examination and interview and his name is put in the merit list of selected candidates he is the qualified person for appointment to the post and can be appointed at any time as and when the vacancy arises.
Learned counsel submitted that the rejection of the representations and refusal to make appointments from the panel has resulted in violation of petitioners fundamental right guaranteed to them under Articles 14, 16 and 21 of the Constitution of India.
Learned counsel submitted that it was unnecessary to hold fresh test when the selected persons were available.
It was pointless to subject the petitioners to go through the same exercise once again because they had already qualified and selected by the Selection Committee.
5.
The respondents have filed a counter affidavit.
Learned counsel for the respondents did not dispute that the petitioners and 10 others were the successful candidates in the test held on 261085.
It was submitted that there were 24 posts of Superintendent (23 Permanent and 1 temporary) and 30 permanent posts of Court Master which includes three post of Interpreters converted as Court Masters on the category strength of Delhi High Court at the relevant time.
In August 1985, five vacancies became available.
Since at the relevant time 25% of the vacancies had to be filled in by seniority, two posts of Court Master were filled against that quota by order of the Chief Justice dated 591985 and for filling up the remaining posts against 75% vacancies, a Committee of three Judges was appointed by the Chief Justice.
A test was held of the eligible candidates on 26101985 and interview was held of the successful candidates by the Committee on 21111985.
On the basis of marks obtained by the candidates in the written test and interview the Committee declared the following 12 candidates arranged in the order of merit, qualified.
1.
Shri Govind Ballabh  2.
Shri VK Seth  3.
Shri Shiv Kumar  4.
Shri Gopal Krishan Sharma  5.
Shri JN Verma  6.
Shri SR Sharma  7.
Shri Bal Krishan  8.
Shri AK Khanna  9.
Shri OP Sharma  10.
Shri Faquir Chand  11.
Shri RK Jain  12.
Shri P.L.
Karwal  The Chief Justice on 22111985 approved the list and on 26.11.1985 first three persons were appointed as officiating Superintendent/Court Master against available three vacancies.
The following vacancies occurred subsequently for the period of one year from 22111985 to 21.11.1986 and during the next six months ie from 22111986 to 2151987 :  (i) Deputation vacancy of Sh. Govind Ballabh, Offg.
Court Master w.e.f.
811986 -  (ii) Deputation vacancy of Shri RN Madan, Librarian, w.e.f.
811986, (Librarian's post is a technical one in its nature.
Sh. Kashmir Singh, Assistant working in the Library has been appointed on ad hoc basis).
(iii) Leave vacancy of Sh. BK Wadhwa, Supdt.
from 5486 to 31.8.86.
(iv) Deputation vacancy of Sh. CB Aggarwal, Court Master from 27186 to 31586.
He retired on 31.8.86, Selected test candidate namely Sh. VK Seth earlier Offg.
against the deputation vacancy of Sh. PK Sharma, Supdt.
was regularly absorbed against the vacancy of Sh. CB Aggarwal w.e.f.
9111986.
(v) Sh. MS Sharma, Court Master took leave for the following period :, Sh. MS Sharma, Court Master proceeded on short periods of leave in the year 1986.
E.L. 10386 to 21386.
However, he took long leave only in the year 1987.
27586 to 21386 Commuted Leave  EL 12.11.86 to 281186  EL 10.2.87 to 30587  EL 11.6.87 to 3787  (vi) Vacancy of Court Master on account of appointment of Shri RN Prabhakar, Court Master as Offg.
Assistant Registrar w.e.f.
14886.
(vii) Sh. JL Bhambri, Supdt.
retired from service w.e.f.
3131987.
However since there had been no orders for keeping a panel, the candidates in the list could not be appointed.
The file was put up by the office before the Chief Justice on 7121985 whereon the then Chief Justice passed order on 21121985 "Place it before my successor."
Again the matter was put up by the office on 911986 and the Registrar made a nothing on 3011986 "H.C.J.
has desired that this case be put up after sometime".
Again, another representation was made by the affected candidates which was placed before the Chief Justice on 341986 and the Registrar conveyed on 2051986 as follows :  "H.C.J.
has desired to put up the latest position regarding vacancy in the cadre of Superintendents on permanent/temporary basis and on account of deputation."
The complete vacancy position as desired was put up the office and the Registrar ordered that the file be put up before the Chief Justice after vacation.
Once again another representation was received on 361986 and the file was put up before the then Chief Justice and on 16.8.1986 once again the Chief Justice observed "Placed before my successor."
The file was again put up before the Chief Justice on 24.10.86 and on 681987 the following order was passed by the Chief Justice.
The duration of a panel is stated in Rule 12 contained in appendix 29 in Chaudhry's Compilation of the Civil Service Regulations, Volume III, 13th Edition at page 557.
The rule reads as follows :  "The panel drawn by DPC would normally be valid for one year.
In any case, it should cease to be in force on the expiry of a period of one year and six months or when a fresh panel is prepared, whichever is earlier."
I think, this is a salutary rule, and can see no reason for not following it.
As more than 18 months have passed since the panel in this case was prepared, it cannot be allowed to continue.
Consequently, I direct the steps be taken for holding a competitive departmental examination as early as possible.
It follows from the decision I have taken that I cannot accede to the representation dated 14th March, 1986 and 3rd June, 1986 made by OP Sharma and others and hence, they are rejected."
6.
Learned counsel for the respondents submitted that there cannot be automatic empanelment and that though the Selection Committee had prepared a list of successful candidates, in fact there was no panel.
Thus, on the appointment of first three persons on the list, the list came automatically to an end.
In order to have a panel there has to be a specific order by the Chief Justice.
In fact, for this reason the file was put up before the Chief Justice for directions whether a panel should be prepared.
It is for the Chief Justice to feel the administrative necessity to have the panel and if he had not taken the decision it cannot be presumed that he had ordered a panel.
Learned counsel submitted that undoubtedly if there was a panel prepared, the persons on the panel would be entitled to be appointed as and when the vacancy arose at least during the life of the panel.
Learned counsel submitted that in any event after the amendment of Rule 7, none of the petitioners and similarly placed persons are entitled to be appointed.
Learned counsel submitted that the approval granted by the Chief Justice was for the result and not for the select list.
7.
In rejoinder, learned counsel for the petitioners contended that the word "panel" is not sacrosanct.
The words "select list" and "panel" are one and the same and once the Chief Justice had approved the list there was no question of further orders to be given regarding empanelment of the persons.
He further submitted that there is no question of giving retrospective effect to the amended Rule and the panel did not expire at any time because there is no such rule which states that the panel would be valid only for a particular number of days and thus even after the amendment if the vacancy arose the selected candidates had a right to be appointed in those vacancies.
Learned counsel relied on Prem Prakash v. Union of India, AIR 1984 SC 1831, unreported judgment of the Supreme Court in Union of India v. Ishwar Singh Khatao, YV Rangavah v. J Sreenivasa Rao, AIR 1983 SC 852, Union of India v. ML Capoor, AIR 1974 SC 87, and S Govindaraju Karnataka v.
SRT.C., 1986 SCC (Lab & Services) 520.
8.
Thus, the first question for consideration before us is whether there was a panel prepared of the selected candidates for appointment to the posts of Superintendent Court Master from the quota 75% to be appointed by selection.
9.
The respondents produced the file in court and we have had the occasion to look at it.
Undoubtedly after the Selection Committee declared the list of selected candidates, the Registrar time and again sought directions from the different Chief Justices regarding preparation of the panel of these candidates but no decision came to be taken for a very long time.
Rather right from 22111985 i.e. the date of declaration of the result till 681987 the position remained in eflux.
Neither the petitioners nor the representationists similarly placed were appointed nor any appointments were made on the basis of promotion in the vacancies that had arisen during this period.
The Chief Justice on 681987 relied on the observations contained in Chaudhary's compilation of the Civil Service Regulations, Volume III, 13th Edition at page 557 and observed that the rule which provides that a penal be drawn up by a DPO would normally be valid for one year and in any case should cease to be in force on the expiry of period of one year and six months or when a fresh panel is prepared, whichever is earlier is a salutary rule.
The Chief Justice therefore, observed that since more than 18 months had passed after the panel in this case prepared, it cannot be allowed to continue and accordingly directed that steps be taken for holding fresh competitive departmental examination as early as possible and consequently rejected the representations made by the candidates in the list.
Thus, the Chief Justice considered the representation of the petitioners for appointment on the basis that there was a select list or panel prepared.
10.
Learned counsel for the respondents submitted that due to some mistake or misreading of the record for the first time in a note prepared by the Registrar for consideration of the Chief Justice, the list of candidates prepared on 21.11.1985 were referred to as the select list and, therefore, the Chief Justice also examined the matter in that a light and came to the conclusion that as more than 18 months have passed, the panel cannot be allowed to continue.
11.
We find this explanation given by the learned counsel for the respondents rather unconvincing because when the Chief Justice considered the representations, the whole file was placed before the Chief Justice and he must have taken into consideration all the aspects of the matter.
In fact, in the past when examinations were held and candidates selected for appointment to the post, there was a panel prepared.
In 1983, 29 persons were put on the panel and as and when the vacancy arose the persons from the panel were appointed.
Thus, as per the prevalent practice a panel had to be prepared.
Now admittedly when the circular was issued, the number of vacancies available at that time were not specified and, therefore, the Selection Committee prepared a list of all the successful candidates.
If the circular had been issued for selection of candidates in the specified available vacancies only as many number of persons to be appointed in the available vacancies would be selected.
As would be seen from the facts narrated above even the first three candidates were appointed in the leave vacancy available at that time and were not in the regular vacancies.
Thus, the very idea in making the selection was to have a panel ready in order that the vacancies could be filled in expeditiously.
In the very nature of things it is not practical to hold written examination and interview every time a vacancy arises and, therefore, a panel is prepared.
The Chief Justice on 11.9.1985 made the following noting :  "It is known sufficiently well in advance what posts are to fall vacant.
They fall vacant normally either on the retirement of some of officials or when the official goes not deputation, or on leave for not less than a month.
In either case the office is fully aware when the vacancy is to fall vacant.
I feel that in such cases it is the normal expectation of the staff that such vacancies would be filled up.
The office should start processing such cases and see that such posts should not be kept vacant for more than couple of days.
In cases of leave vacancies for a period of not less than a month proposal for leave arrangement should be simultaneously put up for orders.
I would therefore, suggest that steps should be taken to immediately fill up all the vacancies which are at present lying vacant."
This nothing further strengthens the case of the petitioners that when selection is made perusal to a circular which does not specify the available vacancies the idea in preparing the list is to make appointments as soon as vacancy arise.
Undoubtedly under Article 229 of the Constitution of India, appointment of officers and servants of a High Court has to be made by the Chief Justice.
Thus, the Chief Justice must feel the administrative necessity to have a panel.
In the facts of the present case however, we find that since the Chief Justice directed issuance of a circular without specifying the vacancies and appointed a Selection Committee to select candidates without specifying the number and furthermore approved the list prepared by the Selection Committee show that the Chief Justice did feel the administrative need to have the panel.
It was thus not necessary for the Chief Justice to once again reiterate the decision to maintain a panel.
The noting of the Chief Justice dated 681989 further made the position abundantly clear that the list prepared by the Selection Committee was in fact a panel of selected candidates.
12.
The next question for consideration is whether these persons on the panel are entitled to be appointed now despite the fact that the rule has been amended and now only 25% of the posts have to be filled in by selection.
13.
We are not impressed by the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner that the panel is alive till at the candidates are absorbed.
The Supreme Court in Prem Prakash etc. (supra) observed that there should be no limit on the period of validity of the list of selected candidates prepared to the extent of declared vacancies and once a person is declared successful, the appointing authority has the responsibility to appoint him even if the number of vacancies undergoes a change after his name is included in the list of selection candidates.
The Supreme Court was in that case considering the question of appointment of SC/ST candidates to the Delhi Judicial Services by direct recruitment in the light of Rule 18 of the Delhi Judicial Service Rules 1990 and the Delhi Judicial Service Rules 1990 and notification dated 831982 issued by the Ministry of Home Affairs, Department of Personnel and Administrative Reforms.
The facts of the present case are different because admittedly there is no rule for empanelment in the present case.
It cannot, therefore, be said that the panel was effective till all the selected candidates in the panel were appointed.
Rule 7 came to be amended on 1631988.
Once the rule was amended that whole position changed.
The quota to be filled in by selection itself got reduced.
The empanelled candidates lost their right to be appointed because as per the amended rule, 75% of the posts had to be filled in by promotion on the basis of seniority.
The petitioners are thus not entitled to appointment in the vacancies that arose after the amendment of the Rule.
In any event, by then the life of the panel had also expired because as observed by the Chief Justice in his note dated 681987 he considered that a rule which provides that the panel at best could be said to be alive for a maximum period of 18 months is salutary.
Since there is no specific rule for empanelment, the Chief Justice was entitled to take a decision regarding the life of the panel which he did on 671987.
However, the question of appointment of empanelled persons in the vacancies that arose when the panel was still alive was not answered.
In our opinion the petitioners and other persons on the panel were entitled to be appointed in the vacancies which arose before the Amendment of the rule while the panel was still alive i.e. within 18 months in the empanelment.
14.
Learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that the respondents now propose to amend the rule once again the restore the original quota but in their case the appointments were deliberately delayed because the respondents wanted to give benefit to a few persons as per the amended rule.
Undoubtedly, the delay ought to have been avoided but we find no force in the contention that it was done mala fide.
However, we are constrained to note that the long delay in taking the decision is going to result in reversion of some persons who were promoted as per the new rule during the pendency of the writ petition i n vacancies that should have been filled in before the amendment of Rule 7 and while the panel as alive.
Fortunately, the number may not be large and in any event the respondents have made only ad hoc appointments.
Furthermore, we are informed that some of the persons in the panel have also been promoted on the basis of their seniority under the new rule.
Naturally, those persons who were in the panel must be first appointed in the available vacancies during the 18 months period during which the panel was valid.
The respondents will have to work out the vacancies and adjust them accordingly.
Such persons who will be appointed will also be entitled to the consequential benefits including seniority.
The writ petition is allowed to the extent indicated hereinabove.
There will no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.