Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - On March 29, 2001, posts of Art and Craft teachers were advertised.
The petitioner applied.
She has been considered.
Having not been selected, she has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
2.
The petitioner alleges that the selection of respondent Nos. 5 to 8 is liable to the quashed as the Art and Craft teachers "are borne on district cadre.
Their seniority is determined at district level.
The posts are earmarked district-wise...".
The 3rd respondent "advertised the post for the whole of the State as if these posts are on State-cadre.
The respondents even held interview at State level...in Ropar for male and in Jalandhar for female candidates".
On this basis, the petitioner contends that the selection is vitiated.
She also alleges that marks had not been awarded to her "for the experience she gained while working in the school affiliated to PS Education Board and also for the Scouting on the plea (sic) Certificate of Scouting is not equivalent to first class."
On these premises, the petitioner prays that the selection and appointment of respondent Nos. 5 to 8 as Art and Craft teachers (female) be quashed.
3.
The respondents contest the petitioner's claim.
A reply has been filed on behalf of the respondent Nos. 1 to 4.
It has been inter-alia averred that the petitioner had applied for the post.
Her claim was duly considered.
She has scored 3823 marks on the basis of her academic qualifications of matriculation and diploma in Art and Craft.
The petitioner was interviewed on November 3, 2001.
She had produced various certificates.
She was given 2 points for the Sports certificate, 1 point for Scouting certificate and 1 point for being the district level winner in cultural activities.
Since teaching experience only in government/privately aided/recognised institutions was to be considered, she was not given any credit on account of teaching experience.
She had been awarded 9 marks out of 15 at the time of interview.
Her total score was 5121.
Thus, the petitioner was not selected.
4.
The petitioner's claim that the recruitment had to be made at the district level has been controverted.
It has been pointed out that there is no violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
5.
Learned counsel for the parties have been heard.
On behalf of the petitioner, it has been contended that the seniority of Art and Craft teachers is determined at the district level.
Thus, even recruitment should have been made on that basis.
Since the candidates were considered at the State level, the impugned selection and appointments of respondent Nos. 5 to 8 are vitiated.
The claim as made on behalf of the petitioner has been controverted by the counsel for the respondents.
6.
Admittedly, the posts of Art and Craft teachers were advertised by the respondents on March 29, 2001.
A copy of the advertisement has been placed on record as Annexure P/8 with the writ petition.
A perusal of this advertisement shows that there was no district-wise distribution of the posts.
It was clear that any-one, who fulfilled the qualifications as stipulated in the advertisement, was eligible to apply.
No restriction with regard to residence etc. had been imposed.
The qualification of matric with 2 years' diploma course in Arts and Craft from an Institution recognised by the Government of Punjab was essential.
Various other conditions regarding age, knowledge of Punjabi etc. had also been laid-down.
The petitioner had applied for the posts without raising her little finger against it.
Having failed to make the grade, the petitioner is challenging the selection on the ground that it should have been made district-wise.
Keeping in view the fact that the petitioner had not raised any objection at the threshold, we are of the view that by her own conduct, the petitioner is estopped from challenging the selection on the ground that the posts could have been filled-up by allowing the candidates from all over the State to compete.
The candidates who apply for recruitment to civil posts cannot be permitted to sit on the fence, take their chance and then raise a plea after they are unsuccessful.
If a person has any objection with regard to the procedure or the method of recruitment as initially prescribed, the candidate must raise the objection at the earliest available opportunity.
Otherwise, the candidate shall not be permitted to invoke the writ jurisdiction after the selection has been finalised.
7.
Even, if the above aspect of the matter is ignored, the short question that arises for consideration is - Have the respondents violated the law by considering the candidates from the whole State ?
8.
Admittedly, the petitioner had applied.
Her claim has not been confined to a particular district.
In fact, she has been considered against the posts available in the entire State.
No prejudice is shown to have been caused to the petitioner.
In fact, she has had a wider opportunity for consideration.
In this situation, it cannot be said that there was any violation of Article 14 or 16 of the Constitution.
9.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that under the Rules, the seniority of the persons appointed as Art and Craft teachers is determined district-wise.
It may be so.
Learned counsel has not referred to any rule which may indicate that even the selection has to be made on district-wise basis.
In fact, after the selection, the selected candidates are posted in different districts.
This posting is treated as allocation and the seniority of the teachers is determined vis-a-vis the other persons already working in the respective districts.
The procedure as adopted by the respondent authority does not violate any provisions of the rules or offend against the guarantee of equality of opportunity as contained in the Constitution.
Despite being repeatedly asked, learned counsel for the petitioner has not been able to refer to any provision in the rules, which may even remotely suggest that the selection had to be made on district-wise basis.
10.
In fact, in our view, if the department had made selection on district- wise basis, there would have been denial of opportunity to persons residing within the State.
All persons fulfilling the qualifications have a right to equality of opportunity and no discrimination can be made on the basis of the place of birth or residence.
In fact, the selection made on the basis of place of birth may suffer from the criticism of being violative of Article 16.
In the present case, the action was in complete conformity with the provisions of Article 16 of the Constitution.
11.
It is not disputed that marks had been allotted to the petitioner for all her achievements viz., Sports etc.
Her claim was duly considered.
She having failed to make the grade, it cannot be said that the action of the respondents in preferring respondent Nos. 5 to 8 vis-a-vis the petitioner was unfair.
No other point has been raised.
In view of the above, we find no merit in this petition.
It is consequently dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.