R Gururajan, J - The petitioners are before this Court challenging Annexures 'A' and 'E' on the following facts.
2.
The two petitioners are the employees' Association/Union representing the Andhra Pradesh Generation Corporation Employees Association and KPTCL employees.
According to the petition averments, the salaries are made to the employees through the Divisional Engineer, TBHES, TB Dam in cash.
The Superintending Engineer issued a memo on 27-4-2002 stating therein that the salaries of the employees be credited to the Savings Bank at the Syndicate Bank, Tungabhadra Dam.
Employees were requested to furnish their account numbers to the office of the Superintendent Engineer in terms of Annexure 'A'.
Employees seem to have given a representation at Annexure 'B'.
They also met the authorities and explained to them.
Thereafter, a reply was issued in terms of Annexure 'D'.
Subsequently, in terms of Annexure 'E', the Superintending Engineer informed the employees that the salaries would be disbursed through the Syndicate Bank and State Bank of India, Kamalapur.
These orders at Annexures 'A' and 'E' are challenged.
3.
Heard Sri Jayavittal Rao Kolar, learned Counsel appearing for the petitioners.
He says that the impugned orders require my interference.
According to him, the petitioners are put to several practical difficulties in the matter.
He states that without obtaining their consent, a decision is taken by the respondent.
He challenges these orders in these petitions.
4.
In the light of the submissions of the petitioners, I have carefully perused the material on record.
Annexure 'A' is a memo issued by the Superintending Engineer, Hyderabad.
It is stated in the said memo that the salaries starting from the month of April 2002 would be credited to the Savings Bank Accounts of Officials/Employees at the Syndicate Bank, Tungabhadra Dam.
It also refers to a Scheme with regard to the payment of salaries.
Thereafter, the employees have submitted their representation and the same is pending decision.
In the meanwhile, Annexure E is issued by the Superintendent Engineer stating therein that the salaries of O & M Staff of TB Dam and Hampi Divisions is to be disbursed through the Syndicate Bank and State Bank of India, Kamalapur respectively.
I do not find any infirmity in these two orders.
These two orders are nothing but a working arrangement with regard to the disbursement of salaries through Bank.
It is purely an administrative decision taken in the larger interest of all concerned including the employees.
The disbursement through the Bank would prevent impersonation, delay and wastage of time etc. No exception could be taken to Annexures 'A' and 'E'.
Moreover, in these days of rapid industrialization, most of the activities are carried through the Banks to avoid unnecessary difficulties to the parties concerned.
The same practice is almost recognised in other service sectors.
In these circumstances, I do not find any justifiable grounds to interfere with the administrative decision with regard to the disbursement of salary through the Bank.
No grounds are made out for my interference.
No provision of law is shown to me opposing such disbursement through the Bank.
5.
The Counsel points out certain practical difficulties and such practical difficulties cannot render an order illegal or invalid, if taken in the interest of public.
In these circumstances, the argument with regard to the practical difficulties does not appeal to me.
However, I deem it proper that if any employee in his individual capacity has any special practical difficulties, he may seek for exemption from disbursement through the Bank by way of a representation.
6.
Writ petitions stand dismissed with the above observations.
Parties to bear their respective costs.
Petitions dismissed.