Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was working as a Centre Head Teacher.
He had retired from service on December 31, 1991.
During the course of his service, he was placed under suspension vide order dated December 11, 1989.
He was reinstated on July 24, 1990.
During this period, a charge-sheet dated July 18, 1990 was issued.
An enquiry was held.
The petitioner alleges that the Enquiry Officer had exonerated him.
Despite that, the 3rd respondent had ordered the period of suspension from December 11, 1989 to July 24, 1990 shall be treated as leave of the kind due.
Feeling aggrieved by the order, the petitioner filed an appeal on October 29, 1990.
This appeal has not been decided till today.
As a result, the petitioner's salary for the period from December 11, 1989 to July 24, 1990 has not been paid.
Still further, the petitioner also complains that the amount due on account of provident fund was not fully paid to him.
On this basis, the petitioner prays that the respondents be directed to release the amount due to him.
The petitioner has also claimed salary for the month of August, 1957.
2.
A detailed written statement has been filed.
The claim made by the petitioner has been controverted.
The respondents maintained that it is the prerogative of the employer to suspend an employee and that the action of the authority in directing the petitioner to take leave of the kind due for the period of suspension is legal and valid.
3.
Mr. SP Jain, learned Counsel for the petitioner has not pressed the claim in respect of salary for the month of August, 1957.
However, he has contended that the action of the respondents in directing the petitioner to take leave for the period of suspension and in not fully paying the arrears of provident fund is arbitrary.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioner has been controverted by Mr. DV Sharma, learned Counsel for the respondents.
4.
Admittedly, the petitioner had been placed under suspension on December 11, 1989.
He was reinstated on July 24, 1990.
A charge-sheet was issued to him.
Nothing has been placed on record to show that the charge of mis- behaviour with an officer was proved against him.
In this situation, the petitioner's claim that a wholly false charge has been levelled and the Enquiry Officer had exonerated him appears to be correct.
Still further, nothing has been pointed out to show that the petitioner's suspension was justified.
No charge having been proved against the petitioner, he was entitled to payment of full salary for that period.
If the authority felt that some deduction was required, a show cause notice had to be given to the petitioner.
None was given.
In this situation, the direction that the petitioner shall apply for leave of the kind due was wholly unfair and unwarranted.
The rule in this behalf has been laid down by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in M Gopala Krishna Naidu v. State of Madhya Pradesh, 1967 S.L.R.
800.
No opportunity having been given to the petitioner, the order for treating the period as leave of the kind due cannot be sustained.
Resultantly, the petitioner shall be entitled to the payment of full salary for the period from December 11, 1989 to July 24, 1990.
This period shall also be treated as qualifying service for the purpose of pension and other retiral benefits.
The respondents shall pay the petitioner whatever becomes due within three months from the date of receipt of a certified copy of this order.
In the event of failure to do so, the petitioner shall be entitled to the payment along with interest at the rate of 9% per annum from the date of accrual till its payment.
5.
As far as the arrears of provident fund is concerned, it is the admitted position that sanction has been given vide order dated June 25, 2002.
Since the petitioner has already retired from service and as we are informed that he is residing in Faridabad, it would only be fair that the amount is disbursed to him through a bank draft at the address given in the petition.
No other point has been raised.
In view of the above, this writ petition is allowed.
No costs.
Petition allowed.