M Katju, J - Heard learned counsel for the petitioner and learned standing counsel.
2.
Petitioner is the District Agriculture Officer and he has challenged the impugned order dated 28-1-2002 (Annexure 2 to the writ petition) by which his administrative and financial powers have been taken away from him and transferred to some other officer.
3.
In our opinion, an order withdrawing administrative and financial powers does not cause any prejudice to the employee, rather it benefits the employee by reducing his burden of work.
There is no allegation that the petitioner is not getting salary, allowance and perquisites or that they have been reduced in any manner.
It is the employer's choice to take work or not to take work from an employee.
If salary and allowances are paid to an employee without taking work from him or lesser work he surely cannot complain, rather he should be thankful to the employer, who is giving full salary, allowance and perquisites without taking work or giving lesser work.
4.
It is well settled that to obtain a writ, the petitioner has not only to show violation of law but also some prejudice, because writ jurisdiction is equity jurisdiction.
In the present case, even assuming that there is some violation of law no prejudice is caused to the petitioner, because his burden of work has been reduced.
It is only an employee, who wants to earn money dishonestly, apart from his salary, who may have a grievance, against an order reducing his burden of work.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has relied upon a Supreme Court decision in PK Chinnasamy v. Government of Tamil Nadu, AIR 1988 SC 78.
We have carefully perused the said decision and are of the opinion that it is confined to the facts of that particular case, and it does not lay down any principle of law that an employer is bound to give work to an employee even if it pays full salary and allowances.
6.
In our opinion, it is open to the employer not to take work or to take lesser work from employee, provided the employer is willing to pay the full salary, allowance perks.
No honest employee can insist that he be given work apart from salary and allowances.
7.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the impugned order has been passed by the authority who is not competent authority.
Be that as it may, the order is causing no prejudice to the employer, and hence we are not inclined to exercise our discretion under Article 226 in such cases.
8.
There is no merit in this writ petition, and it is accordingly dismissed.
Petition dismissed.