Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - Is the action of the University in providing that "the evening course is meant for employees serving within 30 KMs from the Faculty of Law......" arbitrary and illegal ?
This is the short question that arises for consideration in this petition.
2.
A few facts may be noticed.
3.
The petitioner is working as a Social Studies Master since the year 1965.
He applied for admission to the 3 years LL.B.
Course (evening) in May, 2002.
The petitioner took the entrance test.
He was able to make the grade.
He was called for counselling.
During the course of the counselling the petitioner was informed that he was not eligible for admission to the course as he was serving at a place which was more than 30 kms away from the University.
Aggrieved by the action of the respondent-University, the petitioner has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
He alleges that the distance between the place of his residence/work viz. Safidon and Rohtak is about 60 kms.
He is serving in the morning shift which starts at 700 in the morning and finishes at 1230 pm Thereafter, it would be possible for him to travel from Safidon to Rohtak and back so as to be able to attend to the studies as well as the service.
On these premises, the petitioner prays that the condition imposed by the University be quashed and that a writ of mandamus be issued directing it to admit him to the LL.B.
Professional Course in the evening classes.
4.
The solitary contention raised by Mr. Malik, learned Counsel for the petitioner, is that the condition imposed by the University is arbitrary.
Thus, it deserves to be struck off.
The relevant condition provides as under :-  "The evening course is meant for employees serving within 30 KMs.
from the Faculty of Law, MD University, Rohtak, so the candidates in this category have to produce a certificate that their place of service/work posting is within 30 kms.
from the law Faculty, MD University."
A perusal of the above extract from the Prospectus shows that only such employees as are serving within 30 kms.
from the University are eligible to apply.
The obvious purpose of the University is to ensure that the student should be living within a reasonable distance so that he is able to simultaneously serve and study.
If the student is working at a far off place, the studies as well as the performance of duties are bound to be affected.
It is with this object in view that the condition has been imposed.
It is not arbitrary.
It is not unfair or unreasonable.
It has a reasonable nexus with the object of ensuring that even those persons who are working are able to improve their qualifications but it should be reasonably possible for them to devote sufficient time to their studies.
5.
Mr. Malik submits that Safidon is at a short distance of only 60 kms.
from the University.
It shall be possible for the petitioner to travel to and from every day.
Thus, the action of the University is arbitrary.
6.
The contention cannot be accepted.
It today's world, fast movement is possible.
However, one has to keep in view the ground realities.
It is the admitted position that the evening classes start at 5 pm These continued till 8 pm Thereafter, the candidate has to travel from the University to the Bus Stand and back to his place of work.
It is not difficult to imagine that the student who would travel 120 kms and reaches home late at night shall neither be able to suitably devote himself to the studies nor to the service.
It is to obviate such a situation that the above noted condition has been imposed by the University.
We find nothing wrong in it.
No other point has been raised.
In view of the above, the writ petition is dismissed in limine.
Petition dismissed.