Viney Mittal, J - The petitioner Ramji Lal, who was working as Deputy Superintendent, PWD, Public Health Division No. 1, Bhiwani, has filed the present civil writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for the issuance of a writ of Certiorari for quashing the orders dated October 18, 2001 passed by the Engineer-in-Chief, Haryana (respondent No. 2) retiring the petitioner compulsorily from Government service on the expiry of three months notice and the orders dated November 27, 2001 passed by the Executive Engineer, Public Health Division (respondent No. 3), vide which it was directed that the petitioner would stand retired from service with effect from January 31, 2002.
A copy of the order dated October 18, 2001 passed by respondent No. 2 has been appended as Annexure P-5 whereas the copy of the order dated November 27, 2001 passed by respondent No. 3 has been appended as Annexure P-6 with the petition.
2.
The petitioner has stated that he was appointed as a Clerk in Public Health Department of the State of Haryana on adhoc basis on August 22, 1966 and later on the services of the petitioner were regularised with effect from August 30, 1968.
The petitioner was promoted as Assistant and joined on the aforesaid post with effect from February 5, 1979 and during the course of his service, the petitioner was further promoted as Deputy Superintendent with effect from April 5, 1996.
The petitioner states that throughout his service, there has been absolutely no complaint and he has been serving the department to the best of his capability and competence without any grievance at any end.
3.
On December 14, 1999, the petitioner was charge-sheeted under Rule 7 of the Haryana Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1987 with the following charges :  "i) He violated the provision of rule 3(1) of the Government employee conduct rule 1966 and failed to maintain devotion in the performance of his duties.
He failed to comply with the provision of rule 511 and 515 of B&R Manual of order.
ii) He is guilty for recommending wrong designation of Shri Surender Kumar i.e. as WPO-II that too under his own signatures.
iii) He is guilty of non-preparation of Written Statement in time in respect of CWP No. 6018 of 1998 even after several reminders from Superintending Engineer's Office."
4.
The petitioner has stated that due to sudden demise of his mother in June 1999 and untimely death of his young son of 22 years in October 2000, the petitioner was living in a state of depression at the relevant time and due to this reason, the petitioner could not submit the reply to the charge sheet in time.
A regular enquiry was ordered upon the aforesaid charges and an Enquiry officer was appointed vide order dated January 23, 2001.
The Enquiry Officer conducted the enquiry and found all the allegations to be baseless.
The Enquiry Officer ultimately concluded that the petitioner is not responsible against any charge and opined that he be exempted/exonerated from the charges mentioned in the charge sheet.
A copy of the enquiry report dated May 11, 2001 has also been appended to the writ petition as Annexure P-1.
However, the Engineer-in-Chief-respondent No. 2 did not agree with the conclusion reached by the Enquiry Officer and without forming any opinion of divergence against the findings recorded by the Enquiry Officer proposed an action against the petitioner in the following manner :-  "i) Recovery of Rs. 500/- fine deposited in the Hon'ble Court by Sub Divisional Engineer.
ii) Stoppage of one increment with future effect.
iii) Censure of conduct.
iv) Downgrading of ACR for the year 1996-1997.
5.
A show cause notice in this regard was issued to the petitioner on August 7, 2001, which has been appended as Annexure P-2 with the writ petition.
The petitioner submitted his explanation to the aforesaid show cause notice and brought all the relevant facts in the reply specifically urging that he was not at fault from any angle.
However, the explanation submitted by the petitioner was not found satisfactory and the aforesaid proposed order of punishment was confirmed and the aforesaid punishment was awarded to the petitioner vide order dated August 31, 2001.
A copy of the aforesaid order of punishment is attached as Annexure P-4 with the present petition.
After passing of the aforesaid orders dated August 31, 2001, the Engineer-in-Chief- respondent No. 2 still passed his further orders on October 18, 2001, ordering the compulsory retirement of petitioner from service on the expiry of three months from the date of the order.
A copy of the aforesaid order dated October 18, 2001 is attached as Annexure P-5 with the present petition.
Subsequently, in pursuance to the aforesaid order passed by the Engineer-in- Chief-respondent No. 2, the Executive Engineer-respondent No. 3 issued an office order on November 27, 2001 whereby it was directed that the period of the notice of three months would expire on January 31, 2002 and that the petitioner would stand retired from service on the aforesaid date.
This order is appended as Annexure P-6 with the petition.
The petitioner is aggrieved against the aforesaid orders Annexures P-5 and P-6 and has filed the present petition challenging the same.
6.
Upon a notice issued to the respondents, a written statement has been filed by them on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 to 3.
The claim made by the petitioner has been contested and the punishment imposed upon the petitioner by the punishing authority is sought to be defended.
The order of compulsory retirement Annexure P-5 is also sought to be defended on the ground that since there were two charge sheets pending against the petitioner, therefore, Officers Committee considered it proper to retire the petitioner at the age of 55 years after giving him three months notice.
7.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance also gone through the record of the case.
Mr. Raj Mohan Singh, learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that there was absolutely no basis for passing the order of compulsory retirement against the petitioner and although it has been so mentioned in the order that the petitioner was being retired in the public interest but the aforesaid public interest has neither been elaborated in the aforesaid order dated October 18, 2001 nor there has been any other material shown as to why the retirement of the petitioner was in public interest.
It has been further pointed out by Mr. Raj Mohan Singh that the petitioner had more than 70% of his Annual Confidential Reports as `Good' in the last preceding 10 years and no adverse remarks were ever communicated to the petitioner.
It has been further pointed out by the learned counsel for the petitioner that once the Enquiry Officer has exonerated the petitioner from all the charges then no grounds existed at all for retiring the petitioner compulsorily at the age of 55 years nor there were any other reasons for respondent No. 2 to disagree with the findings recorded by the Enquiry Officer.
On the other hand Mr. Rajbir Sehrawat, learned D.A.G., Haryana appearing for the respondents has submitted that in fact the order Annexure P-5 retiring the petitioner compulsorily was in public interest and was well within the authority and competence of the State Government since the petitioner had already attained the age of 55 years.
Mr. Sehrawat has further relied upon the fact that another charge sheet was served on the petitioner on November 28, 2001.
Mr. Sehrawat submits that in view of the cumulative effect of the aforesaid circumstances, no fault could be found with the order Annexure P-5.
8.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, we find that this petition deserves to succeed.
The petitioner was served with a chargesheet and vide the Enquiry Report Annexure P-1, all the charges against him were found to be baseless and the Enquiry Officer himself has concluded that the petitioner was not responsible for any of the charges.
A recommendation was made by the Enquiry Officer that the petitioner be exonerated from the charges mentioned in the charge sheet.
Respondent No. 2, Engineer-in-Chief, did not agree with the conclusion reached by the Enquiry Officer but there is absolutely nothing on the record to show the reasons for his disagreement with the enquiry report.
Even otherwise, the charges served on the petitioner on December 14, 1999 (reproduced above) show that the same were trivial in nature.
Even the punishment proposed and ultimately awarded by respondent No. 2 upon the petitioner was also not of the kind which would justify passing the order of compulsory retirement against the petitioner.
The reliance on the second charge sheet served on the petitioner vide memo dated November 28, 2001 is also without any basis since till date the said charges have not been enquired into nor any report in this regard has been received by the respondents against the petitioner.
9.
From the entire circumstances of the case, we have come to the conclusion that the order Annexure P-5 passed by the Engineer-in-Chief ordering the retirement of the petitioner compulsorily on his attaining the age of 55 years by giving him three months notice is absolutely based upon no material and could not be said to be motivated by any public interest.
Since it has not been shown to us at all that the petitioner was having any adverse record within the last 10 years, therefore, the aforesaid order of compulsory retirement cannot be legally sustained and is hereby quashed.
As a necessary consequence of this the order Annexure P-6 passed by respondent No. 3 also falls along .
10.
As a result, the present petition is allowed and the orders Annexure P-5 and P-6 whereby the petitioner has been ordered to be compulsorily retired from service are hereby quashed and the petitioner would be deemed to be in service and would be allowed to continue, in accordance with law, till he reaches the age of superannuation.
The petitioner would also be entitled to all consequential benefits with regard to continuity of service and arrears of salary etc. All such arrears of salary etc. be paid to the petitioner within a period of three months from the date of a certified copy of this order is received by the respondents.
No costs.
Petition allowed.