Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner is working as a Stores Superintendent in the Department of Civil Defence.
He is aggrieved by the promotion of respondent Nos. 3 to 6 to the posts of District Commanders made vide order dated May 18, 2002.
A copy of this order has been produced as Annexure P-3 with the writ petition.
The petitioner alleges that Departmental Promotion Committee had considered the claim of the eligible candidates on the basis of instructions issued by the State Government vide letter dated September 06, 2001.
A copy of these instructions has been produced as Annexure P-8 with the writ petition.
He maintains that the vacancies had occurred in March/April, 1998.
Thus, the criteria as it existed at the relevant time had to be followed.
The action of the respondents in assessing the inter se merit of the candidates on the basis of the criteria laid down in September, 2001 is wholly illegal.
Thus, the promotions are vitiated.
The petitioner prays that the order dated May 18, 2001, a copy of which is at Annexure P-3 be quashed.
A writ of mandamus be issued directing the respondents to promote him with effect from March 31, 1998.
2.
We have heard Mr. RR Dhawan, learned counsel for the petitioner.
He contends that the vacancies being available in the year 1998, the petitioner had a right to be considered in accordance with the prescribed criteria as it existed on that date.
According to the petitioner, the instructions regarding promotion had been issued by the Government vide letter dated November 23, 1990, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-4 with the writ petition.
3.
On our asking, Mr. Dhawan states that the vacancies, which had occurred in the year 1998 or prior thereto, had been kept pending.
The Government had not filled up these vacancies.
Still further, it is the admitted position that the Departmental Promotion Committee had met for consideration of the claims of various persons on April 26, 2002.
In that meeting the petitioner's claim was considered.
He was over-looked on account of the fact that the marks awarded to him on the basis of his record of service were less than those awarded to the selected candidates.
In fact, a perusal of the order shows that the petitioner's claim was considered.
He was "not found fit for promotion as District Commander/Deputy Commander/Junior Staff Officer".
In this behalf it deserves mention tthat the petitioner was not the only person who was found unsuitable.
In fact, 11 other persons were also found unfit for promotion.
It is, thus, clear that so far as the petitioner's right to consideration is concerned, there was no violation by the Departmental Promotion Committee.
4.
Mr. Dhawan submits that the criteria, as laid down by the State Government vide its letter dated November 23, 1990, had to be followed.
We have perused these instructions.
These relate to the setting up of "Departmental Promotion Committee for considering cases of promotion to Class-I and II posts."
In paragraph 3, the constitution of Promotion Committee has been laid down.
In paragraph 4, a provision regarding the frequency of meetings has been made.
In para 5, it has been provided that the Committee "will take into consideration the record of service of the officer concerned with respect to the post-----."
Further, the Committees have been directed to forward the cases in accordance with the rules of allocation of Business.
No provision regarding the manner of assessment of an individual's merit has been made in these instructions.
This provision appears to have been made vide instructions dated September 06, 2001.
The zone of consideration and the method of allocation of marks on the basis of the gradation in the Annual Confidential Report was laid down.
To illustrate, a candidate was to get a credit of four marks for an `outstanding' report and three marks for a `very good' report.
A similar provision had been made on an earlier occasion by instructions dated December 29, 2000.
This criteria was admittedly followed.
It is on the basis of the prescribed criteria that the petitioner was found wanting and was not promoted.
If by following this process, persons with higher merit have been preferred to the petitioner, the action of the respondents cannot be said to be arbitrary or illegal.
5.
Mr. Dhawan submits that the instructions have to be applied prospectively and not retrospectively.
He places reliance on the decision of a Division Bench of this court in Civil Writ Petition No. 10605 of 2001 (Dr. Kulbir Singh v. State of Punjab) 2002(1) S.C.T.
615 decided on October 18, 2001.
In this case, it was held that the administrative instructions can have only prospective operation.
There is no quarrel with this proposition.
In the present case, the promotions have been made vide order dated May 18, 2002.
On that date, the instructions issued vide letter dated September 06, 2001 were in operation.
The promotions have been made on adhoc basis.
These are subject to the regularisation by the Public Service Commission.
These are not retrospective in operation.
Thus, it cannot be said that the instructions have been retrospectively applied.
6.
Mr. Dhawan submits that the vacancies having occurred in the year 1998, the criteria as existing on that date had to be followed.
We are unable to accept this contention.
In the absence of a specific rule laying down that eligibility and suitability of candidates has to be judged with reference to the date of the occurrence of the vacancy, the contention cannot be accepted.
The mere occurrence of a vacancy gives no right to an employee to claim promotion.
The Government is competent to take a conscious decision not to fill up a post.
Infact, it is not disputed that on account of financial stringency a ban had been imposed on filling up of posts.
Thus, the vacancies had remained unfilled from the year 1998 till 2002.
In any case, at the time of consideration of claims for promotion, the petitioner was treated equally with all the others.
He can have no cause for grievance.
7.
In fairness to the petitioner, it may be mentioned that he has produced on record copies of two charge-sheets issued vide letters dated November 23, 2000 and December 21, 2000.
These are at Annexure P-13 and P-14 with the writ petition.
It is, thus, clear that the petitioner's case was examined on the basis of his record.
However, he is even under a cloud.
In this situation, it cannot be said that the respondents have acted unfairly or arbitrarily in finding him unfit for promotion.
No other point has been raised.
In view of the above, we find no merit in this petition.
It is consequently dismissed in limine.
Petition dismissed.