RL Anand, J - Smt. Swaran Lata, widow, and S/Shri Rajiv Kumar, Sanjiv Kumar and Rohit Kumar sons of late Shri Inder Mohan Oberoi (retired JE) have filed the present writ petition under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India against the respondents and it has been prayed by them that directions be issued to the respondents to release the arrears of annual increments, fixation of pay scale, annual bonus, etc. of Shri Inder Mohan Oberoi (deceased).
2.
Some facts can be noticed in the following manner :-  Shri Inder Mohan Oberoi, husband of petitioner No. 1 and father of petitioners No. 2 to 4 joined the service of Punjab State Electricity Board on 2971961 as Line Superintendent.
He retired from service on attaining the age of superannuation on 3111993.
He expired on 24.5.1998 leaving behind the petitioners as his legal heirs.
During the re-organisation the services of the deceased were transferred to the Haryana State Electricity Board.
During the course of employment of Shri Inder Mohan Oberoi, respondent No. 4 wrote a letter to the Executive Engineer, Gurgaon for completion of service book of the deceased employee and requested that after the completion of service book the same be returned to his office.
It was sent for completion but thereafter the service book was not traceable.
After the retirement of Shri Inder Mohan Oberoi he did not receive the retiral benefits mainly on the ground that the service book of the employee is not complete.
The grievance of the petitioners is that they cannot be allowed to suffer if the respondent authorities had not completed the service book of Shri Inder Mohan Oberoi.
It was the duty of the department of prepare a duplicate service book.
In spite of several representations made by the deceased the service book could not be completed.
Resultantly, Shri Oberoi filed C.W.P.
No. 6153 of 1996 making a prayer that directions be given to the respondents to prepare his service book and release the arrears of annual increments, etc.
The stand taken up by the respondents in the earlier writ petition was that during transit in the year 1984 the service book of the employee had been lost and since then the Board was not in a position to complete the service book.
As a result, his retiral benefits could not be computed and paid.
Subsequently, the respondents took a stand in the earlier proceedings that the husband of petitioner No. 1 and father of respondents No. 2 to 4 had not explained about the utilisation of various articles/material which had been issued to him and thus there was a shortage of material worth Rs. 9,29,08385.
That writ petition was disposed of with the observations that let the employee approach the respondent authorities and explain the shortages.
If he does so, the respondents shall consider and decide the matter as expeditiously as possible.
If any amount is found due to the petitioner, it shall be paid along with interest that may accrue thereon.
It was also observed by the Bench of which I was one of the members that the record shall be shown to the employee at Chandigarh and shall be preserved in the office of the Board in Sector 6, Panchkula.
It will be appropriate for me to quote the order of the Division Bench which disposed of the writ petition on 11111997 :  "We dispose of the writ petition with a direction that the petitioner may approach the respondents and explain the shortages.
If he does so, the respondents shall consider and decide the matter as expeditiously as possible.
If any amount is found due to the petitioner, it shall be paid along with interest that may accrue thereon.
The petitioner is present in Court and he prays that the record may be shown to him at Chandigarh.
Mr. Aggarwal states that the record shall be kept in the office of the Board, Sector 6, Panchkula, for the next two days.
The petitioner undertakes to attend he office of the Secretary of the Board tomorrow at 1000 am the respondents are directed to show the record to him.
If necessary, the record shall be kept here till reconciliation is complete.
The petition is accordingly disposed of.
No costs."
3.
The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioners have vehemently submitted that vide order dated 11111997 the Board came with a cheque of Rs. 2,70,50250, the amount which would not be paid to the deceased.
Rather, directions were given to the respondents to deposit the money in an account so that whatever interest accrues is paid to the person found entitled to the amount.
The learned counsel further submitted that after the death of Shri Inder Mohan Oberoi, the petitioners cannot be allowed to suffer as they have no occasion or chance to rebut the alleged shortages as stated by the learned counsel for the respondents.
It was also argued by Shri Singla that during the life time of Shri Oberoi no memo was issued to him with the allegations that the Board had found some shortages.
Since the deceased did not have the opportunity to rebut the allegations, therefore, now the legal heirs of the deceased cannot be allowed to suffer on account of the allegations levelled by the respondents.
4.
On the contrary, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents submitted that it was the desire of the Division Bench and directions were given to the deceased to approach the respondents and explain the shortages.
He did not appear.
Thus he was responsible for the shortages caused to the Board and now the petitioners cannot be allowed to take the advantage of the lapse committed by the Board.
5.
I am not in agreement with the submissions raised by the learned counsel for the respondents.
During the life time of Shri Oberoi no action was taken by the respondents within a reasonable time.
He was allowed to retire.
The retiral benefits could not be released to him on account of the loss of service book.
Assumed for the sake of argument, if the directions dated 11111997 passed by the Division Bench were not complied with by the deceased, it was always open to the respondent authorities to proceed departmentally against the deceased employee either during his life time or immediately after his death.
No action was taken by the respondent authorities as a result of which at this juncture the respondent authorities will not be allowed to say that on account of alleged shortages the amount due to the deceased has been withheld.
Resultantly, this writ petition is allowed and directions are given to the respondents to release the amount of Rs. 2,70,50250 along with interest which might have accrued on this amount, to the petitioners within one month from the receipt of the copy of the order.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.