Viney Mittal, J - In brief, the controversy involved in the present writ petition is that on November 14, 1999, 860 posts of Hindi Teachers were advertised out of which 129 posts were meant for Ex-servicemen category, 34 posts were meant for Ex-serviceman general category and 26 posts were meant for Ex-serviceman BC (B) category.
It has been averred that petitioner No. 1 Vishnu Kumar was belonging to Ex-serviceman general category.
He applied for the aforesaid post and was interviewed.
However, according to the respondents only 28 candidates of the said category were found eligible and 6 posts remained vacant due to the non-availability of the candidates.
Similarly petitioner No. 2 belongs to Ex-serviceman BC (B) category.
He was also interviewed and out of the 26 posts available for that category, 16 candidates were found eligible and 10 posts remained vacant since as per the respondents no other eligible person was available for the aforesaid category.
2.
The petitioners state that they are duly qualified since petitioner No. 1 is Prakbhakar, BA & B Ed. with teaching subject Hindi.
Petitioner No. 2 is also Prabhakar and MA BEd.
As per the averments made in the petition both the petitioners were duly qualified qua the posts and since they were available for appointments, therefore, they were entitled to be appointed along with other eligible candidates.
3.
The stand taken by the respondents in the written statement was that the petitioners had not attached eligibility certificate of dependent of Ex- servicemen renewed up-to-date and further that the petitioners did not possess the requisite education qualifications.
4.
As regards the first objection taken by the respondents, learned counsel for the petitioners has relied upon a communication dated July 11, 1997 issued by the Secretary, State Sainik Board Haryana, Sainik Bhawan, Panchkula to the Secretary, Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana wherein it has been clarified that that the eligibility certificate issued by the District Sainik Board for employment is valid till the said dependent is appointed or he crosses the maximum age limit for appointment.
Thus, the objection taken by the respondents that the eligibility certificates produced by the petitioners as dependent of Ex-servicemen had not been renewed up-to-date was incorrect in view of the specific communication dated July 11, 1997 (Annexure P/8) issued by Secretary, State Sainik Board, Haryana.
5.
As regards the second objection with regard to the educational qualification of the petitioners, we find that the matter is squarely covered by the judgment of this court in Rajinder Parshad v. State of Haryana and others, 2002(2) SCT 340 (P&H) (DB) : C.W.P.
No. 2869 of 2002 decided on February 12, 2002.
The aforesaid case also pertained to the appointment to the posts of Hindi Teachers.
The relevant observations made by the Division Bench are reproduced as follows:  "On the basis of the above rules, it is argued on behalf of the respondents that the petitioner does not satisfy the prescribed qualification.
A simple degree of Graduation is of no avail to the petitioner, as in terms of Clause 3 of the above rule, the petitioner is ought to possess degree of BA (Honours) in Hindi, which petitioner admittedly is not possessing.
We are not able to appreciate this submission on the part of the respondents.
Under clause (ii) of the above rules, Prabhakar/BA (Honours) in Hindi from a recognised University is an essential qualification.
Once Prabhakar and BA are treated to be the equivalent qualification, then clause (iii) cannot be construed to defeat what is specifically stipulated under clause (ii) of the above rules.
In fact, both these rules may be read so as to achieve the purpose of the Rule i.e. a person could be BA (Honours) in Hindi or Prabhakar and should have also done B.Ed.
to satisfy the required qualifications.
Certainly, the petitioner possesses these qualifications.
The petitioner is a Matric.
He has done his Prabhakar (Honours) from Kurukshetra University (photostat copy of the original degree is attached).
The petitioner has also done B.Ed.
from a recognised University and which fact is admitted by the State of Haryana."
6.
In these circumstances, the present petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to issue the letters of appointment to the petitioners forthwith.
For all intents and purpose the appointment of the petitioners shall relate back to the date with effect from which other, who had participated in the same process of selection were appointed; except their salary and emoluments to which they would be entitled to with effect from the date of decision of the present petition.
The parties are, however, left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.