RL Anand, J - CM is allowed.
Replication filed along with the application is taken on record.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance, have gone through the record of this case.
2.
The petitioners are-seeking a direction of this Court for setting aside the order Annexures P-7, P-8 and P-10.
It has been further prayed by the petitioners that a writ of mandamus be issued against respondent Nos. 1 and 2 to promote the petitioners as Sanitary Inspectors as has been done in the case of respondent Nos. 5 to 11.
3.
During the course of submissions, the learned counsel for the petitioners invited our attention to the various certificates Annexures P-1 to P-3 issued by one Institution by the name and style of Messrs RG Polytechnic, New Delhi, but these institutions are not recognized either by the State of Punjab or by any other State.
In these circumstances, these certificates issued by these types of Institutions have no leg to stand.
4.
Faced with this difficulty, the learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that the petitioners are being discriminated vis-a-vis respondent Nos. 5 to 11 as the experience of these respondents was not more as compared to the petitioners.
Two wrongs cannot make one right.
Admittedly, the petitioners do not fulfil the qualifications required for the post of Sanitary Inspector as laid down in Punjab Municipal Service (Recruitment and Conditions of Services) Rules, 1975 vide which the following are the qualifications :  S. No. Name of post Qualification for direct recruitment Qualification for promotion  23.
Sanitary Inspector Sanitary Inspector's Certificate should be a Municipal employee possessing Sanitary Inspector's Certificate.
Note :- The degrees, diplomas or certificates indicated in columns 3 and 4 would be from a recognised university or institution.
It is submitted that the Government of Punjab in Department of Local Government vide its letter No. 3 DLG-MSC-87/5545-5650 dated 1791987 had recognised the following institutions for the Sanitary Inspectors Certificate Course :  1.
The Post Graduate Institute, Chandigarh.
2.
Hygience and Vaccine Institute, Amritsar.
3.
Medical College, Rohtak.
4.
All India Institute of Local-Self Govt., Bombay (now called Mumbai)  Resultantly, we do not see any merit in this writ petition.
Petition dismissed.