RL Anand, J - Smt. Manjit Kaur is the widow of Shri Karam Chand who was the ex-employee of the Food Corporation of India.
She has filed the present writ petition seeking directions of this Court that order Annexure P-6 be quashed vide which her claim for release of the amount of Rs. 1 lac under the Group Saving Linked Insurance Scheme on account of the death of her husband has been rejected.
2.
Some facts can be noticed in the following manner :-  Shri Karam Chand was working as District Manager in the Food Corporation of India, Gaya Branch.
He was the member of the Group Saving Linked Insurance Scheme and has been making his contribution so long he was posted at Gaya.
He was transferred on promotion from Gaya to Calcutta and thereafter to Haryana.
Due to mistake on the part of the Drawing and Disbursing Officer, District Office, Gaya, a note could not be given in the L.P.C.
(Last Pay Certificate) that the deceased Karam Chand was a member of the Insurance Scheme.
He joined in Haryana on 2nd November, 1996.
The Scheme is renewable on annual basis.
Since there was no note on the L.P.C.
that he was the member of the Scheme or that he had been contributing his deductions towards the scheme, the Insurance could not be renewed by the transferee office in Haryana.
Deceased Shri Karam Chand expired on 14th March, 1998.
Under the provisions of the scheme, the nominee was entitled to the sum of Rs. 1 lac.
This amount has been deprived to the petitioner mainly on the ground that since the Scheme has not been renewed for the benefit of the deceased and that at the time of his death, he was not a member of the scheme, therefore, this benefit could not flow to his wife.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
The stand of the Insurance Company is simple as we stated above and at the cost of repetition, we may state that since the Scheme was renewed from year to year and at the relevant time the deceased was not the member of the Scheme, therefore, it is the stand of the Insurance Company that it is not liable to pay.
4.
The main contest is between the petitioner and respondent Nos. 1 to 4.
The stand of the Food Corporation of India is that since there was no note on the L.P.C.
issued by the Branch office at Gaya, therefore, the Corporation could not make any contribution for the renewal of the scheme for the benefit of the deceased and, as such, it is not liable to pay any amount to the petitioner.
In the alternative, it is the stand of the Corporation that the liability, if any, is that of the Life Insurance Company.
5.
During the course of submissions, a stand has also been taken on behalf of the respondent Nos. 1 to 4 that since the deceased was the Incharge of the District Office, Gaya and that he brought the L.P.C.
himself, he should have pointed out the mistake in the transferee office that he was the member of the Scheme at the time of his transfer.
Also a stand was taken by respondent Nos. 1 to 4 that the deceased on joining the transferee office applied afresh to become a member of the scheme.
He made his contribution which was forwarded to the life Insurance Company, but it had been illegally rejected.
Moreover, the contribution given by the deceased in the transferee office has already been withdrawn by the deceased, therefore, respondent Nos. 1 to 4 are not liable to pay any amount.
6.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance, have gone through the record of the case and are of the considered opinion that it was a case of mistake and negligence on the part of the Drawing and Disbursing Officer.
The District office, Gaya who did not examine the record properly while issuing the L.P.C.
in favour of the husband of the petitioner.
This mistake was even noticed by the department and at one point of time, it gave the suggestion to the Managing Director that a sympathetic view be taken and a grant of Rs. 1 lac be given to the petitioner in lieu of insurance claim from Benevolent fund as a special case to mitigate the sufferings of the family of the deceased.
In this regard, we can quote the contents of Annexure P-8 where the following suggestion was given by the Senior Regional Manager to the Managing Director, Food Corporation of India.
The suggestion runs as follows :  "In view of the above circumstances, I would humbly request you to take a sympathetic view and allow a grant of Rs. 1 lac in lieu of insurance claim from benevolent fund as a special case to mitigate the sufferings of the family."
Our attention has also been invited to Annexure P-5 whereby the Deputy Zonal Manager has virtually acknowledged the lapse on the part of District Office, Gaya by making a mention which runs as follows :  "We have lost that opportunity due to sheer negligence on the part of District Office, Gaya."
7.
Our attention has also been invited to the letter Annexure P-9 dated 27th April, 2000 issued by the Head Office to the Zonal Manager (East), Calcutta, where it has been observed as follows :  "The competent authority has taken a serious view of the lapse committed by concerned officials at District Office Gaya due to which the late officer's family has been deprived of the GSLIS compensation."
8.
In view of the above quoted lines from different correspondence, we are left with no doubt that the petitioner is suffering on account of the fault of the officials of the District Office, Gaya.
Had L.P.C.
been issued with a sense of responsibility, the misery which is now being faced by the petitioner would not have been suffered by her.
The master is always responsible for the acts of his servant if those acts and omissions are performed in the discharge of his/her duties.
The Life Insurance Company cannot be held liable as the Scheme was renewable from year to year.
There was no contribution to the Life Insurance Company, therefore, it had validly evaded its liability qua the petitioner and qua the Food Corporation of India but, so far as respondent Nos. 1 and 4 are concerned, they cannot escape their liability as they were negligent in not issuing L.P.C.
of the deceased, Shri Karam Chand, in a proper manner.
Resultantly, we allow this writ petition vis-a-vis respondent Nos. 1 to 4 and give directions to them to release the amount of Rs. 1 lac within three months from today, failing which the petitioner will also be entitled to interest at the rate of 9% per annum.
Petition allowed.