Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - Is the degree of Master of Surgery awarded by the Punjab University a recognised medical qualification under the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 ?
This is the short question that arises for consideration in this appeal.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
After passing the MBBS examination, the respondent-Dr. Sukhwinder Singh Gill joined studies leading to the degree of Master of Surgery at the Dayanand Medical College and Hospital, Ludhiana.
He appeared in the MS examination held in June 1988.
This examination was conducted by the Panjab University, Chandigarh.
The respondent passed the examination.
He was awarded the degree by the Panjab University.
Thereafter, he worked in the Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh on different jobs.
He also appeared in the entrance examination for admission to the M.Ch.
course.
He was considered as eligible by the PGI and was permitted to take the tests held in July 1999, January 2000 and July 2000.
Thereafter, the Institute issued Prospectus for admission to the course commencing in the year 2001.
The respondent submitted his application.
Vide letter dated October 31, 2000, the Institute called upon the respondent to show that the MS degree was recognised by the Medical Council of India.
The respondent explained his position.
The explanation was not accepted.
Aggrieved by the action, he approached this Court through CWP No. 15809 of 2000.
He claimed that the degree of Master of Surgery was duly recognised under the Act.
He prayed for the issue of a writ of mandamus directing the respondent-Institute to consider him for admission to the M.Ch.
course and to allow him to appear in the entrance test for the session commencing in January 2001.
During the pendency of the petition, the Medical Council of India was also impleaded as respondent No. 2.
3.
After consideration of the matter, the learned Single Judge accepted the respondent's claim.
It was held that he possessed a medical qualification duly recognised under the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956.
Thus, he was eligible to be considered for admission to the M.Ch.
course.
4.
Aggrieved by the decision, the Medical Council of India has filed this appeal.
5.
Mr. Amarjit Singh, counsel for the appellant contends that under the provisions of Section 11 of the Act, the College in which a student studies as well as the University from which he qualifies the examination should be included in the First Schedule.
Only then, a candidate can be said to possess a medical qualification recognised under the Act.
Is it so ?
6.
It is apt to notice the provision of Section 11.
It provides as under :-  11.
"Recognition of medical qualifications granted by Universities or medical institutions in India - (1) The medical qualifications granted by any University or medical institution in India which are included in the First Schedule shall be recognised medical qualifications for the purposes of this Act.
(2) Any University or medical institution in India which grants a medical qualification not included in the First Schedule may apply to the Central Government to have such qualification recognised and the Central Government, after consulting the Council, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend the First Schedule so as to include such qualification therein, and any such notification may also direct that an entry shall be made in the last column of the First Schedule against such medical qualification declaring that it shall be a recognised medical qualification only when granted after a specified date."
7.
A perusal of the above provisions would show that a qualification "granted by any University or medical institution in India" which is included in the First Schedule is a recognised medical qualification for the purposes of the Act.
The provision does not require that the candidate should have studied in a recognised institution and then secured a degree from a University included in the First Schedule.
The only requirement is that the degree should have been granted by a University or an institution included in the First Schedule.
8.
What is the position in the present case ?
Admittedly, the respondent had been awarded the degree of Master of Surgery.
This degree had been awarded by the University of Punjab.
In the schedule to the Act, the University of Punjab is specifically mentioned.
The degree of MS (Surg.)
is also mentioned.
The learned Single Judge has found that this is the degree which has been awarded to the respondent.
Nothing has been pointed out to show that it is not a recognised medical qualification.
9.
Mr. Amarjit Singh contends that the respondent had studied at the Dayanand Medical College and Hospital, Ludhiana.
This institute has not been recognised by the Medical Council of India.
10.
On a consideration of the matter, we are satisfied that this is not the requirement of Section 11.
Under the provisions of Section 11, if the degree and the University are included in the Schedule, the person possessing the decree is deemed to have a recognised medical qualification.
The respondent fulfils this requirement totally.
11.
Mr. Amarjit Singh contends that even the Institute should have been recognised.
He emphasised the word `institute' in Section 11.
12.
The contention raised by the counsel is wholly misconceived.
A perusal of the Schedule shows that medical degrees are being awarded not only by the Universities but also by Institutes.
In fact, a closer examination of the Schedule shows that the following Institutes or Colleges are mentioned in the Schedule :-  1.
All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi.
2.
College of Physicians and Surgeons, Bombay.
3.
Manipal Academy of Higher Education.
4.
National Board of Examinations, New Delhi.
5.
Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh.
6.
State Medical Faculty of Bengal.
7.
Sanjay Gandhi Post Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences, Lucknow.
8.
Sher-I-Kashmir Instt.
of Medical Sciences, Srinagar.
9.
Shri Chitra Tirunal Institute for Medical Sciences and Technology, Trivandrum.
10.
Sri Ramachandra Medical College & Research Instt, Chennai.
13.
It is on account of the fact that even the Institutes like All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi are awarding medical degrees that these names have been included in the Schedule and the expression `institute' finds mention in Section 11.
14.
Mr. Amarjit Singh contends that the Act was amended in the year 1993.
The provisions regulating the establishment of new Institutions, introduction of new courses etc. were made in Sections 10A, 10B and 10C.
It is undoubtedly so.
However, if in view of these provisions, the Medical Council of India wanted to de-recognise the degrees awarded by the Punjab University or to take action against some of the colleges whose students were being examined by the University, it had to proceed in accordance with the provisions of the Act.
So long as the degree and the University are mentioned in the Schedule, the respondent's position remains secure.
15.
On behalf of the respondent-writ petitioner, Mr. Sarjit Singh has pointed out that the judgment given by the learned Single Judge has been accepted by the Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh.
The admission to the M.Ch.
course in paediatrics Surgery was granted to him.
He had deposited the fee and is continuously attending the course.
The factual position has not been controverted on behalf of any of the parties.
Thus, it would not be fair to now interrupt the career of the respondent.
A photo copy of the order of admission produced by the counsel for the respondent-writ petitioner is taken on record as Marked `A'.
16.
No other point has been raised.
17.
In view of the above, we find no merit in this appeal.
It is, consequently, dismissed.
The first respondent shall be entitled to his costs which are assessed at Rs. 10,000/-.
Appeal dismissed.