VK Bali, J (Oral) - The petitioner who is presently holding the post of District and Sessions Judge (Vigilance) Haryana and belongs to Superior Judicial Service in the State of Haryana, being dissatisfied with fixation of his pay as initially done at the time of his entry into service or thereafter when there was revision of pay scales after unsuccessfully representing against wrong fixation as intimated to him vide orders dated May 14, 1991 has approached this Court by way of present Writ Petition filed by him under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
Brief facts that have driven him to this Court need a brief reference.
2.
Before his appointment to the Superior Judicial Service, the petitioner was holding a permanent post of District Attorney and was posted in the office of Advocate General, Haryana.
He was getting a basic pay fixed at Rs. 1930/- plus special pay of Rs. 200/- besides other allowances in the grade of Rs. 1200-2000/-.
On his selection to Superior Judicial Service, he was appointed as Additional District and Sessions Judge, Karnal which post he joined on July 15, 1891.
At the time the pay scale of Additional District and Sessions Judge was also Rs. 1200-2000 and, therefore, his pay in normal course was fixed at Rs. 1200/- on account of first entry in the Superior Judicial Service.
Inasmuch as it is only his basic pay which was protected and not the special pay which he was getting on the post of District Attorney.
Obviously, he was not satisfied with the aforesaid fixation of pay and therefore, he made a representation for protection of his pay including special pay which he was getting as District Attorney.
The State of Haryana vide orders dated November 9, 1982 fixed the basic pay of the petitioner at Rs. 1567/- per month but while doing so again benefit of special pay towards fixation of pay was not given.
In the meantime, however, the pay scale of District Attorneys had been revised retrospectively.
Therefore, the basic pay of the petitioner was raised to Rs. 2,000/- in the selection grade of Rs. 2000-2400/- before his appointment to Superior Judicial Service on July 15, 1981.
In consequence of the revision of pay scales in the manner indicated above, the pay of the petitioner was re-fixed by the State at Rs. 1637/- per month with effect from July 15, 1983.
At this time as well the benefit of special pay was not given to the petitioner.
The petitioner in the circumstances aforesaid had no choice but to make a representation to the High Court that in the matter of fixation of his pay the special pay was not taken into consideration.
Copy of representation dated January 21, 1990 has been placed on the record of the case as Annexure P5.
The High Court found substance in the representation of the petitioner and, therefore, recommended the case of the petitioner for acceptance by the Government vide letter dated September 20, 1990.
A recommendation was made in the aforesaid communication that the benefit of special pay of Rs. 200/- per month towards fixation of the pay of the petitioner should be allowed to him.
The Government, however, vide impugned order dated May 14, 1991 rejected the representation of the petitioner.
It is this order (Annexure P7) which is under challenge in this case.
3.
The petitioner for his pay protection in particular with regard to special pay of Rs. 200/- that he was getting for nearly seven years on the post of District Attorney mainly relies upon Rule 44 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules Volume I Part I and note 9 which runs as follows :-  44.
The initial substantive pay of a Government employee who is appointed substantively to post on a time-scale of pay is regulated as follows :- xxx xxx xxxx  xxx xxx xxxx  (c)(i) Notwithstanding anything contained in the rules, where a Government employee holding a post in a temporary or officiating capacity is promoted or appointed in a substantive, temporary or officiating capacity to another post carrying duties and responsibilities of greater importance than those attaching to the post held by him, his initial pay in the time scale of the higher post shall be fixed at the stage next above his pay drawn by him in the lower post provided it is certified by the Head of the Department in which the Government employee was holding the lower post that he would have continued to officiate in the lower post but for his promotion/appointment to the higher post.
xxx xxx xxx  xxx xxx xxx  Note 9.
- (1) where a Government employee is in receipt of special pay in a post his pay on promotion to a higher post will be fixed after taking into account the special pay drawn in the lower post subject to the following conditions :  (i) The special pay in the lower post should have been granted in lieu of a separate higher time scale (e.g. special pay granted to Steno-typists, Clerks-in-charge etc.) (ii) If the special pay has been drawn in the lower post continuously for a minimum period of three years on the date of promotion, the pay in the higher post will be fixed under the normal rules, treating the special pay as part of basic pay.
In other cases, the pay in the time scale of the higher post will be fixed under the normal rules, with reference to the basic pay drawn in the lower post (excluding the special pay).
Where this results in drop in emoluments, the difference between the pay so fixed and the pay plus special pay drawn in the lower pot will be allowed in the form of personal pay to be absorbed in future increases of pay.
(iii) In both the kinds of cases referred to in clause (ii) above, it should be certified that but for the promotion the Government employee would have continued to draw the special pay in the lower post.
(II) The following types of cases special pay will not be taken into account for fixation of pay in the higher posts :- i) Special pay drawn in a tenure post.
ii) Special pay granted for service in particular localities on account of remoteness, unhealthiness, severity of climate, etc. iii) Deputation (Duty) allowance or special pay drawn in lieu thereof.
(III) This amendment takes effect from Ist January, 1968.
Clarification  (a) It has further been decided that the condition of special pay having been drawn continuously for a minimum period of three years, as well as the certificate of continued drawal of special pay but for promotion, should not be insisted upon in the case of persons holding substantively a lower post carrying special pay, in lieu of a separate higher scale.
This exemption will not be available to officers with substantive position in a cadre and holding a post carrying special pay in lieu of a separate higher scale in the cadre, as confirmation of officer in the cadre is to be made against individual posts.
The condition of drawal of special pay in such posts continuously for not less than three years should be applied in those cases.
b) The certificate of continued drawal of special pay but for promotion, in cases where special pay is in lieu of higher scale of pay and has been drawn continuously for at least three years should be dispensed with.
In other cases, such a certificate should be insisted upon.
c) It may happen that a senior person promoted to the higher post, before completing three years in the special pay post, draws less pay than his junior who is promoted after completing three years in the special pay post.
Where such cases occur, the pay of the senior should be stepped up to the level of pay of the junior from the date of promotion of the latter, provided the junior was not drawing a higher pay than the senior from time to time in the lower post and that the lower and higher posts held by the junior and the senior belong to same cadre.
d) According to para 1(ii) of Note 9, the special pay in lieu of a higher scale should have been drawn continuously for a minimum period of three years on the date of promotion for it to be treated as part of the basic pay.
It is clarified that where such special pay has been drawn for a minimum period of 3 years without break in more than one post within the same cadre or department, the total period will be taken into account.
In case, where quantum of special pay varies in different posts, the least of the special pay drawn in different posts, should be taken into account for the purpose of fixation of pay in the higher post.
The above clarificatory orders came into effect from 3rd September, 1970.
(e) Even in cases where the special pay in lieu of a higher time scale of pay has been drawn in the same post for broken period, the benefit of special pay being treated as part of the basic pay on promotion to a higher post will be admissible provided the total of the broken periods put together is not less than three years."
4.
The petitioner also relies upon guidelines issued by three Government of Haryana vide letter dated March 3, 1983 which go to show that where all posts in a cadre carry the same amount of special pay, such special pay shall be considered in the matter of fixation of pay in the higher post as having been granted in lieu of higher time scales.
With a view to substantiate that guidelines are binding, the petitioner also cited example of one Dewan Chand who joined as H.C.S.
Judicial Service on May 15, 1981 and before the said appointment he was working on the post of Assistant District Attorney where he was getting a special pay of Rs. 100/- per month and at the time of fixation of his pay in H.C.S.
the special pay drawn by him on the post of Assistant District Attorney was protected.
5.
The State of Haryana as also the High Court have filed separate written statements.
Whereas respondent No. 2, High Court of Punjab and Haryana has supported the cause of the petitioner, the State, however, has chosen to oppose the same, on the preliminary objection that the petition is belated as also on the ground that Rules of Punjab Civil Services as applicable to Haryana State, govern the conditions of service, including fixation of pay of employees other than those borne on all India Service Cadre.
The members of the IAS are, therefore, not governed by the provisions of the Punjab Civil Services Rule even in the matter of pay fixation.
Inasmuch as the petitioner is a member of the Haryana Superior Judicial Service and his pay is to be regulated in accordance with the provisions of Rule 13 of the Punjab Superior Judicial Service Rules, 1963 (as applicable to the State of Haryana), there was no question of protecting the special pay that the petitioner was drawing on the post of District Attorney.
Rule 13 which is the main reliance of the respondent-State runs as under :-  "13.
Pay of members of Service.
(i) The scale of pay of the members of the Service, other than those placed in selection grades, shall be the senior scale of the Indian Administrative Service as allowed from time to time and their pay in the aforesaid scale shall be fixed in accordance with the rules and instructions that have been issued or may hereinafter be issued by the Government of India with regard to fixation of pay in the senior scale of the Indian Administrative Service.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the sub-rule (i) the initial pay of a direct recruit, to be appointed after the commencement of these rules, shall be fixed at such stage in the permissible time scale as may be determined in each case by the Government in consultation with the High Court and the Finance Department, having regard to his age and the length and extent of his previous practice as an Advocate or Pleader."
6.
The case of the respondent-State is, thus, that the pay of petitioner has to be fixed in accordance with the Rules and instructions issued by the Government of India with regard to fixation of pay in the senior scale of the Indian Administrative Service and, therefore, the Rules and guidelines from which the petitioner seeks solace will not be attracted to the service conditions of the petitioner.
7.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the considered view that the cause of petitioner is meritorious and, therefore, this petition deserves to succeeded.
Dealing with the preliminary objection with regard to delay as has been raised by the respondent-State, suffice to say that the petitioner had in fact made a representation with regard to protection of special pay that he was getting on the post of District Attorney and revision of pay scales necessitated filing yet another representation which was decided by the Government vide orders dated May 14, 1991 vide Annexure 17.
The petitioner did not wait for any time thereafter and filed the present petition on June 4, 1991.
Even though it has been mentioned in para 2 of the preliminary objections that the petitioner in his representation dated January 11, 1983 did not make any request for protection of his pay yet in para 3 on merits it has been mentioned that the refixation of pay of the petitioner was in consequence of acceptance of the request of the petitioner as made in the representation dated January 11, 1983.
It is not disputed that when the pay was fixed after taking into consideration the representation, reference of which has been given above, there was admittedly hike in the pay scales of District Attorneys so done with respective effect.
The petitioner was justified in the circumstances referred to above, to make another representation which he did make with the result as already indicated above.
8.
In so far as the merits of the case are concerned, I find that the matter is squarely covered in favour of the petitioner by a Division Bench judgment of this Court in State of Punjab and another v. Balwant Rai, 1991(2) Service Cases Today 256.
The facts of above cited case would reveal that Balwant Rai, the petitioner of the said case was appointed as Additional District and Sessions Judge on October 16, 1979 while he was working as Assistant Advocate General, Punjab.
The State of Punjab vide letter dated August 26, 1987 fixed the pay of petitioner in the time scale of Additional District and Sessions Judge at the rate of Rs. 1530/- per month in the pay scale of Rs. 1580-2400 with effect from November 21, 1979.
The fixation of pay resulted in reduction of pay of the petitioner by Rs. 420/- per month.
The High Court intimated to the Punjab State that the duties and responsibilities of the Additional District and Sessions Judge are higher than those of Assistant Advocate General.
The petitioner claimed protection of his pay in view of Rule 44(c)(i) of the Punjab Civil Services Rule, Volume I Part I.
9.
The State of Punjab defended fixing of pay on the ground that the petitioner was holding the post of Assistant Advocate General in a temporary capacity and the Head of the Department where he was holding the post of Assistant Advocate General did not issue a certificate to the effect that he would have continued to hold the post of Assistant Advocate General but for his appointment as Additional District and Sessions Judge and therefore the benefit of Rules for pay protection cannot be granted.
It was further urged that the Rule 44 was not applicable to the facts of the case of the petitioner and it is Rule 13(2) of the Punjab Superior Judicial Service Rules which would govern the field.
In so far as first objection, as has been noticed above is concerned, the same was dealt with by the Division Bench of this Court in Balwant Rai case (supra) and the same need not detain me any further for that is not applicable to the facts of the present case.
A reading of Rule 44 as has been reproduced above would leave no manner of doubt that the Government employee holding post on temporary or officiating capacity when promoted in a substantive, temporary or officiating capacity to another post carrying duties and responsibilities of greater importance than those held by him, has to have his initial pay in the time scale of the higher post and his initial pay, therefore has to be fixed at the stages next above his pay drawn by him in the lower post.
In so far as the certification of the department in which the Government employee was holding the lower post is concerned, the same in my considered view is applicable only to a temporary employee and not to the permanent employee as is clear from note 9 reproduced above.
In so far as the other question that has been raised to the present case, the same was dealt with by the Division Bench by observing "In our considered view, providing for eligibility conditions for a post has no nexus with the rules and regulations for fixing the pay of a person.
There can be go gainsaying that Rule 13(2) of the Punjab Superior Judicial Service Rules, 1963, provides for fixation of the pay of the members of service who are admittedly the direct recruits from the bar and were not previously in the service of the State.
There is no rule under the 1963 Rules, nor the learned Additional Advocate-General has been able to point out anything to show that the pay of a member of service like Assistant Advocate-General on joining the Superior Judicial Service as Additional District and Sessions Judge is to be fixed like direct recruits, though for his eligibility the condition of being an Advocate or a member of the bar for a particular number of years might have been applied to find out his fitment for the cadre post.
Rule 21 of the Punjab Superior Judicial Rules, 1963 provides that in case of there being no express rule, the members of the Service shall be governed by such general rules as the authority competent under Article 309 of the Constitution of India, might have framed or would frame time to time.
In this situation, the respondent shall be squarely governed by Rule 44(c)(i) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume I, Part I."
10.
The aforesaid decision was followed by a Single Bench of this Court in Mrs. Nirmal Yadav v. State of Haryana, C.W.P.
No. 10166 of 1988 decided on June 7, 1990.
The learned counsel for the petitioner states that the decision rendered in the aforesaid judgment of the Single Bench was affirmed in Letters Patent appeal and also by the Supreme Court in Special Leave Petition carried against the judgment of the revision Bench.
11.
The petitioner is, thus, held entitled to pay fixation under Rule 44 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume I Part I and special pay of Rs. 200/- that he was getting on the post of District Attorney has necessarily to be protected and, therefore, the representation of petitioner was wrongly declined.
This petition is, thus, allowed and order Annexure P7 is quashed.
A direction is issued to the State of Haryana to fix the pay of the petitioner in such a manner that the special pay of Rs. 200/- is protected.
The respondents are further directed to pay the entire arrears that may be due on the basis of fixing the pay in the manner indicated above within three months from today.
Inasmuch the stand taken by the respondent-State has since been unsuccessfully tried upto Supreme Court and yet the same point was persisted with, it would be proper to burden the State with costs which are quantified at Rs. 1,000/-.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to interest if the arrears that may be due to him on account of pay fixation in the manner indicated above are not remitted within three months as has been directed above.
There shall, however, be no interest on the amount that may be due upto three months from today.
Petition allowed.