Swatanter Kumar, J - In this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner prays for issuance of a writ, order or direction to the respondents to take interview of the petitioner for the post of Workshop Calculation and Science Instructor as he is eligible for the same.
The facts necessary for decision of this writ fall in a very narrow compass.
The Haryana Public Service Commission, issued an advertisement on 1012000 inviting applications for the posts of Workshop Calculation and Science Instructor, Category No. 24.
The petitioner had deposited the requisite fee in the treasury vide challan No. 45 on 3112000 and submitted his application.
The interviews for the said post were to be held on 23.10.2001.
Notice to this effect was published in the Dainik Tribune and it was stated that the applicants who had not received the interview letters could contact the concerned officer on 18th and 19th of October, 2001.
The petitioner had not received the interview letter and, therefore, got in touch with the office of the Secretary of the Commission, where he was informed that he is not eligible for the said post as he does not possess requisite qualifications.
This compelled the petitioner to file the petition.
2.
Upon notice, the respondent filed a detailed reply.
The basic case of the respondent is that the petitioner does not possess the requisite qualifications and experience and as such has rightly not been called for the interview.
Being ineligible the petitioner cannot be interviewed or appointed to the post in question.
3.
As is evident from the above narrated facts, the controversy in the present case in very limited as to whether the petitioner is eligible for being called for interview or not.
In order to answer this basic question reference can be made to the extracts of the advertisement in furtherance to which the petitioner had applied.
The relevant extract of the written statement in this regard is as under :-  "The prescribed essential qualification for the post of Workshop Calculation and Science Instructor is given below :-  E.Q.
(i) Diploma in Mechanical/Electrical Engineering from State Board of Technical Education of any State.
(ii) Five years practical/teaching experience including the period mentioned in (i) above from a reputed industrial concern or recognised training institute."
"In the aforesaid advertisement Note (i) was appended, which is reproduced below :-  Unless specifically provided otherwise age, qualifications experience etc. will be determined with reference to the last date fixed for receipt of applications.
Similarly under the heading document to be attached with the application form condition No. 4(iv) was also inserted, which is reproduced below :-  Certificate of experience (with details of salary per month received) if any, in a field related to the post applied for (where applicable).
Experience wherever prescribed acquired after the acquisition of requisite minimum qualification will only be taken into account except where otherwise provided."
4.
A bare reading of the above clearly shows that a person should acquire the requisite experience after he has obtained the minimum qualification provided.
In other words the experience must precede passing of the requisite diploma.
If the candidate had acquired the experience without obtaining the minimum qualification first, that will not be counted.
Furthermore, the eligibility was to be considered with reference to the last date fixed for receipt of applications.
It cannot be disputed that the petitioner was not possessed of the requisite experience of two years after passing the diploma as on the last date of submission of application.
The petitioner in fact became eligible only in June, 2001 when he acquired the requisite qualification and from that date he absolutely could not satisfy the condition of requisite period of experience from a reputed industrial concern or the institute.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner relied upon the judgment of, the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of AK Raghumani Singh and others v. Gopal Chandra Nath, 2000(2) SCT 465 (SC) : 2000(2) RSJ 638 to contend that even if requisite experience had been obtained before acquiring the educational qualification, the same could be counted for the purposes of determining the eligibility.
We are of the considered view that this case is of no help to the petitioner.
In that case, the advertisement did not provide specifically that the experience, which shall be counted for determining the eligibility, should be of a period subsequent to the obtaining of prescribed education qualification.
Once such a condition is incorporated in the advertisement, then it has to be strictly adhered to by the Commissioner.
There is no challenge to this clause of the advertisement.
No rule has been brought to our notice which is in contradiction to this clause of the advertisement.
In these circumstances, the respondents were obliged to act in consonance with the advertisement and they have rejected many other applications on this ground.
Thus, it will be most inequitable to disturb the selection on this ground.
6.
The petitioner ought to have challenged this condition much earlier if he was aggrieved from imposition of this condition.
Having submitted the application on the basis of these terms and conditions, the petitioner will have to abide by the view taken by the respondents in rejecting the application and cannot be permitted to raise any objection now.
7.
For the reasons afore-stated, we find no merit in this writ petition.
The same is hereby dismissed leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.