Swatanter Kumar, J - The request of the petitioner, sought for providing suitable job on compassionate grounds, was declined by the respondents vide order dated 122002, Annexure P-3 to the petition.
This order has been challenged by the petitioner in this writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Criminal Procedure Code.
2.
The father of the petitioner was working as Officer in United Commercial Bank in its Branch at Panipat.
He died on 20111995, while in service.
The petitioner at that time, was minor.
The mother of the petitioner is stated to have written to the Bank that since her son is minor, on attaining majority, he should be appointed.
Upon attaining majority on 412001, the petitioner submitted an application, Annexure P-2 to the petition.
This was rejected by the respondent-Bank vide its impugned order on the basis of the policy of the Bank dated 21.9.1999, Annexure P-4 to the petition on the ground that the gross income of the family was higher than 60% of the salary of the deceased in terms of the provisions of the Scheme and as such, no employment on compassionate ground could be granted to the petitioner.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner, while relying upon the judgment of a Division Bench of this Court in Balwan Singh v. Union of India, 1998(4) RSJ 691, contended that the element of family pension and the arrears received by the family could not be taken into consideration for determining the income of the family for the purpose of granting appointment on compassionate grounds.
4.
We do not find any force in this contention.
5.
The case of Balwan Singh (supra) would not be squarely applicable to the facts of the present case, inasmuch as the Bank had formulated the Scheme and there is no challenge to the Scheme before us.
If a person drives benefit of a Scheme then he must adhere to the contents of the said Scheme as provided therein.
While rejecting the request for compassionate appointment, the respondents enclosed a sheet of computation showing that the petitioner was not entitled to receive benefit under the Scheme.
The relevant extract of the said computation sheet reads as under :-  "Monthly income of the family :-  (1) From Net Surplus (@11%) Rs. 5,62240  (2) From family pension Rs. Nil.
(3) From salary of wife of deceased Rs. 7,82000 Total Rs. 13,442.40 Gross salary of the deceased Rs. 11,86000 60% of the above Rs. 6,61600 Reasons for Rejection  As monthly income of the family becomes higher than 60% of gross salary of the deceased in terms of the provisions of the Scheme, neither the applicant is eligible for employment in the Bank nor the family is eligible for payment of lumpsum."
6.
This computation is in line with the Scheme annexed by the petitioner himself as Annexure P-4 to the writ petition.
We are not able to see any error in the approach adopted by the Bank and the same appears to be in consonance with law.
Furthermore, it is settled principle of law that such compassionate appointments be initiated taking into consideration the emergent needs of the family.
Unfortunately, father of the petitioner died in the year 1995, while appointment on compassionate ground is sought in the year 2002.
This fact we are mentioning only to say that the petitioner has failed to satisfy the ingredients of the policy prescribed by the Bank.
We see no reason to interfere.
Petition is dismissed in limine.
Petition dismissed.