Satya Brata Sinha, J - Although the questions of some importance have been raised in this writ application but having regard to the order proposed to be passed by us, we are of the opinion that the same may not be adverted to in this writ application at this stage.
The private respondent herein filed the original application before the learned Tribunal praying for the following reliefs :  "(a) Leave under Rule 4(5) of the Central Administrative Tribunal (Procedure) Rules, 1987, be given to the applicants to file this application jointly since the cause of action and the reliefs prayed for, are identical in nature.
(b) To direct the respondents to cancel, withdraw and/or rescind the impugned Notification published in Employment News dated 10-13 October, 1998, for holding fresh examination for the post of Trainee Asstt.
Station Master for Category No. 23 in Eastern Railway, Vide Notification No. 1/97.
(c) To direct the respondents to finalise the panel and give appointment on the basis thereof and fill up the post in terms of the Notification No. 1/97 in respect of the Trainee Asstt.
Station Master on the basis of the written examination and viva-voce including Psychological Tests held therefor.
(d) To direct the respondents to deal with and/or dispose of the representation dated 20101998.
(e) To direct the respondents to produce the entire records of the case before this Hon'ble Tribunal for adjudication of the points at issue and administering conscionable justice.
(f) And to pass such further or other order or orders and/or direction or directions as to this Hon'ble Tribunal may deem fit and proper.
Interim relief(s), if any, prayed for :  (a) An injunction do issue restraining the respondents from giving any effect or further effect to the said impugned Notification published in Employment News dated 10-16 October, 1998 for holding fresh written examination on the basis of the earlier Notification being No. 1/97 in respect of Category No. 23 for the post of Trainee Asstt.
Station Master till the disposal of the application.
2.
The basic fact of the matter is not much in dispute.
For filling up certain posts, applications were invited.
More than 60,000 candidates applied therefor but ultimately about 28,000 candidates sat for the examination.
Such examination was held by an authorised agency.
After being successful in the written test, candidates were asked to appear for the viva voce and psychological test, which was held and conducted by the authorities concerned.
However according to the writ petitioner herein, panel had not been prepared within one week which ought to have been done.
Such psychological tests were held on and from 531998 to 731998 and 9.3.1998 to 1131998.
On or about 941998, one Debabrata Chakraborty without making any allegation as regard irregularity in holding the examination filed an application before one Shri Agarwal said to be Chairman of the Indian Railway Board which is to the following effect :-  "With due honour and humble submission, I Debabrata Chakraborty son of Nani Gopal Chakraborty, Vill.
Adampur, PO Ajhapur beg to state that I come of a very poor Bramhin family in the District of Burdwan, West Bengal, and my father being old and disabled has no landed property and no other source of income.
Therefore I have to do priestly job and worship and maintain family with inadequate little income but the old parents and the other members have to starve many days of the year.
I am a young man of energetic habits and a dutiful citizen of the country having fundamental right to get job in order to feed my family members.
Finding no ray of hope I am to surrender myself to your goodness for kindly sympathetically providing me with any kind of job at your disposal by which I can save the lives of my old parents.
For this purpose I send herewith two zerox copies of admit card of examination for Railway Board Recruitment.
Under the circumstances I appeal to you to consider my case and offer me a job to enable me to save me and the old parents from sure death.
May I hope that you will be generous and kind enough to grant my humble prayer."
3.
A bare perusal of the aforementioned application would show that no allegation had been made with regard to commission of any irregularities or illegalities on the part of the authorities of the Recruitment Board.
Curiously enough, relying on the basis of the said letter, purported enquiry was held.
On the basis of the said enquiry, the written examination was sought to be cancelled by letter dated 29.6.1998.
Thereafter the aforementioned application was filed.
The learned Tribunal by reason of the impugned order dated 2012000 directed :  "The impugned order of cancellation of written examination contained in the letter dated 29.6.1998 (Annexure `R4') and notification appeared in the Employment News dated 10-16th October, 1998 (Annexure `D') in pursuance of the above decision of the Railway Board contained in the letter dated 29.6.1998, Annexure `R4' are hereby set aside.
The written examination conducted by the respondents should be treated as final and valid and the respondents are directed to allot 50% marks in the written examination to each of the candidates who appeared in the earlier psychological-cum-interview test and the respondents are also directed to hold a fresh psychological-cum-interview test of 378 candidates who appeared earlier and thereafter they should prepare a final list according to merit after taking into consideration of 50% marks in the written test, as allotted to each candidate and the marks which would be obtained by them in the psychological-cum-written test in view of our observation made above and the respondents should finalise the panel for appointment according to merits within three months from the date of communication of this order and thereafter they should appoint the candidates from the panel according to merit and in accordance with the rules.
With this observation we allow the application awarding no cost."
4.
Mr. Roy, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner has raised a number of contentions in support of this application.
The learned counsel submits that the impugned direction must be held to be beyond the scope of judicial review, inasmuch as, this Court or the learned Tribunal cannot act in lieu of the Selection Committee by directing awarding of 50% marks in the written examination.
Mr. Roy, learned counsel, submits that if each of the candidates is awarded 50% marks in written examination, the same would result in an absurdity, inasmuch as, the candidates in that situation will be required to be selected only on the basis of the viva-voce test which would be violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
The learned counsel however submits that having regard to the finding upon enquiry, it wouldn't appear that as 50% of the evaluation sheets do not carry any marks and in several cases Roll Numbers did not appear and as such the petitioner had no other option but to pass the order impugned before the learned Tribunal.
In support of the said contention strong reliance has been placed on the decisions reported in 1981(1) SCC 722, 1980(4) SCC 95, 1971(1) SCC 38, AIR 1991 SC 1011 and AIR 1992 SC 1630.
5.
Mr. Kashi Kanta Maitra, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent on the other hand submits that the petitioner herein proceeded on a wholly wrong premise, inasmuch as, a bare perusal of the letter of Debabrata Chakraborty dated 941998 would clearly show that no allegation as regard commission of irregularity or illegality in the process of holding examination having been made the question of making any enquiry did not arise.
The learned counsel contends that even if the documents which were lying in MM Building had been destroyed, there cannot be any difficulty in finding out the duplicate copies thereof from the Agency appointed by the Railway Recruitment Board.
Mr. Maitra, learned counsel, pointed out that from paragraph 26 of the application it would appear that the name of the outside Agency has deliberately been withheld.
In the event, such name was not known, the question of writing any letter to the said Agency would not have arisen.
6.
It was further submitted that the allegation contained in the letter dated 28.4.1998 addressed to the Chairman of the Railway Recruitment Board by the Deputy Director, ESTT(RRB) must be held to have been issued on a wrong premise, inasmuch as, there was no occasion to cancel the examination only on the basis of the aforementioned complaint of Debabrata Chakraborty.
7.
Our attention has further been drawn to the letter dated 29.6.1998 issued by the Chairman of the Railway Recruitment Board, Calcutta, to the Executive Director-Estab (RRB), Railway Board, Rail Bhawan, wherein it has been asserted :  "2.
On receipt of a complaint from one Sri Debabrata Chakraborty bearing Roll No. 23708598 for this examination forwarded vide Board's letter No. E/REP II- 98/APZ/MRS/21 dt. 2941998, it has been observed at the time of scrutiny that though the candidate appeared in the examination as per records, in the OWR result Sheet his Roll Number is missing.
Likewise, there are a number of cases, where appeared candidates' marks are missing though Roll Numbers are available in the result sheets.
Contrarily, in a number of cases, marks have been reflected without corresponding Roll Numbers.
3.
The Agency which was entrusted with the OWR evaluation has not returned about 50% of Answer Sheets.
As a result, it is not possible to think of re- scanning the answer sheets, leaving aside the advisability of this step as it is not done except in exceptional cases."
The learned counsel submits that no details or particulars having been furnished in support of the said allegation, the same should not be accepted.
8.
Having heard the learned counsel for the parties, we are of the opinion that, that part of the order whereby and whereunder the learned Tribunal had directed the petitioner herein to award 50% marks in the written test cannot be sustained.
However, we are also of the opinion that so far as the candidates appearing in the examination for appointment are concerned they derive certain right from stage to stage.
It may be true that by reason of empanelment the candidates would not acquire any indefeasible right to be appointed but it is equally true that such right cannot be arbitrarily denied to them.
Any arbitrary action on the part of the employer while holding examination in course of the selection process or thereafter may be the subject-matter of the judicial review.
In the instant case, advertisement had been issued on 821997.
Written examination was held in January, 1998 and the psychological test was held in March, 1998.
If there had been a large scale irregularity or illegality, the same undoubtedly confers a power upon the Board to cancel the examination.
It appears that the entire enquiry was held on the basis of the purported letter of Debabrata Chakraborty dated 941998 although the same does not contain any allegation whatsoever as regard conduct of selection process.
9.
Mr. Roy, learned counsel, when questioned, very fairly submitted that there cannot be any doubt whatsoever that the name of such Agency is known to his client.
The learned counsel also very fairly states that if an enquiry is made by the learned Tribunal in presence of the said Agency, the truth probably would come out.
10.
In this situation, we are of the opinion that the Union of India would disclose the name of the aforementioned Agency before the learned Tribunal.
The said Agency shall be impleaded as a party before it.
The applicant before the learned Tribunal (respondent herein) shall serve a notice upon the said Agency.
11.
The learned Tribunal is hereby requested to see that the aforementioned Agency produces all the relevant records in its power and possession.
If necessary, parties may bring on record other and further materials by way of affidavit.
We would expect that the petitioner herein shall render all co- operation to the Tribunal in arriving at a correct finding of fact by producing all such materials and if necessary by examining witnesses so as to enable the learned Tribunal to pass an appropriate order having regard to the fact that the career of so many candidates are at stake.
We would also request the learned Tribunal to take steps for causing the outside Agency appointed by the Union of India to produce all the materials on record in its power and possession.
12.
For the reasons aforementioned, this application is allowed and the impugned order is set aside.
The matter is remitted back to the learned Tribunal for fresh determination in accordance with law and in the light of the observation made hereinbefore.
13.
We also request the learned Tribunal to consider the desirability of disposing of the matter at an early date having regard to the fact that large number of posts are lying vacant for a long time.
Till an appropriate order is passed by the learned Tribunal, status quo shall be maintained by the parties.
Urgent Xerox certified copy of this order, if applied for, be supplied on priority basis.
Application allowed.