RL Anand, J. (Oral) - Smt. Kulwant Kaur has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India and it has been prayed by the petitioner to the impugned order dated 29th November, 1999 (Annexure 10) be quashed, vide which she has been declared ineligible for the purpose of pension.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that she joined the service of respondents as Steno-typist on 2851975.
She was promoted as Senior Assistant on 13101998.
She applied for voluntary retirement after completing 20 years of service on 25.11.1998.
Respondent No. 2, after verifying the service of the petitioner from her service book, granted approval for her voluntary retirement.
Resultantly, the petitioner was relieved from service on 26.2.1999.
She was paid her gratuity and provident fund on 861999.
On 29111999 she received a letter from respondent No. 3 that respondent No. 4 has raised objection that she was not eligible for pension as she had not completed 20 years of qualifying service because she had proceeded without leave during her service which could not be counted for the purpose of her pension.
The petitioner submitted many representations that she was not at fault.
Once she has been relived by the employer after verifying her service book, now it is not open to it to say that she is not entitled to pension.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
A preliminary objection was raised by respondent Nos. 1 and 2 that the petitioner has come to this Court without availing the right of appeal under Section 237 of the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911.
On merits, the stand of these respondents is that the petitioner is entitled to the benefit of pension after completing 20 years of qualifying service.
Since she has not completed 20 years of qualifying service because she remained without pay for 4 years 8 months and 19 days, therefore, she is not entitled to the relief as claimed for.
4.
Respondent No. 3 has also taken a similar objection by stating that during her service, the petitioner had availed extra-ordinary leave without pay for a total period of 4 years 8 months and 19 days and, as such, this period could not be counted for pension as per Rule 47, Volume II of Punjab Civil Service Rules.
5.
Respondent No. 4 also prayed for the dismissal of the writ petition on the similar plea which has been taken by respondent Nos. 1 to 3.
6.
I have heard Shri GC Gupta, Advocate, on behalf of the petitioner, and Shri Ashok Aggarwal Addl.
Advocate General, Punjab, on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2.
Nobody has appeared from the side of respondent Nos. 3 and 4.
7.
The learned Counsel Shri GC Gupta, appearing on behalf of the petitioner, relies upon a judgment of the Hon'ble Division Bench reported as Rajbir Singh v. The State of Haryana and others, 1996(3) SCT 31 : 1996(2) R.S.J.
559 and Ramesh Chand Kaushik v. State of Haryana, 1994(1) SCT (P&H) (DB) 227 : 1994(2) R.S.J.
792 wherein it was observed that when an employee seeks voluntary retirement it is the duty of the employer to show compliance of the statutory rules which enjoins upon a duty to see that employee is permitted to proceed on voluntary retirement on his completion of qualifying service of 20 years.
Further, it was observed that once an employee was permitted to proceed on voluntary retirement and the same has been implemented, it is no longer open to the employer to revert back to say that the employee has not completed the qualifying service.
The ratio of the judgment passed in 1994(2) RSJ 792, Ramesh Chand Kaushik v. State of Haryana (supra) can be reproduced as follows :-  "Otherwise also, when the petitioner sought voluntary retirement, it was the duty of the respondents to ensure compliance of the statutory rules which enjoin a duty upon the respondents to see that an employee is permitted to proceed on voluntary retirement if he qualifies twenty years service, so that his right to pension is not adversely affected.
Once the petitioner has been permitted to proceed on voluntary retirement, and in fact he has so retired, it is no longer open to the respondents to tell him that instead of 20 years, he has put in 19 years and 15 months' service, and on that account he was not entitled to draw any pension."
8.
In the present case also, the petitioner was allowed to proceed on voluntary retirement.
She actually proceeded on voluntary retirement and now the respondent authorities cannot take a somersault by saying that the petitioner's qualified service was less than 20 years and for that alleged reason, she is not entitled to draw pension.
9.
Relying upon the judgments, the present writ petition is allowed.
The impugned order Annexure P-10 dated 29th November, 1999 is hereby quashed and it is declared that petitioner will be entitled to pension as if she has already completed 20 years of qualifying service.
Directions are also given to the respondents to compete the necessary formalities and release all pensionary benefits to the petitioner within three months from the receipt of copy of this order, failing which the petitioner shall also be entitled to interest at the rate of 12% per annum on the amount due to her w.e.f.
the date it became due till its payment.
There shall be no order as to costs in the present writ petition.
10.
Copy of the judgment be given to the petitioner Dasti and one copy of the judgment be sent to the respondent authorities for compliance.
Petition allowed.