RL Anand, J - The petitioner Shri SK Goyal, has filed the present writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India in which a prayer has been made by him for quashing the decision of the Board of Directors taken in its 140th meeting held on 1821999 in which, decision taken 15 years ago by the Board of Directors in its 65th meeting held on 23983, has been reviewed/reversed.
The petitioner has also made a prayer that the order dated 441985 Annexure P2/E and the order dated 931999 vide which the promotion granted to the petitioner has been cancelled and also the order dated 11.3.1999 vide which the seniority of the petitioner has been changed, be quashed.
Some facts can be noticed in the following manner for the purpose of present order.
The petitioner is a degree holder and he joined the Corporation as Junior Engineer on ad hoc basis on 10101979.
Private respondents are either the degree holders or AMIE (Associate Member of Institute of Engineers).
The appointment of the private respondents as Junior Engineer is prior to the appointment of the petitioner.
They were appointed in 1978 or so.
The next rank of promotion from the post of Junior Engineer is the Assistant Engineer.
The regulation in this regard is that a degree holder Junior Engineer should have a requisite experience as Junior Engineer for a period of 3 years, whereas for the diploma holders/AMIE this experience is five years.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that his services were regularised in the cadre of Junior Engineer with effect from 1031983.
On the contrary, the case of the respondents is that since the services of the petitioner were regularised from 1031983, therefore, his eligibility be considered for the post of Assistant Engineer with effect from 2721985 when the petitioner passed the departmental examination which was necessary for seeking promotion to the post of Assistant Engineer.
It is also not being disputed that the petitioner got one more promotion for the post of Divisional Engineer.
Similarly, the private respondents No. 3, 4 and 5 had also been promoted to the post of Junior Engineers.
3.
Here the dispute is whether the promotion of the petitioner to the post of Assistant Engineer was in accordance with the regulations of the Board or not.
4.
As stated above, the case set up by the petitioner is that since he cleared the departmental examination as on 2721985, therefore, he had the right to be considered for promotion to the post of Assistant Engineer as he had already completed more than three years service starting from 10101979.
5.
On the contrary, the case set up by the respondents is that the period from 10101979 up to 1031983, could not be counted for the purpose of promotion as the petitioner became regular with effect from 1031983 and therefore, irrespective of the fact that he had cleared the departmental examination on 2721985, the petitioner could not be considered for the post of Assistant Engineer as he had not the requisite experience of 3 years as a regular service.
It is also the stand of the respondents No. 3, 4 and 5 that they had passed the departmental examination prior to 1031986.
6.
The controversy in this case lies somewhere else.
As stated above, that petitioner was given promotion to the post of Assistant Engineer and then to the post of Divisional Engineer.
The petitioner has given the challenge to the proceedings of the Board of Directors.
Whether before taking this action, the principle of natural justice was adhered to or not.
This point is of vital importance for me.
The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents submitted that 140th meeting was held by the Board of Directors on 1821999 vide which the ex-post facto sanction to the action of the Managing Director who promoted the petitioner, was declined and not granted.
It was submitted by Shri Sethi, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the Corporation that the principles of natural justice were complied with by the Chairman before putting up the matter before the Board of Directors for consideration, but in my opinion, the principles of natural justice have not been complied with in this case.
The decision was taken up by the Board of Directors.
There is no special resolution passed by the Board of Directors at any point of time authorising the Chairman to hear the petitioner before taking any decision by the Board of Directors.
7.
In this view of the matter, I am of the considered opinion that the action of the Board of Directors taken in 140th meeting held on 1821999 is violative of the principles of natural justice and, therefore, the said order cannot be sustained in the eye of law.
The same is hereby quashed with the observation that let a fresh decision be taken by the Board of Directors and it shall comply with the principles of natural justice.
The petitioner should be heard either in person or through his representation or through his representative.
This Court further holds that a fresh decision shall be taken by the Board of Directors as early as possible but not later than two months from the receipt of the copy of the order.
For the time being the consequential orders Annexures P-14 and P-15 are also hereby set aside.
The Board of Directors shall also hear the private respondents.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.