RL Anand, J. (Oral) - Shri Sone Lal, Ex Technical Assistant, Grade-I, of the Food Corporation of India, has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India and it has been prayed by the petitioner that the orders Annexures P-1 and P-3 be quashed.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner mainly is that the impugned order of compulsory retirement has been passed by the authority which was not competent to do so and, therefore, the order Annexure P-3 dated 27111987 is illegal and without jurisdiction.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents who filed the reply and denied the allegations and according to the respondents the Senior Regional Manager Shri Mukul Joshi has validly exercised it jurisdiction and imposed penalty of compulsory retirement upon the petitioner.
In para No. 5 of the written statement, respondents No. 1 to 3 have taken a categoric stand which is as under :  "Senior Regional Manger is the competent authority to impose the penalty under the Food Corporation of India Staff Service Regulations, 1971.
The petitioner was not appointed by the Zonal Manager, North as stated.
The promotion case of Category-III employees are considered by the Zonal Promotion Committee headed by Deputy Zonal Manager as per circular No. 74/1980.
The matter of promotion is never placed before the Zonal Manager for approval or for demising the posting.
The promotion orders are being issued from the Zonal Office as the seniority is being maintained at the Zonal level.
The Deputy Zonal Manager is competent to post the promoted employees within the zone and such promotion orders has been passed by the Deputy Zonal Manager alone.
The Deputy Zonal Manager is not an authority higher in rank than the Senior Regional Manager and, therefore, the Senior Regional Manager is competent to initiate the disciplinary proceedings and to impose the penalty in terms of Staff Service Regulations."
4.
The sole point for determination for disposal of the present writ petition is whether the impugned order Annexure P-3 dated 27111987 has been passed by the authority which had the jurisdiction or not ?
5.
The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner submitted on the strength of the office order dated 28/29.11.1979 that the petitioner was promoted as Technical Assistant Grade I by the Zonal Manager and the said order was signed by Shri Shiv Charan, Deputy Manager (Administration) for Zonal Manager (North).
Therefore, for all intents and purposes, the petitioner has been promoted to the post by the Zonal Manager.
In the light of the amended regulations which came into force w.e.f.
16th October, 1987, the petitioner could only be retired compulsorily by the Zonal Manager.
6.
On the contrary, the learned counsel Shri Hemant Gupta appearing on behalf of the respondent-Corporation vehemently submitted that the petitioner in fact was promoted by the Deputy Manager (Administration), therefore, the Senior Regional Manager who is equal in rank to the Deputy Zonal Manager had the jurisdiction to pass the impugned order.
7.
As, I stated above, the Staff Service Regulations came into force w.e.f.
16th October, 1987, the impugned order dated 27111987 has been passed after coming into force the amended regulations which runs as follows :  "Regulation 56 : Disciplinary Authorities : The Board or the authority specified in Appendix 2 in this behalf or any other authority than the authority specified in Appendix 2) empowered in this behalf by general or special order of the Board, may impose any of the penalties specified in Regulation 54 on any employee : Provided that the penalties of reduction in rank, compulsory retirement, removal from service or dismissal from service specified in clauses (v) to (ix) of Regulation 54 shall not be imposed on any employee by an authority lower than the appointing authority.
Explanation : Appointing Authority in relation to an employee for the purpose of this Regulation shall be as under : (i) the authority empowered to make appointments to the post/grade which the employee for the time being holds, or (ii) the authority which appointed the employee to such post/grade as the case may be; whichever authority is the higher authority."
8.
The reading of the above would show that by virtue of explanation, a different meaning has now been given to the phrase `Appointing authority'.
On the strength of the document Annexure P-9 that the order of promotion was passed by the Zonal Manager and not by the Deputy Zonal Manager, as suggested by the learned counsel for the respondents.
The impugned order has been passed by the lower authority than that of the Zonal Manager.
Therefore, it cannot be sustained in the eyes of law.
9.
The learned counsel for the respondents has relied upon a judgment of this Court reported as Hari Singh and others v. The Food Corporation of India and others, 1994(3) SCT 546 (P&H)(DB) : 1994(2) S.L.R.
239.
This judgment is not applicable in view of the finding given that the promotion order was passed by the Zonal Manager.
Resultantly, the writ petition is allowed, the impugned order is set aside and directions are given to the respondents to take the petitioner into service.
The petitioner shall be deemed to be in service for all intents and purposes and he shall also be entitled to all the consequential benefits.
A declaration is given in favour of the petitioner that he shall be deemed to be in service with effect from the date of the impugned order as if his services were never dis-continued.
It will always be open to the respondent authorities to pass appropriate order in accordance with law.
Petition allowed.