RL Anand, J - Shri VK Gupta, Ex-Chief Manager (MIS) has filed the present writ petition under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India and it has been prayed that a writ in the nature of certiorari be issued quashing the order dated 7121998 (Annexure P-5) vide which he was ordered to be dismissed from service.
It was further prayed that the order dated 8.10.1999 vide which his appeal against the order of dismissal was rejected be also quashed.
According to the petitioner, these orders are totally illegal, arbitrary and have been passed in violation of the principles of natural justice and against the law laid down in 1995(5) SLR 11.
The petitioner has also prayed that a declaration be given in his favour that he shall be deemed in service.
2.
Some facts can be noticed in the following manner :-  The petitioner joined the service of the respondent-Bank on 9111973.
As on 181998 he was working as Branch Manager at Sirsa.
On 3131997 a charge sheet was issued to the petitioner to which he gave the reply Annexure P-2 on 1741997.
Inquiry Officer was appointed, who gave the report dated 12.5.1998.
Acting upon the report of the Inquiry officer the Disciplinary Authority recommended that three annual increments of the petitioner be stopped.
This recommendation of the Disciplinary Authority did not find favour with the Central Vigilance Commission.
The Central Vigilance Commission made recommendation to the Disciplinary Authority to award punishment of dismissal to the petitioner.
The recommendation of the Central Vigilance Commission was sent to the Disciplinary Authority which did not agree with the recommendation of the Central Vigilance Commission and it was suggested that any other punishment except dismissal be awarded to the delinquent-officer.
The recommendation of the Disciplinary Authority again did not find favour with the Central Vigilance Commission which reiterated its earlier decision for awarding the punishment of dismissal and this time the Disciplinary Authority yielded to the suggestion of the Central Vigilance Commission as a result of which when the matter went to the Punishing Authority it awarded the punishment of dismissal.
The petitioner filed an appeal against the order of dismissal which too was rejected.
Hence the present writ petition.
3.
I have heard Shri PS Patwalia, Advocate on behalf of the petitioner, Shri CB Goel, Advocate for the respondents and with their assistance have gone through the record of the case.
4.
The short argument which was raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner and which carries weight is that the Punishing Authority before awarding the punishment of dismissal had acted upon the advice of Disciplinary Authority as well as of the Central Vigilance Commission but the opinion of the Disciplinary Authority and that of the Central Vigilance Commission which are the vital documents were not supplied to the petitioner, as a result of which a serious prejudice has been caused to the petitioner.
In these circumstances, the order of dismissal passed by the Punishing Authority as well as the order passed by the Appellate Authority cannot be sustained in the eyes of law.
In support of his contention the learned counsel for the petitioner relies upon 1995(5) SLR 11 and 1992(5) SLR 598.
5.
The delinquent officer has the right to know on what premises the Punishing Authority has passed the order of dismissal.
In this case at one point of time the Disciplinary Authority had suggested the stoppage of three annual increments of the petitioner.
Later on it yielded to the advice of the Central Vigilance Commission.
The advice of the Disciplinary Authority and the Central Vigilance Commission has been acted upon by the Punishing Authority and in these circumstances the principles of natural justice do demand that the petitioner must be supplied with the material which led to his dismissal.
Since these documents have been withheld by the respondents and the petitioner has been prejudiced in his defence, therefore, this Court is of the opinion that the impugned orders cannot be sustained in the eyes of law.
6.
Resultantly, the writ petition is allowed.
The impugned orders are set aside and directions are given to the bank to reinstate the petitioner into service with consequential benefits.
However, it will always be open to the Punishing Authority to pass appropriate/fresh orders but only after supplying the opinion of the Disciplinary Authority and Central Vigilance Commission or any other document on which it wants to rely.
It will also be open to the petitioner to raise all legal pleas which are permissible to him under the law.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.