Swatanter Kumar, J (Oral) - We have heard learned counsel for the parties.
2.
The petitioner applied in response to an advertisement by Haryana Public Service Commission against 17 posts of Principals in Senior Secondary Schools which were reserved for general category and one seat for ex-serviceman.
The petitioner was selected under general category and was placed in the waiting list.
In this petition, the petitioner claims that she is entitled to get employment for the seats reserved for the wards of Freedom Fighters as she belongs to that category.
In response to the notice issued by the Court, written statements were filed on behalf of respective respondents.
The stand taken up by the Haryana Public Service Commission in the written statement reads as under:-  "2.
That in reply to para 2 of the petition, it is submitted that the last date of the receipt of the application forms for the posts of the Principals Government Senior Secondary Schools (Both Men and Women) in HES (Class II) was 30/12/1996.
The candidate applying for the post of Principal in any reserved category was required to apply in that category, to give the particulars of the category to which he/she belonged and attach the requisite certificate from the prescribed authority in support of his/her claim of belonging to that reserved category with the application form.
The petitioner did not apply for the post/posts reserved for Ex-servicemen category nor mentioned the fact that she was the daughter of the Freedom Fighter of Haryana nor attached any such certificate with the application form.
It is pertinent to mention that the Answering Respondent made the recommendation for appointment to the posts of Principals to the Respondent No. 1 on 18.2.1999.
The certificate dated 551999 cannot be taken into consideration, nor the petitioner can now be considered against the post reserved for Ex-servicemen category."
3.
From the above facts, it is clear and which have not been disputed by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the petitioner did not apply under the category meant/reserved for wards of Freedom Fighters which, in the event of non-availability of candidates from Ex-servicemen was to be converted and filled in by the candidate of Freedom Fighters category.
The petitioner admittedly did not annex the requisite documents along with her application form nor applied under the Freedom Fighters category.
As such, the petitioner has no case and the petition is dismissed.
However, it will not obstruct the right of the petitioner to claim appointment under general category as undisputedly she is in the waiting list.
No order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.