RL Anand, J - Petitioner, Pawan Kumar Gupta, has filed the present writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India seeking the directions of this Court against the respondent that a writ of certiorari may be issued for the quashment of the order dated 22112001, copy Annexure P14 passed by Respondent No. 2, the Commissioner and Secretary to Government of Haryana, Education Department, Chandigarh vide which he reversed the order of Respondent No. 3 and approved the proposal of termination of the services of the petitioner given by the Management i.e. Respondent No. 1.
2.
According to the petitioner the order passed by Respondent 2 is illegal, contrary to Rules, non-speaking, perverse and unconstitutional.
Petitioner Pawan Kumar Gupta, joined as clerk with Respondent No. 1 on 31.7.1974 and he was promoted as Head Clerk on 211978.
A complaint was inquired into by Sub Divisional Officer (C) who found the serious irregularities.
The Management charge-sheeted the petitioner on several counts which runs as follows :  "1.
You are charged that you were placed under suspension vide letter No. 51/NRW/99 dated 30111999 and were also directed who to over the charge Shri Pawan Kumar Goyal vide letter No. 56/Narwana dated 6121999 but, failed to hand over the charge till date thus you have violated the orders.
2.
You are charged that you had taken an advance amounting to Rs. 3000/- on 23121994 from the Managing Committee to confirm the UGC grant from UG.C.
office.
You submitted the expenditure bill of the same on 3111995.
Whereas you never visited the UGC Office to confirm the UGC grant.
Hence, you have received the said amount illegally by wrong means as such you are responsible.
3.
That you submitted the TA and DA bill for Rs. 350/- for visiting UGC Office and received the said payment extra to the amount of Rs. 3000/-.
Whereas you never visited the UGC Office, therefore, you are responsible.
4.
You are charged that you un-authorisitedly withdrew Rs. 78,801.32 from the AF Accounts of the Maha Vidyalya during the year 1992 for your personal use as reported clearly by CA in their Audit Report and thereafter, you deposited the said amount in small instalments in the accounts which amounts to breach of trust on your part.
5.
You are charged that a Cheque No. 91862 dated 2481998 for Rs. 23847/- was handed to you by Managing Committee for depositing the same in the Oriental Bank of Commerce in AF account but, you did not deposit the same as such, you have failed to perform the duty.
6.
You are charged that you have recorded un-warranted remarks on the pay roll of 1998 against the order passed by the Managing Committee for the stoppage of enhancement of pay of the non-teaching employee Smt. Anita Gupta which is indiscipline on your part.
7.
You are charged that you behaviour towards the Principal is not satisfactory and you used derogatory language in your writing and speaking.
You usually tried to avoid her orders and did not properly respond the letter in a proper way and time."
3.
The petitioner gave reply to the charge-sheet.
Shri Mohan Gupta, Inquiry Officer was appointed who submitted inquiry report, copy Annexure P.8.
He conducted the proceedings in the following manner :  "After receipt of the appointment order as an inquiry officer and the charge sheet, Shri Pawan Kumar Gupta and the presenting officer were directed to appear before me on 172000. shri Pawan Kumar Gupta appeared in person on the said date.
Whereas, Shri Pawan Kumar Goyal, Accounts Clerk appeared as presenting officer on behalf of the Managing Committee.
Shri Pawan Kumar Gupta was also informed about my appointment as an inquiry officer to hold the regular departmental enquiry for the charges levelled against him and he was also charges levelled against him and he was also asked as to whether he wants that I may conduct this enquiry against him or not.
On his admission, he was directed to produce his evidence in support of his defence on the said date.
He tendered the Ex. R.1 i.e. letter No. 56/NRW dated 6.1.1999 in support of charge No. 1.
In support of charge No. 2, he submitted a written request for summoning the bill and also intimated that he did not want to produce any further/extra evidence.
The said request is marked exhibit R 2.
Further, he stated that in support of charge No. 3, the original TA bill submitted by him may be seen and be perused and also produced Exhibit R4 in support of his contention of charge No. 4 and further stated that the he did not want to produce any further extra evidence.
He has also tendered Exhibit R.5 in support of his reply of charge No. 5 and Exhibit No. R.6 in support of charge No. 6 and also stated that he did not want to adduce any extra evidence except the aforesaid documentary evidence.
Thereafter, he stated that he did not want to adduce any evidence in support of charge No. 7 and also closed his oral as well as documentary evidence on the said date i.e. 172000 and the presenting officer of the Management produced the record relating to the said charges which is detailed in marked {B} and {C}.
Thereafter, the enquiry was fixed on 572000 at 1200 noon and it was adjourned to 1072000.
Shri Pawan Kumar Gupta appeared in person.
Whereas, Shri Pawan Kumar Goyal appeared as presenting officer on behalf of the Management.
Both the parties were given full and adequate opportunity to lead their evidence and to cross evidence and cross examine further.
4.
The inquiry officer gave his findings on various charges including charges No. 4 and 5 which runs as follows :  "that he unauthorisedly withdraw Rs. 78,801.32 from the AF Account of the Mahavidyalaya during the year 1992 for his personal use as reported by CA in their Audit Report and therefore, he deposited the said amount in small instalments which amounts to breach of trust on his part.
In support in his contention, Sh. Pawan Kumar Gupta produced the photocopy of the proceedings of the Managing Committee which is marked as Exhibit Rs.4, whereas, the presenting Officer tendered the account statement of the CA (Chartered Accountant).
The accounts statement of the CA clearly indicates that Sh. Pawan Kumar Gupta, Head Clerk had taken away Rs. 78,801.32 from the Amalgamated Accounts of the College.
The said entry, in the statement of the CA has also been marked as star at CP-59 pd Annexure-C It has also been admitted by Shri Pawan Kumar Gupta that he had taken the said amount from the AF account of the College for the various works of the college.
In his reply to the charge sheet, Shri Pawan Kumar Gupta has also admitted the withdrawal of the amount in question from the AF account of the College during the year 1983-1984 onwards upto 1992-1993 in connection with the various requirements of the college and he also submitted that the bills of the expenditure of the amount of Rs. 35,820/- and the said expenditure had duly been approved by Managing Committee in its meeting dated 17.4.1983 vide its resolution No. 1 and the balance amount was recovered from him in instalments as such, there was no question of breach of trust on his part.
I have gone through the accounts statement and Ex.R.4 tendered by the parties.
It is an admitted fact that Shri Pawan Kumar Gupta had taken away Rs. 78,801.32 from the AF Account of the college.
As submitted by him, he had taken the said amount for the various works of the college and also submitted that the bills of Rs. 35,820/- had also been approved by tile Management in the year 4/1983 but, he failed to explain as to how and why the balance amount had taken from the AF account of the College after 4/1983 and why the said amount was not deposited in the AF account of the College immediately and why he had retained the balance amount.
It is thus, well proved on the file that he illegally and in unauthorisedly had taken away the said amount from the AF account of the College, for his personal use which amounts to temporarily embezzlement on his part and misuse of the college money therefore the charge No. 4 is proved on the file.
5.
Charge No. 5.
That he was handed over one cheque No. 91862 dated 2481998 for Rs. 23,847/- by the Management of the SDMM Narwana for depositing the same in the Oriental Bank of Commerce in AF Account but, he never deposited the same in AF Accounts.
Hence he failed to comply with the orders.
I have gone through reply to the charge sheet submitted by Shri Pawan Kumar Gupta, Head Clerk.
In the said reply to the charge-sheet Sh. Pawan Kumar Gupta has denied the receipt of the said cheque.
It has, however, been admitted by him that the Principal had written a letter dated 15111999 to enquire and verify the position of the said cheque dated 2441998 but, he declined the receipt of the said cheque.
It is an admitted fact that Sh. Pawan Kumar Gupta is the head clerk of the college and is also looking after the Bank Accounts as such his statement is not believable that he has not received the said cheque.
Even otherwise after the receipt of the said letter of the Principal, he should have enquired the same from the Principal or the Management but, he never did so.
Even Shri Pawan Kumar Gupta failed to justify as to why the Principal had written the said letter to him about the cheque and why he had not rebutted the receipt of the same.
It is thus, clear that the said cheque was sent to him by the Management for depositing the same in the Bank but, he never deposited the same thus, he is fully responsible for the non-compliance of the orders and hence this charge is also proved on the file."
5.
Finally, the inquiry officer held that the petitioner had committed the various financial irregularities besides other official irregularities and all the charges levelled against him stand duly proved on the file.
6.
The petitioner filed an appeal which was disposed of by the Director, Higher Education, Haryana, Chandigarh on 2342001.
She did not agree with the proposal of the Management for the termination of the services of the petitioner.
Rather she made the observation that the Management would be at liberty to initiate proceedings against Shri Pawan Kumar Gupta, Head Clerk in accordance with rules for any act of omission and commission/misconduct.
7.
The Management was not satisfied with the order of the Director and it filed revision before the Commissioner and Secretary to Government of Haryana who after hearing both the parties came to the following conclusion :  "I have heard both the parties, perused the relevant record, gone through the order of Director Higher Education and read the written argument submitted on behalf of Shri Pawa Kumar Gupta.
In the revision petition before me it is necessary for me to examine whether the due procedure as laid down in the rules has been followed and that the order passed by Director Higher Education is sustainable in the light of facts produced before me or not.
The only argument on procedure which is sustainable and presented by the delinquent employee is that statement of allegations was not issued.
In all other respects it is a matter of record that due procedure has been followed.
It is a matter of record that it was the Managing Committee which had taken all decisions "but only the communication of decision was left to officials.
It is also clear on record that orders issuing six members committee was subsequently revised the Shri Mohan Parkash Gupta was appointed as Enquiry Officer.
It is also clear from record that due opportunity was given to delinquent employee for rebutting the charges but no evidence was led by him and he never objected to the procedure which was followed by the management.
The case of the management (revision petitioner) is that the charges are proved on record and are admitted and therefore, there was no need of leading evidence in any other form.
It is clear from the record that the delinquent employee replied to the charge sheet and never raised the technical issue of non-issuance of statement of allegations which in any case does not materially alter the charges levelled against him.
During the proceedings before the Enquiry Officer the delinquent employee did not produce any evidence to rebut the charges which were levelled and shown on record by the revision petitioner.
The order of Director, Higher Education is not sustainable since her conclusion that proper procedure was not followed for appointment of Enquiry Officer is not borne by record.
The conclusion that there is no credible evidence on record has not been argued in the impugned order and the basis for this conclusion has not been stated.
The order of Director, Higher Education is, therefore, set aside.
In the light of proper procedure having been followed by the revision petitioner management, the proposal of termination of services of the respondent No. 2 Shri Pawan Kumar Gupta requested by the revision petitioner is approved."
8.
Not satisfied with the order of the Commissioner who stated in the impugned order that there was a credible evidence on record, he agreed with the finding of the Inquiry Officer and approved the proposal of termination of services of the petitioner.
The petitioner has given challenge to the order dated 22112001 of the learned Commissioner on various grounds such as that the Inquiry Officer did not adopt the due procedure.
According to the learned counsel for the petitioner, Shri Garg, the Inquiry Officer started the inquiry from the wrong end by calling upon the delinquent official to lead evidence in the first instance as the charge had to be proved by the Management in view of the specific denial.
It was also the grouse of the petitioner that the impugned order is non-speaking one.
The Management has not led any evidence before the Inquiry Officer from which the Inquiry Officer could say that the delinquent official is responsible for the charges.
Also it was stressed during the course of submissions by Shri Garg that the petitioner who served the Department for years together has been deprived of his livelihood without taking into consideration that he also became illegible in order to get pension.
9.
After hearing the learned counsel for the petitioner at some length we are of the considered opinion that there is no illegality in the order of the Commissioner and Secretary.
Firstly, we are inclined to hold that the impugned order is not a cryptic one.
It shows the full application of mind on behalf of the revisional authority.
Nevertheless, it would be appropriate on our part to see whether the procedure of inquiry had been flouted or violated by the Inquiry Officer to the prejudice to the petitioner requiring our interference.
Charge No. 4 against the petitioner was that he unauthorisedly withdrew a sum of Rs. 78,801.32 from AF Account of the Institution during the year 1992 for his personal use as reported by the Chartered Accountant in the Audit Report and thereafter he deposited the same in small instalments in the accounts which amounted to breach of trust on the part of the petitioner.
10.
The principal argument raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner is that the Management has not led any evidence to show before the Inquiry Officer regarding the alleged embezzlement made by the petitioner.
Moreover, the Managing Committee had approved the action in its meeting dated 17.4.1983 as a result of which the petitioner was directed to deposit the amount in instalments.
11.
We are not convinced with the submission raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
The Management did produce before the Inquiry Officer the report of the Audit which has been marked as CP-59, Annexure-C The charge against the petitioner stood proved when he admitted that he withdrew the amount for the various works of the College.
In the reply to the charge sheet it has also been admitted by the petitioner regarding the withdrawal of the said amount in question during the year 1983-84 onwards upto 1992-93.
The petitioner only submitted bills of the part of the amount withdrawn by him.
Those withdrawals were proved by the Management and in these circumstances it was obligatory on the part of the petitioner to deposit the amount either in one go but the petitioner kept the amount for his personal use and deposited the amount through different instalments.
In these circumstances, a reasonable inference can always be drawn by the Inquiry Officer who did not oblige strict principles of inquiry that it was a case of temporary embezzlement on the part of the petitioner.
The moment the petitioner admits the withdrawal of the amount the onus lies upon him to explain how he utilised differently that amount.
In the absence of any proper explanation it has to be inferred that the petitioner utilised the remaining balance for his personal use and it clearly becomes a case of temporary embezzlement.
12.
From the above discussion, we are of the opinion that it cannot be said that it was a case of no evidence on the part of the Management.
The learned Commissioner while disagreeing with the order of the Director has clearly held in the order that the contention by the Inquiry Officer is not borne out from the record.
Moreover, even minor irregularity before submitting the inquiry report is not to be viewed with seriousness unless it is shown to us that some prejudice has been caused to the delinquent official or that he was materially misled in his defence.
Resultantly, we are inclined to uphold the impugned order.
13.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has relied upon various judgments in support of the case of the petitioner such as Jagdish Kumar v. The State of Punjab and another, 1994(4) SCT 256 (P&H) : 1994(4) Recent Services Judgments 151; KC Arora, Ex-Sub Divisional Engineer v. State of Haryana and others, 1997(1) SCT 326 (P&H) : 1996(4) R.S.J.
678, KJ Rai v. State of Punjab, 1996(1) R.S.J.
491, Ramesh v. State of Karnataka and others, 1989 Supp.
(2) SCC 89 and AV Mohal v. Senior Superintendent of Post Offices and others, 1991(1) SCT 479 (SC) : 1991 Supp (2) SCC 503.
14.
We have gone through the citations relied upon by the learned counsel for the petitioner and in our opinion those judgments has no full applicability as we are satisfied that in the present case due procedure was adopted by the Inquiry Officer.
The principles of natural justice had not been violated in view of the procedure led by the Inquiry Officer as well as the Regional Authority especially with regard to the charge sheet.
The case of embezzlement is always a serious one.
The Punishing authority is to see at initial stage what punishment is to be given.
A proposal was given by the Management to the Government for terminating the services of the petitioner.
The citations relied upon by the counsel for the petitioner with regard to the quantum of sentence again are not helpful to him.
The allegations are to be seen in each case.
15.
In the present case the charges against the petitioner were quite serious and it can be said with full justification that the proposal of the Managing Committee suggesting the termination of the services of the petitioner is in full compatibility with the allegations levelled against him.
Resultantly, we do not see any merit in this writ petition and the same is hereby dismissed in limine.
Petition dismissed.