RL Anand, J Shri Rajibir Singh Kundu has filed the present writ petition under Articles 276/227 of the Constitution of India and it has been prayed by the petitioner that a writ in the nature of certiorari be issued quashing the order Annexure P-4 dated 9th May, 2001 passed by respondent No. 2 vide which the petitioner has been reverted from the post of Assistant Foreman to the post of Lineman after working more than 13 years on the post of Assistant Foreman.
The action taken by respondent No. 2 is against the principles of natural justice as no show cause notice was issued nor any inquiry was conducted against the petitioner.
2.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents and the stand of the respondent is that the petitioner was never selected or promoted to the post of Assistant Foreman.
Only officiating charge was given in the own pay scale of the petitioner.
Virtually, it was a transfer and the petitioner was posted as Lineman against the post of AFM vide order dated 19th November, 1987.
3.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance, have gone through the record of the case.
4.
Reliance has been placed on the document Annexure P-1.
The reading of the same would show that the petitioner was posted as officiating lineman in his own pay scale against the post of Assistant Foreman.
In other words, he was simply adjusted.
He was never posted against the post of AFM.
In these circumstances, the petitioner cannot lay claim for the post of Assistant Foreman against which he was never posted.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner then submitted that since the petitioner has been serving for the last more than 13 years on the post of Assistant Foreman, therefore, directions should be given to the respondent authorities to create a post for the adjustment of the petitioner.
In support of his contention, the counsel for the petitioner has relied upon a decision of the Supreme Court reported in Gujarat Agricultural University v. Rathod Labhu Bechar and others, 2001(2) SCT 394 (SC) : 2001(1) R.S.J.
770.
We have gone through this citation.
The facts are not applicable to the facts in hand.
Hence, there is no merit in this writ petition.
Dismissed.
6.
The dismissal of this writ petition will not have any effect on the other writ petition filed by the petitioner regarding wages.
Petition dismissed.