Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - A clear mandate of the Rule has been ignored.
The petitioner, a former Chief Justice of this Court has been forced to approach this Court.
He claims that the action of the Union of India and the State of Punjab is not computing his pension in accordance with the provisions of Punjab Superior Judicial Service (First Amendment) Rules, 1990, is arbitrary, discriminatory and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
After graduating in Law, the petitioner was enrolled as a Pleader on March 1, 1954.
He was enrolled as an Advocate on January 27, 1959.
While practising at the Bar he was selected and appointed as Additional District and Sessions Judge on November 29, 1968.
On December 14, 1977, the petitioner was elevated to the office of a Judge of this Court.
He became its Chief Justice on October 6, 1989.
He retired as such on December 31, 1989.
3.
It has been averred that the petitioner had elected for the computation of his pension under Part III of the Ist Schedule to the High Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Act, 1954 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Act').
According to the provisions contained in Part III, the pension of a Judge has to be determined in accordance with the rules of his Service.
These rules are the Punjab Superior Judicial Service Rules, 1963 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Rules').
The provision regarding pension is contained in rule 16.
This rule was amended by the Government of Punjab vide notification dated February 22, 1990.
By this amendment, it was provided that while calculating the qualifying service for superannuation, pension and other retirement benefits, "the actual period of practice at the Bar not exceeding ten years shall be added to this service...".
The petitioner claims that being a direct recruit to the Punjab Superior Judicial Service, he was entitled to add the actual period of practice at the Bar not exceeding ten years to his service qualifying for superannuation pension and other retirement benefits.
The High Court had duly written to the Accountant General on June 5, 1990 (Annexure P.2) to compute the petitioner's pension in accordance with the provisions of Rule 16 as amended vide notification dated February 22, 1990.
The Accountant General had in turn sought clarification from the State Government.
The State Government vide its letter of February 25, 1991 took the view that the notification "dated February 22, 1990 shall have prospective effect i.e. with effect from the date of publication."
The benefit of the amended provision having not been given to the petitioner, he has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
It has been inter alia prayed that the respondents be directed to "give benefit of the amended Rule 16 as substituted by Annexure P.1 and to compute the pension of the petitioner in accordance therewith."
4.
Separate written statements have been filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1, 2 and 3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the Union of India, it has been inter alia averred that the subject matter mainly falls within the ambit of respondent No 2 viz. the State of Punjab.
Respondent Nos. 2 and 3 have primarily contended that the provisions of Rule 16 as amended vide notification dated February 22, 1990, are prospective.
Respondent No. 2 has taken the position that the provisions of the amended rule apply only to the persons, who have retired on or after February 22, 1990.
It has been averred that the petitioner is not entitled to take any benefit of the amended provision.
5.
Mr. ML Sarin, learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that the provisions of Rule 16 apply to all Judges of the High Court of Punjab and Haryana who have retired before or after February 22, 1990.
He contends that the action of the respondents in not computing the petitioner's pension on the basis of the amended provision is discriminatory and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
On the other hand, Mr. SS Saron, Dy AG, appearing for the State of Punjab has vehemently contended that persons who retired before the amendment of Rule 16 constituted a class by themselves and had to be paid pension in accordance with the provisions of Rule 16 as it existed prior to the notification dated February 22, 1990.
He contends that the position crystalised on the day of retirement viz. December 31, 1989 and no benefit under the amended provision could be granted to the petitioner.
6.
Before proceeding to consider the respective contentions of the learned counsel for the parties, the provisions of the Act and the Rules may be briefly noticed.
Provisions to place the higher judiciary out of the reach of the executive have been specially made in the Constitution of India.
Article 221 of the Constitution of India inter alia postulates that a Judge of a High Court is entitled to rights in respect of leave of absence and pension as may from time to time be determined by or under law made by Parliament.
It also ensures that these rights shall not be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment.
The Act determines the rights in respect of leave of absence and pension and certain other ancillary matters.
Section 2(gg) defines pension to mean "a pension of any kind whatsoever payable to or in respect of a Judge, and includes any gratuity or other sum or sums as payable by way of death or retirement benefits."
Chapter II of the Act deals with matters pertaining to leave and Chapter III contains provisions relating to pension.
Section 15 makes a provision for the grant of pension in respect of Judges, who have held a pensionable post prior to their appointment as Judges.
The relevant portion reads as under :-  "Section 15.
Special provision for pension in respect of Judges who are members of service.- (1) Every Judge -  (a) who is member of the Indian Civil Service shall, on his retirement, be paid a pension in accordance with the scale and provisions in Part II of the First Schedule : (b) who is not a member of the Indian Civil Service but has held any other pensionable post under the Union or a State, shall, on his retirement, be paid a pension in accordance with the scale and provisions in Part III of the First Schedule : Provided that every such Judge shall elect to receive the pension payable to him either under Part I of the First Schedule or, as the case may be, Part II or Part III of the First Schedule, and the pension payable to him shall be calculated accordingly."
A perusal of the above provision would show that a Judge who is not a member of the Indian Civil Service but has held a pensionable post under the Union or a State is entitled to the payment of pension in accordance with the provisions in Part III of the Ist Schedule.
The proviso gives the option to the Judge to receive pension under Part I, Part II and Part III.
It is in accordance with this provision that the petitioner had opted to receive his pension in accordance with the provisions in Part III.
Part III provides as under :-  "1.
The provisions of this part apply to a Judge who had held any pensionable post under the Union or a State (but is not a member of the Indian Civil Service and who has not elected to receive the pension payable under Part I.
2.
The pension payable to such a Judge shall be - (a) the pension to which he is entitled under the ordinary rules of his service if he had not been appointed a Judge, his service as a Judge being treated as service therein for the purpose of calculating that pension; and (b) a special additional pension of Rs. 1,600/- per annum in respect of each completed year of service for pension but in no case such additional pension together with the additional or special pension, if any, to which he is entitled under the ordinary rules of his service, shall exceed Rs. 8,000/- per annum : Provided that the pension under clause (a) and that additional pension under clause (b) together shall in no case exceed Rs. 54,000/- per annum in the case of a Chief Justice and Rs. 48,000/- per annum in the case of any other Judges.
XX XX XX XX"  A perusal of clause 2 of PArt III shows that the pension has to be computed under the ordinary rules of the Service of which a Judge was a member and his service as a Judge has to be treated as a part of that service for the purpose of calculating the pension.
It is by virtue of this provision that the provisions of the Rules are invoked for calculating the pension.
Rule 16 of the Rules as it originally stood provided as under :-  "16.
Death-cum-Retirement Benefits :- In respect of death-cum-retirement benefits the members of the Service shall be governed by the All India Services (Death-cum-Retirement Benefits) Rules, 1958, as amended from time to time."
Vide notification dated February 22, 1990, the following provision was made :-  "16.
Death-Cum-Retirement Benefits.
- In respect of death-cum-retirement benefits the members of the Service shall be governed by the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume II as amended from time to time : Provided that in the case of a direct recruit to this service, the actual period of practice at Bar not exceeding ten years, shall be added to his service qualifying for superannuation, pension and other retirement benefits.
Explanatory Note - For removal of doubt, it is hereby clarified that a direct recruit to this service, who immediately before joining the Service was a Law Officer of District Attorney shall also be entitled to the benefit of actual number of years not exceeding ten years, put in by way of practice at the Bar, being counted towards his service qualifying for superannuation pension and other retirement benefits."
A perusal of the above provision shows that in the case of a direct recruit to the Punjab Superior Judicial Service, the actual period of practice at the Bar not exceeding ten years has to be added to his service for computing the superannuation pension and other retirement benefits, like gratuity etc.
The petitioner submits that w.e.f.
February 22, 1990, he was entitled to the payment of pension in accordance with the provision contained in Rule 16 as amended.
On the other hand the respondents contend that the benefit under Rule 16 is available only to the persons who retire on or after February 22, 1990 and not to persons who had retired prior to the issue of the notification.
Is it so ?
I think it is not.
7.
Indisputably the proviso to Rule 16 contains a provision beneficial to a member of the Service.
There is nothing in the language to suggest that the benefit therein is confined to the persons who retired on or after February 22, 1990.
It does not say that "in the case of a direct recruit, who retires hereafter........the actual period of practice at Bar not exceeding ten years shall be treated to his service qualifying for superannuation pension......"  The rule creates no classification whatsoever.
It applied to all direct recruits to the Service.
It entitles all members to the counting of the "actual period of the practice at Bar not exceeding ten years" towards service qualifying for pension etc.
In my view the plain language of the rule entitles the petitioners to the counting of ten years of practice at Bar towards superannuation pension and other retirement benefits.
The action of the State in denying this benefit to him is plainly contrary to the provision of the Rule.
8.
Nor can the stand of the respondents be sustained on the touchstone of Article 14 of the Constitution.
In my view, all retired Judges irrespective of the date of their retirement constitute one class.
The benefits available under the Rule cannot be confined to the persons who retired after the issue of the notification.
Mr. Saron contends that the notification is only prospective.
He is undoubtedly right.
However, the benefit flowing from the notification is only prospective.
He is undoubtedly right.
However, the benefit flowing from the notification cannot be confined to the persons, who retire after the issue thereof.
On the contrary, the benefits have to be given to all the Judges who may have retired prior to February 22, 1990 but are still drawing pension.
With effect from February 22, 1990, their pension has to be recalculated.
Any other course would attract the vice of an invidious discrimination and violation of Article 14 of the Constitution.
In fact, whenever the benefit of a rule liberalising pension has been restricted to persons "retiring subsequently to the specified date", the provision has been held as unconstitutional.
In Union of India v. RS Dhaba, 1969 S.L.R.
442.
DS Nakara v Union of India (AIR 1983 SC 130) such a provision was considered as "dividing a homogeneous class," introducing a classification "being not based on any discernible rational principle and being wholly unrelated to the objects sought to be achieved by grant of liberalised pension and the eligibility criteria devised being thoroughly arbitrary" and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
The said class was severed and the memorandum "enforced and implemented after Severence of the unconstitutional part."
This mandate of the Constitution Bench was recently reiterated by another Constitution Bench in Indian Ex-Services League v. Union of India, 1991(1) SCT.
468 : JT 1991(1) SC 243 in the following words :-  "The conclusion of the Constitution Bench in Nakara was that the benefits of liberalisation and the extent thereof given in accordance with the liberalised pension scheme have to be given equally to all retirees irrespective of their date of retirement and those benefits cannot be confined only to the persons who retired on or after the specified date because for the purpose of grant of the benefits of liberalisation in pension, all retirees constitute one class irrespective of their date of retirement.
In order to give effect to this conclusion the only relief granted was to strike down that portion of the memoranda by which the benefit of the liberalised pension scheme was confined only to persons retiring on or after the specified date with the result that the benefit was extend to all retirees, irrespective of their date of retirement."
In view of the above dictum of law it follows that the petitioner is entitled to the recalculation of this pension in accordance with the provisions contained in Rule 16 w.e.f.
February 22, 1990.
The action of the respondents in not doing so was totally contrary to the provisions of the Rule and cannot be thus sustained.
The petitioner has been illegally denied the revised pension w.e.f.
the date of the issue of the notification, viz. February 22, 1990.
9.
I, thus, allow this writ petition.
The respondents are directed to compute the pension of the petitioner in accordance with the provisions of Rule 16 w.e.f.
February 22, 1990.
The petitioner will be entitled to the arrears of pension alongwith interest @ 18 per cent pa on the amount found due for every month w.e.f.
February 22, 1990.
The respondents shall do the needful within three months from the date of the receipt of a copy of this judgment.
The petitioner will also be entitled to his costs, which are assessed at Rs. 5000/-.
Petition allowed.