RL Anand, J - Davinder Kumar Romana, (petitioner) has filed the present writ petition against respondents No. 1 to 4 and it has been prayed by the petitioner that a writ in the nature of certiorari be issued quashing the impugned selection of Respondent No. 4, Usha Sethi, who was given the post of Director, Shramik Vidyapeeth, Sirsa by the Board of Management on the ground that Respondent No. 4 was not having prescribed qualifications as per Advertisement, copy Annexure P.1.
The petitioner has further sought directions of this Court against Respondents No. 1 to 3 to appoint the petitioner as Director in place of Respondent No. 4.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that Respondent No. 1 advertised for the post of a Director vide Annexure P 1 and as per the advertisement the qualifications and experience was as follows :  "(I) Master's Degree or Post-Graduate Diploma in Management from a recognised University/Institution/equivalent.
(II) 7 years experience in planning, administration and supervision of educational or community development programme.
OR 5 years experience in a Shramik Vidyapeeth as a Programme Officer."
3.
As against the prescribed qualifications, the qualifications of Respondent No. 4 are as follows :  "Master's Degree in Economics as well in Hindi and B.Ed.
She is having more than 7 years experience as Principal in recognised educational institutions."
4.
This is the stand taken by Respondent No. 4 in para No. 4 of the written statement.
5.
On merits several - fold submissions have been raised by the respondent No. 4, that the petitioner has no locus standi to challenge the selection of Respondent No. 4 as he himself appeared in the selection process and he was having the same qualifications as that o Respondent No. 4.
Secondly writ petition has been contested by Respondent No. 4 on the ground that the petitioner himself was not having the requisite qualifications as interpreted by him now in the present writ petition; that respondent No. 1 is not a Government Aided Institution and rather it is a Society and does not fall within the ambit of Article 12 of the Constitution of India Thirdly, it was submitted that the Diploma Course has started and the tenure of the post is going to expire in August, 2002.
Also it was the stand of Respondent No. 4 that the writ petition deserves to be dismissed on the ground of delay and laches.
6.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance have gone through the records of the case.
7.
It was specifically alleged by the petitioner that Respondent No. 1 is an aided institution.
There is no rebuttal from the side of Respondent No. 1 in this regard.
Otherwise also, from the minutes of the proceedings it is clear that District Education Officer was one of the members of the Selection Committee which was headed by Shri BK Panigrahi as Chairman.
He is an IAS Officer.
8.
In the absence of any reply from the side of Respondent No. 1, we are inclined to hold that Respondent No. 1 is an aided institution.
Otherwise also, it looks to be more appropriate that it is controlled by the Government because that is the reason that representative of the State Government has associated in the meeting of the Board of the Management.
The qualifications held by Respondent No. 4 do not fulfil the prescribed qualifications as per the Advertisement, copy Annexure P.1.
Therefore, respondent No. 4 is usurper of the post and it does not debar the petitioner to challenge the selection of Respondent No. 4 irrespective of the fact that the petitioner was not qualified.
9.
Resultantly, the writ petition is allowed and we quash the selection of Respondent No. 4 and give directions to the Selection Committee to start afresh process of selection within 2 months from the date of the receipt of the copy of this order.
We also give directions to Respondents No. 1 to 3 not to release any salary of Respondent No. 4 forthwith.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.