NK Sud, J - The petitioner sought admission to the Master of Computer Applications Course in the Punjabi University.
Patiala (respondent No. 1) for the Sessions 2001-2002.
Alongwith her application, she had appended a certificate of disability issued by the Medical Board and countersigned by the Medical Officer of the Punjabi University certifying that she was suffering from 60% permanent disability.
She appeared in the joint written test held on June 26, 2001 and was placed at rank No. 278.
The total number of seats for admission in the University Campus, Patiala were 32 out of which 22 were reserved for general category and 10 additional seats were reserved for various other categories.
Out of 22 general seats, seats were reserved for the following categories as per para 61A of the Handbook of Information issued by the University:-  "(i) Scheduled Castes (15%) 2 (ii) Scheduled Tribes (7-1P2%) 2 (iii) Backward Class (5%) 1 (iv) 1984 Riots affected 1 (v) Backward area/Physically handicapped/Armed forces.
BSF/CRPF (6%) 1" 2.
In para 7 of this Handbook, break-up of reservation of seats had been given and the break-up of 6% under clause (v) of the above para was as under :-  (i) Handicapped/disabled candidates; 3% of the total seats.
(ii) Backward area candidates; 2% of the total seats.
(iii) Armed Forces, B.S.F./CRPF candidates; 1% of total seats.
The petitioner was not given admission against this reserved category and has come before this Court by way of present writ petition.
3.
According to the petitioner, the Handbook of Information clearly mentions that 3 per cent of the total seats were reserved for physically handicapped students and she being at the top in the merit in this category ought to have been granted admission against this category.
She alleges that this seat has been wrongly given to respondent No. 3-Yogesh Mittal, who was a Backward area candidate.
It has been further alleged that respondent No. 3 was not entitled to this seat because he was placed at rank No. 31 and had been offered a seat against the open seats in the Punjab College of Information Technology, Patiala, but he had declined that offer because he wanted admission in the University Campus.
It was, therefore, alleged that he had lost his right to be considered against a reserved seat for admission in the University Campus.
4.
In reply the University has clarified that since the total number of seats in General category were 22, the reservation of 3% for handicapped/disabled candidates did not work out even to one seat.
Similar was the position about the Backward area category as well as the Armed Force BSF/CRPF category for which reservation was 2 per cent and 1 per cent of the total seats respectively.
Therefore, in the Handbook of Information the University has clarified that the reservation in three categories had been combined and against 6 per cent, one seat was reserved for these combined categories.
It was further pointed out that even as per the petitioner's admission respondent No. 3 was higher in merit as he was placed at rank No. 31 against the petitioner's rank of 278 and, therefore, he had rightly been admitted against this seat.
Regarding the other objection about his disentitlement against this seat on the ground that he had refused the offer of admission against open seats in the Punjab College of Information, Patiala, it was stated that it had nothing to do for the admission in the Department at the University Campus, Patiala.
The relevant para 61A only contemplates the reservation of seats and break-up for admission at the University Campus and there is no condition that the candidate, who had declined an offer for admission in any other college is not entitled to admission against a reserved seat.
5.
Mr. BR Vohra, Advocate, appearing on behalf of the petitioner reiterated the contentions raised in the writ petition.
According to him, the petitioner admittedly fell in the category of physically handicapped persons and there being reservation of 3 per cent in this category and the petitioner being the candidate in this category could not be refused admission.
He contended that this reservation could not be defeated by combining three categories under one head.
He repeated the contention raised in the writ petition that respondent No. 3 was not entitled to the reserved seat under para 61A of the Handbook of Information as he had declined the offer against an open seat in the Punjab College of Information Technology, Patiala.
6.
After hearing the Counsel for the parties and going through the Handbook of Information, we find no merit in the contentions raised on behalf of the petitioner.
It is not the case of the petitioner that the admission has not been done strictly in accordance with the reservation mentioned in Para 61A of the Handbook.
It has been correctly explained by the University that since the reservation in the three categories mentioned under clause (v) of this para separately did not work out even to one full seat, they were clubbed together and allotted one seat.
This evidently was the only working arrangement.
At any rate, the action of clubbing these three categories under one head was clearly mentioned in the Handbook of Information.
Since the admissions are governed strictly by the provisions as contain in the Handbook, the petitioner after having appeared in the entrance test in terms of this Handbook, cannot be heard to complaints against any provision thereafter, on the three categories had been clubbed together and one seat had been reserved against them, no fault can be found with the action of the respondent- University in granting admission to respondent No. 3, who was eligible for admission as a Backward area candidate and was higher in merit than the petitioner.
7.
The other objection against admission of respondent No. 3 on the ground that he had declined an offer of admission in the open category in the Punjab college of Information Technology is also not tenable.
A candidate is free to seek admission in an Institute of his choice.
By declining admission in the aforesaid College, respondent No. 3 merely closed one of his options, but did not become ineligible for admission in the University Campus.
If, as per rules and conditions prescribed in the Handbook, he was eligible for admission for any seat in the University Campus, his application could not be turned down.
The petitioner has not been able to refer to any provision of Handbook wherein a candidate, who had declined admission in any other College, may have been disqualified for admission in the University Campus against the reserved seats.
8.
In view of the foregoing discussion, we find no merit in the contentions raised on behalf of the petitioner and decline to interfere.
The writ petition is, accordingly, dismissed.
However, in the circumstances of the case, there shall be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.