RL Anand, J - Smt. Parminder Kaur petitioner has filed the present writ petition against the respondents under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India and she has prayed for the quashment of the order Annexure P-9 dated 1471997 vide which the services of the petitioner were terminated by the management.
According to the petitioner, the decision of the management is without any authority and jurisdiction.
In the alternative, the petitioner has prayed that she has not been paid the subsistence allowance with effect from 3051996 as per rules when she was placed under suspension.
2.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
The stand of respondent No. 4 is that the Managing Committee vide resolution dated 1471997 had recommended to the DPI for giving approval to the decision of the Managing Committee terminating the services of the petitioner but the approval has not been given as a result of which no further action could be taken against the petitioner.
The stand of respondents No. 1 and 3 is that there are two managing committees operating in this school and a conditional approval was granted to the school for the release of the grant-in-aid.
The stand of respondents No. 1 and 3 for the disposal of the present writ petition is not of much relevance.
3.
During the course of submissions, the learned counsel for the petitioner states that at this juncture he does not press the relief of challenging the recommendation dated 1471997 as those recommendations of the committee have not got the approval of the DPI.
He simply submits that petitioner has not been paid the subsistence allowance from the date of her suspension.
4.
The learned counsel appearing on behalf of respondent No. 4 submits that petitioner is not even entitled to the subsistence allowance because she was not co-operating in the inquiry and rather she has challenged the very jurisdiction and authority of the appointing authority.
5.
After considering the rival submissions of the parties, I am of the opinion that the relief of quashing the order dated 1471997 cannot be granted to the petitioner at this stage as the said order has never got the approval of the DPI.
Moreover, if the DPI gives the approval still the petitioner has the right to file an appeal before the appropriate authority.
6.
With regard to this subsistence allowance, I give directions to respondent No. 4 to release the subsistence allowance to the petitioner according to rules within one month from the receipt of the copy of the order.
7.
I also hold that there was no delay on the part of the petitioner.
Learned counsel appearing on behalf of respondent No. 4 has drawn my attention to the copy of the plaint earlier filed by the petitioner in the Civil Court.
A reading of the said plaint would show that in the said suit the plaintiff only challenged the order of her suspension.
8.
The directions given above to respondent No. 4 shall be complied within one month.
I also give the directions to the DPI to decide the proposal dated 1471997 within four months according to rules.
Copy of this order be given Dasti.
The writ petition stands disposed of accordingly.
Order accordingly.