Swatanter Kumar, J - We have heard the learned counsel for the parties.
This is a petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India praying for the issuance of a writ of mandamus and a writ of Certiorari to the respondents quashing the order dated 122001 (Annexure P6) vide which the claim of the petitioner for appointment as Hindi Teacher has been rejected.
The facts in this writ petition are not disputed.
The only controversy raised for determination before this Court is whether the petitioner possesses the requisite qualifications prescribed for appointment to the post of Teacher of Hindi.
The requisite qualifications for the post of Hindi Teacher are mentioned below :-  i) Matric from Haryana School Education Board or an equivalent qualification recognised by the Haryana School Education Board; ii) Parbhakar/BA (Honours in Hindi) from a recognised University; iii) LTC/OT in Hindi conducted by the Haryana Education Department or an equivalent qualification recognised by the Haryana Education Department or BA (Honours) in Hindi with B.T./B.Ed.
with Hindi as Teaching subject from a recognised University; NOTE : In case the candidates of above qualifications are not available then BA with Hindi as an Elective Subject with B.T./B.Ed.
with Hindi teaching subject from a recognised University shall be considered.
iv) Knowledge of Hindi upto Matric Standard.
2.
On the basis of the above rule, it is argued on behalf of the respondents that the petitioners does not satisfy the prescribed qualifications.
A simple degree of Graduation is of no avail to the petitioner, as in terms of Clause 3 of the above rule, the petitioner ought to possess degree of BA (Honours) in Hindi, which petitioner admittedly is not possessing.
We are not able to appreciate this submission on the part of the respondents.
under clause (ii) of the above Rules, Parbhakar/BA (Honours) in Hindi from a recognised University is an essential qualification.
Once Parbhakar and BA are treated to be the equivalent qualifications, then clause (iii) cannot be construed to defeat what is specifically stipulated under Clause (ii) of the above Rules.
In fact, both these rules may be read so as to achieve the purpose of the Rule i.e. a person could be BA (Honours) in Hindi or Parbhakar and should have also done B.Ed.
to satisfy the required qualifications.
Certainly, the petitioner possesses these qualification.
The petitioner is a Matric.
He has done his Parbhakar (Honours) from Kurukshetra University (photostat copy of the original degree is attached).
The petitioner has also done B.Ed.
from a recognised University and which fact is admitted by the State of Haryana.
3.
In view of the above, we find no hesitation in allowing this writ petition.
Consequently, we allow this petition, set aside the impugned order passed by the respondents Annexure P-6 dated 122001 and direct the respondents to grant appointment to the petitioner to the post of Hindi Teacher in accordance with law and on merits, if otherwise eligible.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.