Jasbir Singh, J (Oral) - Petitioner is aggrieved by order dated 2041995 (Annexure P7) vide which he was reduced to lower scale than the one at which he was working at that time.
He is also aggrieved against the order dated 12121995 (Annexure P12) vide which his appeal was dismissed.
2.
Brief facts of the case are that the petitioner was working as a Peon in the office of Command Area Development Authority, Haryana at Rewari.
On 1111991, he was promoted to the post of Clerk.
In the month of July, 1994, he was deputed for election duty and in his absence it was found that he has failed to despatch as many as 18 letters, embezzled government postal stamps to the tune of Rs. 50 and has also delayed the despatch of one cheque.
Petitioner was charge sheeted on 7.11.1994 and he was asked to file reply to the charges levelled against him.
Petitioner denied all the allegations levelled against him by filing a reply Annexure P4.
The competent authority being not satisfied with this reply, appointed respondent No. 5 as an Enquiry Officer, who conducted the enquiry and submitted his report Annexure P5, opining that the petitioner is guilty of indisipline and creating of obstacle in the work of the office and he has embezzled the postal stamps.
After receipt of enquiry report, again show cause notice was given to the petitioner for imposing punishment i.e. dismissal.
Thereafter order Annexure P7 was passed on 2041995, ordering his reduction to the lower scale from where he was promoted.
Petitioner filed an appeal and a representation which were dismissed vide Annexure P9 and P12.
Hence, the present writ petition.
3.
Mr. MS Yadav, Advocate appearing on behalf of the petitioner vehemently contended that orders Annexure P7 and P12 cannot be sustained since the punishment order has been passed without holding any proper enquiry.
It has been stated that the petitioner was not having good relations with respondents No. 5.
He made allegations against him while filing reply to the charge sheet but still, respondent No. 5 was appointed as an Enquiry Officer.
He also stated that his application for change of the Enquiry Officer was dismissed without any reason.
On merits, he stated that a complaint against him was the creation of respondent No. 5 who was inimical to him and petitioner has tried to justify the fact that he has not committed any mistake and the charges levelled against him are false.
4.
Mr. Satbir Godara, Advocate appearing on behalf of the respondents controverted all the arguments raised by Mr. Yadav.
He has stated that since the petitioner has mis-appropriated/embezzled postal stamps, has not performed his duties in good manner as a despatch Clerk and has failed to despatch many letters, which amounts to indiscipline, the punishment has rightly been awarded to him.
5.
After hearing counsel for the parties, this court is of the opinion that the present writ petition is liable to be allowed.
The enquiry seems to have been conducted in total disregard to the principle of natural justice.
The following were the charges levelled against the petitioner :-  1.
"I, Satish Kumar Clerk, was allotted the duties of receipt and despatch Clerk.
He despatched 18 letters/cheques of different dates as shown in the charge list.
(Photocopy enclosed) but were not sent to the consignee upto 24894 which were handed over to Smt. Pushpa Sharma on 24894.
2.
While performing duties of despatcher he despatched 18 letters/cheques and shown money in the shape of stamps as expenditure while these were not sent to the consignees as such he embezzled Rs. 50.
Letter No. 6895 dt. 18.2.1993 Rs. 2200 Letter No. 71192 dt. 22101993 to 7174 Rs. 2100  Letter No. 12557 dt. 17394 Rs. 700 Rs. 5000 3.
Sending of cheque No. 200626 dt. 17994 worth Rs. 60,000/- late to Municipal Committee, Bawal.
4.
Disruption in DRDA work due to non sending of letters/cheques in time to the consignees.
5.
Negligent in duties."
6.
While filing the reply to the above mentioned charge sheet, the petitioner has clearly stated that the complaint against him is a creation of respondent No. 5 with whom he did not have any cordial relations.
It is further stated that earlier the Last Pay Certificate of respondent No. 5 was misplaced and the petitioner was accused for the same and even his explanation was called, ultimately the letter was recovered from the drawer of respondent No. 5 and because of that, respondent No. 5 was inimical to him.
Despite all these averments being there against respondent No. 5 in the reply filed by the petitioner, still the competent authority chose to appoint respondent No. 5 as an Enquiry Officer in the present case.
Thereafter, the petitioner even moved one application to change the Enquiry Officer by stating all these facts.
That application was also dismissed by the competent authority on 20th December, 1994 by passing order Annexure P8.
In that order nothing has been stated regarding charges levelled by the petitioner against the Enquiry Officer.
The averment of the petitioner that the Enquiry Officer was inimical to him, is also apparent from manner in which enquiry was conducted by respondent No. 5.
At the very outset, the petitioner was asked to lead his evidence and no evidence was led on behalf of the Department.
It is also apparent from the Enquiry Report that even the alleged letters regarding which it was stated that the petitioner has failed to despatch, were not brought before the Enquiry Officer and ultimately, the Enquiry Officer, on the basis of evidence led by the petitioner alone, gave his finding to the following effect:-  "Sh. Satish Kumar has given self contradictory statements and he failed in dis-proving the charges and it has proved that the charges levelled against the employee are correct and the employee is guilty of indiscipline and creating of obstacle in the work of the office and he has done hanki-tanki (HERA FERI) in the matter of postal stamps."
A reading of the above mentioned passage clearly shows that findings given are totally vague and are not supported by any reasoning and evidence on record.
Findings are also given regarding certain allegations which are not the subject matter of the charge sheet against the petitioner.
The appeal and representation of the petitioner were also dismissed in a very cryptic manner while relying upon some confessional statements made by him.
Regarding said confessional statements, the petitioner has stated that it was forged and fabricated, after getting signatures of the petitioner on plain papers.
Be that as it may, it has been found, as a matter of fact, that the enquiry has been conducted while ignoring the principles of natural justice.
Once the petitioner has levelled certain allegations at the time of filing the reply to the charge sheet, against respondent No. 5, it was incumbent upon the competent authority not to appoint that officer as an Enquiry Officer.
The Enquiry Officer could have been changed even at a later stage when an application was moved by the petitioner for the said purpose.
7.
In view of the reasoning given above, the enquiry report (Annexure P5) and the consequent order of punishment Annexure P7 and P12 whereby appeal was dismissed cannot be sustained.
Since that writ petition is being allowed on the first argument only, it is not necessary to go into other arguments of the petitioner and respondents.
Writ petition is allowed.
Orders Annexure P5, P7 and P12 are quashed.
However, liberty is granted to the respondents to conduct fresh enquiry, as per law.
Petition allowed.