Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - On June 4, 1998, the petitioner dismissed respondent No. 3 from the service.
The third respondent challenged the order by filing an appeal before the Deputy Registrar.
The appeal was dismissed vide order dated December 15, 1998.
A copy of this order has been produced as Annexure P2 with the writ petition.
The third respondent filed a second appeal.
It has been allowed by the Additional Registrar (C), Cooperative Societies, Haryana, vide order dated January 18, 2000.
A copy of the order has been produced as Annexure P6 with the writ petition.
Aggrieved by the order, the petitioner has approached this court through the present writ petition.
It is alleged that the order dated January 18, 2000 is not in conformity with the provisions of the rules and that the Authority has erred in remanding the case to the Deputy Registrar.
Thus, the petitioner prays that the order, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P6 with the writ petition, be quashed.
2.
No written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents.
No one has put in appearance on behalf of the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 despite service.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
Mr. Rajinder Goyal, counsel for the petitioner contends that the impugned order is wholly nebulous.
It assigns no reason.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioner has been controverted by the counsel for the third respondent.
3.
A perusal of the impugned order shows that after noticing the facts, the Additional Registrar has disposed of the appeal filed by the third respondent with the following observations :-  "I have heard the arguments of the learned counsel of the petition(er) and the learned counsel of the appellant.
There is no force in the judgment of the learned Deputy Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Hisar who opined that the issue does not fall in the purview of section 27 of the Act and is a fit case for deliberation under Rule 19 of the Service Rules of the Society.
I accept the appeal and set aside the order of DRCS Hisar dated 15121998.
The arguments of the case were heard on 20121999 and the judgment was be (sic) informed accordingly."
A perusal of the above extract from the order shows that the learned Authority found that the view taken by the Deputy Registrar was not valid.
Why?
There is no answer.
There was no proper consideration of the issues arising in the case.
The Authority should have examined the merits of the controversy and decided it by passing a speaking order.
It does not appear to have done so.
Thus, the impugned order is set aside.
The matter is remanded to the Additional Registrar (C), Cooperative Societies, Haryana, for a fresh decision after bearing the parties.
The writ petition is, accordingly, allowed in the above terms.
No costs.
Petition allowed.