Swatanter Kumar, J - In this writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, petitioner Kusum Lata claims that she is eligible and satisfies the conditions prescribed in the brochure for seeking admission to the Diploma Course in Education in order of her merit.
She passed her qualifying examination of 10+2 from Central Board of Secondary Education, hereinafter referred to as the Board, and took the entrance test for admission to Diploma Course (two years duration) in Education on 31122000.
The result of the entrance test was declared on 2822001 and she secured rank No. 1460.
According to the petitioner there are total number of 3200 seats in different educational colleges of State of Haryana for which the entrance test was conducted.
However, the petitioner was denied admission on the ground that she has not secured 50% aggregate marks in qualifying examination i.e. 10+2 examination as per the terms of the brochure.
The petitioner submitted to the respondents letter dated 2032001 issued by the Board wherein it was clarified that under the scheme of study of the Board, the petitioner has to pass in five subjects.
The aggregate of the five subjects was 504% in the 10+2 examination.
On this qualification of the Board, the petitioner claims that she satisfies the eligibility condition provided in the brochure.
2.
Upon notice, the respondent filed reply wherein it was stated that the said letter of the Board was of no consequences because the conditions of the brochure required 50% aggregate marks in the Board Examination to make a candidate eligible for admission to the entrance test and consequently in the Course.
The petitioner secured 291 marks out of 600 marks and as such she does not satisfy the eligibility condition.
According to the respondents, the petitioner is not entitled to get any seat.
3.
It is a settled principle of law that terms and conditions of the brochure and the notified scheme of the Government for admission to such courses is binding and has to be strictly adhered to.
It is not permissible that conditions of the brochure or such scheme should be varied by the Courts on the ground of compassion or displaced equity.
The eligibility condition of the brochure which relegates the minimum qualifications for admission to the Course reads as under :-  ELIGIBILITY (i) DIPLOMA IN EDUCATION (D Ed.) A candidate should have passed 10+2 Examination from Board of School Education Haryana, or its equivalent examination from any other Board, recognised by Board of School Education, Haryana, with atleast 50% aggregate marks."
4.
A bare reading of the above eligibility clause makes it clear that the aggregate marks of 10+2 should be 50%.
This clause indicates beyond ambiguity that the 50% aggregate marks have to be of all the subjects which the candidate took in his 10+2 examination.
Admittedly, the petitioner had taken Hindi, History, Political Science, Physical Education, Home Science and English Core as the subjects (compulsory and elective) in her Board examination.
Thus, she needs 50% marks in the aggregate of all these six subjects which she admittedly does not possess.
5.
Coming to the letter of the Board dated 2032001 Annexure P/2, the Board clarified that under its education scheme a candidate would be required to obtain at least 33% marks in all the five subjects.
Such a candidate could be declared as pass because the sixth subject where the candidate was having less marks was treated as additional subject.
In other words, that is the passing aggregate for the examinations of Senior Certificate and this criteria was applied to the students for the year 1999.
The petitioner, thus, cannot take any advantage of this so called clarificatory letter to satisfy the eligibility conditions.
No body has questioned before this Court that the petitioner has or has not passed the Board examination.
In fact it is an admitted case that she has passed Board examination but still does not satisfy the minimum qualifying marks.
In other words, the petitioner has passed the Board examination, but unfortunately, has not been able to satisfy the minimum prescribed percentage under the eligibility condition.
6.
We do not find any error in the action of the respondents declining admission to the petitioner as this appears to be the only plausible interpretation that can be given to the eligibility clause in the facts and circumstances of the present case.
The respondents have adopted this practice for all these years and has been truly implemented.
Any other interpretation of the eligibility clause is bound to frustrate the essence and purpose of this condition.
7.
For the reasons afore-stated we see no merit in this petition and the same is hereby dismissed, leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.