VK Bali, J - The petitioners are teachers who were initially appointed as research/teaching/extension associates and were then redesignated as Assistant Professors and equivalent.
They all came to be so appointed between January 1, 1976 to September 8, 1980.
The post in question carried pay scale of Rs. 700-1600 as per recommendations of the University Grants Commission and they were so appointed under scheme of Indian Council of Agriculture and Research (ICAR) which recommended the University to grant same pay scales as are given by the University to Assistant Professors and equivalent as approved by the University Grants Commission.
The case of the petitioners is that w.e.f.
January 1, 1973 the University Grants Commission recommended the revision of pay scales of teachers in the service of the Universities in the country in respect of the following posts.
Posts Existing Scales 1966-1971 Revised Scales from 191976  Professors (Sr. Grade) 1600-1800 1500-2500 Professor 1100-1600 1500-2500 Reader 700-1250 1200-1900 Lecturer 400-950 700-1600 The aforesaid revision of pay scales is reflected in Government of India letter dated November 2, 1974.
The petitioner further contended that on June 28, 1977 and July 1, 1977 the Indian Council of Agricultural Research conveyed to the State Governments that the benefits of the revised pay scales recommended by the University Grants Commission could be extended to the Research/Extension/Teaching Assistant in the scale of Rs. 700-1600 who were recognized as teachers as per statute of the University.
According to the letter of Indian Council of Agricultural Research, New Delhi, besides other things it was mentioned as follows :-  "As you are already aware, the Indian Council of Agricultural Research has already agreed in principle to extend the benefit of revision of pay scales to the teachers in Agricultural Universities.
The Council makes no distinction between academic, research of extension in Agricultural Universities and have decided to extend the benefit to Research/Extension Assistant in the revised scale of Rs. 700-1600 also provided they possess the same qualification as the Lecturers and are recognized as teachers as per statute of the University."
Taking clue from the aforesaid letter one Dr. Nihal Singh, who like petitioner was appointed as Research Assistant in the pay scale of Rs. 300-600 by the order of the Vice-Chancellor in the year 1975 in the Udaipur University, claimed that he should be given a pay scale of Rs. 700-1600.
He while making representations pressed into service recommendations made by the University Grants Commission and being unsuccessful in his clamour for pay scale of Rs. 700-1600, he was constrained to file a Writ Petition No. 39 of 1979 before Rajasthan High Court.
The matter came up for disposal and the High Court of Rajasthan vide order dated April 22, 1981 accepted the claim of aforesaid Dr. Nihal Singh and clearly directed the respondents to give aforesaid Dr. Nihal Singh the revised scale of Rs. 700-1600 w.e.f.
July 2, 1974.
It was clearly observed in the aforesaid decision that Dr. Nihal Singh should be given the pay scale w.e.f.
September 1, 1976 as was done in the case of Lecturers.
The decision rendered in favour of Dr. Nihal Singh was subject-matter of an appeal before a Division Bench in appeal bearing No. 264 of 1980.
The Division Bench of Rajasthan High Court modified that judgment to the extent that the petitioner of the said case should be placed notionally in the revised pay scale of Rs. 700-1600 w.e.f.
the date of his appointment as Research Assistant.
It is the case of the petitioner that against the judgment of the Division Bench S.L.P.
No. 1732 of 1982 was dismissed on September 6, 1982 and even a Review Application filed by the State of Rajasthan was dismissed by the Supreme Court on November 7, 1983.
2.
The petitioners have supported their case by placing on record various judgments the reference to which has been given above.
Further the petitioners have made a positive averment, which averment, it may be mentioned at this stage has not been controverted at all that the Research Assistant/Extension/Teaching Associates of the Universities possess the same qualifications as are that of a Lecturer.
They are performing similar duties with similar qualifications and, therefore, they cannot be legitimately denied the revised pay scales as per recommendations of the University Grants Commission which is also being supported by the Indian Council of Agricultural and Research.
They further contend that the revised pay scales should be granted to the petitioners from the same date as were revised in the case of Lecturers.
3.
The Haryana Agricultural University issued an ordered on 18th of September, 1980 wherein it is mentioned that in pursuance of the decision taken by the Board of Management in the meeting held on 8th September, 1980, it was decided to revise the pay scales of Teaching/Research/Extension Associates w.e.f.
8th of September, 1980.
The aforesaid decision is reflected through Annexure P-7 annexed with the petition.
The petitioners contend that the decision to revise their pay scales from 8th of September, 1980 and not from a date when the same pay scales were allowed to the Lecturers, would result in discrimination and arbitrariness.
Besides the arbitrary date i.e. 8th of September, 1980 was a sheer violation of the recommendations of the University Grants Commission and clarifications given by the Indian Council of Agricultural Research.
Mr. Kumar, learned counsel for the petitioner forcefully contends that once an equation of the posts of petitioners with that of Lecturers was found to be justified even by the competent authorities, there was no reason with the respondents to equate the pay scale of the petitioner with the Lecturers from a later date.
In support of his contention, the learned counsel has relied upon decisions rendered by Rajasthan High Court which decisions, as referred to above, were even confirmed by the Supreme Court.
There is absolutely no distinction between the facts of the present case with the one of Rajasthan High Court and therefore, the matter is totally covered in favour of the petitioners, contends the learned counsel.
The petitioners have been trying to get their due and the matter was even taken up by the Research Associates with Haryana Agricultural University Authorities for the grant of University Grants Commission scales.
The request succeeded only partially inasmuch as the respondent-University granted pay scales of Rs. 700-1600 only from September 1980 on which date as well the petitioners were re-designated as Assistant Professors and equivalent.
4.
I have gone through the written statement filed by respondent No. 1.
The preliminary objection with regard to delay and laches has been taken and it is stated that even though the revised pay scales were given w.e.f.
8th September, 1980 the petitioners had sought for the revised pay scales for the period 1976 to 1980 after a gap of more than seven years.
Although this objection is taken in the preliminary objections but the averments of the petitioners made in paragraph 26 to the effect that the petitioners had made number of representations to the authorities and last such representation was submitted to the Vice Chancellor of Haryana Agricultural University wherein University Grants Commission scales were prayed on 19th of June, 1987 have not been denied in the corresponding para of the written statement.
It is significant to mention here that the contention of the petitioners with regard to the Research Assistant/Extension/Research Associates possessing same qualifications as that of Lecturer and being similar situated and performing a similar duties with similar qualifications has not been specifically denied in corresponding para 13 of the written statement.
5.
After hearing Mr. Kumar, learned counsel for the petitioners and going through the written statement filed by respondent No. 1, I find that in the present case, the respondent-University has revised pay scales of two equivalent posts from different dates and while doing so no reason whatsoever has been mentioned either in the orders whereby scales were revised or even in the written statement filed in this Court.
It is also clearly made out from the pleadings of the parties supported by various documents as also judgments of the Rajasthan High Court that the qualifications of the posts held by the petitioners and Lecturers were the same.
They were also performing similar duties and in fact, as referred to above, this has not been even specifically denied by the respondent-University.
It is thus clearly made out that the same has thus to be styled as discriminatory and arbitrary.
The matter seems to be covered in favour of the petitioners by recent judgments of Supreme Court in the Employees of Tenary v Union of India, Judgment Today 1991 Volume V Supreme Court 90.
The competent bodies which are assigned besides other duties, the duty of finding out equivalence in various posts have squarely supported the case of the petitioners on various occasions.
6.
In view of the facts and circumstances of the case stated above, this petition succeeds, there shall be a direction issued to the respondent-University to grant equivalent pay scales to the petitioners who were holding the posts of Research/Teaching/Extension Associates or equivalent from the dates they came to occupy the posts which period is stated to be January 1, 1976 to September 8, 1980.
The arrears that are found due towards the petitioners, shall be paid to them within a period of three months.
Before I part with this judgment, it is made clear that the fact that the petitioners opted for another pay scales that became available to them during the pendency of the petition, shall make no difference and they shall be paid arrears for the period the same is due towards them.
It may be mentioned in passing that the interim order passed in this case in Civil Miscellaneous No. 12547 of 1989, it was made clear that exercise of petitioners to opt for new scales shall be without prejudice to their rights in the present petition.
The said order is made absolute.
There will be no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.