Swatanter Kumar, J (Oral) - Issue notice to show cause why petition be not admitted.
2.
Mr. Rajbir Sehrawat, Deputy Advocate General, Haryana accepts notice.
3.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties.
4.
Challenge in this petition under Articles 226 of the Constitution of India is to the order passed by the State dated 28th August, 2000, vide which services of the workman-petitioner were regularised with effect from 31st January, 1996 but he was taken as part of the regular cadre for the purpose of payment of salary from the state of his joining services i.e. with effect from 22nd March, 1999.
5.
The contention of the petitioner is that the impugned order takes away the consequential relief which the petitioner would be entitled to as a result of the award of the Labour Court passed in favour of the workman ordering his reinstatement with continuity of service and full back wages.
6.
On the other hand, it is contended on behalf of the respondents that the impugned order dated 2882000, Annexure P/5 is fully justified on the principle of "No work No pay" and also the possibility of the petitioner serving somewhere else cannot be ruled out or they might have been gainfully employed till 22nd of March, 1999 when they actually joined the duty with the respondent-department.
7.
The contention raised on behalf of the respondents cannot be said to be without any merit but no reasons whatsoever have been given in the impugned order, Annexure P/5.
The impugned order is silent and in fact has been passed without affording any opportunity of hearing to the petitioner.
Once the services of the petitioner were regularised with effect from 31st January, 1996, the consequential rights thereto to receive salary for that period obviously accrues in favour of the petitioner.
If the same is to be curtailed or taken away, then some cogent and valid reasons must exists there that too after affording an opportunity of being heard to the petitioner.
8.
It is settled cannon of law that one cannot be deprived of his right without applying the principle of natural justice i.e. an opportunity of being heard.
9.
For the reasons afore-stated, we set aside the impugned order dated 2882000, a copy of which is appended with the petition as Annexure P/5 without communing upon the merit of the contentions raised on behalf of the either party as this stage.
However, the respondents are at liberty to pass afresh order in accordance with law within a period of six months from today.
The parties are left to bear their own costs.
Order accordingly.