RL Aanand, J (Oral) - By this short order, I dispose of Civil Writ Petition No. 52 of 2000 filed by Col JS Virk (Retd.)
against Sant Longowal Institute of Engineering and Technology, Longowal, Distt.
Sangrur, and others.
2.
The prayer made by the petitioner in the writ petition was for the quashment of the two orders dated 10th December, 1999 and 7th July, 1999, Annexures P-21 and P-11, respectively on the ground that these orders have been passed in a mala fide manner.
The petitioner has further made a prayer that the adverse remarks contained in Annexures P-13 and P-14 as communicated to him vide letter dated 1181999 (Annexure P-12) for the years 1997-98 and 1998-99 be treated as illegal and arbitrary.
Yet another prayer was made by the petitioner that he should be treated as confirmed professor on completion of his initial period of probation since he has completed the PhD Degree.
3.
The case set up by the petitioner in the writ petition is that he was appointed as Assistant Professor (Electronics) against the post of Professor (Electronics/Computer/Instrumentation) for the time being with the understanding to the petitioner that the moment he gets the decree of Ph.D, he will be designated and placed in the scale of Professor in the Institute.
According to the petitioner, he obtained the decree of PhD He completed his period of probation successfully, but in order to shunt him out from the Institution, the management had manipulated the adverse remarks, it had arbitrarily and in an illegal manner extended the period of probation of the petitioner and finally passed the order terminating the services of the petitioner vide order dated 10th December, 1999 (Annexure P-21).
4.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents who filed the reply and denied the allegations.
The stand taken up by respondent Nos. 1 and 2 was that the services of the petitioner were kept under probation, his work was not found satisfactory and, therefore, his services were terminated as per the terms and conditions in his appointment letter and without any mala fide against the petitioner.
5.
During the course of submissions, the learned counsel for the petitioner stated at the Bar that the impugned order Annexure P-21 is a astigmatic one under the garb of simple order dispensing with the services of the petitioner.
The petitioner is aggrieved by the order Annexure P-21.
He would be fully satisfied if the order Annexure P-21 may be considered and converted as the one passed in pursuance of the resignation submitted by the petitioner and the said order should be deemed to have been effective form the same date i.e. 10th December, 1999.
6.
The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents submit that they have no objection if the Court in the present order may declare that the said order shall be deemed to have been passed in pursuance of the resignation submitted by the petitioner.
In view of the statement made by the leaned counsel for the respondents, this writ petition stands disposed of with the observations that the order dated 10th December, 1999 (Annexure P-12) shall be deemed to have been considered for all intends and purposes as having been passed in pursuance of the resignation submitted by the petitioner and the deemed order of acceptance of resignation of he petitioner will be considered as non-stagmatic.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.