Mehtab S Gill, J - The petitioner has prayed for the issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari for quashing order dated 1712002 (Annexure P-6) by which the claim of the petitioner for regularisation has been rejected.
2.
The petitioner has averred in this petition that this educational qualification is Matric and was appointed as Work Mistri in August, 1988.
He has further stated that he was working in Municipal Council, Ambala and was performing the duties of sewerage and water services which were handed over to Public Health Department and all daily wagers were relieved and directed to join the Public Health Division as all water pumps etc. were transferred to the said Department.
The petitioner was transferred to the Public Health Department.
The petitioner was relieved on 15.4.1993 as per Annexure P-1 and thereafter he was working in P.W.D., Public Health Department, Haryana.
3.
The Haryana Government took a decision that all daily wagers who have completed five years service on 3111996 were entitled to regularisation and later on this period of five years service was reduced to three years.
Copies of the policy decisions have been attached as Annexures P-2 and P-3.
The petitioner has stated that although he was entitled to regularisation as Work Mistry with effect from 3111996 in view of the policy decisions Annexures P-2 and P-3, the case of the petitioner was kept pending.
Various representations were made and a demand notice was also served but no decision was taken.
When no reply came, the petitioner and other employees filed Civil Writ Petition No. 19272 of 1998 and the same was disposed of on 23.9.1999 as per orders Annexure P-5.
4.
The claim of the petitioner was considered in the light of the aforesaid direction issued by this Court and the same was rejected as per order dated 1712000 (copy annexure P-6) which he has been impugned in this writ petition.
5.
Notice of motion was issued.
Separate written statements have been filed on behalf of the respondents.
6.
Learned counsel for the petitioners has stated that as per policy decisions (copies at Annexures P-2 and P-3), the services of all the work- charged/casual/daily rated employees who have completed five years service as on 3111996 and fulfil the other conditions laid down had to be regularised.
The period of five years was reduced to three years as mentioned in Annexure P-3.
The petitioner has been working with the respondents since August 1988.
As the petitioner has been shifted from Municipal Council and was directed to report to Public Health Department, the service of the petitioner was continuous and was definitely without a break.
7.
Learned State counsel, on the other hand, has stated that the petitioner in Civil Writ Petition No. 19272 of 1998 had claimed regularisation on the post of a Coolie from the post of Mali.
Now in the present writ petition he is claiming regularisation on the post of a Work Mistri.
There is no post of Work Mistri in the office of respondent No. 4 and thus the claim of the petitioner that he be regularised as Work Mistri cannot be accepted.
He has further contended that petitioner was not appointed through proper channel originally when he was appointed as a Mali as this post was neither filled through the Employment Exchange nor was filled through advertisement.
8.
The petitioner did not, at any stage before filing of this writ petition, make a representation for regularisation under the Government instructions, i.e., Annexures P-2 and P-3.
The services of the petitioner in the initial stages were with the Municipal Council and subsequently transferred to the Public Health Department.
The petitioner was only re-adjusted in another Department as he had served the Municipal Council for a long time.
Thus the petitioner continues to be in service for the last more than three years.
On going through the regularisation policy of the State Government Annexures P-2 and P-3, we find that the petitioner fulfils the requisite conditions for regularisation.
Annexure P-4 is a letter written to all the Heads of the Departments by the Chief Secretary to Government, Haryana wherein guidelines have been given as to the regularisation of ad hoc/work-charged employees and casual/daily wagers etc.
The petitioner fulfils all the conditions as enumerated in paras i), ii), iii) and iv) of the said letter.
With the above observations, the writ petition is allowed.
Consequently, order Annexure P-6 dated 1712000 is hereby quashed and the respondents are directed to regularise the services of the petitioner in the light of the policy decisions Annexures P-2, P-3 and P-4.
The parties to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.