Swatanter Kumar, J (Oral) - We have heard learned counsel for the parties at some length.
2.
The petitioner in this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India prays for regularisation of his services on the post of Mortar Mate to which he was appointed as daily wager on 1121992.
The petitioner has been working for the last more than 10 years on the said post and is qualified in terms of the prescribed qualification and as the petitioner has worked for more than 240 days in each year and does not have a break in service.
3.
Upon notice, respondents have appeared.
All other averments have been admitted except the fact that there is no break.
It is stated that there is break of two months in the service of the petitioner.
It is contended that as per policy of the state Government, if there is break of more than two months in a year, the petitioner cannot be regularised in service.
There is no challenge to the policy of the government.
Thus, we will proceed to discuss the merit of the claim of the petitioner as per existing policy.
It is an admitted case that there was a break in service for two months but the explanation of the petitioner is that this break resulted as a result of illegal and unauthorised order of termination of services of the petitioner by the management.
The petitioner had served a demand notice.
The matter was referred to the labour Court-cum-Reconciliation Officer and during the conciliation proceedings, the management had taken back the petitioner in service.
Thus, this break by no stretch of imagination can be attributed to the workmen-petitioner.
It has been held in the case of Anand Kumar v. Haryana Urban Development Authority, 1995(1) Recent Services Judgments 230 : 1995(1) SCT 677 (P&H)(DB) that if the break is attributable to the petitioner that cannot be taken disadvantage of the workman.
4.
For the reasons afore-stated, we allow this petition and direct the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner for regularisation of his services in accordance with policy de hors the objection that there is break in service of the petitioner.
The writ is allowed without any order as to costs.
Petition allowed.