JS Narang, J. (Oral) - The short question is whether the petitioner is entitled to disability pension on account of the disability suffered by him way back in 1986 and especially when the Medical Board held at that time had specifically given a finding that the disease so suffered by the petitioner is neither attributable nor aggravated by military service.
This finding was never questioned by the petitioner and ultimately, he retired from service in the year 1989.
The claim of disability pension was rejected by the Ministry of Defence, Government of India, New Delhi on account of the finding given by the Medical Board as aforesaid.
It is in the year December 1994 that the petitioner was sent to Escort Hospital for undergoing Coronary Artery Bye-pass Surgery (CABG).
2.
The petitioner sent a request letter dated 19.4.1999 claiming after a gap of almost 10 years that the disease which was suffered by him i.e., Myocardial Infraction and Diabeties Mellitus had occurred due to stress and strain of Army Service.
The claim was made on account of judgment rendered by this Court in the 1998 and the prayer has been that his disability should be assessed as attributable to and aggravated by military service and that the percentage of disability already stands assessed above 20%.
3.
The petitioner aggrieved of non-action on the part of the respondents filed present petition which was admitted on 2542000.
The claim is that the order Annexure P-1 dated December 5, 1989 vide which the claim of the petitioner for seeking disability pension had been rejected, be quashed and that the petitioner should be granted disability pension from the date of release from the service.
It has been further claimed that the respondents be directed to conduct Rusurvey Medical Board for assessing disability pension afresh and grant disability pension on the basis of the recommendations of disability resurvey Medical Board.
4.
The respondents have contested the claim of the petitioner by way of filing written statement and the stand is that the petition is hopelessly belated.
Even otherwise, the finding of the Medical Board to the effect that the disease is not attributable to or aggravated by military service has not been contested.
It is further contended that the petitioner had suffered on account of normal body disorder which may suffered by a human being in normal course of the life and nothing is attributable to or is aggravated by military service.
It is also contended that the subsequent disability which is being alleged is not the cumulative effect of the previous disease, as such both have no link whatsoever.
Thus, the claim is no sustainable and that the petition deserves to be dismissed.
5.
I have considered the rival contention of the petitioner and the respondents.
I am impressed by the contentions of the learned counsel for the respondents that the finding of the Medical Board which was given way back in 1986 has not been contested by the petitioner and that he was released in 1989 and the disability pension was claimed at that time which was declined by the respondents in the year 1989.
After 1989, the finding/reply given by the respondents has not been contested anywhere.
It is too late in the day to give any indulgence especially when a specific finding has been given that the diseased suffered by the petitioner is neither attributable to nor is aggravated by military service.
The Medical Board (findings) could have been contested by the petitioner at the relevant time and could have asked for resurvey Medical Board but none of the kind was done.
The subsequent disability is stated to have been suffered has not been claimed to be the cumulative effect of the previous disease which has been held to be not attributable to or aggravated by military service, the second and given under the said category.
6.
The petition is highly belated and that no reason is forthcoming in this regard and none has been pleaded.
No merit.
Dismissed.
Petition dismissed.