RL Anand, J - Shri RC Gupta, petitioner has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India against the Punjab State Electricity Board (hereinafter called, the Board,) for quashment of charge-sheet dated 26.3.1999 and the case set up by the petitioner can be summarised in the following manner :-  2.
The petitioner joined the service of the respondent in the year 1996.
He became Executive Engineer in 1972.
He was promoted to the post of Superintending Engineer in 1984 and then to the post of Chief Engineer in the year 1998.
He was allowed to retire on attaining the age of superannuation w.e.f.
30.6.1998.
After his retirement, the petitioner was served with the impugned charge-sheet Annexure P-1 dated 26.3.1999 on the allegations that while working as Executive Engineer, Civil Construction Divison No. 1 RTP.
PSEB Ropar, a scheme was formulated to construct 318 houses Type No. 1 (Single storey) at Noohan Colony, Ropar Thermal Plant, on account of the acts of omission and commision the department suffered a loss of Rs. 20/22 lac and these acts were committed by the petitioner in order to help a contractor.
The summaryof allegations can be reproduced as under :-  "When he (Er.
RC Gupta) was posted as Xen.
Civil Construction Divison No. 1, RTP Ropar, he did the following mistakes and irregularities.
(1) When he (Er.
RC Gupta) was posted as Xen Civil Construction Division No. 1, RTP, PSEB Ropar a scheme was formulated to construct 318 house Type No. 1 (Single storey) at Noohan Colony, Ropar Thermal Plant, NIT (Notice inviting tender) single storey was made by him and after approval the same was sent to the newspapers for publication.
After this the department changed the scheme from signel storeyto double storey.
He instead of making the NIT again incroporated the addition in the NIT of the single storey that the contractors should fill the rates of double storey instead of single storey and if they do not do so it will be presumed that the same rates are for double storey houses and after that the claim of the contractor will not be considered.
When he made the NIT of single storey houses at that time the drawing of double storey houses No. 2116 dated 651981 which were sent to SE and Xen Civil Construction Division No. 1 RTP Ropar through letter No. 11094 dated 1161981 were present in which the size of wood used in the houses was also mentioned and the work was to be done according to this.
In case there was any change in the design then the approval about the same was to be obtained from the Chief Engineer, Thermal Design, Patiala.
(2).
In the tenders received from three firms namely M/s Gupta Construction Company, Patiala, M/s Lakshvir Gupta Construction Company, Patiala and M/s Ved Parkash Aggarwal, Government Contractor, Bathinda, a condition No. 13 was mentioned by M/s Gupta Construction Company, Patiala that the firm will claim the rates C.S.R.+S.P.+30% profit on any item of C.S.R.
which is not mentioned in NIT.
Such a condition was not mentioned by any other firm.
M/s Lakshvir Gupta Construction Company, Patiala gave the offer that if the firm is given Rs. 25 lakh on the allotment of work or within 15 days then it will give rebate of 15%.
At the time of consideration of tenders and making the comparative statement he mentioned the condition No. 13 of M/s Gupta Construction Company as vague.
About M/s Lakhsvir Construction Company he wrote that the firm did not clarify that the money demanded by the firm is returnable or not and written that this may be got clarified from the firm.
Loading about this was given in the comparative statement.
Because of less rates of M/s Gupta Consruction Company the Chief Engineer approved it with this condition that the payment of rates of extra items may be given after the aproval of the Chief Engineer.
He did not do anything for getting the condition 13 withdrawn and due to this the firm after that claimed from the departments rates of extra items of double storey and by this way the departments had to pay 20/22 lakhs of rupees extra and thus the Government had to suffer financial loss.
(3) The above fautls and irregulatires done by him (Eng.
RC Gupta) in performing the office duty establish serious miscondcut and lead to disciplinary action against him under Regulation 8, PSEB Employees (Punishment and Appeal) Regulation, 1971 and Punjab Rule 2.2(b) of CSR VoI 2."
3.
Now the challenge has been given by the petitioner mainly on the ground that as per rule 2.2(b) of the Punjab Civil Service Rules, Volume-II the petitioner could not be served with the charge-sheet of the events which had taken place four years prior to the date of his retirement and especially when the petitioner was allowed to go free to his house in spite of the fact that he wrote a letter dated 5.3.1998 requesting the authorities that if any action is contemplated against him that may be taken so that the petitioner maybe able to go to his house after attaining the age of superannuation in peace.
In short, the grievance of the petitioner is that the charge-sheet pertains to the events of 1983-84, prior to the date of his superannuation and on such stale allegatons a departmental action cannot be contemplated.
4.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondent who filed the reply and the defence of the respondent is contained in para No. 5 of the written statement which is reproduced as follows :-  "The contents of paragraph 5 insofar as the charge sheet being issued as well as reproduction of the regulations are admitted being a matter of record, it is, however, denied that statutory requirements stand violated in the case of the petitioner with the issuing of charge sheet.
It is further denied that the case of the petitioner is not covered under Rule 2.2(c) read with Rule 9.14(a) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Vol.-II.
As already submitted the answering respondent for the first time came to know that the petitioner was held guilty by the vigilance department in an inquiry when the letter dated 07031996 was received by the Secretary of PSEB on 12031996.
The case of initiation of proceedings against petitioner was put up before the Board on 24071998, after it had been considered at lower levels and the Board took a decision in its meeting held on 22101998 that charge sheet be issued.
During the intervening period, the Government had failed to provide the answering respondent with the necessary documents as well as the draft charge sheet which is why a certain amount of delay took place.
Notwithstanding this delay the charge sheet that has been issued on the petitioner is well within the time limit that has been provided under the Rules.
It is necessary to state that the record relating to the inquiry as well as the inquiry report was not available at the answering respondent and it is for this reason that the answering respondent had to wait until final clearance was given by the Government and the documents received.
According to the Civil Service Rules, if an employee has retired, departmental action can still be started against this person after obtaining sanction of the Government.
It is submitted that in the present case, the Government has asked the answering respondent to initiate action against the petitioner as such the Government sanction for proceeding departmentally against the petitioner has only been received on 12031996 and as such, there is adequate time to proceed agaisnt the petitioner despite the fact that he has retired from service.
Further, it may be stated that at thetime of his retirement, the petitioner had given an undertaking that in case he is found liable to pay any amount to the answering respondent on the basis of the vigilance inquiry and the show cause that had been issued to him he would make payment of the same.
A copy of this undertaking is annexed as Annexure R1.
It is also necessary to state that the retirement of the petitioner was made subject to the finalisation of the proceedings against him.
Merely because the charge sheet was not served prior to the petitioner retiring from service does not preclude the answering respondent from initiating action against him.
It is therefore denied that the petitioner is not covered under the provisons of the Rules quoted above.
The relevant portion of Rule 2.2(b) of the Punjab Civil Service Rules, Vol-II is reproduced as under for the kind consideration of this Hon'ble Court :- 22(b) provided that such departmental proceedings, if not instituted while the officer was in service, whether before his retirement or during his re- employment.
(1) shall not be instituted save with the sanction of the Government.
Further Rule 2.2(c) provides that the Gratuity allowed to be withdrawn by the competent authority on the conclusion of proceedings will have to be treated as fallen due on the date of issuance of final order by the competent authority.
These provisons show that action can be taken against the petitioner after his retirement and in the present case such action has been taken within the time prescribed keeping in view the date of knowledge."
5.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance have gone through the record of this case.
6.
The learned counsel for the petitioner during the course of his submissions has relied upon a judgment ofthe Hon'ble Division Bench rendred on 2382001 in LB Gupta v. The Punjab State Electricity Board where a similar controversy had arisen and was decided by holding that a charge-sheet issued after a period of four years after the date of retirement of the official/officer pertaining to the old events cannot be sustained in the eye of law.
7.
Faced with this difficulty the learned counsel for the respondent submitted that earlier it was not to the knowledge of the respondent with regard to the illegalities committed by the petitioner as the matter was pending with the Vigilance Department and on coming to known from the Vigilance Department the respondent authorities had initiated the action against the petitioner.
But we are not convicted with the submission raised by the learned counsel for the respondent in view of Rule 2.2(b) of the Punjab Civil Service Rules which states that the departmental proceedings, if not instituted while the officer was in service, whether before his retirment or during his re-employment, shall not be in respect of any event which took place more than four years before such institution.
A reading of the rule would show that the defence taken up by the respondent is not open to it.
Admittedly, the petitioner has been charge sheeted for the events of 1984 vide charge sheet dated 26.3.1999.
Therefore, such charge sheet cannot be sustained in the eyes of law.
8.
Resultantly, we allow this writ petition and quash the charge sheet dated 26.3.1999 with no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.