Swatanter Kumar, J (Oral) - We have heard learned counsel for the petitioner at some length.
2.
While answering the reference in favour of the workman and granting him reinstatement with continuity of service and back wages, the learned Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Panipat, held as under :-  "From the perusal of list Ex. M-1 which is tendered by the management in the statement of MW-1 it is admitted that total number of working days of the petitioner within the 12 months preceding the day of termination of his service is more than 240 days and this fact has also been admitted by MW-1 in his cross-examination.
Only plea of the management is that the workman has not continuously worked for 240 days and there is break of one month ie July, 1995 but this plea of the management is sustaining as while counting 240 days the number of working days within 12 months preceding the day of termination are to be seen.
The management has taken the plea that the workman has left the job at his own will but there is no proof on the file to the effect that any notice was served to the workman for recall the workman on the job and moreover MW-1 in his examination-in-chief has admitted that there is no document on the record to this effect.
MW-1 has also admitted that notice pay or retrenchment compensation was never paid to the petitioner and no domestic departmental enquiry was also held.
MW-1 has also admitted in his cross-examination that junior to the petitioner are still working.
Therefore, under these circumstances in my opinion termination of the services of the petitioner in the present case is illegal and he is entitled for the benefits of sections 25-F and 25-G of the Act.
Therefore, I decide this issue in favour of the petitioner and against the management."
3.
The above findings of facts are based upon proper appreciation of evidence.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner contends that the workman ought not to have been granted full back wages as he would be supposed to have been gainfully employed during the period of the date of termination to the reinstatement.
5.
This argument is mis-conceived.
There is no presumption of law against the workman that he would be deemed to have been employed gainfully.
Otherwise also it was for the management to take the plea of gainful employment of the petitioner during his termination period in response to the reply of the statement of claim filed by the workman and then lead at least some evidence to discharge his primary onus.
But neither the plea was taken nor proved.
6.
We find no reason to interfere with the impugned award.
Dismissed.
Petition dismissed.