SS Sudhalkar, J (Oral) - By this common judgment, Civil Writ Petitions No. 7048 of 1990 and C.W.P.
No. 753 of 1990 are being disposed of as common question of law is involved in both the writ petitions.
2.
Birender Singh, petitioner in Civil Writ Petition No. 7048 of 1990 was appointed as a Restorer in Education Department on 2311980.
He was transfered, on his application, to the Excise and Taxation Department on 23.2.1989.
On 761989, he was promoted as a Clerk.
However, by an order dated 10.5.1990, copy Annexure P/6 he was reverted and the reason for reversion mentioned in the impugned order is that he did not fulfil the basic condition of five years service as a Restorer in that particular office or of three years service as Clerk in another department.
He has filed this writ petition challenging the same.
3.
Civil Writ Petition No. 753 of 1990 is filed by Bhushan Lal and Ram Singh, who are working as Peon in the Excise and Taxation Commissioner Office, Haryana for promotion to the post of Clerk.
They have made the aforesaid Birinder Singh, as respondent because he was earlier promoted as Clerk.
4.
I have heard learned Counsel for the parties.
Counsel for the petitioner Birender Singh (petitioner in CWP No. 7048 of 1990) has argued that the petitioner was having the required qualifications for the post of Clerk.
He has relied on the rules regulating the Recruitment and Condition of Service of persons appointed to Haryana Excise and Taxation Commissioner's Office (Group-C) Service Rules, 1980 (hereinafter referred to as "the Rules").
Rule 9(h) of the Rules is as under :-  "9(h) in the case of Clerks :- (i) by direct appointment; or (ii) (a) by appointment on seniority-cum-fitness basis, from amongst Restorers, Duplicating Operators and Potedars; and (b) by promotion on seniority-cum-fitness basis from amongst Group D employees of the Commissioner's office and who possess educational qualifications specified in Appendix B for the post of Clerk and have rendered at least five years service on such post, subject to the condition that not more than twenty percent of the posts shall be filled in by this method; or (iii) by transfer or deputation of an official already in the service of any State Government or the Government of India."
The qualification for the post is prescribed in Appendix-B which is as under :-  "Appendix `B'" (See Rule 7) Sr. No.
Designation of Post Academic qualifications and experience if any, for direct recruitment Academic qualification and experience, if any for appointment other by direct recruitment.
1 2 3 4 xx xx xx xx 9.
Clerk (1) Matric Ist Division/Hr.
Secondary 2nd Division/intermediate 2nd Division/ Graduate of a recognised University or equivalent (for ESM Matric only) (i) Five years service as Restorer or Duplicating Operator or Potedar or Group D employees who possess Matriculation or its equivalent qualifications.
(2).
Knowledge of Hindi upto Matric standard.
(3) Should pass the prescribed test in Hindi or English typing at the speed of 25 w.p.m.
or 30 w.p.m., respectively within a period of one year of the appointment.
(ii) Three years service as Clerk in another Government or Department.
5.
Relying on the above mentioned rule and the Appendix, the learned Counsel for the petitioner has argued that the petitioner had the experience of service as Restorer for five years.
Learned counsel for the State argued that the petitioner's experience in the department in which he worked earlier, cannot be taken into consideration because Appendix B requires five years service as Restorer and according to Section 2(e), the Service means "Service in the office of Haryana Excise and Taxation Commissioner's Office".
The said definition is reproduced as below :-  "(a) to (d) xxx xxx xxx (e) "Service" means the Haryana Excise and Taxation Commissioner's Office (Group C) Service."
6.
Similarly the defence of the respondent department in the writ petition filed by Bhushan Lal and Ram Singh (CWP No. 753 of 1990) is that because the petitioners were earlier working in the field office of the Taxation Department, their experience gained by them in that office, cannot be taken into consideration.
Petitioner No. 1 was appointed as Peon on 1471981 and petitioner No. 2 was appointed as such on 4111982 and on 131989 they were transferred to the Head Office.
7.
The short question therefore, in both these petitions is whether the experience gained by the petitioners of these writ petitions in the department/offices in which they worked earlier, can be taken into consideration for promotion as Clerk in the office of Excise and Taxation Commissioner.
8.
Counsel for the petitioner-Birender Singh, has relied on Rule 7 of the Rules.
It is regarding the qualifications for appointment to the Service.
It is as under:-  "7.
No person shall be appointed to the service, unless he is in possession of qualifications and experience specified in column 3 of Appendix B to these rules in the case of direct recruitment and those specified in column 3 of Appendix B to these rules in the case of direct recruitment and those specified in column 4 of the aforesaid Appendix in the case of recruitment, other than by direct recruitment."
9.
This rule deals with appointment to the Service and the qualification of Appendix B have to be fulfilled.
If the appointment in the earlier department/office is not a service in the office of Excise and Taxation Commissioner, then no body can be appointed to the Service because he will not be possessing qualification under Appendix B He has argued that the last column of the Appendix is regarding "academic qualifications and experience, if any, for appointment other than by direct recruitment" and if service as required under the column is to be service in the office of respondent then there cannot be any appointment as such.
10.
Learned counsel for the petitioners have relied on various rulings.
They have relied on the case of SI Rool Lal and another v. Lt.
Governor, Delhi, 2000(1) SCT 630 (SC) : AIR 2000 SC 594.
It has been held therein that regarding seniority in the case of absorbed deputationist, the service rendered in parent department has to be counted.
It has been held therein as under :-  "24.
"It is clear from the ratio laid down in the above case that any Rule, Regulation or Execution Instruction which has the effect of taking away the service rendered by a deputationist in an equivalent cadre in the parent department while counting his seniority in the deputed post would be violative of Arts.
14 and 16 of the Constitution.
Hence, liable to be struck down."
11.
Learned counsel for the petitioners have also relied on the case of K Madhavan and another v. Union of India and others, reported as AIR 1987 SC 2291 and their Lordships in that case have held as under :-  "It will be against all rules of service jurisprudence, if a Government servant holding a particular post is transferred to the same or an equivalent post in another government department, the period of his service in the post before his transfer is not taken into consideration in computing his seniority in the transferred post.
The transfer cannot wipe out his length of service in the post from which he has been transferred.
It has been observed by this court that it is a just and wholesome principles commonly applied where persons from different sources are drafted to serve in a new service that their pre-existing total length of service in the parent department should be respected and presented by taking the same into account in determining their ranking in the new service cadre see RS Mokashi v. IM Menon, 1982(1) SCC 379 : AIR 1982 SC 101; Wing Commander J Kumar v. Union of India, 1982(3) SCR 453 : AIR 1982 SC 1064.
12.
Learned counsel for the petitioners have also relied on the case of Scientific Advisor to Raksha Mantri and another v. VM Joseph, reported as 1998(2) SCT 779 (SC) : 1998(5) SCC 305.
It has been held therein that :-  "From the facts set out above, it will be seen that promotion was denied to the respondent on the post of Senior Storekeeper on the ground that he had completed 3 years of regular service as Storekeeper on 7.6.1980 and, therefore, he could not be promoted earlier than 1980.
In coming to this conclusion, the appellants excluded the period of service rendered by the respondent in the Central Ordnance Depot, Pune, as a Storekeeper for the period from 27.4.1971 to 661977.
The appellants contended that, since the respondent had been transferred on compassionate grounds on his own request to the post of Storekeeper at Cochin and was placed at the bottom of the seniority list, the period of 3 years of regular service can be treated to commence only from the date on which he was transferred to Cochin.
This is obviously fallacious inasmuch as the respondent had already acquired the status of a permanent employee at Pune where he had rendered more than 3 years of service as a Storekeeper.
Even if an employee is transferred at his own request, from one place to another on the same post, the period of service rendered by him at the earlier place where he held a permanent post and had acquired permanent status, cannot be excluded from consideration for determining his eligibility for promotion, though he may have been placed at the bottom of the seniority list at the transferred place.
Eligibility for promotion cannot be confused with seniority list as they are two different and distinct factors."
13.
Learned counsel for the petitioners have also relied on the case of Narinder Singh Baath v. State of Punjab, reported as 1990(2) R.S.J.
344.
It has been held therein as under :-  "Having gone through the written statement filed by the respondents and after hearing the learned Counsel for the parties, I find that the writ petition deserves to be allowed as the stand taken by the respondents is wholly untenable in law.
The interpretation being placed by the respondents on the words "ten years" continuous service under the Government" is not based on any rationale whatsoever nor do the words used in the statutory rule permit such a restricted view to be taken.
Rule 9(5) of the Punjab Civil Services (Executive Branch) (Class-I), Rules, 1976, only requires that before the name of a person can be included in the list, he should - (i) be a confirmed hand; and  (ii) have completed ten years' continuous service under the Government.
Any service which is continuous under the State Government is good enough for the purposes of this Rule.
Emphasis on continuity of service is not in one and the same department on a particular post, but it has to be under the Government, that is, Government of the State of Punjab.
Since the petitioner has served as Inspector, Food and Supplies Department, Punjab from 17th June, 1977 to 14th September, 1979 and 15th and 16th of September, 1979 were holidays being Saturday and Sunday, his joining as Tehsildar on 17th September, 1979, duly maintains his continuity in service under the State Government."
14.
From the principle laid down in the above mentioned judgments, a person's experience in the earlier department cannot be ignored for the purpose of considering eligibility etc.  15.
Hence no valid reason is shown why the petitioner should be ignored for the purpose of promotion.
The petitioners were transferred from earlier department/office and they were possessing the particular experience in that department/office.
The fact that they were transferred to the respondent department, meant that there was a parity in both the departments otherwise, they could not have been transferred.
When this, the position, the experience of the petitioners prior to their transfer to the respondent-department from their parent departments mentioned above, cannot be ignored for the purpose of computing their experience for consideration for promotion as envisaged in Appendix mentioned above.
16.
As a result, these writ petitions are allowed.
The order of reversion of petitioner Birender Singh dated 17.4.1990 is quashed.
Petitioners in Civil Writ Petition No. 753 of 1990 are also held eligible for promotion under the Rules.
The respondents are, therefore, directed to consider their cases for promotion, if they are otherwise also eligible for promotion and possess the requisite seniority.
Petitions allowed.