RL Anand, J. (Oral) - By this order, I disposed of as many as five writ petitions (Nos. 5801 of 1990, 13199 of 1992 and 8306, 8313 and 8317 of 1993) as, in my opinion, all the five writ petitions can be disposed of by one common order.
For the sake of facts, I have taken from C.W.P.
No. 13199 of 1992 Dharam Pal v. The State of Haryana and others, 2002(1) SCT 540 (P&H).
2.
The petitioner Shri Dharam Pal has filed this petition in the nature of mandamus under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India seeking a direction of this Court that the respondents be directed to promote the petitioner as junior engineer with effect from the date when he had completed 10 years of service in the year 1984.
3.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he joined as a Work Inspector in the PWD B&R Department in the year 1969.
He became Work Munshi in November 1972 and joined the P.W.D.
Public Health Branch.
In the year 1975 he was promoted to the post of Work Mistry and thereafter in January 1976 he became the Work Inspector.
The case of the petitioner is that as per the rules then prevalent before 1986, 10% posts of junior engineers were supposed to be filled from the Surveyor/Work Mistry/Sub Divisional Mechanics/water works superintendents/work inspectors etc.
According to the petitioner, he was eligible to the post of a junior engineer on the completion of 10 years of service, but the department had not considered his case for promotion.
Resultantly, the writ petitions.
4.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
They filed the written statement and the main defence of the respondents is that in the year 1986 rules have been amended vide which certain essential qualifications have been laid down for the post of Junior Engineer by way of promotion.
Since the petitioner did not fulfil the requisite qualifications, therefore, he has no right to say that he should be considered for the post of Junior Engineer.
5.
I have heard Shri I.S.
Balhara, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner and Shri Vijay Dahiya, learned AAG on behalf of the respondents and with their assistance, have gone through the record of this case.
6.
The basic principle of law is that amendment in the rules or any legislation made by the government invariably has to be applied prospectively and not retrospectively unless the intention is to the contrary.
The Haryana Public Works Department, Public Health Branch, Junior Engineers (Group-C) Service Rules, 1986 came into force vide Notification dated 8121986.
Prior to that the establishment of overseers, re-designated as Junior Engineer, was governed by the Punjab Public Works Department Building and Road Branch Subordinate Engineering Service Rules, 1943.
7.
It is the case of the petitioner that there were certain posts of Junior Engineers which were lying vacant before the Rule of 1986 came into force i.e. before the amendment of the rules and in order to fulfil those posts of Junior Engineers, the old criteria and eligibility formula has to be applied.
Since the petitioner was qualified and eligible for the post of Junior Engineer, therefore, he should be promoted subject to his service record, especially a recommendation was made to the higher authorities that the petitioner is in a position to discharge the obligation and duty of the post of Junior Engineer.
There is a merit in the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
The rule of 1986 can only apply prospectively and it cannot deprive those persons who had already got the right to be considered for promotion.
8.
In this view of the matter, I dispose of all the five writ petitions by giving directions to the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner(s) for promotion to the post of Junior Engineer(s) and if some posts were in existence prior to coming into force the Rules of 1986, those posts should be filled by applying the old criteria for the purpose of eligibility and the record prior to coming into force the rules vide Notification dated 8th December 1986 shall be taken into consideration.
This exercise shall be completed by the respondents within six months.
With these observations and directions, all the five writ petitions stands disposed of.
Petitions disposed of.