BJ Shethna, J - The appellant who is original petitioner filed writ petition No. 2220/1996 before this Court on 3796 and prayed that the respondents may be directed to appoint him as Lower Division Clerk (LDC) under the Rajasthan Recruitment of Dependants of Government Servant (Dying While in Service) Rules, 1975 on the ground that his mother Smt. Rajkumari Bhati, who was serving as Assistant Teacher with the respondent-Department died while in service on 29288, therefore, he being dependant of his mother, he should be given appointment as LDC.
The learned Single Judge dismissed the writ petition by his impugned judgment and order dated 17399.
The same is challenged in this special appeal by the appellant-original petitioner.
2.
It may be stated that the deceased mother as well as father of the appellant both were serving.
The mother was serving as Assistant Teacher with the respondent department whereas father was serving as Clerk with Rajasthan State Electricity Board.
His mother died way back on 29288 and at that time, the appellant was minor.
When his father was very much alive and was also in service, then it can never be said that he was dependant of his mother.
Being minor child, he would be dependent of his father rather than mother.
Application dated 2694 (Annex.
2) shows that the appellant passed his Secondary School Examination in the year 1990 i.e. after the death of his mother.
This was not possible if he was not dependant of his father and maintained by his father.
Merely because he was eligible to get service in the year 1994 that does not mean that he was entitled to get employment of compassionate ground as a matter of right.
3.
In our considered opinion, when father of the appellant was actually in service and mother died while in service then it cannot be said that the appellant being son would be dependant of his mother and not of his father.
One of us (BJ Shethna, J) has taken this view in writ petition No. 24/96 decided on 7197.
Rule 5 of the Rules of 1975 is reproduced by the appellant in his writ petition at page 5, therefore, we would not like to reproduce the same.
However, Rule 2(f) of the Rules clearly defines `family', which reads as under :  "Family" means the family of the deceased Govt. Servant and shall include wife or husband, sons and unmarried or widow daughters, who were dependent on the deceased Government servant."
(emphasis supplied) 4.
Unless and until, the appellant establishes that he was not dependent of his father, but he was dependant of his mother, he would not be entitled to seek appointment on compassionate ground on the death of his mother.
5.
In view of the above discussion, the present appeal fails and is hereby dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.