JS Khehar, J - Kusum Chaudhary, respondent No. 4 herein, was appointed against the post of Head Mistress in the Bharti Kanya Senior Secondary School, Kath Mandi, Rohtak, on 29121998.
Her appointment order expressly indicated that her appointment was in the grade on Rs. 2000-60-2300-75-2900-EB-100-3500 plus usual allowances sanctioned by the Haryana Government.
The terms and conditions of her appointment which were indicated in the order of appointment dated 29121998 are extracted hereunder :-  "TERMS AND CONDITIONS 1.
She shall be on probation for a period of one year in accordance with the rules which can be extended for such further period by the competent authority under the rules may determine.
2.
In case of resignation or discharge on grounds other than abolition of post or disciplinary actions shall be given one months notice or paid one month's pay with allowances in lieu thereof on either side subject to the fulfilment of other conditions of service.
3.
No TA/DA will be admissible for joining the post.
4.
Before assuming the charge of duties, she shall be required to produce the following certificate to the institution/Management :- i) Medical Certificate of fitness from qualified registered medical practitioner.
ii) Attested copies of academic and professional qualifications with matriculation certificate, and iii) A certificate of good character from a gazetted officer/MLA/MC.
5.
If she has not been vaccinated with the last  months she should have done before reporting for duty.
If the above terms and conditions are accepted to her she should join her duty immediately/within a week."
2.
The petitioner herein i.e. the Managing Committee of Bharti Shiksha Samiti (Regd.)
(hereinafter referred to as the Managing Committee) passed a resolution on 1552000 terminating the services of Kusum Chaudhary.
She challenged the aforesaid order of termination by filing CWP No. 7184 of 2000 in this Court.
During the pendency of the aforesaid petition, the Managing Committee decided to withdraw the order of termination with liberty to take further action against Kusum Chaudhary in accordance with law.
Accordingly, a short reply was filed on behalf of the Managing Committee based on its aforesaid decision.
In view of the withdrawal of the resolution on the basis of whcih the services of respondent No. 4 were terminated, CWP No. 7184 of 2000 was disposed of as having been rendered infructuous.
3.
On 1362000, the Managing Committee i.e. the petitioner herein, issued a show cause notice to Kusum Chaudhary, inter-alia, informing her that the factual position disclosed by her in respect of her earlier experience on the basis of which her claim was considered for appointment as Head Mistress during the process of selection, was incorrect and was based on bogus certificates.
Kusum Chaudhary responded to the aforesaid show cause notice through a reply dated 172000, wherein she denied the aforesaid allegations.
She also denied the validity of the other claims addressed to her in the show cause notice dated 1362000.
After considering her reply, the Managing Committee terminated her service vide order dated 1572000.
4.
Kusum Chaudhary impugned the order of termination dated 1572000 before the District Education Officer, Rohtak.
On 1782000, the District Education Officer, Rohtak, upheld her claim and set aside the order of termination dated 1572000 primarily on account of the fact that the Managing Committee had not followed the procedure envisaged under section 3 of Haryana Aided Schools (Security of Service) Act, 1971 (hereinafter referred to as `the 1971 Act') and Rule 28 of Haryana Aided Schools (Security of Service) Rules, 1974 (hereinafter referred to as `the 1974 Rule).
5.
Dissatisfied with the order of District Education Officer, Rohtak, dated 1782000, the Managing Committee, preferred an appeal before the Director, Secondary Education, Haryana, Chandigarh.
The aforesaid appeal was dismissed on 382001.
The Managing Committee i.e. the petitioner herein has impugned the order passed by the District Education Officer, Rohtak, dated 1782000 and that by the Director, Secondary Education, Haryana, dated 382001 through the instant petition.
6.
In order to appreciate the conclusions drawn in the impugned orders it is necessary to examine the scope of Section 3 of the 1971 Act, which is being reproduced hereunder for facility of reference :-  "3.
Procedure of punishing employees of aided schools :- (1) No employee shall be dismissed or removed or reduced in rank except after an enquiry in which he has been informed of the charges against him and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of those charges and where it is proposed, after such enquiry to impose on him any such penalty, until he has been given a reasonable opportunity of making representation on the penalty proposed, but only on the basis of the evidence adduced during such enquiry : Provided that this section shall not apply where an employee is dismissed or removed or reduced in rank on the ground of conduct which has led to his conviction on a criminal charge involving moral turpitude.
(2) No order of dismissal or reduction in rank of an employee shall effect unless it has been confirmed by the District Education Officer who may refuse to do so, if in his opinion, the provisions of sub-section (1) have not been complied with.
(3) An employee against whom an order of the nature specified in sub-section (1) is passed without complying with the provision of sub-section (1) or sub- section (2) may, within a period of thirty days of the date of communication of the order, make an application to the District Education Officer challenging such an order on the ground that he is an employee to whom the provisions of sub-section (1) and sub-section (2) apply and the District Education Officer may, after giving the parties an opportunity of being heard and after making such further enquiry as he may think fit, make an order refusing the application or setting aside the impugned order."
7.
A perusal of the aforesaid provision leaves no manner of doubt that the services of an employee cannot be terminated except after an enquiry in which he/she has been informed of the charges levelled against him/her and has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of those charges during the course of a regular enquiry.
In fact Rule 28 of the 1974 Rules delineates the procedure to be followed while holding a regular departmental enquiry.
For reasons of brevity, it is not considered appropriate to extract herein the aforesaid rule.
Undoubtedly, the decision of the Managing committee is based, inter-alia, on the fact that respondent No. 4 had not correctly disclosed the factual position about her earlier experience when she applied to the Managing Committee for appointment against the post of Head Mistress.
In fact in the opinion of the Managing Committee, the factual position disclosed by her in writing in respect of her earlier experience was incorrect and was based on bogus certificates.
It is, therefore, evident that the order of termination dated 1572000 was based, inter-alia, on the aforesaid misconduct alleged against respondent No. 4.
That being so, in terms of Section 3 of the 1971 Act, before terminating her services, the Managing Committee was required to hold a regular departmental enquiry by following the procedure envisaged under rule 24 of the 1974 Rules.
Since that has admittedly not been done, the order of termination dated 1572000 must be deemed to have been passed in violation of the provisions of the 1971 Act read with the 1974 Rules.
8.
For the reasons recorded above, we find no infirmity in the orders dated 1782000 and 382001 passed by the District Education Officer, Rohtak, and the Director, Secondary Education, Haryana, respectively.
The instant petition being devoid of merit is dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.