SS Sudhalkar, J - Petitioner joined as a Clerk in the Joint Punjab State in the District Exchange, on the recommendation of Subordinate Service Selection Board (SSSB) on 151963.
Thereafter, on May 8, 1965, he was transferred to Finance Department of Haryana Government with effect from 8.5.1965 and since then, he is continuing in that Department and contends that he is a permanent member of the services of the Finance Department.
He was sent on deputation w.e.f.
1111966 in the Union Territory, Chandigarh where he remained upto July 31, 1978.
He was promoted as Assistant on 10.9.1967 and he remained as such till his repatriation i.e. 3171978.
On repatriation, he was appointed as Clerk as he was at the time of his sending on deputation w.e.f 181978.
The petitioner represented against his appointment as Clerk because juniors to him i.e. respondent No. 3 was promoted as Assistant w.e.f.
141976.
During the service of Union Territory, Chandigarh, the petitioner was implicated in a criminal case under Section 420 IPC regarding passing of forged bill.
However, he contends that he was honourably acquitted.
The State had taken a decision not to challenge the order of acquittal.
After the conclusion of the criminal case, the petitioner took up his case with the respondent for promotion from the date his juniors were promoted.
However, the Government did not allow the petitioner to cross the Efficiency Bar.
However, subsequently he was allowed to cross the Efficiency Bar form the date he was entitled to be allowed to cross the same i.e. from 14.7.1975, the order regarding the same is dated 2241988 (copy Annexure P-2).
The petitioner is aggrieved of being superseded by respondent No. 3 who is junior to him for promotion as Assistant Superintendent with effect from 2981980 and subsequently as Assistant Treasury Officer w.e.f.
4111982.
The petitioner was of course promoted as Assistant on 871987 w.e.f.
1171980.
Vide this writ petition, he has prayed that order Annexure P-4 rejecting his representation, an order Annexure P-5 regarding promotion of respondent No. 4 to the post of officiating Assistant of Ambala Treasury and order Annexure P-6 promoting respondent No. 3 as Assistant Superintendent Treasury and prayed that he may be promoted from the date his junior was promoted.
2.
Respondents No. 1 and 2 in the written statement have inter alia contended as under :-  "In reply to para 8 of the writ petition, it is submitted that at the time of promotion of Clerks to the post of Assistants during the year 1975-76, he had earned 10 reports out of which, 8 were average and 2 were good and apart form that, he was under suspension at that time.
And again, during the year 1977-78 (29.11.1977) when his case was again considered for promotion along with others, apart from being under suspension, he had 8 average and 2 good reports as would be apparent from his service record at Annexure `R'.
Again, on 16.6.1980 while considering the case of Clerks for promotion to the post of Assistants he had earned 50% good reports but as already submitted above, till the conclusion of criminal proceedings against him, he could not be promoted but it was decided to keep a post for him and on being exonerated of all charges by the court, he was promoted to the post of Assistant with effect from 1171980 from the date his junior Shri Deep Chand had been promoted."
The petitioner contends that both the petitioner and respondent No. 3 belong to Scheduled Caste category.
The respondents have not, in reply, controverted the statement of the petitioner that respondent No. 3 is junior to the petitioner and that both petitioner and respondent No. 3 belong to the Scheduled Caste category.
The question of caste may not have any importance in this case when the petitioner alleges that both, he and respondent No. 3 belong to the same category and that respondent No. 3 is junior and is promoted w.e.f.
1976.
When it is not shown that respondent No. 3 is not junior to the petitioner, the question to be seen is why the petitioner is not promoted.
3.
As stated earlier, the petitioner was facing a criminal trial and he was acquitted.
If this was the only reason for not promoting him, after the acquittal, the petitioner got a right to be considered for promotion.
It is to be seen that there was no departmental enquiry against the petitioner for the charges, which were levelled in the criminal complaint.
4.
The question of adverse remark against the petitioner now remains to be considered.
The petitioner has stated in para No. 11 of the writ petition that no adverse report has ever been communicated to him.
In reply to para No. 11, in the written statement, this averment is not controverted.
It is, of course, mentioned that the record of service of the petitioner was not satisfactory and criminal proceedings were pending against him and hence his name could not be considered along with respondent No. 3.
The petitioner has again made a statement in the replication that no adverse report has ever been communicated.
If the average reports are considered against an employee for consideration for promotion, then they are adverse, and have to be communicated to the employee and when they are not communicated to the employee concerned, he cannot be denied promotion based on the ground of said adverse report.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that the principle of earning 50% good reports is not applicable to the Scheduled Caste category persons.
I do not accept this argument in view of the fact that no such rule has been shown to me.
However, when the adverse report is not communicated, the petitioner cannot be deprived of promotion because of average reports.
6.
As a result, this writ petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to consider the case of petitioner for all the promotions, which he would be entitled to from the date(s), respondent No. 3 was promoted.
Petition allowed.