JS Narang, J - The petitioner was appointed as a Clerk w.e.f.
3.10.1971 in the Department of Food and Supplies, Haryana.
He was promoted as Junior Auditor w.e.f.
1531973 and was confirmed in the said post vide order dated 2121982.
He was placed in the grade of Rs. 525-1050.
Subsequently, the pay scales of the post of Junior Auditor and that of the Statistical Assistant and Accountant stood defined as the same.
The post held by petitioner was redesignated as Statistical Assistant vide order dated July 31, 1982.
The next promotion from the post of Assistant/Statistical Assistant/Accountant was to the post of Deputy Superintendent/Assistant Food and Supplies Officer.
The services of the petitioner were governed under the rules known as Haryana Food and Supplies Department Sub Offices Group C Rules, 1982 (hereinafter referred to as "the Rules").
Promotion to the post of Deputy Superintendent could be made in pursuant to rule 9 of the Rules and that is case of reserved categories rule 19 of the rules was/is applicable.
It shall be apposite to notice the above said rules which read as under :-  "9.
(1) Method of Recruitment  Recruitment to the service shall be made, - (a) in the case of Superintendent, by promotion from amongst Deputy Superintendents; (b) in the case of Deputy Superintendent, by promotion from amongst Assistants, Statistical Assistants and Accountants.
Their inter se seniority for the purpose of promotion shall be determined by the date of their continuous appointment as such; (c) xxx xxx xxx xxx" 19.
Reservations Nothing contained in these rules shall effect reservations and other concessions required to be provided for Scheduled Castes and others Backward Classes in accordance with the orders issued by the State Government in this regard from time to time under clause (4) of Article 16 of the Constitution."
2.
The Government of Haryana issued instructions vide letter No. 38/20/78-2- GSI dated February 9, 1979 regarding reservation of posts for Scheduled Caste and Backward Class and other ex-servicemen under the Service of State of Haryana.
In pursuant to these instructions 20% promotional posts in Class-III and Class-IV were to be reserved for the Scheduled Caste to be filled on the basis of seniority-cum-merit.
A roster of 100 was to be prepared and in accordance thereof the posts at No. 4, 8, 14, 18, 24, 28, 34, 38, 42, 50, 54, 58, 64, 68, 74, 78, 84, 88, 92 and 100, would be reserved for the employees belonging to the reserved category.
In accordance with these instructions, the posts on the reserved point if not filled on account of non-availability of eligible candidates would be carried forward for two recruitment years.
A copy of the said instructions has been appended as Annexure P3.
3.
The petitioner belongs to the reserved category of Scheduled Caste and has, therefore, claimed entitlement to be considered for the post of Deputy Superintendent/Assistant Food and Supplies Officer against the reserved roster point.
It is contended that since the issuance of the aforesaid instructions, only one post has been filled up from amongst the candidates belonging to the category of Scheduled Caste, namely Sri Ishar Dass Khan.
It is admitted case of the petitioner that Shri Ishar Dass Khan was senior to the petitioner on September 30, 1984.
After him, the petitioner is the senior most Statistical Assistant amongst eligible candidates for promotion to the post of Deputy Superintendent/Assistant Food and Supplies Officer from amongst candidates belonging to the reserved category.
The claim is that he is entitled to be considered for promotion against the vacancies at roster points i.e. No. 8 and 14 which have fallen to the share of the reserved category.
It is claimed that the petitioner has excellent service record and is eligible as per the conditions provided in the rules and is, therefore, entitled to be considered for promotion.
4.
The total strength of the cadre of Deputy Superintendent in the Sub Offices (Field Staff) is five.
Only one post out of the aforesaid five posts has been given to Scheduled Caste category.
The total posts of Assistant Food and Supplies Officer in the Sub Offices (Field Staff) are 81, out of which 10 posts are manned by the candidates belonging to the category of Scheduled Caste.
It is further the claim that total posts of Superintendents in the Sub-Offices (Field Staff) are 8 and that none is occupied by any candidate belonging to the reserved category.
Thus, Shri Ishar Dass Khan, Deputy Superintendent and the petitioner are, therefore, entitled to be promoted to the post of Superintendent.
In the first instance, petitioner claims promotion to the post of Deputy Superintendent and thereafter to the post of Superintendent.
5.
The petitioner made various representations to the Government and also issued justice demand notice dated 1691988, copy of which has been appended as Annexure P4.
The official respondents have neither communicated any decision upon the representation of the petitioner nor any reply has been sent to the justice demand notice.
On account of inaction on the part of the Government, the present petition has been filed seeking issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner to the roster point meant for the reserved category.
6.
On the other hand, stand of the Government is that admittedly the petitioner was re-designated as Statistical Assistant vide order dated 3171982.
The 4th post as per the roster has been treated as dereserved as no candidate was available and, therefore, promotion was made from the General Category.
So far as 8th post is concerned, Shri Ishar Dass Khan belonging to Scheduled Caste category has been promoted.
Therefore, there is no shortfall of representation in the Scheduled Caste category in the cadre of Deputy Superintendents.
However, the case has been set up by the official respondents that the petitioner can be considered against 14th post of Deputy Superintendent and that the said point has not been reached as yet.
As and when the said point is reached, the petitioner would be considered accordingly.
So far as the post of Assistant Food and Supplies Officer is concerned after 1979 only one post has been filled up from the ministerial staff of Field Offices and that has gone to the candidate belonging to the Scheduled Caste on the basis of seniority-cum-merit.
As such, the petitioner does not have any claim upon the said post.
7.
Petitioner, controverted the claim of the official respondents and filed an affidavit dated July 11, 2000 and it is claimed that Shri Ishar Dass Khan who was admittedly senior to the petitioner was entitled to roster vacancy No. 4 and the petitioner being next in seniority in the said category was entitled to be given vacancy No. 8, as the quota of the Scheduled Caste category in the cadre was not filled up at that time when the petitioner had become eligible on July 31, 1985.
8.
The State has filed an affidavit dated July 25, 2001 vide which it has been stated that 11 vacancies of Deputy Superintendents were filled up from September 2, 1981 to November 20, 1985 against the five sanctioned posts of Deputy Superintendents.
Thus, out of five sanctioned posts of Deputy Superintendents only one post as per prescribed percentage i.e. 20% goes to Scheduled Caste category.
In September 1981, the case of Scheduled Caste category was considered against 4th and 8th point of roster but no employee belonging to the said category was found eligible as none of them fulfilled the condition of prescribed experience of three years as Statistical Assistant/Assistant.
The petitioner had been promoted as Statistical Assistant on July 31, 1982.
Resultantly, the 4th point was de-reserved and offered to the General Category in accordance with the 1979 instructions.
It was on June 12, 1984, Shri Ishar Dass Khan, Assistant who belongs to the Scheduled Caste category and is also senior to the petitioner was promoted as Deputy Superintendent.
The petitioner was also considered in June 1984 in the penal of Scheduled Caste candidates but not found eligible as he had not completed the prescribed experience of three years service as Statistical Assistant.
It is further averred that Shri Ishar Dass Khan was promoted against 8th point and that 4th point was considered extinguished.
It is further averred that the cadre strength of Deputy Superintendents in the field offices of Food and Supplies, Haryana, remained five upto January, 1990 and further raised to 8 w.e.f.
January 19, 1990 due to creation of new posts of Deputy Superintendents for newly created districts.
It is also averred that against 5/8 sanctioned posts, 20 vacancies occurred and were filled.
It is admitted that out of these vacancies 4th, 8th, 14th and 18th were meant for Scheduled Caste category but during this period commencing from February 9, 1997 the three Scheduled Caste candidates have been given promotion on reserved points.
It is stated that 4th point was de-reserved due to non- availability of Scheduled Caste candidates, 8th point vacancy was carried forward for two recruitment years and consequently Sh. Ishar Dass Khan was promoted against this reserved point on 1261984.
So far as 14th point is concerned, this vacancy is stated to have been filled by General Category candidate on November 2, 1985 because at that time roster was discontinued as per Government instructions dated August 22, 1985 due to completion of prescribed 20% percentage in the cadre of Deputy Superintendents.
Roster was not operated from June 13, 1984 to January 18, 1990, as the prescribed percentage of 20% out of five posts of Deputy Superintendent was completed i.e. one as per Government institutions dated August 22, 1985.
9.
During the course of arguments, vide order dated 1072001, State had been directed to file a detailed affidavit specifically stating as to how many posts of Deputy Superintendents have been filled up in the block of 100 posts and how the roster points at No. 4, 8, 14 and 18 and so on have been filled up in the reserved category and on what date the said points became available for the reserved category.
The exercise was directed to be carried out with effect from 1979 upto date.
The aforesaid affidavit dated July 25, 2000, has been filed.
The averment contained therein have been noticed above.
10.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that as per the averments contained in para 5 of the aforesaid affidavit, he is entitled to be considered at roster point 14, which is meant for scheduled caste category, he had become eligible on July 31, 1985 which fact has not been controverted by the official-respondents.
Surprisingly, this vacancy has been filled up by General category candidates on November 2, 1985 because at that time roster was discontinued as per the instructions dated August 22, 1985 issued by the Government of Haryana and that the prescribed percentage of 20% was to be sent out of five posts of Deputy Superintendents and, therefore, the percentage having been accomplished, the roster point became inoperative.
It is argued that as per the admission of the Government, 20 vacancies have occurred and they have been filled in accordingly.
It has also been admitted that out of these vacancies 4th, 8th, 14th and 18th points were meant for Scheduled Caste category and that during this period three Scheduled Caste candidates have been given promotion on reserved points.
It is absolutely not clear as to how and why the 14th point has been passed over to General Category candidate especially when the petitioner became eligible on July 31, 1985 and that as per the admission of the Government the vacancies at points 4, 8, 14 and 18 were meant for Scheduled Caste category.
Admittedly 4th point had been de- reserved and became extinguished as no eligible candidate from the Scheduled Caste was available despite the carry forward formula having been applied for two years but the right of reserved category is to be reserved on the next point unless the said category exceed the limit of 20% no such claim has been specifically disclosed in the affidavit.
It is the admitted case of the Government that 20 vacancies had occurred and were filled, despite clear categoric instructions of the Government, the petitioner has not been considered for promotion to the post of Deputy Superintendent at Roster point 14 despite the fact that he had become eligible on 3171985.
The claim of the petitioner has been incorrectly denied at Roster point 14.
It shall be apposite to notice the stand of the Government as projected in para 5 of the affidavit dated 2572001 which reads as under :-  "5.
Since 921979 against the 5/8 sanctioned posts 20 vacancies were occurred/filled as shown in Annexure "A".
Out of these vacancies 4th, 8th, 14th and 18th were meant for Scheduled Caste category, but during this period the 3 Scheduled Caste candidates have been given promotion on reserved points as detailed below :- 4th, Point : De-reserved due to non-availability of SC candidate.
8th, Point : This vacancy was first carry forward for two recruitment years and consequently Sh. Ishar Dass Khan at Serial No. 11 of roster was promoted against this reserved post on 1261984.
14th Point : This vacancy was filled up by General category candidate on 2.11.1985 because at that time roster was discontinued as per provision contained in Haryana Government instructions dated 2281985, copy enclosed as Annexure D due to completion of prescribed 20% percentage in the cadre of five Deputy Superintendents.
Roster was not operated from 1361984 to 18.1.1990 as the prescribed percentage of 20% out of 5 posts of Deputy Superintendent was complete i.e. one as per Government instructions dated 2281985.
18th Point : That on 1911990 after increase in the cadre strength of Deputy Superintendent from 5 to 8, the roster was revived and Sh. Daulat Ram i.e. petitioner was to be adjusted against this reserved point.
Whereas he had already been given promotion at Serial No. 11 of the point meant for General category.
24th Point : Shri Ram Dhan Scheduled Caste candidate should have been adjusted at this point but he had been given promotion against 20th point of roster of General category on 711993 due to fall in prescribed 20% percentage of Scheduled Caste in the cadre of Deputy Superintendents consequent upon promotion of Ishar Dass (SC) Deputy Superintendent to the post of Superintendent on 3091992."
11.
I have considered the rival contentions of learned Counsel for the parties.
I am not at all convinced by the stand taken by the Government.
It has been categorically admitted that out of the vacancies 4, 8, 14 and 18 roster points were meant for Scheduled Caste category but it is not understood how it is projected that three Scheduled Caste candidates had been given promotion on the reserved points, whereas to the contrary till November 2, 1985, only one person belonging to Scheduled Caste category had been adjusted against roster point 8, Shri Ishar Dass Khan who was promoted on 1261984.
Admittedly, the petitioner had become eligible on 3171985 and was, therefore, eligible to be appointed upon roster point 14 meant for Scheduled Caste category.
It has not been categorically disclosed as to how the percentage of 20% can be said to have been arrived at by appointment of Shri Ishar Dass Khan on June 12, 1984.
It has also not been explained as to when the roster point 14 became available for Scheduled Caste category.
I had categorically required that it should be disclosed as to on what date the post became available for the said reserved category but no such information has been provided by way of affidavit.
According to me, it is total misreading of the statute regarding the vacancies which have occurred in the post of Deputy Superintendent and there is no clear projection made by the Government by way of affidavit dated 2572001.
In the absence of a clear categoric disclosure as to when the post became available for the reserved category, I am left with no other alternative but to draw adverse inference to the effect that a vacancy was available as on 3111985, when the petitioner became eligible to be considered for promotion to the post of Deputy Superintendent and that too against point 14.
This point could not be rolled out for the General Category candidate as the case of the petitioner has not been considered at all against this point.
Only plea has been taken that as per Government instructions dated August 22, 1985, due to completion of prescribed 20% percentage in the cadre of Deputy Superintendents, roster was not operated and that it became operational in the year 1990, but by that time the petitioner already stood promoted by placing him at Serial No. 17 of the point meant for General Category.
The affidavit is a miserable effort to circumvent the clear information which had been asked for by this Court.
12.
In view of the above, petition is allowed and the official respondents are directed to consider the case of the petitioner for promotion to the post of Deputy Superintendent at Roster point 14 meant for Scheduled Caste category accepting him to have become eligible on July 31, 1985.
Upon such consideration if found suitable in accordance with the provisions of law, he shall be deemed to have earned promotion at Roster point 14 with effect from the date he became eligible to be considered i.e. July 31, 1985.
The exercise for considering the case of the petitioner shall be carried out within a period of six months from the date of receipt of a copy of this judgment.
Upon having been found suitable and upon his appointment as such, he shall be entitled to all consequential benefits as well with effect from the date he is deemed to be appointed accordingly.
No costs.
Petition allowed.