RL Anand, J - This is the second writ petition of Jaidev Singh, ASI against the State of Haryana and others vide which the petitioner has challenged the order dated 3032001 (Annexure P-2) vide which he has been prematurely retired.
I may make a mention that vide my separate judgment of even date one writ petition of Jaidev Singh, ASI as been dismissed by me in which he challenged the adverse report for the period 171991 to 3131992.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he was enrolled as Constable in the Haryana Police on 28101967.
He was promoted in the year 1975 as Head Constable and was promoted as Asstt.
Sub-Inspector in the year 1984.
He had been working to the utmost satisfaction of his seniors and in the year 1991 he was posted in District Sonipat at Police Stations Baroda and Kharkhoda and Sonipat.
His confidential report was adversely entered by the then SP, Sonipat for the reasons best known to him.
The petitioner filed a detailed representation before the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Rohtak Range, Rohtak in the year 1992 in which he has given the detailed explanation why his Annual Confidential Report has been spoiled by the Superintendent of Police, Sonipat Mr. SS Deswal.
The representation of the petitioner was rejected by a single word "considered and rejected".
According to the petitioner, his representation was rejected in a mechanical manner.
Prior to the rejection of the representation, the Deputy Inspector General had punished the petitioner by refusing to grant increment though there was nothing against the petitioner.
Consequently, the petitioner filed another revision petition/mercy petition-cum-representation to the Director General of Police which was also rejected on the ground that it was not maintainable.
According to the petitioner, his record of service was very good throughout and in the month of June, 1991 he was awarded a commendation certificate by the Deputy Inspector General of Police for doing exceptional work.
The grouse of the petitioner is that the respondents have ordered his retirement in clear violation of the law and facts of the case under Rule 9.18(1) of the Punjab Police Rules.
Before ordering his retirement in public interest the petitioner has not been given any opportunity to represent his case.
The opinion to retire the petitioner is not based on facts.
The order of retirement cannot be sustained in the eyes of law as it is void ab initio as no material whatsoever has been shown to the petitioner or considered by the Superintendent of Police.
The order has been passed by the Superintendent of Police without the prior approval of the Deputy Inspector General of Police.
As the Superintendent of Police is not competent to pass such order of retirement, therefore it cannot be sustained in the eyes of law.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents, who filed the reply and denied the allegations.
According to the respondents, it was to the information of the Reporting Officer that the petitioner is indulging in unfair dealing with the public.
It was also known to him that the petitioner was accepting illegal gratification from liquor vendors and the local satta gamblers.
The petitioner was reprimanded personally.
He was transferred to Police Station Sonipat where too the petitioner continued with his nefarious activities.
The Inspector, Police Station, City Sonipat was always critical of the petitioner.
He did not assign any important work to him.
The petitioner extorted Rs. 10,000/- from the accused party in case FIR No. 122 of 1991 under Section 302/34 IPC The accused party belonged to village Nooran Khera.
The matter was also brought to the notice of Mr. SS Deswal, IPS.
He brought the facts to the knowledge of the Reporting Officer i.e.
Superintendent of Police, Sonipat.
He deputed Deputy Superintendent of Police, Gohana to verify the facts.
The petitioner has to return the money to the accused party.
The petitioner also apologised before the Superintendent of Police, Sonipat that the would not indulge in such like activities in future.
The adverse entry was recorded against the petitioner and it was conveyed to him.
The petitioner has coined a cock and bull story.
The petitioner made a representation against the adverse remarks which has been rightly rejected.
His representation was rejected after carefully considering all the material and not in a mechanical manner.
As the record of the petitioner was not good, he was awarded different punishments from time to time.
The competent authority under Rule 121 has issued the order of premature retirement to the petitioner.
Appropriate opportunity of hearing was given to the petitioner as is clear from the order dated 3032001.
The petitioner has not made any representation against the above order.
He has come to the Court straightaway.
The order dated 3032001 is legal and the petitioner is not entitled to remain in service after 3062001.
4.
In support of his case the petitioner has placed on record order Annexure P-2, dated 3032001.
5.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance have gone through the record of this case.
6.
The challenge in this writ petition has been given to Annexure P-2, which runs as follows :-  "Where I Superintendent of Police, Sonipat is of the opinion that it is in the public interest to retire Sh. Jaidev Singh, Assistant Sub-Inspector No. 154/RR Department of Police from service after he attaining the age of 55 years on 3062001 AN by giving him three months notice being his date of birth 30646.
Now therefore in pursuance of the provision contained in rule 9.18(1) of the Police Rules and Rule 3.26(3) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume-I, Part 1, as applicable to the State of Haryana, I Superintendent of Police, Sonipat in the public interest hereby ordered that Sh. Jaidev Singh No. 154/RR shall stand retired from service under the State Govt. of Haryana on the expiring of three months passed from the date of receipt of this order by him i.e. 3062001 AN.
Sd/.
Superintendent of Police, Sonipat."
7.
The above would show that the order has been passed in public interest by the Superintendent of Police.
The term "public interest" has not been defined in the Police Rules nor in the Civil Services Rules but it is always a question of fact.
It is the specific case of the respondents that the petitioner had been indulging in nefarious activities.
He has been taking illegal gratification from bootleggers and had taken Rs. 10,000/- from the accused party in case FIR No. 122 of 1991 under Section 302/34 IPC registered at Police Station Baroda.
The matter came to the notice of Shri SS Deswal, IPS, who brought the matter to the notice of the Reporting Officer, who in turn deputed Deputy Superintendent of Police, Gohana to verify the facts.
The petitioner has to return the money and he apologised before the Reporting Officer.
The Police Department is a department of discipline.
It has vast powers which are supposed to be exercised in a honest manner.
If a police officer indulges in corruption and if he is retired, it is always in the public interest.
There was an adverse entry against the petitioner of corruption.
The petitioner made a representation which was rejected.
He filed an appeal which was also rejected.
Vide my separate judgment of even date, I have upheld that adverse report.
8.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has vehemently submitted that the impugned order of compulsory retirement has been passed by the Superintendent of Police, Sonipat, who is not competent to pass the same.
According to the petitioner, only the Deputy Inspector General of Police has the jurisdiction to pass such order.
In support of his contention the learned counsel for the petitioner relied upon a judgment of the Hon'ble Division Bench passed in C.W.P.
No. 11606 of 1999, SI Amar Singh v. State of Haryana and others.
This judgment is not helpful to the petitioner.
As per the Police Rule 121, the Appointing Authority of the Asstt.
Sub-Inspector is Superintendent of Police.
It is not shown on the record that the petitioner was promoted to the post of Asstt.
Sub-Inspector by the Deputy Inspector General of Police.
The promotion order has not been placed on the record for the reasons bets known to the petitioner.
Once it is held that the Superintendent of Police is the Appointing Authority of the petitioner, therefore, I do not see any illegality in the order Annexure P-2 when it has been issued by the Superintendent of Police.
Resultantly, I am of the considered opinion that there is no merit in this writ petition which is hereby dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.