RL Anand, J. (Oral) - Shmt.
Kalawati Devi retired as a Craft Teacher has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India seeking a direction of this Court against the respondents that they be directed to grant revised pay scale of Rs. 950-1500 to the petitioner w.e.f.
111986.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that she was appointed as a Craft Teacher in the Panchayat Samiti Ateli Nangal on 2461964.
She was made regular on 1231983 and worked as Craft Teacher in Nangal Chaudhary.
She retired from service of the Panchayat Samiti at the age of 58 years on 661990.
Vide government letter dated 861988, the respondents had directed the Panchayat Samitis in Haryana to give new pay scales w.e.f.
111986 to the Craft Teachers working under the Panchayat Samitis after passing a Resolution.
On 581987 the Panchayat Samiti Ateli Nangal unanimously passed a resolution and allowed the new pay scale of Rs. 950-1500 w.e.f.
111986 to both the Craft Teacher and Samiti Patwaris with clear directions to the Executive Officer, Panchayat Samiti to do the needful.
3.
In short, the case set up by the petitioner is that since she has retired from service on 661990 and the revised grade was made applicable to her service when she was serving in Nangal Chaudhary, therefore, she is entitled to this grade.
Hence this petition.
4.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents who filed the reply and denied the allegations.
The respondents have taken the stand that though the petitioner had retired on 6th June, 1990, yet the revised pay scale has not been made applicable by the Panchayat Samiti, so, the releasing of the payment does not arise.
In Para No. 9 of the written statement it is the specific stand of the respondents which can be quoted in the following terms :  "In reply to para No. 9 of the writ petition, it is submitted that while quoting resolution dated 581987 of Ateli Nangal Panchayat Samiti, the petitioner intends to get benefit from Panchayat Samiti Nangal Chaudhary for which she is not entitled because Nangal Chaudhary block had not given benefit of new Pay scales to either of the Craft Teachers working in the Block due to poor financial conditions.
However, it is pertinent to mention here that the other Craft Teachers working in Nangal Chaudhary Block had been extended the benefit of new Pay scales by Ateli Nangal Block prior to her transfer to Nangal Chaudhary Block.
It is wrong to allege that the aforesaid Resolution No. 15 dated 2131991 had been passed in order to take revenge from the petitioner: rather it had rightly been passed and the poor financial condition of the Panchayat Samiti Nangal Chaudhary is depicted from the Audit report (Copy of para No. 8 is enclosed hereby as Annexure R-1/A to this reply)."
5.
I have heard Shri Rup Chand Advocate on behalf of the petitioner and Shri Vijay Dahiya, learned AAG on behalf of the respondent-State and with their assistance, have gone through the record of this case.
6.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties I am of the considered opinion that the petitioner has no case as the revised grade of pay scale was ever adopted by the Panchayat Samiti.
Faced with this difficulty, learned counsel for the petitioner has invited my attention to the document Annexure P-2 dated 5th August, 1987 vide which Resolution No. 6 was passed by the Panchayat Samiti, Ateli Nangal, but the learned counsel for the petitioner has not drawn my attention to the document Annexure P-3 which show that the decision was revised on reconsideration in the meeting held on 21st March, 1991 and the Panchayat Samiti after careful consideration declined the proposal holding that due to poor financial condition of the Panchayat Samiti, it could not give the pay in the revised scale to their employees in pursuance of the Resolution of the Panchayat Samiti No. 15 dated 21st March, 1991.
The granting of the revised pay scale was not automatic which was subject to the approval of the Panchayat Samiti.
On account of the financial constraints, it was not approved.
Hence the petitioner cannot claim the benefit of the revised pay scale of Rs. 950-1500 w.e.f.
111986.
There is no merit in this writ petition.
Dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.