Vikramajit Sen, J - The Petitioner has been passed over for promotion to the rank of Colonel in the Indian Army.
It is this decision which has been assailed by way of the present writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution.
After the Counter Affidavit was filed by the Respondent, an additional affidavit had been placed on record by the Petitioner in which he has stated that the Respondents have violated Special Army Order 105 (SAO 105) which reads as follows :  "105.
Extracts of assessment of the reporting officers other than the IO required to be communicated to the officer, will be sent to the officer through the IO.
Such extracts will be signed and dated by the reporting officer.
The officer reported upon after signing the extracts, will return it to the IO.
The extract, bearing the signature of the Officer reported upon will then be forwarded to the MS Branch for record."
2.
It is the common case that the Reporting Officer/Reviewing Officer, namely, Rear Admiral MS Bedi (hereinafter referred to as the RO), in respect of the ICR for the period 1st June, 1994 to 13th December, 1994, dated 23rd January, 1995 communicated his assessment directly to the Petitioner, on that very day, and obtained the Petitioner's signature thereon.
This document is Annexure-P1 to the petition.
It is contended on behalf of the Petitioner that the RO was biased and inimical towards the Petitioner, and for these reasons had given an unfavorable grading to the Petitioner.
It is further argued that it is mandatory that, in conformity with SAO 105, the grading/remarks of the RO ought to have been conveyed by him through the IO and not directly to the Petitioner.
As this procedure had not been followed, the Petitioner is entitled for promotion to the rank of the Acting Colonel.
As indicated above, the gravamen of the attack in the writ petition had been altogether altered by way of the addition affidavit.
The arguments of learned counsel for the Petitioner were confined to the averments contained in the additional affidavit, and he took pains to underscore that the Petitioner had no grievance with the established promotion policy of the Army.
3.
The factual matrix is that the first consideration of the Petitioner for selection to the rank of Colonel was carried out in November, 1994 in resect of Cut off CR 6/93-3/94 and the Petitioner was rejected.
Thereafter there was a Special Review (fresh) conducted in July, 1995 in respect of the said Cut off CR.
As a Redressal had been granted against the figurative assessment made by the IO by orders of the GOC-in-C dated 16th February, 1995, the Petitioner was again considered, but rejected.
Thereafter, the First Review took place in the month of December, 1995 for Cut off CR 6/94-12/94 where the Petitioner was once again rejected for promotion.
The Final Review took place in July, 1996 for Cut off CR May 1995 but the Petitioner was finally rejected.
The propriety of the proceedings before the Selection Board was not agitated before me.
It is significant to mention that the Redressal dated 16th February, 1995 was not against the assessment of the Reviewing Officer (RO) but against that of the Initiating Officer (IO).
This is being emphasised for the reason that the Petitioner's case is that the RO was prejudiced against him.
Since he had assailed the assessment of the IO, quite obviously, this goes against the grain of the Petition.
4.
The question of bias/prejudice shall be dealt with first.
Rear Admiral MS Bedi (RO) has not been impleaded as a party, even though objections in this direction had been taken on various previous hearings.
The averment in the writ petition is that the Initiating Officer has given excellent reports which were not accepted by the Reviewing Officer.
In my view the RO should have been impleaded as a party in these proceedings, since his personal bias has been alleged.
Reference is directed towards a decision of the Division Bench in Lt. Col. Krishan Chand v. Union of India, 1996 V AD (Delhi) 199 wherein it was observed that the claim of bias, "in the absence of the concerned officers being parties to the writ petition was not required to be probed and was rightly turned down."
In these circumstances I would have considered it unnecessary to deal with the Petitioner's allegations of bias.
However, since at the instance of the Petitioner, the Respondent has produced for the perusal of the Court the four ACRs considered by the Selection Board, it would be in the interest of justice to record that in the thirteen years period commencing from the 11th year of the service of the Petitioner, the Petitioner's apprehension and accusation of bias of the Reviewing Officer is not substantiated and borne out from a scrutiny of the records.
5.
The second question is whether there has been any infraction of SAO 105 necessitating the striking down of the decision of the Selection Board.
In the present case the Petitioner has been posted at the National Defence Academy, Kharagwasla, Pune.
The Initiating Officer, and the Reviewing Officer (who was posted as the Deputy Commandant, NDA) have also been posted in the same Institution.
The SAOs should necessarily be interpreted and understood keeping in view the normal circumstances prevailing in the Indian Army.
It would usually be uncommon for the Officer, his IO, as well as RO to be posted in very close geographical proximity of each other.
Clearly, it is for this reason that the SAOs envisages the downward communication from the Reviewing Officer via the Initiating Officer and thence to the Officer reported upon.
Attention was drawn by learned counsel for the Respondents to Regulation 160 which states that communication of endorsements should normally be done through the IO by Registered letter.
SAO 105 need not be pedantically, mindlessly and meticulously followed by the letter, thereby necessitating the communication only through the conduit of the IO The intendment of the Orders/Rules is to ensure that the officer reported upon has personal knowledge of the views/assessment of the RO  6.
In the present case, since all three officers were posted in the NDA, the Reviewing Officer had considered it appropriate to communicate the assessment directly to the Petitioner.
I cannot perceive any infraction of SAO 105 into the event as it transpired.
The SAO does not indicate that the Reviewing Officer is expected to discuss his assessment with the Initiating Officer.
Only if this was so, could it perhaps be arguable that the downward/written communication should have been necessarily through Initiating Officer.
It is possible that the Officer reported upon may be posted at some distance from his Initiating Officer.
It is more than likely that these officers would be posted at some distance from the Reviewing Officer.
This conceivably could well be the reason why SAO 105 was promulgated.
By directly communicating his assessment to the Petitioner, Rear Admiral MS Bedi has not in any manner jeopardised or prejudiced any right of the Petitioner.
7.
For these reasons I see no merit in the petition which is dismissed.
Parties, shall, however, bear their respective costs.
Petition dismissed.