RL Anand, J - Ex-Sepoy Ujagar Singh-petitioner has filed this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India and he has made a prayer that a writ in the nature of Certiorari be issued for quashing Annexure P-1 dated 1651997 vide which the claim of the petitioner for disability pension was rejected.
It has been further prayed by the petitioner during the course of submissions that the order dated 21.1.1999 passed by the appellate authority be also set aside.
2.
Some facts can be noticed in the following manner.
As per the case of the petitioner, he was born on 7111965.
He joined the Army on 19121965 and at the time of joining of the Army, he was found hale and hearty by the Medical Board.
The petitioner became patient of Mitra Valve Prolapse-394 and deformity was noticed by the Medical Board on 1031996.
On account of this, he was validated from service on 161996.
The petitioner made a prayer that the benefit of disability pension be given to him but his case was rejected on 1651997.
The petitioner also filed an application in August, 1997, and the same has not been dismissed on 21.1.1999.
The case set up by the petitioner in short is that the disease has been aggravated on account of his military service and, therefore, it is attributable to it.
Hence, he is entitled to the benefit of disability pension.
Notice of the petition was given to the respondents.
They have filed the written statement.
According to the stand taken up by the respondents, the disease Mitra Valve Prolapse-394 is neither attributable nor aggravated to the military service and that the petitioner is not entitled to the benefits of any disability pension.
It was also pleaded by the learned counsel for the respondents that recommendations of the Medical Board, if any, are only persuasive in nature and these are not binding upon CCDA who formulates an independent opinion.
A rejoinder was also filed by the petitioner in which he reiterated his averments made in the petition by taking those of the written statement.
3.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance I have gone through the record of the case.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has invited my attention to para 2 of preliminary objections in the written statement where it has been stated as follows :-  "Since the petitioner was placed in low medical category "BEE" permanent, he was brought before a release medical board on March 9, 1996.
The medical board held on him at 167 Military Hospital reviewed his disability as aggravated by military service and assessed the degree of disablement at 20% for two years."
My attention has been further invited by the learned counsel for the petitioner to para 3 wherein a similar stand has been taken by the respondent-authorities.
It was vehemently argued by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the disability suffered by the petitioner has been aggravated on account of the military service and it is attributable to the army service and moreover CCDA cannot sit over the judgment of the Medical Board when the Officer has got no opportunity to examine the patient.
Learned counsel for the respondents submitted that the disease was congenial in nature, and, therefore, it is not attributable to the Army Service, and the opinion of the Board is not binding on the CCDA who can always formulate an independent opinion.
5.
I have considered the rival contentions of the learned counsel for the parties and in my opinion, both the points should be decided in favour of the petitioner and against the respondents.
Mitral is one of the most important organ of the heart.
The disease of Mitra Valve Prolapse-394 is invariably congenial.
The function of the Mitral is to create blockage in the blood circulation.
By virtue of the stress undertaken by the patient, this disease can aggravate.
We all know that duty of a soldier in the Army is very strenuous and arduous in nature.
In this view of the matter, I hold that the disease suffered by the petitioner is attributable to the Army Service.
Support can also be derived from the decision of this Court dated 14122000 passed in CR 4228 of 1999.
CCDA never got the opportunity to examine the petitioner.
Thus, I am of the opinion that this writ petition deserves to succeed.
6.
I allow this writ petition and set aside the impugned orders and direct the respondents to release the benefit of disability pension to the petitioner within 3 months from the date of receipt of the copy of this order, failing which, the petitioner shall be entitled to interest @ 12%.
The petitioner shall appear before the Medical Board as and when called upon by the respondent-authorities.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.