GR Majithia, J - This judgment disposes of Civil Writ Petitions No. 13638 of 1990 and 848 of 1990.
The petitioner in C.W.P.
No. 13638 of 1990, namely, Dr. I.P. Singh Parmar, Professor and Head, Department of Ophthalmology, Medical College and Hospital, Rohtak and Dr. Vir Singh Malik petitioner in C.W.P.
No. 848 of 1990 (who had completed the tenure of four years as Registrar, Medical College, Rohtak), have sought a writ of quo warranto from this Court calling upon Dr. JP Singh, Director, Medical College Rohtak, to show cause before this Court under what authority he is holding the office of Director, Medical College, Rohtak, in these petitions under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
2.
Reference to relevant facts has been made from C.W.P.
No. 13638 of 1990 :-  A High Powered Selection Committee was constituted by respondent No. 1 for making selection for the post of Director, Medical College, Rohtak.
The Selection Committee invited applications for the post of Director through advertisement No. 3/89 appearing in The Tribune dated May 8, 1989.
It was provided in the advertisement that the Selection Committee might also suo motu or on being sponsored by any Organisation or institution consider any eminent person fulfilling the requisite qualifications and experience for appointment to this post.
The necessary qualifications mentioned in the advertisement read thus -  "Qualifications :  A basic University qualification included in the Schedules to Indian Medical Council Act, 1956.
2) MD/MS/DM/M.Ch.
or equivalent qualification in any speciality.
Preferential :  Should have attained national/international status in the Profession.
This may be in teaching, research or professional competence.
Age :  Not less than forty years or more than fifty years on or before the first day of the month next preceding the last date of submission of applications to the Selection Committee.
Provided that the Government may in the case of persons with outstanding qualifications and experience relax the age limit.
Experience :  Teaching and/or research experience of not less than 10 years out of which 5 years should be as Professor in the Department."
The petitioner alleges that Dr. JP Singh did not have the requisite experience in teaching for the post of Director, Medical College, Rohtak as provided in the advertisement.
The essential qualification prescribed therein was that the applicant must have 10 years teaching experience, out of which 5 years should be as Professor in the Department.
- The second ground of challenge is that Dr. JP Singh had crossed the age of 58 years on the date of selection as Director, Medical College, Rohtak and thus was ineligible.
3.
Written statement on behalf of respondents 1 and 2 has been filed by Shri MS Rao, Deputy Secretary to Government, Health and Medical Education Department, Haryana.
It was denied that Dr. JP Singh did not possess the requisite teaching experience.
Relaxation in age limit was granted to him.
4.
Governor of Haryana in exercise of the power, conferred by Section 3 of the Medical College, Rohtak (Conditions of Service of Teachers) Act, 1986, made rules called the Haryana Medical Education Service Rules, 1988 (for short, the Rules) for regulating the recruitment and conditions of service of persons appointed to the Haryana Medical Education Service (for short, the Service).
Service under the Rules means Haryana Medical Education Service.
Rule 5 of the Rules lays down the age limit for recruitment to the Service.
It says that in the case of a Director or Medical Superintendent, the incumbent should not be less than forty years or more than fifty years of age.
Proviso to the rule says that the Government may in the case of persons with outstanding qualifications and experience relax the age limit.
Rule 7 of the Rules deals with the qualification and experience for appointment to the Service.
It provides that no person shall be appointed to any post in the Service unless he is in possession of the qualification and experience.
specified in column 3 of Appendix B to the Rules in the case of direct recruitment or appointment by transfer or deputation and those specified in column No. 4 in the case of appointment by promotion.
Rule 9 relates to method of recruitment to the posts of Director and Medical Superintendent.
The qualifications for the post of Director, Medical College, Rohtak mentioned in the advertisement were the one prescribed in the Rules.
5.
The gravamen of the charge is that Dr. JP Singh did not possess the requisite teaching experience of 10 years out of which 5 years should be as Professor in the Department.
6.
Respondents No. 1 and 2 alongwith their written statement produced a copy of letter No. 3-64/67-H, dated June 3, 1968 from Under Secretary to Government of India (Ministry of Health and Family UD, Department of Health and UD), New Delhi, addressed to the Director General of Health Services, New Delhi, in which it was stated that the Government of India approved the conferment of teaching designations on the Medical Officer in the Willingdon Hospital, New Delhi and Dr. JP Singh was designated as Assistant Professor.
Office order No. 10-14/78-Est.I, dt. 5584-90, dated March 16, 1972 was also issued by the Consultant in Medicine and Medical Superintendent, Willingdon Hospital, New Delhi, that for teaching purposes, Dr. JP Singh will be designated as Assistant Professor (Surgery).
A reading of the Government of India's letter dated June 3, 1968 along with the office order dated March 16, 1972 issued by the Medical Superintendent, Willingdon Hospital, New Delhi point out that Dr. JP Singh was also designated as Assistant Professor (Surgery).
The Principal, University College of Medical Sciences, New Delhi informed Dr. JP Singh, who was then working as Head, Department of Surgery, Safdarjang Hospital, New Delhi that vide Delhi University's letter No. 17(18)/CSIII/44869, dated Ist/3rd October, 1983, he had been given the designation of Professor of the University in the subject of Surgery with effect from September, 30, 1983 till such time the Safdarjung Hospital continues to impart clinical instructions to the undergraduate students of that College.
Dr. JP Singh had been working, as Assistant Professor (Surgery) since June 3, 1968 and an October 6, 1983 he was designated as Professor (Surgery) with effect from September 30, 1983.
Thus he had more than ten years teaching experience to his credit, out of which for more than five years he had teaching experience as Professor of Surgery.
He possessed the requisite teaching experience as laid down in the Rules and in the advertisement No. 3/89.
Dr. JP Singh's name was sponsored by the Vice Chancellor, Haryana Agricultural University, Hissar.
The High Powered Selection Committee consisting of (i) Chief Secretary to Government, Haryana ; (ii) Secretary, Health and Medical Education, Haryana (iii) Vice Chancellor, MD University, Rohtak (iv) Director, Post-Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh ; (v) Director, Health Services, Haryana, interviewed Dr. I.P. Singh Parmar (Petitioner in C.W.P.
No. 13638 of 1990), Dr. RC Dadu and Dr. (Mrs.) Rathee, etc. and none of them was found suitable by the Selection Committee.
The Selection Committee selected Dr. JP Singh on merits having found him to be meritorious.
The State Government under the rules could grant relaxation with regard to age limit and the same was granted in the present case and no exception can be taken to it.
7.
Dr. I.P. Singh Parmar (petition in CWP No. 13638 of 1990) was alone one of the candidates for the post of Director, Medical College, Rohtak.
The High Powered Selection Committee did not select him.
Selection on merits means selection of a candidate who is meritorious than others.
8.
Dr. Vir Singh Malik (Petitioner in C.W.P.
No. 848 of 1990) stated in the petition that he finished his tenure of four years as a Registrar, Medical College, Rohtak.
Respondent No. 3 in his written statement has averred that the petitioner wanted extension in his service as a Registrar after completion of his tenure which was not granted.
He also appeared in interview for the post of Lecturer in Medicine but was rejected by the High Powered Selection Committee of which, respondent No. 3 was the Member-Secretary.
The petitioner tried to influence respondent No. 3 for his selection.
He did not come upto the standard prescribed and was not selected and the writ petition has been filed out of vendetta to harass respondent No. 3.
9.
Unlike other prerogative writs, issuance of a writ in the nature of quo warranto is purely a discretionary writ.
Writ of quo warranto is somewhat drastic remedy.
The Courts in administering it proceed with anxious deliberation and with utmost caution.
In England, by Section 9 of the Administration of Justice (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1933 proceedings by way of prerogative writ of quo warranto to challenge the right of any person to hold a public office has been abolished.
But there is a provision by which the Queen's Bench Division may be requested to issue an injunction restraining in individual from acting in a public office in circumstances in which quo warranto could formally have been brought.
The above views and principles, broadly indicate and throw sufficient light on the path, the Courts have to ambulate before issuing a writ of quo warranto.
These principles were followed by the apex Court in the University of Mysore v. CD Govinda Rao and another, A.I.R. 1965 S.C. 491, wherein it was observed by their Lordships of the apex Court as under :-  "The judgment of the High Court does not indicate that the attention of the High Court was drawn to the technical nature of the writ of quo warranto Which was claimed by the respondent in the present proceedings, and the conditions which had to be satisfied before a writ could issue in such proceedings.
As Halsbury (in Halsbury's Laws of England, 3rd Ed. Vol. 11, P. 145) has observed :  "An information in the nature of quo warranto took the place of the obsolete writ of quo warranto which lay against a person who claimed or usurped an office, franchise or liberty, to enquire by what authority he supported his claim, in order that the right to the office or franchise might be determined."
10.
Broadly stated, the quo warranto proceeding affords a judicial enquiry in which any person holding an independent substantive public office, or franchise or liberty, is called upon to show by what right he holds the said office, franchise or liberty; if the enquiry leads to the finding that the holder of the office has no valid title to it, the issue of writ of quo warranto ousts him from that office.
In other words, the procedure of quo warranto confers jurisdiction and authority on the judiciary to control executive action in the matter of making appointments to public office against the relevant statutory provisions; it also protects a citizen from being deprived of public office to which he may have a right.
It would thus be seen that if these proceedings are adopted subject to the conditions recognised in that behalf, they tend to protect the public from usurpers of public office, in some cases, persons not entitled to public office may be allowed to occupy them as a result of the connivance of the executive or with its active help and in such cases, if the jurisdiction of the courts to issue writ of quo warranto can be ousted and person entitled to the post allowed to occupy it.
It is thus clear that before a citizen can claim a writ of quo warranto, he must satisfy the court, inter alia, that the office in question is a public office and is held by the usurper without legal authority, and that necessarily leads to the enquiry as to whether the appointment of the said alleged usurper has been made in accordance with law or not."
The petitioners have failed to show that respondent No. 3 is holding the office without any legal authority or that he was ineligible for holding the post of Director, Medical College, Rohtak.
11.
Apart from this, the allegations made in the writ petitions appear to be motivated.
Respondent M. 3 in his written statement has stated that he was a Member-Secretary of the High Powered Selection Committee, which was constituted for making selection for the post of Lecturer in Medicine and Dr. Vir Singh Malik (petitioner in C.W.P.
No. 848 of 1990) appeared for interview, but was not selected.
He tried to influence respondent No. 3 for his selection, but the latter could not help him.
Since he did not come upto the standards prescribed, he was rejected.
This averment in the written statement by respondent No. 3 has not been controverted by Dr. Vir Singh Malik, petitioner, by filing a rejoinder.
In the absence of any rebuttal, these averments have to be taken as correct.
Dr. I.P. Singh Parmar, petitioner was also one of the candidates for the post of Director, Medical College, Rohtak.
He was duly considered by the High Powered Selection Committee but was rejected.
These facts per se disentitle the writ petitioners from claiming purely discretionary prerogative writ.
12.
For the reasons aforementioned, the writ petitions are devoid of any merit and are dismissed with costs.
Counsel's fee is assessed at Rs. 1000/- in each.