SB Sinha, C.J.
- The 1st respondent herein was appointed as Sewing and Tailoring instructor in Panchayat Raj Department on payment of a consolidated sum of Rs. 300/- pm She was retrenched.
She thereafter made a representation to the District Collector, Cuddapah and although the District Collector was not an appointing authority he directed the Regional Deputy Director of Women and Child Welfare, Kurnool to allot her in any one of the vacant posts of organizers in Cuddapah District in the District Women and Child Welfare Office as instructor in sewing and tailoring.
Despite the same she had not been absorbed as organiser.
Thereafter the 1st respondent filed the original application before the learned Tribunal being numbered as 1292 of 1994.
The said application was disposed of directing the respondents therein to absorb her in one of the existing vacancies under the control of the Regional Deputy Director of Women and Child Welfare, Kurnool.
She was appointed as Matron by proceedings dated 30111995.
The grievance of the 1st respondent in the original application which led to the passing of the impugned order dated 1791998 is that the order of the learned Tribunal in OA No. 1292 of 1994 had not been complied with.
Having regard to the fact that the Tribunal had passed its earlier order on 18.3.1994 in OA No. 1292 of 1994 directing the 1st respondent to be absorbed, the learned Tribunal allowed the said OA directing :  "In view of the above facts and circumstances of the case, the respondents are directed to treat the applicant as having been appointed as Organiser w.e.f.
18.3.1994 (the date of the judgment rendered by this Tribunal in OA No. 1292 of 1994) retrospectively and grant all consequential service benefits including seniority.
The OA is accordingly allowed with the above directions."
2.
The learned Government Pleader appearing on behalf of the petitioner inter alia submitted that apart from the fact that the Collector was not the appointing authority, in terms of the aforementioned order passed by the Tribunal in OA No. 1292 of 1994 having regard to the fact that no post of Organiser was vacant, and only posts of matrons were vacant and the 1st respondent herself expressed her willingness to join that post and she had also given undertaking that she will not have any legal objection, she has been appointed as Matron.
The learned Counsel would submit that this aspect of the matter has not been considered by the Tribunal.
Sri D Linga Rao, the learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the 1st respondent on the other hand submitted that such an undertaking was illegal.
3.
In the original application the 1st respondent herein stated thus :  "(b) Such being the position, strangely the 1st respondent has adopted hostile attitude and obtained willingness from the applicant for her absorption as Matron and issued the impugned Pro.
No. 585/A/94, dated 30111995, appointing the applicant as Matron, Regional Children, Cuddapah on the untenable ground that if the orders of the 1st respondent and the orders of the Hon'ble Tribunal implemented as the applicant is appointed in the post of Organizer it would face many troubles (from) local people for filling up of remaining posts which are still vacant which is illegal, discriminatory, unjust and subversive of Articles 14, 16 and 21 of the Constitution of India and also opposed to all equity, justice and fair play...." 4.
It is, therefore, not a case where an allegation was made to the effect that the undertaking given by the 1st respondent herein was not a voluntary one.
Even the aforementioned statement is not verified.
5.
It is not in dispute that the Collector, Cuddapah had no jurisdiction to direct absorption of the 1st respondent.
It has also not been disputed that the appointing authority is the Regional Deputy Director of Women and Child Welfare, Kurnool.
It is also not in dispute that for absorption of surplus employees the procedure laid down in Government Memo No. 2058/Ser.
A/88-10, dated 2511990 was required to be complied with.
The Collector, Cuddapah in his order dated 351993 directed :  "In the reference 1st and 2nd read above, Smt. K Baby Sarojini who is a retrenched employee in Sewing, Tailoring Centre, Chalamkur, Cuddapah requested for absorption in the District Woken and Child Welfare Office, Cuddapah.
In the circumstances reported by the District Women and Child Welfare Officer, Cuddapah in his letter second read above Smt. K Baby Sarojini who is a retrenched employee in Sewing and Tailoring Instructor is hereby appointed and allotted.
The Regional Dy.
Director, Kurnool is requested to appoint and allot her in one of the vacant posts as organizer in Cuddapah District for absorption in District Women and Child Welfare Office, Cuddapah as instructor in Sewing and Tailoring (or) equal to that category of the post for absorption as per Government Memo 3rd read.
The above allotment is made on administrative grounds."
6.
In OA No. 1292 of 1994 it was directed :  "2.
Since the applicant is a retrenched employee, she should have been absorbed in some vacancy that arose subsequent to her retrenchment.
This aspect was examined by the 3rd respondent and order dated 351993 was issued.
The 1st respondent is therefore directed to absorb the applicant in one of the existing vacancies under his control, as already ordered by the 3rd respondent by proceedings dated 351993, if not already absorbed.
The OA is accordingly disposed of at the admission stage.
No costs."
7.
It is, therefore, not correct to contend that the learned Tribunal directed to absorb the 1st respondent in the post of Organiser.
8.
The recommendation by the Collector was wholly illegal.
A recruitment to a post whether by way of absorption or otherwise must be done in accordance with the rules.
Any appointment made contrary to rules would be nullity.
In Dr. Meera Massey v. Dr. SR Mehrotra, 1998(1) SCT 727 (SC) : 1998(3) SCC 88 it was held that no appointment should be made contrary to statutory provisions.
9.
Furthermore, as indicated hereinbefore it is not the case of the respondent herein that the undertaking was obtained from her upon exercising threat or coercion.
The learned Tribunal has not arrived at such a finding.
10.
In Secretary-cum-Chief Engineer v. Hari Om Sharma, 1998(3) SCT 90 (SC) : 1998(5) SCC 87 : AIR 1998 SC 2909 on which the learned Counsel for the 1st respondent relied upon has no application to the facts of the present case.
In that decision the apex Court was considering a matter with regard to promotion.
In the said decision it is observed thus :  "8.
Learned Counsel for the appellant attempted to contend that when the respondent was promoted in stop-gap arrangement as Junior Engineer-I, he had given an undertaking to the appellant that on the basis of stop-gap arrangement, he would not claim promotion as of right nor would he claim any benefit pertaining to that post.
The argument, to say the least, is preposterous.
Apart from the fact that the Government in its capacity as a model employer cannot be permitted to raise such an argument, the undertaking which is said to constitute an agreement between the parties cannot be enforced at law.
The respondent being an employee of the appellant had to break his period of stagnation although, as we have found earlier, he was the only person amongst the non-diploma holders available for promotion to the post of Junior Engineer-I and was, therefore, likely to be considered for promotion in his own right.
An agreement that if a person is promoted to the higher post or post to officiate on that post or, as in the instant case, a stop-gap arrangement is made to place him on the higher post, he would not claim higher salary or other attendant benefits would be contrary to law and also against public policy.
It would, therefore, be unenforceable in view of Section 23 of the Contract Act."
11.
In the facts of that case it was held the respondent therein had a right to be considered for regular promotion having regard to the extant rules.
Such is not the position in the present case.
12.
For the reasons aforementioned the impugned order cannot be sustained which is set aside accordingly.
The writ petition is allowed.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.