Radha Mohan Prasad, J - Heard learned counsel for the parties.
2.
In this writ petition the petitioner has assailed the validity of the order contained in Memo No. 2233 dated 1781998 (Annexure 3) issued by the Joint Secretary in the Water Resources Department, whereby and whereunder in the purported exercise of power under Rule 139(a) and (b) of the Bihar Pension Rules, the pension of the petitioner has been reduced to the extent of 50%.
3.
According to the case of the petitioner the said order which is purported to have been passed pursuant to the notice contained in Annexure 4, was never served upon him and as such the same is fit to be quashed on this ground alone.
4.
The learned Government Pleader No. 9, appearing for the State, has submitted that the provision mentioned in the impugned order is misplaced and in fact the said order has been passed in exercise of power under Rule 43(b) of the Bihar Pension Rules pursuant to the departmental proceeding initiated against the petitioner prior to his superannuation from service on 3111993.
It is submitted that the proceeding was initiated vide order dated 2971992 contained in Annexure `A' to the counter-affidavit and the order dated 2931993 contained in Annexure `A/1' of the said counter-affidavit, pursuant to which the petitioner submitted his show cause, but no final order could be passed and as such the petitioner was given show cause notice in exercise of the power under Rule 139(a) and (b) of the Bihar Pension Rules contained in Annexure 4.
5.
The learned Counsel for the petitioner has submitted that the argument of the learned Government Pleader No. 9 is completely misconceived and not tenable in the facts and circumstances of the present case.
It is submitted that a bare perusal of the orders contained in Annexure `A' and `A/1' would show that no departmental proceeding was ever initiated against the petitioner.
In fact vide Annexure `A' the petitioner has been found to be guilty even before calling for an explanation by the same letter and the allegation attached thereto also supports the said contention, and by Annexure `A/1' the petitioner was simply asked to submit this explanation as to why departmental action should not be initiated and recovery should not be made from him and other concerned officers.
It has further been submitted by the learned counsel for the petitioner that in the facts and circumstances of the case in absence of any allegation that the service of the petitioner has not been thoroughly satisfactory the action under Rule 139(a) and (b) of the Bihar Pension Rules was completely misconceived.
This Court finds substance in the submission of the learned Counsel for the petitioner.
6.
A bare perusal of the order contained in Annexure `A' shows that even before calling for explanation the authority found the petitioner guilty and then by the same order he has been called upon to submit his explanation pursuant to the charge-sheet attached thereto.
The so called charge-sheet also shows that the charges of dereliction of duty against the petitioner have been found to be proved.
Further from Annexure `A/1' which has been issued later, it appears that the petitioner has been asked to submit his show cause as to why disciplinary action should not be taken.
Thus, a bare perusal of the said two Annexures shows that the authority ever proceeded departmentally against the petitioner before his retirement in terms of the provision of Rule 55 of the Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules.
Moreover, admittedly no order was passed pursuant to the said so-called proceeding.
Annexure 4 shows that the Government later decided to take action under Rule 139(a) and (b) of the Bihar Pension Rules and such pursuant to the Government Circular contained in the Finance Department's Memo No. PC/11-40-72-75975-F, dated 1911976 issued show cause notice, but on perusal of the said show cause notice also it is evident that the same has been issued only with respect to the allegation on which Annexure A and A/1 were issued and not on the ground that the service of the petitioner has not been thoroughly satisfactory.
Thus, in my opinion, the notice under Rule 139(a) and (b) of the Bihar Pension Rules contained in Annexure 4 is also completely misconceived and legally unjustified.
7.
Having regard to the fact that no proceeding was ever initiated, as already held above, and the fact that no final order was passed which at least is admitted, the learned Counsel for the State has finally submitted that the impugned order contained in Annexure 3 even if is taken to have been passed under Rule 43(b) of the Pension Rules, cannot be sustained.
Rule 43(b) of the Bihar Pension Rules vests power in the State Government to withhold or withdraw a pension or any part of it, whether permanently or for a specified period and also the power to order for recovery of the whole or part of any pecuniary loss caused to the Government from the pension if the pensioner is found in the departmental or judicial proceeding to have been guilty of grave misconduct or negligent during his service including the service rendered on re-employment after retirement.
Admittedly no such finding was recorded even if it is assumed that departmental proceeding initiated vide Annexures `A' and `A/1'.
Thus, in my opinion, the impugned order dated 1781998 (Annexure 3) cannot be sustained and the same is fit to be quashed.
8.
In the result this writ application is allowed, the impugned order contained in Annexure 3 is hereby quashed and the respondents are directed to issue necessary sanction order for payment of the remaining pension of the petitioner within two weeks of the receipt/production of the copy of this order and the Accountant General shall issue necessary authority slip within one week thereafter.
In the circumstances of the case, however, there shall be no order as to costs.
Writ petition allowed.