Nirmal Singh, J - Petitioner has invoked the jurisdiction of this Court under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for the issuance of the writ in the nature of Certiorari quashing Annexure P-5 vide which it was decided that the post of Leather Designer will be filled up by direct recruit who fulfil the prescribed qualification through the Board according to the government instructions and till then the petitioner will continue to work to the post of Leather Designer on ad hoc basis.
2.
The petitioner joined with the respondents as Helper to Leather Designer in the year 1970.
The petitioner served on that post efficiently.
It was further pleaded that Mir Singh Leather Designer was an illiterate person who retired on 3111981.
On his retirement, petitioner submitted an application to the respondents for considering him for the promotion to the post of Leather Designer.
The application of the petitioner was considered by respondent No. 2.
The name of the petitioner was recommended to the Government for promotion to the post of Leather Designer as the petitioner was considered eligible and the petitioner was promoted vide Annexure P-3 on regular basis on 121981.
3.
Petitioner was informed by the impugned letter Annexure P-5 that the post of the Leather Designer would be filled up through direct recruitee and till then the petitioner's promotion to the post shall be considered on ad hoc basis.
Petitioner impugned the order Annexure P-5 being violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
There are no service rules governing the service of the petitioner.
There is no prescribed qualification for promotion to the post of Leather Designer.
The petitioner was considered eligible on the basis of experience as Helper to Leather Designer.
The petitioner is to be reverted back as per Annexure P-5 automatically without conducting any enquiry.
4.
Respondents 1 and 2 filed joint written statement and raised preliminary objection that there is no violation of the provision of any Act or statutory rule resulting in injury of a substantial nature.
On merits, it was admitted that the petitioner was working as Helper to Leather Designer and was promoted to the post of Leather Designer vide letter Annexure P-3.
It was pleaded that the petitioner was promoted as Leather Designer against the post which was meant for direct recruitment.
The petitioner was not promoted on regular basis.
It is also admitted that after giving the promotion to the petitioner as Leather Designer by respondent No. 2, a request was made to the Secretary, Subordinate Services Selection Board Haryana vide memo No. Admn.
7/23011 dated 28121980 for withdrawing the demand letter dated 20111979 sent earlier for filling the post of Leather Designer in the Cooperative Department by way of advertisement through direct quota.
It was also intimated to the Subordinate Services Selection Board that the department had decided to fill up the post by way of promotion.
It was pleaded that the Subordinate Services Slection Board did not agree to it and pointed out that the promotion of the petitioner to the post of Leather Designer was irregular contravening the Government instructions dated 2811969.
It was further pleaded that the Subordinate Services Selection Board pointed out that the department had only got approved the qualification from the competent authority meant for recruitment to the post of Leather Designer through direct quota and that no qualifications existed meant for giving promotion to the post of Leather Designer.
5.
It was pleaded that the petitioner was not qualified upto Middle Standard Examination and did not fulfil the qualification meant for the post of Leather Designer by way of the direct recruitment.
The requisite qualifications meant for the post of Leather Designer are as under :-  i) Matric with Hindi (having) Diploma in footwear technology and advance course in footwear technology with five years experience in supervisory capacity in a licensed factory manufacturing leather footwear/goods, or ii) Matric with Hindi having Diploma in footwear (technology) and 7 years experience in supervisory capacity in a licensed factory manufacturing leather footwear/goods, or iii) Matric with Hindi and certificate in footwear (technology) having 10 years experience in a licensed factory manufacturing leather footwear/goods.
6.
It was further pleaded that the respondent No. 1 had decided that the post of Leather Designer be filled up by way of direct recruitment through Subordinate Services Selection Board who fulfil the prescribed qualifications according to the Government instructions and till then the appointment of the petitioner will continue on ad hoc basis.
The petitioner does not fulfil the qualification meant for the post of Leather Designer which is of technical nature, therefore, the petitioner has no right to the post of Leather Designer.
It was further pleaded that the promotion was made by the Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Haryana inadvertantly as the government instructions were not brought to the notice of the competent authority at the relevant time when the petitioner was promoted.
It was further pleaded that the post of Helper to the Leather Designer is a Class IV post and the petitioner or any other person can get promotion to the post of Leather Designer (Class III post) only, if they acquire the requisite qualification and experience prescribed by the government meant for the post of Leather Designer.
7.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have perused the record.
8.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the respondents have not framed service rules governing the service of Helper to the Leather Designer/Leather Designer or for their promotion till date.
He contended that no qualification has been prescribed for the promotion of Leather Designer.
He contended that Mir Singh was not having any qualification but the respondents allowed him to work on the post of Leather Designer and he retired on 3111981.
He contended that after his retirement, the petitioner was found eligible by respondent No. 2 to be promoted to the post of Leather Designer.
He submitted that when the case of the petitioner was considered for promotion to Leather Designer he was having 10 years experience in the department as Helper to Leather Designer.
He submitted that the Registrar, Co-operative Societies, Haryana sent the case to the Government for approval being promoted to the petitioner as Leather Designer.
The Secretary to Government of Haryana, Cooperation Department informed Registrar vide Annexure P-2 that he is competent to promote the petitioner.
He pointed out that the petitioner was promoted and posted as Leather Designer in Cooperative Societies, Karnal on the retirement of Mir Singh.
Since then he is working on the post of the Leather Designer.
He also submitted that Registrar, Co- operative Societies, Haryana wrote a letter to the Secretary, Subordinate Services Selection Board that they are withdrawing the demand for filling the post of Leather Designer as the department has decided to fill up the post by promotion.
9.
He further contended that Registrar subsequently after 3 years has decided to fill up the post by direct recruit by alleging that the petitioner is not fulfilling the requisite qualification and the petitioner was allowed to work on ad hoc basis.
He submitted that no opportunity has been given to the petitioner before passing the impugned order.
He further submitted that when there are no service rules prescribing the qualification then on the ground that the petitioner is not fulfilling the qualification, he cannot be reverted.
He further submitted that the qualifications as alleged by the respondents are not applicable in the case of promotion.
Those qualifications relate to the candidates who are to be directly recruited.
He further submitted that the petitioner is working on the post of Leather Designer since the afternoon of 3111981.
10.
On the other hand Shri Rattan Singh, learned AAG, Haryana submitted that the petitioner was not fulfilling the qualification for the post of Leather Designer and he was inadvertantly promoted to the post of Leather Designer.
He contended that when the petitioner has inadvertently been promoted then the respondents authority has every right to correct their mistake.
He further submitted that when the petitioner has been appointed by inadvertance then he has no vested right to the post.
11.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and perusing the record, I am of the considered opinion that this petition has merit and deserve to succeed.
12.
Admittedly, the petitioner was promoted as Leather Designer vide Annexure P-3.
A perusal of the letter Annexure P-3 shows that the petitioner was neither promoted on ad hoc basis nor he was given the charge of the post of Officiating capacity.
The contention raised by the learned AAG that the promotion order was by inadvertance is without any foundation.
The Registrar, Cooperative Societies-respondent No. 2 wrote a letter Annexure P-1 to the Commissioner and Secretary to Government Haryana, Cooperation Department, Chandigarh for seeking approval for filling the post of Leather Designer by promotion.
As per this letter Mir Singh who was working on the post of Leather Designer is to be retired on 3111981.
Against that post petitioner moved an application before the Registrar to promote him as Leather Designer.
While considering the application of the petitioner, the respondent No. 2 has observed as under :-  "This applicant is working as Helper to Leather Designer in the Cooperative Department since 10 years in the old pay scale of Rs. 140-300 and his contribution has remained good in the working of the Leather Cooperative Societies.
He is 7th Class and having experience in the Industrial Cooperative Societies who prepare the Leather goods."
13.
The Registrar, Cooperative Societies also observed in this letter that no service rules have been framed so far and as there is no service rule for the promotion from Helper to Leather Designer, the department started the action for framing rules but they considered the application of the petitioner and decided to promote the petitioner to the post of Leather Designer.
The application of the petitioner was sent to the Government by the Registrar for approval of promotion.
While recommending the case of the petitioner to the Government, the Registrar sent a letter vide which the application was also sent alongwith copy of the letter wherein the Government has prescribed the qualification for the post of Leather Designer for direct recruitment.
While forwarding the Letter to the Government, the Registrar, Cooperative Societies observed that these qualifications are for the direct recruit and no qualification has been prescribed for the promotee.
The Registrar has also observed that Shri Mir Singh Leather Designer was an illiterate person and has worked efficiently.
Shri Ram Kumar Helper to the Leather Designer is 7th pass and will be able to perform his duties efficiently because he has 10 years experience in the department.
These recommendations were duly considered by the Commissioner/Secretary to Government Haryana and after considering these recommendations the Secretary informed Registrar, Cooperative Societies- respondent No. 2 that he is competent for filling of the post of Leather Designer by promotion.
The contentions raised by the Learned AAG are not sustainable in view of the facts mentioned above rather it shows that respondent No. 2 has considered all pros and cons of the case.
The Registrar, Cooperative Societies has already sent a demand for filling the post of the Leather Designer to the Secretary, Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana but vide Annexure P-4 the Registrar withdrew the demand for filling the post of the Leather Designer as the department has decided to fill up the vacancy by way of promotion.
The petitioner has been promoted to the post of Leather Designer with due deliberation taking into consideration his experience and his ability to perform the duty of the said post.
Once the petitioner was promoted to the post of Leather Designer on regular basis and has worked for about 3 years before passing the impugned order then the respondents authority have no right to revert him from that post without giving him any show cause notice.
In this regard reliance can be placed upon Shri Satya Pal Sharma v. The Director, Animal Husbandry Haryana and another, 1981(1) SLR 422.
The promotion to the post of Leather Designer of the petitioner was not by inadvertance as alleged by the Learned AAG, Haryana.
14.
In Bhagwati Prasad v. Smt. Bhagwati Devi and others, AIR 1990 SC 371 Their Lordship has held as under :-  "Practical experience would always aid the person to effectively discharge the duties and is a sure guide to assess the suitability.
The initial minimum educational qualification prescribed for the different posts is undoubtedly a factor to be reckoned with, but it is so at the time of initial entry into the service.
Once the appointments of petitioners were made as daily rated workers and they were allowed to work for a considerable length of time, it would be hard and harsh to deny them the confirmation in the respective posts on the ground that they lack the prescribed educational qualifications.
It can be said that three years experience, ignoring artificial break in service for short period/periods created by the management, in the circumstances, would be sufficient for confirmation.
If there is a gap of more than three months between the period of termination and re-appointment that period may be excluded in the computation of the three years period.
Therefore, the petitioners are entitled to equal pay at par with the persons appointed on regular basis to the similar post or discharge similar duties and are entitled to the scale of pay and all allowances revised from time to time for the said posts."
15.
In the instant case the petitioner was promoted on 3111981.
Till date he is working without any break.
So, after 20 years it will not be justified to revert the petitioner to the post of Helper to Leather Designer.
It is pertinent to mention here that the respondent No. 2 has mentioned in Annexure P-1 that for the formation of service rules for the post of Helper to the Leather Designer, the action is being taken but admittedly till date no service rules have been framed.
When it was pointed out to the learned AAG what are the rules which prescribe the qualification for the promotion from Helper to Leather Designer to the Leather Designer he was unable to reply.
When no rules have been framed with regard to the qualification from Helper to Leather Designer then it cannot be said that the petitioner is ineligible for the post of Leather Designer.
Petitioner is working on the post of Leather Designer since 3111981 till date without any interruption, so, after such a long time petitioner cannot be reverted to the post of Helper to the Leather Designer.
He can be reverted only if there is misconduct on his part.
For the reasons mentioned above, the petition is accepted.
Impugned order Annexure P-5 is quashed.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.