Syed Bashir-ud-Din, J - Petitioner, a Lecturer in General Medicine Neurology SKIMS Soura, Srinagar was deputed to undergo DM Neurology Course at Post Graduate Institute Chandigarh.
On being relieved, he joined the course at Chandigarh and completed it ending December, 1993.
Petitioner claimed Study leave and other benefits for the period from 30.1.1991 to 311994, which he spent in prosecuting the M.D.
Course at Chandigarh, same has not been given to him as claimed.
Hence the writ.
2.
Respondents have filed reply.
Their case is that petitioner was not deputed for training by the Government and consequently Study leave cannot be granted to him since the petitioner was sent on training while on probation as Lecturer and had not completed five years the minimum service required for study leave under rules.
No right of petitioner has been violated.
Petitioner's case is not covered by study leave rules.
The formalities required of him have not been completed for obtaining the study leave.
Heard.
3.
Examination of record shows that petitioner Dr. Abdul Salam Bhat was initially appointed in 1973 as Assistant Surgeon by State Government.
However, later he was appointed as lecturer on ad hoc basis in 1986 in Medical College Srinagar, where he worked till ending June, 1989.
It was on 171989 he was appointed as Lecturer with probation period of one year by SKIMS Soura.
When he applied for study leave, he was in the employment of SKIMS, Soura.
Petitioner's case for undergoing MD Course in Neurology at Post Graduate Institute Chandigarh, was taken up by the SKIMS.
A proposal for deputing him to the course was submitted to His Excellency Governor of Jammu and Kashmir in the capacity of Minister Incharge, for accord of sanction to study leave of two years by the then Director SKIMS (both as Director of the Institute and Ex-Officio Secretary to Government).
His Excellency the Governor approved the proposal conveyed under No. 272 dated 23111991 to the Director SKIMS Soura.
It was pursuant to this approval that the petitioner was relieved on 31191 to join the D.M.
Course in Neurology at P.G.I.
Chandigarh.
He completed the course and reported back to the Institute on 311994 and was allowed to join and resume duties with HOD General Medicine.
It is also borne on record that the petitioner was sponsored by the Institute and a sponsorship certificate was issued in his favour in terms specifying that the payment of emoluments shall be the responsibility of the sponsoring authority, i.e. State Government.
4.
Mr. Kawoosa, AAG, contends that on the day and date when petitioner was deputed and relieved to join the post he had not completed minimum five years service therefore, there is a bar to grant him study leave, besides the petitioner could not be granted leave for the reason that necessary formalities have not been completed for such leave.
It is nowhere stated that the MD Course in Neurology has been of some advantage to Government from the public interest point of view.
5.
Annexure P1 and P3 clearly reveal that the petitioner was deputed to do DM Neurology at P.G.I.
Chandigarh after the Director of the Institute obtained sanction to the proposal from His Excellency Governor of J&K in his capacity as Minister Incharge at the relevant period.
It is also seen that His Excellency the Governor has accorded sanction to the Study leave of two years in favour of the petitioner.
The proposal for deputing said Doctor to the course and two years study leave stands approved by His Excellency the Governor of J&K vide No. 272 dated 23111991.
The matter was taken up by the Director with Secretary to Government General Department Training Jammu for grant of Study leave to said Doctor and at the same time petitioner was to do the course at Chandigarh with no financial burden cost on PGI Chandigarh in terms of sponsorship letter, a letter of reference to the PGI Institute at Chandigarh by the Director of SKIMS Soura, Srinagar.
6.
In terms of Business Rules of the Jammu and Kashmir Government, issued under Sections 43(2) and 45 of the Constitution of Jammu and Kashimir, the business of the Government is to be transacted in the department specified in the Ist Schedule to the Rules.
In the schedule at item No. 23 SKIMS Soura, falls for purpose of transacting the departmental work under Health and Medical Education Department.
The business allotted to a particular department has to be disposed of under directions (General or Special) of the concerned Minister Incharge.
Each Secretariat Department is headed by the Secretary to Government, the official head of the department.
Inter alia all orders of the State Government, bearing signatures of Secretary, shall be deemed to be properly authenticated.
(See Rules 9, 12 of the J&K Business Rules)  7.
Director, SKIMS Soura is also declared as Ex-officio Secretary to Government.
Regarding status of the Institute, vide communication of the General Deptt.
dated 1831986, bearing No. GD (Adm) 10/80/Health, it is stated that for all intents and purposes SKIMS Soura is a Government run organisation and the terms and conditions of service of the employees of the Institute are also governed by J&K CSR, besides the rules and regulations as may be framed by the Institute.
It would be seen that deputing petitioner to the course, approval of his study leave case for two years and relieving him to join the course are all matters which have been done by the competent authority and have to be treated authenticated.
There is also presumption of correctness in favour of the official acts.
8.
The contention of Mr. Kawoosa, AAG, that as the petitioner was having less than 2-1/2 years service as Lecturer, he is not and could not be eligible for study leave, is without basis for the reason that the rule 61(4) under Chapter 6 of J & K Leave Rules of 1979, provides that the State Government shall not ordinarily grants Study leave to a Government servant who has rendered less than five years service under the Government.
The service under the Government is not classified.
It can be any service.
Admittedly petitioner as per respondents' own case has been appointed as Assistant Surgeon in the Health Department in 1973 and thereafter as Lecturer in Medical College, Srinagar on ad hoc basis in 1986 and as Lecturer on substantive basis in SKIMS from July, 1989.
In all petitioner had more than 18 years service to his credit, when he was deputed for doing the course.
Sanction of his study leave case has been approved by his Excellency Governor of the State.
Besides, it is to be seen that the rule provides that the leave may not be granted ordinarily to a servant having less than five years service, but does not place an absolute embargo on the powers of the Competent authority not to grant study leave, even if the Government servant has less than five years service.
Once the proposal is approved, sanction of leave is also approved, the question of fulfilling the eligibility under the rules is an off the point hypertechnicality not to govern the case and decisive of the issue in hand.
Petitioner has successfully completed the course and joined back the Institute in early 1994.
All along he is serving there.
These circumstances cannot be ignored or overlooked.
9.
In the facts and circumstances of this case, it cannot be said that the petitioner has not been given the study leave followed by other benefits in terms of the applicable rules.
The questions of exigency of public service to undergo the course of study in DM Neurology at PGI Chandigarh, as a professional course, having direct and close nexus with sphere of duty of the petitioner Doctor is a matter that is presumed to have gone into consideration while initiating and approving the deputation of petitioner to the course at PGI and granting him Study leave, as above.
10.
The follow up during or after the completion of course is a matter for the authorities to be taken care of, but same cannot negate the sanction and approval of the study leave and deputing of petitioner to the course in question.
11.
In Dr. Harbans Lal Sharma v. State of J&K and others, 1998 SLJ 206 where the petitioner, an Assistant Surgeon of the Health Department, was relieved to join Institute of Hygiene and Public Health Calcutta, for undergoing Diploma in Public Health, the period he spent to acquire Diploma and thereafter again on being deputed to complete Hospital exams at AIMS New Delhi, was not treated as leave by the Government, the Court directed the Competent authority of the Government of Health Deptt.
to treat the period of absence of petitioner consumed in doing DPH and Post Graduation Course, at par with treatment extended to named Doctors sent on deputation in order to escape the charge of violation of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
12.
In result, petition succeeds.
Mandamus is issued to respondents to pay salary/emoluments to petitioner for the period of his doing DMN Course at PGI Chandigarh from 30.1.1991 to 311994 after treating two years Study leave as sanctioned and treating the remaining period in accordance with rules on subject.
The petitioner shall be entitled to all benefits to which he is legitimately eligible under the applicable rules.
Petition allowed.