GS Singhvi, J - In this petition, the petitioner has prayed for quashing the seniority list of General Managers (Annexure P11) circulated by Managing Director of Haryana State Federation of Consumer's Cooperative Wholesale Stores Ltd (hereinafter described as `Confed') and for directing the Confed (respondent No. 3) to effect reversion in the cadre of General Managers strictly in accordance with order dated 13.12.1993 passed by the High Court in C.W.P.
No. 16464 of 1989 -- KT Kokne and others v. State of Haryana and others.
2.
The petitioner joined service in the Confed as Assistant Manager on 17111975.
He was promoted as General Manager vide order dated 2331981.
In the meanwhile, he filed C.W.P.
No. 3436 of 1979 questioning the appointments in the cadre of General Managers by direct recruitment by alleging that the same were violative of Staff Service Rules of the Haryana State Federation of Consumer's Cooperative Wholesale Stores Ltd Rules (for short, `the Staff Rules').
The same was dismissed in default on 20101983.
In 1989, the management of respondent No. 3 decided to effect economic cut to reduce the accumulated losses of Rs. 311 lacs and with that in view, the sanctioned cadre strength of various posts including General Managers was reduced.
Apprehending reversion from the post of General Manager, the petitioner filed C.W.P.
No. 16727 of 1989.
On notice, the Confed filed reply asserting therein that the petitioner was likely to be reverted because he was lower down in the seniority list of General Managers.
Similar petitioner was filed by others including some of the private respondents who were threatened with revision.
All the petitions were disposed of by a Division Bench vide order dated 13.12.1993 with the title case being C.W.P.
No. 16464 of 1989.
The Division Bench interpreted the provisions of the Staff Rules and held :  (a) the orders abolishing the posts were legally correct; (b) the termination/reversion of the services of the petitioners as a consequence of abolition of certain posts was justified, but the same had to be done by applying the principle of last come first go; and  (c) the rota rule was not applicable for determining inter-se seniority between the direct recruits and the promotees in terms of Rule 132 of the Staff Rules.
3.
The relevant portions of that order are reproduced below :  "As per Rule 94(a) of the Rules, 33-1/3% of the posts of General Managers/Assistant Managers are to be filled by direct recruitment and the rest 66-2/3% by promotion.
After abolition of the posts, the Confed was supposed to keep this ratio intact of the posts of General Managers/Assistant Managers left after the abolition.
We do not agree with the learned counsel for the petitioners, especially in C.W.P.
No. 16727 of 1989 that while determining seniority inter se between the direct recruits and the promotees, any rota has to be applied.
The seniority inter se promotees and direct recruits has to be determined in accordance with Rule 132 of the Rules and in case the date of appointment of a promotee and a direct recruit is the same, then promotee would rank senior under Rule 132(b) of the Rules.
While keeping the incumbents on the posts, which remain after abolition, the reservation for the members of the Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes etc. as per Rule 950 of the Rules of the promotes has to be kept in view.
This was also so observed in the interim order of the Motion Bench dated 22nd December, 1989 passed in C.W.P.
No. 16464 of 1989.
For the reasons recorded above, it is held that the order of abolition of posts is sustainable in law and cannot be quashed.
The termination/reversion of the services of the petitioners as a result of abolition of certain posts is also justified, but the same had to be done on the principle of `last came first go' as per the seniority determined in accordance with the observations made above and keeping in view the quota of the promotees and the direct recruits, as also of the reserved categories.
The writ petitions stand disposed of in terms of the observations made above.
There will be no order as to costs.
Let this judgment be implemented within three months of the receipt of the copy of the same.
Before parting with the judgment, it may be observed that if the termination/reversion of any of the petitioners has not been ordered by the Confed in accordance with the judgment and while implementing this judgment, the services of some of them have to be terminated or are to be reverted, in order to make room for some of the petitioners, the same should be done as a last resort and supernumerary posts be created to keep those employees while adjusting such petitioners.
The petitioners who are in service and are to be adjusted in the Confed in accordance with this judgment, would not get any arrears of pay.
Efforts should also be made to adjust those petitioners who have been working in the Confed by virtue of stay orders granted by this Court in various writ petitions, though by virtue of this judgment, their services may liable to be terminated/reverted.
This may be done by creating supernumerary posts."
4.
In the purported compliance of the above-mentioned order of the Division Bench, the Managing Director of the Confed issued notice dated 251994 for finalisation of the seniority list of the General Managers.
The petitioner submitted detailed reply/objections dated 951994 (Annexure P.10) and pointed out that the proposed seniority was not in consonance with the direction given by the High Court to maintain the quota of the promotees and the direct recruits.
The Managing Directors of respondent No. 3 rejected the objections of the petitioner and circulated the final seniority list vide Annexure P11 showing him at Sr. No. 32.
5.
The petitioner has questioned the legality of the impugned order mainly on the ground that it is contrary to the directions given by the High Court in C.W.P.
No. 16464 of 1989 and other connected petitions.
He has averred that recruitment to the post of General Manager is required to be made by promotion and direct recruitment in the ratio of 2:3 and 1:3, but this ratio was not kept in view while preparing the revised seniority list.
6.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondent No. 3, it has been averred that the petitioner cannot complain against the revised seniority list of General Managers because his plea for applying the rule of rotation was specifically rejected by the Division Bench.
It has been further averred that the impugned seniority has been prepared strictly in accordance with Rule 132 of the Staff Rules and the petitioner who was recruited as General Manager in 1981 cannot be ranked senior to the direct recruits who were appointed in the year 1979.
7.
In a separate written statement, respondent No. 10 has also relied on Rule 132 of the Staff Rules and pleaded that the petitioner cannot claims seniority above him.
8.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and have perused the record.
We have also gone through affidavit dated 1922004 of Shri Baldev Singh Saini, General Manager (Legal) of Confed.
In paragraphs 2 to 4 of his affidavit, Shri Baldev Singh has stated as under :  "2.
That in terms of the directions passed by the Division Bench of this Hon'ble Court in C.W.P.
No. 16464 of 1989 on 13th December, 1993, the final seniority list was prepared by Confed on 2171994.
The same is enclosed.
The said seniority list is under challenge in this petition.
3.
That in the years 1994, there were 22 persons working as General Manager against the sanctioned strength of 19.
Three persons over and above the sanctioned strength were retained due to the interim directions passed in this writ petition and also in Civil Writ Petition No. 18169 of 1995 titled SP Bishnoi and another v. State of Haryana.
4.
That out of the 22 persons working on the posts of General Managers, four persons were promotees and remaining 18 were direct recruits.
It is further submitted that four persons belonging to the Schedule Caste were direct recruits and two persons belonging to the Backward Class were promotees.
The Schedule Caste/Backward Class persons were kept on the roster point as the directions passed by a Division Bench of this Hon'ble Court on the 13th of December, 1993."
9.
In view of the statement made by Shri Baldev Singh that the petitioner is not being reverted from the post of General Manager, the only question which survives for consideration is whether the impugned order is liable to be quashed on the ground that the same has been passed in violation of the directions given by the Division Bench in C.W.P.
No. 16464 of 1989 and other connected petitions.
10.
There is no dispute between the parties that in the year 1994, the cadre strength of the General Managers was 19.
Therefore, by applying the ratio of 2/3rd : 1/3rd, at least 13 of the total 19 posts were liable to be allotted to the promotion quota and the remaining six to the direct recruitment quota and their inter se seniority ought to have been arranged accordingly.
However, in complete disregard of the quota of the promotees and the direct recruits, the management of respondent No. 3 prepared the seniority as per the dates of appointment in terms of Rule 132 of the Staff Rules.
11.
In our opinion, the list prepared by the Managing Director of respondents No. 3, which was circulated by the impugned order is per se contrary to the direction given by the High Court in C.W.P.
No. 16464 of 1989 and other connected petitions and on that ground alone, the same is liable to be quashed.
12.
In view of the above conclusion, we do not consider it necessary to deal with other issues raised by the parties.
13.
For the reason mentioned above, the writ petition is allowed.
The seniority list circulated vide order Annexure P11 is quashed and the management of respondent No. 3 is directed to re-draw the seniority of the General Mangers keeping in view the direction contained in order dated 13.12.1993 passed in C.W.P.
No. 16464 of 1989 and connected writ petitions.
The needful be done within two months from the date of receipt of copy of this order.
The parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.