NK Sodhi, J (Oral) - This petition has been filed under Article 226 of the Constitution for a mandamus directing the Guru Jambheshwar University, Hisar (for short the University) to consider the claim of the petitioner for admission to the M.Tech.
Computer Science and Engineering (MCSE) - 3 semesters course (hereinafter referred to as the MCSE course).
Admissions to the MCSE course are made through an entrance test and the candidates possessing minimum qualifications prescribed for the course alone could appear in that test.
Petitioner was not considered eligible as he did not possess any of the qualifications prescribed by the University.
He has passed his B.Sc.
examination from the Himachal Pradesh University, Shimla and thereafter he joined the M.Sc.
Laser Technology in the year 1998.
He passed this examination in the year 2000.
His grievance is that in the year 1998 when he joined the M.Sc.
Laser Technology course the same was one of the qualifications for seeking admission to the MCSE course but when he cleared M.Sc.
Laser Technology course the University deleted this course from the minimum qualifications and prescribed different qualifications for MCSE course for the academic session 2000-2001 making him ineligible.
2.
In response to the notice of motion the University has filed its reply admitting that for the academic session commencing in the year 1998-99 one of the minimum qualifications prescribed for the MCSE course was M.Sc.
Laser Technology but for the academic year 2000-2001 the experts in their wisdom decided to delete this subject from the minimum qualifications for the aforesaid course and prescribed the qualifications which are referred to in clause 51 of Chapter 5 of the Hand Book of Information issued by the University for the year 2000-2001.
Clause 51 of the Hand Book which prescribes the eligibility conditions for admission to the MCSE course for the academic year 2000-2001 reads as under :-  "51 M.Tech.
Computer Science and Engineering (MCSE - 3 Semesters (i) B.E./B.Tech./Equivalent degree in Computer Science/Computer Engineering/Computer Technology/Electronics Engineering/Electronics and Communication Engineering/MCA/MIT/M.Sc.
Computer Science/MSc.
Software Sciences with at least 60% marks with valid GATE score.
(ii) If the seat still remains vacant category-wise, the same will be filled up from the candidate(s) who possesses qualification as specified above (i) without valid GATE Score.
OR M.Sc.
in Physics/Maths/Applied Maths/Statistics/Electronics with at least 60% marks with valid GATE score.
OR B.E./B.Tech./equivalent degree in electrical engineering/Instrumentation Engineering/Instrumentation and Control Engineering with at least 60% marks with valid GATE score.
xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx."
A perusal of the aforesaid clause makes it clear that the petitioner does not possess any of the qualifications prescribed therein.
He was, therefore, ineligible to sit in the entrance test and the University was justified in not considering him for admission to the MCSE course.
The view that we have taken finds support from the observations of the Apex Court in Punjab University v. Devjani Chakrabarti and others, AIR 1984 SC 1444.
In the result, there is no merit in the writ petition and the same stands dismissed.
Petition dismissed.