Amitava Lala, J - The petitioner has challenged the impugned order passed by the President of West Bengal Secondary Education in exercise of the power conferred upon him under Section 28(2) of the West Bengal Board of Secondary Education Act, 1963 as amended and on the basis of the resolution dated 31st July, 1998 of the Executive Committee of the Board which was communicated by the Secretary of the Board under such impugned order dated 19th February, 1999.
2.
It appears from the impugned order that the upgradation of the School was disallowed by the Board on various grounds which are as follows:  "(a) The appointments of the teaching and non-teaching Staff as organiser were not made admissible in GO 117-SE dated 24th February, 1995; (b) Though there is a Girls High School at 10 Km.
away from the petitioner School, yet there are several High Schools within a radius of 2 to 5 Km.
with co-educational facilities from the petitioner School; (c) Furniture as well as sanitary arrangements of the petitioner's School are not adequate; (d) As the Board has already recognised other Secondary Schools in the area, it cannot be said that right to education of children guaranteed as fundamental right under Article 21 of the Constitution of India has been affected/infringed with".
3.
Challenging the said impugned order, the writ petition has been made.
Mr. Ashok De, learned senior Counsel, appearing on behalf of the petitioner has contended that this is a third attempt on their part and the upgradation was refused by the authority for some reason or other.
In any event, the grounds as taken by the Board are not acceptable grounds for the purpose of non- consideration of their case as to the question of upgradation in compliance with the earlier order passed by a Single Judge of this Court on 14th January, 1998 in WP No. 149(W) of 1998 (Mr. Sutashar Kanti Barik & Ors. v. State of West Bengal & Ors.).
4.
I have considered the submissions made by the petitioner as well as the respondents at length.
Learned Counsel appearing for the respondent has stated that the case of the petitioner was not routed through proper channel before the Board to consider the issue having all materials.
Moreover, no views of the State Government have been given in this respect.
Under such circumstances, the case of the petitioner cannot be considered towards upgradation of the Institution.
On inquiry and as placed, I have gone through a Division Bench Judgment of this Court reported in 1998(1) CLJ 141, Nabadwip Chandra Das & Ors. v. The West Bengal Board of Secondary Education and Ors. where I find that at least two similar grounds for rejection as to the question of teaching and non-teaching staff and the distance of the School within a radious of 4 to 5 kms.
have been considered by such Division Bench as wrongful grounds for rejection of recognition of the Institution.
I agree with Mr. De to the extent that there is a gulf of difference in between the recognition of Institution and upgradation of Institution.
The case of upgradation is far superior than the case of recognition.
Recognition means baby is yet of born wherein (whereas ?)
upgradation means nourishment of baby born.
The grounds in case of the recognition cannot be fit grounds for upgradation.
Although no such rule has been placed before this court as to whether the Education Department, Government of West Bengal laid down any rules for upgradation or not, but it appears from the Memo No. 65 dated 21st July, 1986 that the office of the District Inspector of Schools (SE), 24 Parganas issued directions in regard to upgradation which are as follows:  "(1) The School proposed for upgradation to a High School must have a reserve fund for at least Rs. 5000/- and the School proposed for upgradation to a 4- Class Jr. High School or proposed for De novo 4-Class Jr. High School must have a Reserve Fund of at least Rs. 3000/-; (2) The School not having qualified Headmaster/Headmistress will not be recommended for upgradation to a High School."
5.
Such memo although was not issued by the Education Department but the view applicable in respect of one district may be considered good view in respect of other districts.
Moreover, I fail to understand as to why discrimination will be made in respect of other districts when a view has already been taken in respect of one district.
6.
The recognition is standing on different foundation.
Sometimes Government may be apprehensive about recognition.
There are many views in respect thereto which has already been considered by the Supreme Court as well as by this Court on numerous occasions, but once the School is given recognition upto a particular level, such School reasonably or legitimately expects that one day or other the School might have been (sic) on certain basis.
But it appears to this court that.
on the third occasion such upgradation was refused taking a similar plea which is available mainly for the purpose of recognition of the School.
7.
The important part of the impugned order is that the appointments of the staffs are not admissible as organiser.
But how their service will be regularised until and unless the School is upgraded is not known to this Court.
Moreover our society especially outside the modernized city in respect of education of the girls is not so much advanced that the parents of the girls of adolescence will send them for studying in Class IX and X to an upgraded School 10 Kms.
away from their respective houses will be forced for the purpose of their education to any Co-education School within a radious of 2 to 5 Kms.
This stand is contrary to the very foundation of the famous judgment of the Supreme Court in Unni Krishnan v. State of AP, reported in 1993(1) SCC 645 : AIR 1993 Supreme Court 2178 : 1993(2) SCT 512 (SC).
The advancement of education is needed and to that extent such judgment is clear.
The only clarification therein is that the recognition or upgradation are in the hands of the authority concerned.
So far as the educational facilities are concerned the ratio of the judgment is squarely applicable.
8.
In the premises, I do not find any reason as to why I shall allow the impugned order to continue and again and again send back the matter for the purpose of consideration by the authority.
9.
Under such circumstances, I have no other alternative but to pass a mandatory order directing the Board to allow the upgradation upto the extent of Class X level within a period of one month from date upon completion of all formalities and with the direction upon the School authority to change the infrastructural value as to the extent of sanitary system and furniture etc., if any, upon enquiring as to whether School has reserve fund for at least Rs. 5000/- and also the School is having appropriate Headmaster or not which are basic conditions for upgradation of schools in respect of other districts.
Therefore, I have to dispose of this matter with such order but without imposition of any order as to costs.
10.
Since I have taken all the points of the respondents on his verbal submission on the basis of impugned order under challenge and as the respondents have not filed any affidavit it is recorded the allegation, if any, in the writ petition is not admitted by them.
11.
The writ petition is accordingly disposed of.
Petition allowed.