GS Singhvi, J - The question that arises for adjudication in this petition is whether the petitioner is entitled to be absorbed in the service of the State of Haryana ?
2.
The facts on which there is no contest between the parties are that the petitioner, who was initially appointed as Clerk in Samaj Kalyan High School, Rohat (Sonepat), was later on appointed as Social Studies Master in the same school and when the government took over the school in 1994, he was holding that post.
The petitioner's request for absorption in government service was declined by the Director, Secondary Education, Haryana on the ground that at the time of taking over the school, he was working against the unsanctioned post.
Feeling aggrieved by the said decision, which was communicated to him vide Annexure P6, the petitioner has filed this petition with the prayer that the letter Annexure P6 be quashed and the respondents be directed to absorb him in the government service as Social Studies Master w.e.f.
191994.
3.
The respondents have opposed the prayer of the petitioner on the ground that he was appointed as Social Studies Master against an unsanctioned post.
According to them, a person appointed against a post which has not been sanctioned by the competent authority is not entitled to be absorbed in government service.
In support of this assertion, the respondents have relied on the instructions issued by the Director, Secondary Education vide letter Annexure R.2 dated 4101994.
4.
The writ petition was allowed by this Court on 1771996.
That order reads as under :  "Petitioner was appointed as Clerk on regular basis against a regular sanctioned post by the Management of Samaj Kalyan High School, Rohat, District Sonepat, on 141980.
He was granted master scale by the Management in January, 1983.
Petitioner was promoted as SS Master on 171992.
On 191994, government decided to take over staff of Samaj Kalyan High School, Rohat.
Policy, Annexure P.3, was framed for taking over the school along with the staff.
Petitioner was not issued letter of appointment on ad hoc basis as per the policy; on the ground that he was not working against a sanctioned post for the purpose of grant-in-aid.
Petitioner has challenged the action of the respondents in not absorbing him as SS Master from the date of other staff was absorbed with consequential benefits.
The point in issue stands concluded by a decision of this Court in Smt. Shakuntla Devi v. State of Haryana and others, CWP No. 15578 of 1995 wherein similarly situated teacher of the same school challenged the action of the respondents in not absorbing her in the service on the same grounds.
It was held as under : "Be that as it may, we are of the opinion that in the absence of any denial of the averments made in the writ petition, the petition will have to be decided on the premises that the averments made in the petition are correct.
Taking the statement of the petitioner to be correct, we find no justification in the action of the respondents to bring about an end to the service of the petitioner in an arbitrary and cavalier fashion.
The fact that the petitioner had served for a period of more than 12 years by the time Annexure P.8 was issued is not in dispute and, therefore, the respondents could not have dispensed with the service of the petitioner on the assumption that the petitioner was working against an unsanctioned post.
Moreover, in the face of the fact that the school was taken over along with class-III and class-IV servants, it is not open to the respondents now to contend that service of the petitioner was not taken over or that she has no right to continue in service.
Moreover, before taking an action to bring an end to the employment of the petitioner, the minimum required to be done by the respondents was that they should have given a notice and an opportunity of hearing to the petitioner before dispensing with the service of the petitioner on the basis of Annexure P.8.
That has admittedly not been done and, therefore, the action of the respondents is liable to be nullified on the short ground of violation of the principles of natural justice."
Accordingly, this writ petition is allowed in terms of the decision in Smt. Shakuntla Devi's case (supra).
Respondents are directed to take the petitioner back in service and give him all monetary benefits by treating him to be continuing in service without any interruption.
No costs."
5.
In compliance of the direction given by the Court, the District Education Officer issued order dated 19101996 for petitioner's absorption in government service.
Simultaneously, the State of Haryana filed petition for Special Leave to Appeal No. 6571 of 1997 which was allowed by the Apex Court on 1181997.
Their Lordships set aside the order dated 1771996 and remanded the case of this Court for fresh decision.
6.
Taking advantage of the reversal of this Court's order dated 1771996, the respondent No. 2 issued order Annexure P12 dated 1081998 for relieving the petitioner from the service.
7.
Threatened with the prospects of un-employment after 18 years of service, the petitioner filed C.M.
No. 19263 of 1998 for stay of the operation of order dated 1081998.
Notice of that application was given to the respondents on 891998 and the hearing of the case was adjourned to 1091998.
On the next date of hearing, the learned Deputy Advocate General was granted 2 weeks time to file reply and the case was adjourned to 24.9.1998.
Simultaneously, operation of the order dated 1081998 was stayed till 2591998.
On the next date of hearing, we accepted the request of the learned Deputy Advocate General for grant of another adjournment for filing reply along with relevant documents.
Today, Shri Jaswant Singh has filed reply to the Civil Miscellaneous Application along with Annexures R.1 and R.2.
8.
Learned counsel for the petitioner argued that in view of paragraph 3 of the letter Annexure R1, issued by the Secretary to Government, Punjab, Education Department containing the policy for take over of the private schools, which is applicable to the State of Haryana as well, the respondents are duty bound to consider the petitioner's case for absorption subject to his being found suitable and the instructions issued by the respondent No. 2 vide memo dated 4101994 are liable to be ignored being inconsistent with the policy framed by the government.
Shri Malik relied on the order dated 1771997 passed in Sat Pal Kumar v. State of Haryana and others, 1997(3) RSJ 695 and urged that Annexures P6 and P12 may be quashed and a direction be issued to the respondents to adjudge the suitability of the petitioner for permanent absorption in government service.
Shri Jaswant Singh submitted that the conditions incorporated in the memo dated 4101994 are in addition to those laid down by the government and, therefore, an employee like the petitioner who was employed in the service of the private school against an unsanctioned post cannot be absorbed in government service.
9.
We have thoughtfully considered the respective submissions and are inclined to agree with Shri Malik that Annexures P.1 and P12 deserves to be quashed.
Paragraph 3 of Annexure R1 and paragraph 7 of the memo dated 4101994 (Annexure R.2), to which reference has been made by learned counsel for the parties, read as under :  Paragraph 3 of Annexure R1  "3.
As regards the staff of a privately managed schools to be taken over the following instructions should be observed : (i) The Education Department will scrutinise the case of each teacher.
Only trained hands with satisfactory record of service will be taken over.
No untrained teachers or any one whose record of service is found to be unsatisfactory, shall be taken over.
(ii) The teachers will be treated as fresh entrants and they will be placed at the bottom of the Govt. teacher's cadre.
No credit whatsoever of previous service will be given.
(iii) The staff will be given Govt. grades and their pay will be fixed according to rules.
In no case they would be granted better scale of pay than their counterparts in Govt.
service."
Paragraph 7 of Annexure R.2.
7.
The appointments of all the Class III and IV employees working in the school against the post sanctioned by the Govt. may be made by the D.E.O.
Sonepat on ad hoc basis within a week of the receipt of this letter.
The appointments should be made respectively w.e.f.
191994.
They should be appointed on regular basis after their candidature is approved by the SSS Board, Haryana, Chandigarh, he will have no claim to that post."
If we hold that the respondent No. 2 had the jurisdiction to lay down additional conditions of eligibility for absorption of the employees of private schools in government service, the decision of the said respondent declining to direct the petitioner's absorption in the service of the Government of Haryana cannot be faulted.
However, in view of the judgment in Sat Pal Kumar's case (supra), we are unable to agree with Shri Jaswant Singh that the respondent No. 2 could issue instructions laying down conditions of eligibility for absorption in addition to those laid down by the government.
A careful reading of that judgment shows that the Court negatived the contention similar to the one advanced by Shri Jaswant Singh by making the following observations :  "The respondents have tried to justify their action not to absorb the petitioner in government service on the basis of the instructions issued by the Director, Secondary Education, Haryana to the District Education Officer, Ambala vide memo dated 13101995.
No doubt para 7 of the instructions issued by the Director speaks of the absorption of all Class-III and IV employees against the posts sanctioned by the government but in view of the fact that no such condition was incorporated in the sanction issued by the Governor at the time of take over, the Director, Secondary Education, being an authority subordinate to the government could not have imposed additional conditions for the purpose of absorption of the existing employees.
Moreover, the claim of the petitioner for absorption on the post of Clerk is strengthened by the fact that the class-IV employees of the erstwhile DAV High School who were initially not absorbed in the service on account of the fact that they had been appointed against the unsanctioned posts were subsequently absorbed vide order Annexure P.8 dated 1761996 conveyed by the District Education Officer, Ambala to the Head Master, Government High School, Udaipur (Ambala).
The respondents have failed to offer any explanation on this count.
The learned Deputy Advocate General could not show as to how the Class-IV employees, who were appointed in DAV High School against the unsanctioned posts, were absorbed in government service in spite of the directions issued by the Director on 13101995.
He also could not explain as to why a different treatment is being meted out to the petitioner.
Therefore, we have no hesitation to hold that failure of the respondents to consider the petitioner for absorption on the post of Clerk in Government service is arbitrary and discriminatory and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India."
In our opinion, the ratio of the decision of Sat Pal Kumar's case is clearly attracted in the case of the petitioner and, therefore, we deem it just and proper to grant relief to the petitioner in terms of that decision.
10.
We may also mention that while allowing this petition on 1771996, this Court had relied on the judgment rendered in CWP No. 15578 of 1995, Shakuntla Devi v. State of Haryana and SLP No. (Civil).../96(CC 4628/96) filed against the order passed in that case was dismissed by the Supreme Court on 1591996 after issuing notice to the writ petitioner.
11.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is allowed.
The letter Annexure P6 as well as the order Annexure P12, which the respondent No. 2 passed during the pendency of the writ petition are quashed with a direction that within 4 months of the receipt of certified copy of this order, the respondents should adjudge the suitability of the petitioner for permanent absorption in government service.
If he is found suitable, then the petitioner shall be absorbed with effect from the date other similarly situated persons were absorbed in government service.
Petition allowed.