V Gopala Gowda, J - The appellant was selected for the post of Sub- Inspector of Police but appointment order was not issued to him since criminal cases had been registered against him.
On the representation dated 3051994 submitted by him to consider his case, an endorsement was issued on 8121995 stating that on verification about his character and antecedents, it was found that criminal case was registered and hence appointment order was not issued.
The appellant has not challenged the said endorsement.
2.
After he was acquitted in the criminal case, he submitted another representation on 2111996 seeking employment.
The same was rejected by an endorsement dated 20121997.
In the meantime, one K. Venkatesh Shetty, who was similarly placed, succeeded in his case.
In his case a Division Bench of this Court held that under Rule 5(7) of General Recruitment Rules only persons convicted of the offences involving moral turpitude could be disqualified and directed appointment of Venkatesh Shetty to the post of Sub-Inspector.
Accordingly he was appointed.
3.
Citing the case of Venkatesh Shetty, the appellant submitted a representation on 12.5.1999 and requesting to consider his case for appointment.
He also filed an application before the Karnataka Administrative Tribunal seeking a direction to issue appointment order.
Since members of the Tribunal were not there, the appellant filed WP No. 30389/99 inter-alia seeking to quash the endorsement dated 20121997 and direction to issue appointment order.
The learned single Judge rejected the writ petition by the order under challenge.
Aggrieved by the same, the present appeal is filed.
4.
We have heard the learned counsel for the appellant and perused the impugned order.
The learned single Judge has held that the petition was hopelessly belated.
It was found that the selection process was completed in the year 1990.
The petitioner kept quiet.
He also did not challenge the endorsement dated 8121995 rejecting his request.
It was further noticed that only after Venkatesh Shetty's case was decided, he submitted representation, which was also rejected.
The learned single Judge also found that Venkatesh Shetty approached the Tribunal immediately after his non- selection but the appellant has not done so and therefore Venkatesh Shetty's case will not come to the aid of the appellant.
5.
Even on merits also the learned single Judge held that the petitioner is not entitled for the reliefs sought for by him.
It was held that appellant was admittedly involved in criminal cases and his subsequent acquittal will not confer a right on him to seek employment in respect of the selection which was completed several years ago.
The learned Judge held that subsequent acquittal of the appellant will not invalidate his non-selection.
6.
We are fully in agreement with the findings recorded by the learned single Judge.
The appellant has no vested right to seek employment after a lapse of several years.
It is an admitted fact that even before the police service the appellant was involved in criminal cases.
A person involved in criminal cases cannot expect appointment as Sub-Inspector of Police and he is not entitled to it.
The learned single Judge has rightly rejected the writ petition and we do not see any ground to interfere with the said order.
7.
Writ appeal is rejected.
Appeal dismissed.