GS Singhvi, J - Aggrieved by his ouster from the zone of eligibility determined by the Haryana Staff Selection Commission (hereinafter described as 'the Commission') for recruitment on the post of Lecturer in Economics, the petitioner has filed this petition for directing the Commission to award marks to him in lieu of the degree of B.Ed.
by treating it to be equivalent to post-graduate qualification and then consider him for selection and appointment against the advertised post.
2.
The details of the academic and training qualifications of the petitioner are :-  i) Matric from the Board of School Education Haryana - 1986. ii) Senior Secondary Examination from the Board of School Education Haryana - 1988. iii) BA from Kurukshetra University - 1991. iv) MA in Economics from Kurukshetra University - 1993. v) B.Ed.
from Kurukshetra University - 1996.
3.
The petitioner is presently working as Lecturer in Economics on the basis of contractual appointment offered to him on November 10, 1997.
He applied for regular selection in pursuance of the advertisement Annexure P-8 issued by the Commission.
His contention is that the criteria framed by the Commissioner for short-listing the number of candidates to be called for viva voce is liable to be quashed being arbitrary, capricious and unreasonable and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
His other plea is that the Commission should be directed to award him one mark in lieu of the degree of B.Ed.
and then interview him for final selection.
4.
Shri SP Laler argued that the petitioner, who is a member of Backward Classes, is entitled to be called for viva voce and the decision of the Commission not to award marks in lieu of the degree of B.Ed.
is per se arbitrary and unjustified.
Learned counsel submitted that the BA is the minimum qualification for entry in the B.Ed.
course and, therefore, B.Ed.
should be treated at par with post-graduate qualification for the purpose of award of marks under para (d) of the criteria.
According to the learned counsel by award of one mark in lieu of B.Ed.
qualifications, the petitioner will become eligible to be called for viva voce.
He also challenged the criteria framed by the Commission on the ground that it arbitrarily excludes the training qualification of B.Ed.
for the purpose of evaluation of over all academic attainments of the candidates.
5.
In our opinion, there is no merit in the contentions urged by Shri Laler.
The relevant extract of the criteria framed by the Commission, which has been circulated vide Annexure-P.9 reads as under :-  "Lecturer in the subject of Economics (Male & Female) (School Cadre) will be selected on the conditions given below : Condition  a) Matric/10+2 and its equivalent, above examination, 010 of percentage of marks obtained in both, whichever is the highest.
: 10 Marks b) BA/B.Sc.
015 of the marks obtained :  15 Marks c) MA in concerned subject M.Sc.
040 of the marks obtained, :  40 Marks.
d) Maximum/additional education qualification i) PhD in concerned subject, :  3 Marks ii) MPhil.
in concerned subject, :  2 Marks iii) Post-graduate degree in any other subject or M.Ed., : 1 Mark Note : These candidates who fall in block (i) to (iii) they may give mark from one block in which they can have maximum benefit.
No. of candidates of General category and reserved category have been informed more than 8 times than the posts and the call letters for the interview will be issued only to those candidates who have obtained the marks as prescribed.
Subject Minimum Marks Total Marks 1.
Economics (Male) 3704 37.00 2.
Economics (Female)  3961 3900 3.
Economics Reserved Category, (Male) + + B.C.-A 33.92 3300 B.C.-B 3381 3300 2.
Economics (Female) + + B.C.-A 3511.
3500 B.C.-B 34.91 3400 In addition to the above mentioned, the number of candidates of reserved category is not more than 8 times than the post in concerned subject, all of them have been called for the interview."
A bare reading of Clause (d) of the extract of criteria reproduced above shows that post-graduate degree in a subject other than Economics or M.Ed.
entitles a candidate to earn one mark.
M.Ed.
is a training degree which the candidate can acquire after doing graduation and B.Ed.
In other words, a candidate can be admitted in the course leading to the award of degree of M.Ed.
after doing BA/B.Sc./B.Com.
and B.Ed.
Therefore, the degree of M.Ed.
has to be treated as higher than the degree of B.Ed.
and by no stretch of imagination B.Ed.
can be treated as equivalent to M.Ed.
or Post-graduate degree.
6.
An issue somewhat similar to the one raised in his petition was considered by the Supreme Court in Dr. Prit Singh v. Mr. SK Mangal and others, 1992(3) SCT 738 (SC) : JT 1992(5) SC 381.
The plea raised in that case was that M.Ed.
should be treated as equivalent to post-graduate degree.
While rejecting the plea, their Lordships of the Supreme Court held as under :-  "It need not be pointed out that the Degree of Master of Arts is an academic qualification, whereas Degree of Master of Education is a professional/qualification.
According to us, when the qualifications required "a consistently good academic record with first or high second class (55% marks/grade B in the seven point scale) Master's Degree in any subject"; it shall mean an academic qualification lie (like ?)
Master of Arts.
The said requirement was prescribed with a consistently good academic record.
That Master's Degree shall mean Degree of Master of Arts in any subject, is apparent also from the fact that apart from that degree the candidate was required to possess also "Degree in Education which will mean B.Ed.
or M.Ed.
Normally if the expression "Master's Degree" was to include even the Master's Degree in Education (M.Ed.)
there was no necessity of prescribing the third requirement of "Degree in Education".
If the claim of the appellant that "Master's Degree" shall include a Degree of Master of Education, is accepted it will lead to an anomalous position.
A person having secured third division in MA who cannot be considered by and University even for the post of Lecturer, will become qualified for being appointed as Principal of any College, if later he secures high second class marks in M.Ed.
Examination by completing a course of one year.
It need not be pointed out that the sole object of prescribing qualification that the candidate must have a consistently good academic record with first or high second class Master's Degree for appointment to the post of a Principal, is to select most suitable person in order to maintain excellence and standard or teaching in the institution apart from administration.
In the present case there is no dispute that in the Master of Arts Examination, the appellant secured only 471% marks which is not even the second division.
We were informed that in the concerned University, second division is 50% and above.
The appellant had not secured even second class marks in his Master of Arts or high second class (55%).
The irresistible conclusion is that on the relevant date the appellant did not possess the requisite qualifications."
7.
A similar view has been expressed by this Court in C.W.P.
No. 11956 of 1996, Mrs. Dilsher Kaur v. State of Punjab and others, decided on 2871998, while quashing the appointment of a candidate on the ground that she did not possess the post-graduate qualification and the degree of M.Ed.
cannot be equated with the post-graduate degree.
In view of these judicial pronouncements we do not have any hesitation to hold that the degree of B.Ed.
cannot be treated equivalent to Post-graduate degree so as to entitle the petitioner to claim an additional mark.
8.
The challenge to the jurisdiction of the Commission to frame the criteria for short-listing the candidates to be called for viva voce deserves to be rejected because it is a well established proposition of law that the recruiting authority is not bound to invite for selection all those who apply for recruitment in pursuance of the advertisement and who fulfil the essential qualifications and that the competent authority can evolve appropriate mechanism to call a limited number of candidates for selection.
Reference in this connection can appropriately be made to the following decisions of the Supreme Court and of this Court :-  i) Ashok Kumar Yadav and others v. Union of India and others, AIR 1987 SC 454; ii) VJ Thomas and others v. Union of India and others, AIR 1985 SC 1055; iii) SB Mathur and others.
v. Hon'ble the Chief Justice of Delhi High Court and others, AIR 1988 SC 2073; iv) The Government of Andhra Pradesh v. P Dalip and another, JT 1993(2) SC 138;  v) Madhya Pradesh Public Service Commission v. Navnit Kumar Potdar and another, 1995(1) SCT 50 (SC) : AIR 1995 SC 77;  vi) Union of India and another v. T Sundararaman and others, 1997(2) SCT 810 (SC) : JT 1997(5) SC 48 and  vii) Dr. Lovekesh Kumar and others v. State of Punjab and others, 1998(1) RSJ 566.
9.
Thus, we do not find any merit in the submission of the learned counsel that the respondent-Commission could not have resorted to the method of short-listing and thereby exclude the petitioner from the zone of candidates found eligible to be called for viva voce.
10.
Shri Laler's argument that criteria should be quashed because it does not take into account the degree of B.Ed.
cannot be accepted for the simple reason that it is for the Court to assume the role of recruiting authority and decided the mode and criteria of selection, more particularly, because it has not been shown that the impugned criteria is per se arbitrary.
11.
In the last, Shri Laler sought to invoke the principle of rounding-off of marks for the purpose of directing the respondent-Commission to consider the candidature of the petitioner.
He submitted that by applying this principle, the 328 marks of the petitioner should be treated as 33 and by doing so, the petitioner will become entitled to be considered for selection for appointment as J.B.T.
Teacher.
However, we are unable to accept this argument in view of the unequivocal rejection of theory of rounding off marks by the Full Bench and by the Division Bench of his Court in Kuldip Singh v. State of Punjab and others, 1997(5) SLR 133 : 1997(3) SCT 454 (P&H); Sanjeev Kumar v. Panjab University, 1996(3) RSJ 83 : 1996(3) All Instant Judgments 156; Rajbir Singh v. The Punjab State Electricity Board and others, 1997(5) SLR 143 : 1997(3) SCT 462 (P&H); and C.W.P.
No. 16470 of 1997, Parminderjeet Kaur another v. State of Punjab and others, decided on 6111997.
12.
No other point has been argued.
13.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.