RL Anand, J - CM 23667/2000 is allowed as prased for.
In this writ petition the point for determination is very short : "Whether the petitioner is entitled to the medical reimbursement of the entire amount spent by her when she got the treatment of heart surgery in BRS Heart Institute, Kot Billa, which is not a recognised institution.
If not, whether she is entitled to the rates which are applicable to the AIIMS/PGI?"
2.
Admittedly, the petitioner Shrimati Krishna, retired as Block Health Assistant and after retirement she started residing at village Sadhaura, Tehsil Jagadhri, District Yamuna Nagar (Haryana).
She initially suffered first heart attack on 9111998 and she was treated at Community Health Centre, Sadhaura and then she was referred to General Hospital Yamuna Nagar for specialist advice.
While rushing towards Yamuna Nagar from Sadhaura via Jagadhri, her condition became very critical and she had to be taken to the Sabharwal Hospital, Jagadhri at about 1.A.M.
on 10111998.
Then she was taken to PGI because she could not improve there.
In the PGI she was admitted to the emergency ward where she was diagnosed as a case of complete heart block.
On 15111998 she was discharged.
On 16.11.1998 she again started feeling uncomfortable at heart and on 19111998, she suffered her second massive heart attack and she was again rushed towards Jagadhri in a vehicle on way to P.G.I., Chandigarh.
On the way her condition became bad and she was taken to Kapil Hospital, near Jagadhri.
There, she remained on emergency medical treatment for survival up to 22111998 under the care of the Heart and Chest Specialist, Dr. Kapil Dev.
On 22111998, her condition became more critical and it was thought proper that immediate heart by-pass surgery was the only way to save her life from the nearest available Heart Surgery Hospital from Jagadhri.
He referred her to the BRS Heart Institute and Research Centre, located in village Kot Billa, about 20 kms prior to Panchkula on the Jagadhri-Panchkula Road.
The angiography was done and thereafter, she was operated upon for by-pass surgery on 29111998.
She was discharged from the hospital on 11121998.
According to the petitioner she spent Rs. 150 lacs by way of package deal.
Apart from that she spent Rs. 19,000/- on the pace maker.
In this regard she incurred a sum of Rs. 1,69,000/-.
She submitted the bills to the authority which have been declined on the ground that BRS Institute is not a recognised one.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
According to the respondents, the petitioner got the treatment from the institute which is not a recognised and she was not referred for any private institute and, therefore, she is not entitled to the medical reimbursement as per the policy of the Government.
4.
I have heard Shri Amrit Paul, Advocate, appearing on behalf of the petitioner and Shri Yash Pal, learned AAG, Haryana, appearing on behalf of the respondents and with their assistance have gone through the record of the case.
5.
I do not dispute with the policy of the State Government which has been carved out with a purpose.
The purpose is very landable and obvious.
Treatment, primarily, should be from a recognised institution otherwise every patient will run to private institution and in this manner, he can give the bill which may not be acceptable to the State Government.
This type of Rule will always admit one exception if urgency so demands.
If a patient does not get proper time and occasion to reach an approved institution because of exigency as has happened in the present case, whether the claim of such patient should be rejected outrightly.
The answer is in the negative.
Rather the view of this Court is that such a patient should get the medical reimbursement for which he was entitled but his medical reimbursement should be at such rates which are applicable to a recognised institution like PGI or AIIMS.
This will not only meet the object of the policy and instructions framed by the Government but it will also give a source of solace to a genuine patient who has spent on his medical treatment.
6.
In this view of the matter, the writ is allowed and directions are given to the State of Haryana to make the payment, out of the bill of Rs. 1,50,000/- to the petitioner, as per rates as applicable to the PGI/AIIMS, whichever are less.
The payment should be sanctioned within three months from the receipt of the copy of this order.
So far as Rs. 19,000/- spent by the petitioner on the pace maker is concerned, this is reimbursable as a whole.
7.
The writ petition is allowed in the above terms.
There is no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.