RL Anand, J - Amar Nath, the petitioner, has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for quashing of the orders, Annexures P-1 and P-3, vide which the claim of the petitioner for disability pension has been rejected.
It has been further prayed by the petitioner that the respondents be directed to release the disability pension to him w.e.f.
151995.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he was enrolled in the Air Force on 151970.
He was placed in Category `A' at the time of admission in the Air Force.
He suffered disability, i.e. NIDDM to the extent of 30% and chronic cholcystitis.
As per the petitioner, the disease was attributable to the military service and, therefore, he is entitled to the benefit of disability pension.
His claim was illegally rejected on 241996.
The petitioner filed an appeal, which was also rejected on 2121997.
With this short plea, the petitioner has prayed for the grant of the disability pension.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents, who filed the written statement.
The stand of the respondents is that the diseases suffered by the petitioner are constitutional in nature and occurred to civilians equally and these diseases are neither attributable nor aggravated by the Air Force service as the service had no effect on the causation of the disability.
It was also the case of the respondents that the individual disability of the petitioner was less than 20% but the composite disability was 20%.
4.
I have heard the counsel for the parties and with their assistance have gone through the record of this case.
5.
The first point for determination in this case would be whether the diseases suffered by the petitioner can be held to be attributable to the Air Force Service and the answer of this court is in the affirmative, as is clear from Annexure P-3, wherein it was stated by the Govt. that the petitioner was being released from the service on account of invalidating diseases, referred to above.
However, it was observed by the Govt. that the disability suffered by the petitioner was constitutional in nature.
6.
The plea of the Govt. cannot be accepted in view of the judgment rendered in Jai Bhagwan Rohilla v. Chief of the AIR Staff & another, 1999(6) SLR 442 : 2000(1) SCT 910 (Delhi), wherein it was found that the petitioner of the said case was suffering from Insulin Dependent Diabetes Mellitus.
In the present case, the petitioner was found to be suffering from Non Insulin Dependent Diabetes Mellitus.
On account of diet compulsions, this disease can be suffered by a soldier.
7.
A combined reading of Deepak Kumar Singh v. Union of India & others, 68 (1997) Delhi Law Times 788, in which the Medical Board declared that the soldier was a case of Insulin Dependent Diabetes Mellitus, and Surjit Singh v. The Secretary to the Govt. of India, Ministry of Defence, New Delhi & others, 1999(5) SLR 59 : 1999(4) SCT 645 (P&H), would show that the disease of NIDDM is such a disease which can be suffered by a soldier when he is serving the armed forces.
8.
The ancillary point for determination, which now arises is with regard to the extent of disability suffered by the petitioner.
9.
It has been stated by the respondents in the written statement that the composite disability of the petitioner was 20%.
In these circumstances, the petitioner is entitled to the benefit of disability pension.
10.
Resultantly, I allow this writ petition by setting aside the orders, Annexures P-1 and P-3, and directions are given to the respondents to release the disability pension of the petitioner w.e.f.
151995 within three months from the receipt of a copy of this order, failing which the petitioner shall be entitled to interest @ 12%.
The petitioner shall appear before the Re- survey Medical Board as and when called.
Petition allowed.