RL Anand, J - Shri Rupinder Singh petitioner has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for the issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari and he has sought the quashment of order Annexure P-4, vide which the respondents have deducted the amount of Rs. 7700/- from the medical reimbursement bills of the petitioner, incurred by him on the treatment of his wife Smt. Manjit Kaur and the petitioner has sought the direction of this Court in the form of mandamus against the respondents directing them to pay the amount of Rs. 7700/- deducted from the medical reimbursement bills.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner was that he joined Pepsu Government in the year 1946 and the said State of Pepsu merged into State of Punjab in the year 1956.
The petitioner retired as Under Secretary (Revenue) Punjab and he was entitled to the medical reimbursement for himself, his wife and dependents.
On 27111994, the wife of the petitioner met with a road accident and she developed chronic disease.
She sustained head injuries.
Her treatment continued till her death which took place on 3071996 in the PGI, Chandigarh.
The petitioner submitted medical claim bills of Rs. 41,483.41 and Rs. 11,77760 on 491996.
The total amount of bills was Rs. 53,26126.
The respondents sanctioned a sum of Rs. 40,584/- against the medical bills and Rs. 7,700/- were deducted from the second medical bill of Rs. 11,77760 illegally and by a non-speaking order.
The petitioner gave a legal notice on 981997 to the respondents but to no effect.
Hence the present writ petition.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents who filed the written statement and denied the allegations.
The broad defence of the respondent-authorities is that petitioner is not entitled to the medical reimbursement with regard to physiotherapy which was got done by the wife of the petitioner from the open market.
Since the treatment has not been obtained by the wife of the petitioner from the PGI or the recognised hospitals, therefore, Government was justified in not making the payment of Rs. 7,700/- to the petitioner.
4.
I have heard Shri D.C. Dhaula, Advocate, appearing on behalf of the petitioner and Mrs. Gurveen H Singh, learned AAG, Punjab, appearing on behalf of the respondents.
5.
So far as the right of the petitioner to get the medical reimbursement qua his wife is concerned, it is not being disputed by the respondents.
It is also not disputed that the wife of the petitioner met with an accident and she ultimately died on account of the injuries on 3071996.
It is admitted at the bar by the counsel for the petitioner that the physiotherapy was recommended to the wife of the petitioner but that treatment was got done from the open market and not from the PGI or recognised institutions.
6.
In this view of the matter, the sole point which survives for determination is as to whether the petitioner is entitled to the medical reimbursement with regard to that treatment which was got done from the open market or not ?
7.
Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner submitted that physiotherapy is an integral part of the treatment and, therefore, the petitioner is entitled to the amount of Rs. 7,700/-.
8.
I am not in a position to subscribe to the argument raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
There is not dispute that the physiotherapy might be an integral part of the treatment but the point is whether the petitioner's wife as ever recommended by the Government doctors to get this treatment from the open market.
If a treatment has been obtained by the petitioner for his wife against the rules, in that situation, the petitioner would not be entitled to any medical reimbursement.
9.
In this view of the matter, I hold that the order issued by the Government-respondents (Annexure P-4) is in accordance with rules.
No relief is available to the petitioner.
10.
No merit.
Dismissed.
Petition dismissed.