RL Anand, J. (Oral) - Petitioner Madan Jaspal through this writ petition is seeking directions of this Court in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to reimburse the expenses of Hemo-dialysis being undertaken by him twice in a week on the advice of respondent No. 4.
He has further prayed for the issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari for quashing the order dated 15111999 vide which his reimbursement bills were refused.
2.
The facts of the case can be described in the following manner :-  The petitioner is a case of kindney failure.
He requires Hemo-dialysis twice in a week and this is so prescribed to him by respondent No. 4-PGI authorities.
He is getting Hemo-dialysis from Chandigarh Medical Centre after paying the necessary charges.
He submitted bills to the respondent- authorities, which have been declined on the grounds that the same are not certified by respondent No. 4; that let the petitioner first go to the PGI, who may certify that he requires Hemo-dialysis and then he should undertake the test.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents, who contested the claim of the petitioner.
4.
I have heard Mr. Anil Kheterpal, Advocate on behalf of the petitioner, Mr. Yash Pal, AAG, Haryana on behalf of respondents No. 1 to 3 and with their assistance have gone through the record of the case.
5.
From Annexure P3 it is established on the record that the petitioner was examined by the Department of Nephrology, PGI, Chandigarh and was diagnosed as a case of Chronic Renal Failure.
It has further been certified by the doctors of the PGI that the petitioner needs to remain on life long dialysis to save his life.
Further, it is suggested in the certificate Annexure P3 that the petitioner has been advised to undergo continuous Ambulatory Pertitioneal Dialysis and this treatment has to be carried out by the petitioner at home after initial surgery in the PGI In the light of this certificate Annexure P3, which has been repeated in Annexure P4, there is no difficulty in holding on my part that the petitioner requires Hemo-dialysis and this is a life saving procedure.
In this view of the situation, any assistance on the part of the respondent-authorities to call the petitioner to PGI for signatures is uncalled for.
6.
It is stated at the Bar by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the Chandigarh Medical Centre is charging less as compared to the rates of PGI In these circumstances, it is more the reason that the claim of the petitioner should be allowed.
7.
Resultantly, the present writ petition is hereby allowed with the observations and declaration that it is not necessary for the petitioner to run to the PGI authorities and to obtain a certificate or counter-sign before getting Hemo-dialysis from the market.
However, it is hereby declared that the petitioner will only get the actual expenses incurred by him either at market rate or PGI rate whichever is less.
He will also be entitled to the cost of injection "Eprex" which shall be reimbursed either at market rate or bazaar rate whichever is less.
Directions are given to the respondent- authorities to clear all the pending bills of the petitioner within two months from the receipt of the copy of this order, failing which the petitioner shall be entitled to interest @ 12% per annum.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.