RL Anand, J - Lakhbir Kaur (minor) through her father and natural guardian Sukhdev Singh has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for issuance of writ of certiorari for quashing of clause 10 of the Information Brochure, Annexure P1, to the extent that it provides for precedence to the performance in the entrance test over the performance in sports which is violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India being illegal, arbitrary and against the Sports Policy, Annexure P5.
The petitioner has further prayed that a writ of mandamus be issued against respondents No. 1 to 3 to declare her selected in the Elementary Teacher Training entrance examination in the category of sports quota as respondent No. 5 has been selected on the basis of Annexure P1 having less meritorious performance in sports and, therefore, her admission may be quashed.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that she applied for Elementary Teacher Training Course for the session 1998-2000.
Her pass percentage was 6250 while that of respondent No. 5 was 6950 The grouse of the petitioner is that she is possessing Sports Certificate Garde `B' vide Annexure P3, whereas respondent No. 5 is having Sports Certificate Grade `C' vide Annexure P4.
Irrespective of the fact that respondent No. 5 has higher merit in marks but while granting the seat under sports quota, the gradation certificate issued by the Sports Department is to prevail.
It is also the case of the petitioner that the certificate which was issued in favour of respondent No. 5 was issued in the year 1981 and such certificate after a lapse of 5 years has no validity because this type of certificate is not in accordance with the policy Annexure P5, dated 10121997.
Whereas the certificate issued in her favour is as per the said policy.
With these broad allegations, the petitioner has prayed for the issuance of necessary directions as stated above.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
The State of Punjab filed a separate written statement and the stand taken by the State is that it was specifically mentioned at page No. 6 of the prospectus that selection/merit of the candidates of sports category will be determined on the basis of the marks obtained by them in the entrance test.
Respondent No. 5 Parvinder Kaur had secured 6950% marks, whereas Lakhbir Kaur-petitioner secured 6250% marks.
As per the report submitted by the Director, Sports, Punjab vide his memo dated 2051999, respondent No. 5 Parvinder Kaur becomes entitled for `D' grade certificate as per new graduation policy.
Justifying the admission of respondent No. 5 the stand of the State is that since respondent No. 5 had better marks than that of the petitioner, therefore, she was preferred for the admission.
4.
A separate statement who also filed on behalf of respondent No. 5 in which same stand has been taken as that of the State of Punjab.
5.
I have heard Mr. VK Kataria, Advocate, on behalf of the petitioner, Ms. Gurveen H Singh, AAG, on behalf of the State, Mr. RK Girdhar, Advocate, on behalf of respondent No. 5 and with their assistance have gone through the record of the case.
6.
The petitioner is seeking admission in sports quota which is a reserved category.
While giving admission in reserved quota, the authorities are supposed to be guided by the reservation rules applicable to such category.
It is not to be guided by the marks.
It is admitted position that the certificate of the petitioner is higher in weightage as compared to the certificate of respondent No. 5 Parvinder Kaur.
In these circumstances, irrespective of the fact that the marks of Parvinder Kaur are higher than that of the petitioner, still she cannot get benefit over and above the petitioner.
Annexure P3 would show that the petitioner participated in 23rd Junior National Kabadi Championship in the year 1996-97 and 45th National Kabadi Championship held in 1997-98.
The grading given to the petitioner is `B' while the grading given to respondent No. 5 is `C' as she participated in Punjab School Games held in 1985-86 and 1986-87 and as per new sports policy this certificate has been further down-graded to `D' category from `C' category.
The certificate issued to the respondent No. 5 pertains to the year 1987 which has been verified in the year 1999 and according to the latest policy this certificate has been down-graded.
Thus the above discussion would show that the grading of the petitioner was definitely higher than that of respondent No. 5 though the marks obtained by the petitioner were less.
I have already stated above that while dealing such type of position the reservation policy is itself to prevail.
In this view of the matter, I declare and hold that petitioner Lakhbir Kaur was entitled to the admission to E.T.T.
Course for the year 1998-2000.
7.
The ancillary point which arises for determination is whether this Court at this juncture should disturb the admission of respondent No. 5 who has already undertaken the Course for a period more than 1-1/2 years.
She was admitted in the year 1999 and is likely to complete her Course in December, 2000.
The right of the petitioner has to be protected and she cannot be allowed to suffer for the fault of the authorities of the State of Punjab.
In this view of the matter, while protecting the admission of respondent No. 5, I allow this writ petition by giving direction to respondents No. 1 to 4 to give admission to the petitioner in Elementary Teacher Training Course in the coming session, even if the State Government had to increase one seat in the sports category.
No order as to costs.
8.
Writ petition stands allowed in above terms.
Petition allowed.