RL Anand, J - Lt. Col. MS Pandher (Retd.)
has filed the present writ petition under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India against the Union of India and others and has claimed disability pension with effect from the date of his retirement from Army with interest.
He has further sought directions against the respondents to grant him the benefit of disability elements from the Army Group Insurance Fund as he has earned 60 per cent disability on his retirement from Army.
2.
Some facts can be noticed in the following manner -  The petitioner joined the Army as Sepoy in February, 1963 and he was found fit by the service doctor.
In the year 1976 he was granted permanent commission in AMC (Non-Tech.)
and was again medically examined by the Board of Medical Officers.
He was found fit in medical classification, Shape-I According to him, his wife suffered metabolic diseases in the month of January, 1992.
In the month of June, 1992 he joined the duty at Command Hospital, Chandimandir as officer in-charge medical stores.
In the month of July 1994 he met with an accident at Chandimandir and he was hospitalised.
On discharge from the hospital he was found suffering from the diseases as mentioned in para 15 of the writ petition.
In January, 1996 he applied for his posting on compassionate ground for the treatment of his wife, but the same was refused.
In the month of May 1996 he was posted at Madras.
He again approached the authorities to accommodate him on compassionate ground, but his request was declined.
In June 1996 he gave a statutory complaint to the Central Government for the change of posting.
He was forced to move to Madras even without waiting for the decision of the statutory complaint.
The grouse of the petitioner is that he was even refused with leave.
In the month of January, 1997 his wife died at Command Hospital, Chandimandir.
He applied for retirement from Army service in January, 1997 and he was granted premature retirement from service in January, 1998.
He submits that he has suffered 60 per cent disability while he was in service and, therefore, he is entitled to the benefit of disability pension.
3.
The notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents, who filed the reply and denied the allegations.
According to the respondents, the petitioner is not entitled to the benefit of disability pension etc. as he himself had sought the voluntary retirement and under Rule 50 of the Pension Regulations (Part-I), 1961 he is not entitled to the benefit of disability pension/elements.
4.
A re-joinder was also filed by the petitioner in which he reiterated the allegations made in the writ petition by denying those of the written statement.
He further reiterated that even as per the proviso to Rule 50 he is entitled to the benefit of disability pension.
5.
I have heard Mr. SS Randhawa, Advocate for the petitioner, Mr. Anil Malhotra, Advocate for the respondents and with their assistance have gone through the records of the case.
6.
Rule 50 of the Pension Regulations for Army, 1961 (Part-I) lays down as under :-  "An Officer who retires voluntarily shall not be eligible for any award on account of any disability.
Provided that officer who is due for retirement on completion of tenure, or on completion of service limits or on completion of the terms of engagement or on attaining the prescribed age of retirement and who seeks premature retirement for the purpose of getting higher commutation value, shall remain eligible for disability elements."
7.
The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents submitted that as per this Rule if an officer who retires voluntarily shall not be eligible for any award on account of any disability.
Supplementing his submission Mr. Malhotra also drew my attention to the document Annexure P5/1, a letter written by the respondent-authorities to the petitioner, vide which the Government gave the approval for the premature retirement of the petitioner.
8.
On the contrary, the learned counsel for the petitioner submits that there is no quarrel with the letter Annexure P5-1.
The counsel submitted that the petitioner had completed a tenure of 35 years 5 months on retirement against the requirement of 20 years as per Rule 36(a) of the Pension Regulations for Army, 1961 (Part-1).
He had also completed the qualifying service limit for the purpose of pension which is 33 years, the maximum period for which pension is admissible.
Moreover, the petitioner had also completed the tenure of engagement which is 20 years in the case of officers vide Rule 5 and as such the petitioner is entitled to the disability pension/elements irrespective of the fact that he had sought voluntary retirement.
After considering the rival contentions of the parties, this Court is of the considered opinion that the petitioner has a case.
The proviso of Rule 50 clearly makes out a case for the petitioner because he had completed 35 years 5 months of service when he retired from the Army Service.
It is true that even on that day the petitioner could serve two years or more, but that is not the criteria to allow or disallow him the benefit of disability pension/elements.
9.
Faced with this difficulty, the learned counsel for the respondents submitted that the petitioner joined the commission in the year 1976 and his tenure of engagement should be counted from 1976 and thus he is not entitled to the benefit of disability pension.
This submission of Mr. Malhotra cannot be accepted.
The entire service of the petitioner has to be taken into consideration.
His earlier service when he was serving as Sepoy till he got the commission cannot be ignored and it has to be counted for the purpose of determining his service.
Since the petitioner has served for more than 33 years, therefore, as per the proviso to Rule 50 he is entitled to the benefit of disability pension/elements.
10.
Resultantly, the writ petition is allowed and directions are given to the respondent-authorities to release disability pension/elements to the petitioner within three months from the receipt of the copy of the order, failing which the petitioner shall get interest @ 12 per cent per annum.
The disability pension shall be released to the petitioner from the date of his discharge from the service.
The petitioner shall appear before the Re-Survey Medical Board as and when called upon by the respondent-authorities.
Copy Dasti.
Petition allowed.