RL Anand, J - Petitioner Suresh Kumar has filed the present writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India for the issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari quashing the orders Annexures P3, P4, and P10 vide which his disability pension case was declined.
He has further prayed that directions be issued to the respondents to release his disability pension forthwith.
2.
The case of the petitioner is that he was enrolled in the Army service on 13.6.1987 and at the time of his entry he was subjected to medical examination.
He was found fit in all respects and there was no defect noticed by the Medical Board that he was suffering from any kind of disease whatsoever.
The petitioner submits that on account of stress and strain of the military service he developed unspecified psychosis disease and on that ground he was discharged from the military service on 2311994.
He made representation on 29101994 for the grant of disability pension, but his case was rejected by the respondent-authorities vide communication Annexure P3 dated 26.12.1995 holding that disability suffered by the petitioner is not attributable to military service.
The petitioner filed an appeal on 29.4.1996.
So much so, he also filed a writ petition in which directions were given to the respondent-authorities to dispose of his appeal within a period of three months.
Finally, his appeal was dismissed on 2761997.
Hence, this writ petition.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents, who filed the written statement and denied the allegations.
According to the respondents the disability of the petitioner is neither attributable to the Army service nor it has been aggravated on account of Army service.
4.
I have heard Mr. Manjeet Dalal, Advocate on behalf of the petitioner, Mr. Anil Malhotra, Advocate, on behalf of the respondents and with their assistance have gone through the record for the case.
5.
Even the trio would agree that when a personnel joins the Army service he undertakes a medical examination.
The case set up by the petitioner is that at the time of his entry and medical examination there was no defect found in him and he has suffered the disease (unspecified psychosis) on account of his Army service and in these circumstances the respondent-authorities are liable to pay the disability pension.
There is a merit in the contention raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
The learned counsel for the respondents has not been able to point out any circumstances from which it can be inferred that the petitioner was a patient of unspecified psychosis at the time of his entry into the service.
We all know that the discipline of the Army and training to the Army personnel cause lot of stress and strain and in these circumstances chances cannot be ruled out that the disease suffered by the petitioner is attributable to his Army service.
It is a common case of the parties that the petitioner was discharged from the Army on account of the disability and the Medical Board at one point of time assessed his disability as 40% permanently.
The case of the petitioner was recommended to the CCDA(P) at Allahabad and the said authorities did not get the petitioner examined from any Medical Board and unilaterally rejected the case of the disability pension.
The authorities of Allahabad cannot sit as a court of appeal nor they are in a position to substitute their own opinion unless the Army personnel undertakes some additional interest or unless there are cogent grounds formulated by the medical authorities with regard to the disease disentitling the petitioner from claiming disability pension.
In this view of the matter, this writ petition is allowed by quashing the impugned orders and directions are given to the respondent-authorities to release the disability pension of the petitioner from the date when he was discharged from the Army within three months from the receipt of the copy of the order, failing which the petitioner shall be entitled to interest at the rate of 12 per cent per annum.
The petitioner shall, however, appear before the Re-Survey Medical Board as and when called upon by the respondent- authorities.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.