RL Anand, J - Shri GL Nagpaul son of Late Shri Madan Gopal Nagpaul has filed the present petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India against the State of Haryana and Director Secondary Education, Haryana and he has sought the direction of this Court in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to reimburse him the medical bill of Rs. 13,000/- which is stated to be pending with the respondent-authorities since December 1994, with interest at the rate of 18% per annum.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that this wife was a Government servant under the State of Haryana.
She was serving as Tailoring Mistress.
She started her job in the year 1980.
At that time the petitioner was serving in National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal.
The Haryana Government sanctioned family pension to the petitioner.
He became entitled to the medical facilities for outdoor and indoor treatment as admissible to the retiree personnel.
The petitioner was operated upon in All India Institute of Medical Sciences on 18.8.1994.
He submitted a medical bill of Rs. 13,000/- to the respondent-authorities without making any addition for the medicines and other admissible expenses.
The bill was declined on the plea that petitioner was not wholly dependent upon the income of his wife and, therefore, he is not entitled to claim the medical reimbursement.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents who filed the written statement and denied the allegations.
According to the respondents, the petitioner was a regular employee of National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal which is a Government of India undertaking and after retirement he got all the retiral benefits from the Goverment of India as Central Government employee.
The wife of the petitioner was employed as Mistress under the Government of Haryana and after the death of his wife the petitioner was getting family pension as per Punjab Civil Services Pension Rules.
According to the respondents, the petitioner is getting the family pension.
He was not dependent upon the income of his wife.
He has an independent source of income of Rs. 3,000/- which amount he is getting by way of pension.
Therefore, the petitioner is not entitled to get medical reimbursement.
4.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance have gone through the record.
5.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has relied upon a judgment 2000(2) PLR 617 : 2000(2) SCT 923 (P&H), Nand Rani v. State of Punjab and others and submitted that Shri GL Nagpaul petitioner was a member of the family.
Though the petitioner is getting a pension of Rs. 3,000/- from his department, still he is entitled to the medical reimbursement being the member of the family and moreover, he was dependent on the income of the wife.
6.
On the contrary, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents submitted that petitioner is getting a pension of Rs. 3,000/- per month from his parent department and he was never dependent upon the family pension of his wife and, therefore, he is not entitled to the amount.
7.
I do not subscribe to the argument raised by the learned counsel for the respondents.
When the income of the wife is brought in the family everybody enjoys the benefit of that income.
In these circumstances, it cannot be said that petitioner was not totally dependent upon the family pension income of his wife.
The judgment relied upon by the learned counsel for the petitioner is squarely covering the point in issue.
Therefore, the writ petition is allowed and directions are given to the respondents to release the amount of Rs. 13,000/- pertaining to medical bill, pending with the respondent- authorities, within three months from the date of the receipt of the copy of this order, failing which the amount shall be paid to the petitioner alongwith interest at the rate of 12% after the expiry of three months.
Petition allowed.