RL Anand, J - Lt. Col. Kulwant Singh (Retd.)
has filed the present writ petition under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India praying for the issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari by quashing the order Annexure P-10, vide which his disability pension was declined.
He has further prayed that directions be issued to the respondent to grant him pension along with interest.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he got commission in the Indian Army on 15.6.1966 in Armoured Corps and he continued to take part in all kinds of sports and also did physical training course with very good grading.
Being in the Armoured Corps, he had to work in Armoured Fighting Vehicles like tanks, which omits plenty of suffocating the harmful fumes, as a result of that he developed allergy to dust and fumes and developed bronchial asthma.
On one day, all of a sudden, he was declared unfit for promotion to the post of Colonel due to which he developed hypertension.
In the year 1992, he was posted at Shillong, as a result of which his medical problem aggravated.
Thereafter he reported to Medical Hospital, Shillong.
On 12111992, he was medically downgraded and the Medical Board declared that the medical problem is aggravated due to military service.
Due to his ill health and mental tension he applied for retirement on voluntary basis which was given and he was put on Regular Reserve of Officers till the age of superannuation.
On 1971993 he was awarded 40% disability and confirmed as permanently medically downgraded.
He applied for disability pension in the month of September, 1993 which was refused to him.
Then he filed C.W.P.
No. 10405 of 1988 which was dismissed as withdrawn with permission to file a fresh one.
In this manner, the present writ petition.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
The short stand of the respondents is that the petitioner sought voluntary retirement from service and, therefore, as per Regulation 50 of the Pension Regulations for Army, 1961 Part-1, he is not entitled to any disability pension.
4.
I have heard Mr. B.P.S.
Dhillon, Advocate on behalf of the petitioner, Mr. Anil Malhotra, Advocate on behalf of the respondents and with their assistance have gone through the record of the case.
5.
For the adjudication of short controversy in hand, it will be useful for me to refer to document Annexure P-11 which would show that on 2431993 petitioner Kulwant Singh himself made a request for premature retirement w.e.f.
1.8.1993 for personal reasons and having been superseded for further promotion.
It was also stated by the petitioner that he was also not maintaining good health.
This request of the petitioner was accepted and he was discharged from the service.
According to Regulation 50, as relied upon by the learned counsel for the respondents, when an officer seeks voluntary retirement from service, he is not entitled to any benefit of disability pension.
Reliance can also be placed upon an order of this Court dated 1172000, passed in CWP No. 10195 of 1996 titled : 2000(3) SCT 956 (P&H), Sanjay Dhawan v Union of India.
Resultantly, I do not see any merit in this writ petition and the same is hereby dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.