RL Anand, J - Baldev Singh son of Shri Jagir Singh has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India seeking directions of this Court against the respondents to grant him the benefit of disability pension of the armed forces.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he was enrolled in the Indian Army as a Sipahi on 6121976 and at that time he was 100 per cent physically fit.
He was discharged from the Army on 291986 after completing the service of 9 years 270 days and was placed in medical category `EEE'.
He made a representation to the authorities for release on the plea that the disability suffered by him was constitutional.
He also filed an appeal on 711994 but the same was also dismissed.
He finally gave a legal notice for the grant of disability pension and in spite of that no relief has been given.
Hence this writ petition.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
According to the respondents the disability (idiopathic epilepsy), which was assessed at 20 per cent, is not attributable to the Army service nor it has been aggravated as such when the petitioner was serving in the Army.
4.
I have heard Mrs. GK Mann, Advocate on behalf of the petitioner, Mr. Anil Malhotra, Advocate, on behalf of the respondents and with their assistance have gone through the records of the case.
5.
The proved facts are that the petitioner joined the Army in 1976 and he was discharged on medical ground of unfitness on 291986.
His disability was assessed at 20 per cent and was placed in category `EEE'.
The only point which survives for determination is whether the disability suffered by the petitioner is attributable to his Army service or it is a constitutional one.
The learned counsel for the respondents though tried to convince me that the disability suffered by the petitioner is constitutional one, but I am not convinced with his contention for the simple reason that when the petitioner was taken into the Army he was medically examined and was declared fit to join to the Army.
At that time no deformity of any kind much less idiopathic epilepsy was noticed.
Also there was no previous history that he was suffering from this very disease.
In this case the petitioner served the Army for 9 years 270 days and during this long period of about 10 years he never earlier suffered the fit of epilepsy.
In these circumstances, a reasonable inference can always be drawn in favour of the petitioner that the disease suffered by him is attributable to the Army service and, therefore, the respondent-authorities are liable to pay the disability pension to the petitioner.
6.
The valid contention raised by the learned counsel for the respondent is that the benefit of disability to the petitioner may be confined to 38 months prior of the institution of the writ petition.
7.
Resultantly, the writ petition is allowed and it is hereby ordered that the petitioner will get the benefit of disability pension of 38 months which was due to him prior to the date of the filing of the writ petition.
Of course, the petitioner will get the recurring benefits of disability pension after the institution of the writ petition.
The petitioner shall appear before the Re-Survey Medical Board as and when called upon by the respondent- authorities.
If the disability pension is not released to the petitioner within three months from the receipt of the copy of the order, the respondent-authorities shall pay interest @ 12 per cent per annum to the petitioner.
Copy Dasti.
Petition allowed.