Bakhshish Kaur, J - This is a petition for issue of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to remove the disparity in the pay-scale of the petitioners and to grant them the pay scale equal to that of Work Munshi on the principle of equal pay for equal work.
2.
The petitioners are working as Mortar Mates for the Last more than 10 years and posted in Sub-Divisions 1 and 2 of Provincial Division of Karnal and Sub-Division No. 2 of provincial Division of Kurukshetra.
Earlier they had been working on work-charge basis on the day when their pay-scales were revised with effect from 141982.
3.
The petitioners aver that there are three Branches of Public Works Department (PWD) in Haryana : (i) Building and Roads (ii) Public Health and (iii) Irrigation Branch.
The post of Mortar Mate is in PWD (B&R Branch) and that of Work Munshi in Public Health Branch of PWD and are interchangeable posts.
Though the nomenclature of these posts has been changed but the work and duties by the holders of these posts are similar in nature.
The qualification, nature of work, responsibility, working hours and other conditions of service are also similar.
The pay scale of Work Munshi and Mortar Mate were revised with effect from 30.4.1978 as they were allowed the pay scale of Rs. 80-2-90/3-120 as per Annexure P.1.
In pursuance of a policy decision taken on 361982, the Work Munshies and Mortar Mates were allowed the pay scale of Rs. 300-430/-.
Copy of the policy decision alongwith relevant part of its annexure is Annexure P2 and P2/A  4.
It has further been averred by the petitioners that the posts of Mortar Mate and Work Munshi are one and the same.
Even then, the respondents vide order dated 381983 had revised the pay-scale of Work Munshi, but similar benefit has not been given to the petitioners who are Mortar Mates and this action on the part of the respondents is, thus, violative of principles of natural justice and equity.
It is discriminatory inasmuch as it violates the principle of equal pay for equal work.
The petitioners made representations Annexures P.1 and P.5 requesting for the removal of disparity in the pay scale of Mortar Mates in comparison with that of Work Munshies.
While the representations were pending consideration, the Government of Haryana vide Circular dated 2941987 as amended vide Corrigendum dated 15.5.1987, has revised the pay-scale of its employees with effect from 111986 on the recommendations of the Fourth Pay Commission.
The petitioners have been placed in the revised pay scale of Rs. 750-940 while the Work Munshies have been granted the revised pay scale of Rs. 950-1400/-.
5.
It has, therefore, been averred that the Government of Haryana has constituted an Anomaly Committee under the chairmanship of Shri Mool Chand Jain and the petitioners made representation Annexure P.7, but no effective order has so far been passed on the representation.
The action of the respondents in not granting the revised pay scale to the petitioners is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
6.
The respondents in their written statements have averred that no legal right of the petitioners is involved and they are not entitled to invoke the extra-ordinary jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
It is contended that the post of Mortar Mate in B&R Branch and that of Work Munshi in Public Health Branch of PWD are not inter-changeable posts.
It is admitted that the pay scale of Work Munshies working in Public Health Branch of Public Works Department, Haryana were revised at Rs. 400-600 (for matriculates) and Rs. 350-500 (for non-matriculates) with effect from 111986.
7.
I have heard Mr. Surya Kant, learned counsel for the petitioners and Ms. Geeta Mathuria, Assistant Advocate-General, Haryana.
8.
The short question that arises for consideration is whether the two posts namely Mortar Mate and Work Munshi have been equated and whether the qualifications prescribed for both these posts is the same.
The answer to this question can be found in Annexure P.8, the letter issued by the Executive Engineer for Superintendent Engineer, PWD (B&R Branch) to Engineer in Chief, Haryana, P&W, B&R, Chandigarh, who had forwarded the representation made by the Mortar Mates of Provincial Division.
It was sent along with proforma for further disposal.
In fact, the office had approved the claim of the petitioners made in their representations for removing the anomaly in the pay-scales and in this respect, reference to the Remarks Column is essential and the same is reproduced as under :-  "Work Munshi/Mortar Mates were allowed same scale of Rs. 44-1/2-1- 1/2/80-120 and then 300-430 by the previous commissions.
They have to perform equal duties and hence it is recommended that the scale of Work Munshi i.e. Rs. 950-1400 be allowed to the Mortar Mates."
It is clear that the Work Munshies and Mortar Mates were allowed the same pay-scale as recommended by the Pay Commissions from time to time.
They performed similar duties.
It is also mentioned in Column No. 8 of Annexure P.8 that there is no bar for appointment to any educational qualification previously for Mortar Mate.
9.
Thus, when once the posts of Mortar Mate and Work Munshi were equated, there was no reason to discontinue with equation at a later stage at the time of revision of pay-scale.
In this regard, Mr. Surya Kant has placed reliance on State of Punjab v. Gautam Mahajan and others, 1994(2) RSJ 102 (SC), Employees of Tanneries and Footwear Corporation Ltd and others v. Union of India and others, 1991(2) SLR 131 : 1991(2) SCT 339 (SC) and Kirpaljit v. State of Punjab, 1987(4) SLR 594.
10.
In the Employees of Tanneries and Footwear Corporation Ltd's case (supra), the pay scale of employees in unionised cadre was same as those of Cotton Corporation of India but the same was disturbed in 1970.
It was directed by the Apex Court to revise the pay scale and bring it at par with that of the Cotton Corporation of India.
Similarly, in Kirpaljit's case (supra) it was held that once the State Government decides to equate the pay scale of certain posts with that of other posts, it is not open to discriminate between the incumbents of two posts in the grant of pay scale at the time of subsequent revision of pay scales.
11.
In the given case in hand as well, there is equation of posts.
The petitioners were appointed on the same pay-scale as the Work Munshies were appointed with the same qualifications.
As such, they could not be denied the revised pay scale of Rs. 950-1400/- as has been allowed to the Work Munshies.
12.
Consequently, the writ petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to grant the petitioners the same pay scale i.e. Rs. 950-1400/- which was granted to the Work Munshies with effect from the date the same was released to Work Munshies.
Petition allowed.