RL Anand, J. (Oral) - Dr. Daulat Ram is a Freedom Fighter and there is no quarrel to this aspect.
He has filed this writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India for declaring the condition that Freedom Fighter shall be entitled for medical reimbursement only when he is treated in government hospital as indoor patient, is illegal, arbitrary and not binding upon him.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that in the capacity of Freedom Fighter he was treated in Escorts Heart institute and Research Centre, New Delhi for his heart problem and when he submitted the medical bills, the same were rejected wrongly on the plea that since he did not remain as indoor patient in a government recognised institute, therefore, he is not entitled to the medical reimbursement.
The petitioner thus sought the directions against the respondents of this Court for the quashment of letter Annexure P3 vide which his case for medical reimbursement was declined.
3.
The petitioner developed the heart problem much earlier to 1998 but he went to the Escorts Heart Institute and Research Centre, New Delhi for by-pass surgery, which was undertaken upon him in the year 1998 itself.
He paid the bills to the said hospital and claimed reimbursement from the Government as per the policy of the Government Annexure P1.
The medical reimbursement bills were declined vide Annexure P3 and for the specific reasons as given in para No. 2 of the said letter dated 1471998, which read as under :-  "You are informed that, according to the Government instructions (attached alongwith), the Freedom Fighters who gets treated at government hospitals as indoor patients are entitled to medical reimbursement.
Since you have got yourself treated at Escorts Heart Institute, New Delhi, therefore, you cannot get medical reimbursement."
4.
I have heard Mr. HS Grewal, Advocate, on behalf of the petitioner, Ms. Gurveen H Singh, DAG, Punjab, on behalf of the respondents and with their assistance have gone through the record of this case.
5.
A Freedom Fighter is entitled to the medical reimbursement if he undertakes the treatment as an indoor patient in a government institute.
In the present case the petitioner has not undertaken the treatment from a government institute though he remained as an indoor patient in Escorts Heart Institute and Research Centre, New Delhi.
It is the human desire to get best treatment and further it is the desire of every patient to have treatment from a doctor of his own confidence.
If the petitioner has gone to Escorts Heart Institute and Research Centre, New Delhi for his treatment for personal reasons, it cannot be said that he has committed a wrong or illegality.
The only penalty which can be imposed upon him should be that he will get the reimbursement as per the government rates as applicable in PGI, Chandigarh or AIIMS, New Delhi, whichever are less, but the claim of the petitioner on the ground that he did not remain patient of a government institute, cannot and should not be declined.
Such a decision of the Government is irrational and arbitrary and cannot be upheld from any standard of judicial conscience.
6.
Resultantly, this writ petition stands disposed of by setting aside the order Annexure P3 with the direction to the respondent-authorities to pay the medical reimbursement to the petitioner at PGI or AIIMS rates whichever are less and compliance of this order should be made within three months from the receipt of the copy of the order.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.