RL Anand, J - Sukhwinder Singh ex-Sapper has filed the present writ petition under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India against Union of India and has prayed for issuance of writ of certiorari quashing the order Annexure P2 vide which his claim of disability pension was rejected.
He has further prayer that a writ of mandamus be issued in his favour against the respondent authorities to grant him the benefit of disability pension as assessed by the Medical Board.
2.
The facts of the case can be summarised in the following manner :-  The petitioner was enrolled in the Indian Army as Sapper on 671991.
He was subjected to medical test at the time of entry into service of the Indian Army and was found fit.
He underwent training.
On 22.10.994 he was discharged and was placed in medical category "EEE" for a period of two years.
He made a prayer for the grant of disability pension which was declined on the ground that the disability suffered by him is a constitutional one.
According to the petitioner, this opinion formulated by the respondent- authorities is incorrect.
He also filed an appeal which was dismissed and hence the present writ petition.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents who filed the reply denying the allegations of the petitioner.
According to the respondents the disability suffered by the petitioner is constitutional one and is not attributable to the military service.
4.
I have heard Mr. Sanjeev Pandit, Advocate, on behalf of the petitioner, Mr. Anil Malhotra, Advocate, on behalf of the respondents and with their assistance have gone through the records of the case.
I am of the considered opinion that the petitioner suffered the disability when he was serving in the Army.
We all know that when a person joins the Army, he undergoes medical test.
As and when declared fully medically fit by the Medical Board, service is offered to a candidate.
It is not shown by the respondents that any type of deformity was noticed at the time of entry of the petitioner into the service.
In these circumstances, this Court has to formulate an opinion in favour of the petitioner that the disability suffered by him was not constitutional but it is attributable to Army service.
These types of diseases are suffered by the Jawans perhaps on account of hard training or hard nature of jobs.
The disability of the petitioner was assessed at 30%, therefore, he is entitled to disability pension.
This disability was of course for a period of two years.
5.
In this view of the matter, the writ petition is hereby allowed by setting aside the order Annexure P2 and directions are given to the respondent- authorities to release the disability pension to the petitioner within three months from the receipt of the copy of the order, failing which he shall be entitled to interest @ 12% per annum on the amount.
The benefits of disability pension shall be released to him from the date of his discharge.
The petitioner shall also appear before the Re-Survey Medical Board as and when called upon by the respondent-authorities.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.