JS Narang, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was granted Commission in the rank of Pilot Officer in the year 1969.
Thereafter, earned promotion to the rank of Flying Officer in the year 1971 and Flight Lieutenant in the year 1976.
Subsequently, he was promoted to the rank of Sqn.
Leader in the year 1982.
As per the averments of the petitioner, the rank of Sqn.
Leader is earned in time scale and promotion from the rank of Sqn.
Leader to Wing Commander is through selection as well as by time scale.
The Officer who is not graded fit or otherwise not found suitable for promotion by selection to the rank of Wing Commander remains eligible and entitled to promotion to the said rank by time scale on completion of 21 years of service.
If the promotion is earned in the time scale, the said officer is kept on the concurrent list meaning thereby that he shall remain eligible for promotion by selection as well during his service.
2.
It is averred by the petitioner that the basis of selection is the policy which may be formulated from time by the authorities and in the case of the petitioner, his promotion to the rank of Wing Commander by way of selection was governed under the policy which is dated 3051995 (copy Annexure R-3) and the same was subsequently modified on 2271996.
The petitioner maintains that he had been found suitable by the Board in the year 1989, but could not clear the Board as his medical category was found low, as such, he was not promoted to the rank of Wing Commander by way of selection.
Similarly, in 1990 was found suitable the Promotion Board but again his medical category remained low.
Therefore, could not earn promotion by way of selection to the rank of Wing Commander.
3.
Thereafter, as per the respondents, the petitioner was considered for promotion in the Concurrent Review Board in the year 1991 and in the said Board, the petitioner could not make the grade.
Thus the question of identifying the medical category in the year 1991 did not arise.
However, in the subsequent considerations in the Concurrent Review Board held in the year 1992 and 1993 though the petitioner was cleared for promotion but was not promoted as he could not possess the requisite medical category as laid down in the promotion policy.
Thereafter, the petitioner made representation that the suitability of the petitioner be adjudged for the subsequent years and he should be considered for selection to the rank of Wing Commander.
As per the respondents, the medical history of the petitioner has been spelt out and has been annexed as Annexure R-2.
The perusal of the same discloses that even though he improved after the Bye-pass surgery, he continued to have stress induced ischaemia (reduced blood supply).
It was on 20111993 his categorisation was given as A5G3(P) - Stable Condition.
Thereafter on 3121994, the categorisation was A4G2(P) - Stable Condition and it was on 12071996, the category was given as A4G3(P) - Improved and stable.
The respondents vide communication dated 1571998 sent a reply to the petitioner indicating "As per the promotion policy in vogue, the officer cannot be promoted to the select rank of Wing Commander, it is requested that the officer be informed accordingly and a confirmation sent to his headquarters."
3.
The petition was admitted on 25.8.1999 and was ordered to be heard within six months.
4.
The impugned communication dated 5.7.1998 has been made the subject matter of challenge by the petitioner before this Court.
5.
The petitioner has argued that since he had made the grade in the year 1989 but could not be promoted due to low medical category, therefore, his case fell under clause 24 of the 1995 policy, as such he was entitled to be considered by the successive promotion Boards and if he is cleared by the Board and in case he clears the medical category in any of the Boards where he has been declared successful, he would be entitled to selection as Wing Commander and in that eventuality, he shall regain his seniority.
It shall be apposite to reproduce the policy conditions of Policy dated 3051995 as under:-  "10.
For promotion to the rank of Gp Capt an officer is considered by the Main Board but; if he is not promoted in three consecutive considerations he will be considered by the Concurrent Review Board till the becomes non effective.
For promotion to the rank of Wg.
Cdr.
an officer who is not promoted after having been considered thrice will be considered by Concurrent Review Board till the completes 24 years of service.
Policy on empanelment of Time Scale Wg.
Cdrs.
in No. 3 of Promotion Board is same as that for Sqn.
Ldrs.
24.
Officer Medically Unfit.
- In case of officers on the Select Main/Reserve/Concurrent Lists of Promotion Boards, who are not promoted due to low medical category, their inter se seniority will be protected, provided they regain medical fitness on or before 31 Mar.
of the year following the Board.
Officers who remain medically unfit beyond the time-frame mentioned above will be placed on the panel for the next Promotion Board and considered afresh for promotion.
When a medically unfit officer who is cleared by successive Promotion Boards regains his medical category, on promotion, will retain the seniority as if he was promoted from the year he was first cleared."
Learned counsel further argued that despite the fact that petitioner could not make the grade in the year 1991 but he did make the grade in the year 1992 and 1993 but medical category was low as such, could not be selected.
However, he had improved his medical category in the year 1996, his suitability is required to be adjudged, he would be entitled for promotion with effect from 1992 at least.
6.
Learned counsel for the respondents has controverted this argument and has stated that infact petitioner was considered in the year 1988 and was not found suitable, thus the question of medical categorisation did not arise.
That fact is that now the petitioner is not entitled to be considered at all and the learned counsel has laid stress on clause 10 specifically and argued that the petitioner was entitled to be considered thrice by the Main Selection Board and three times by the Concurrent Review Board till the completes 24 years of service.
The word "Consideration" as being used in Clause 10 of the policy would mean - officer cleared by Board for promotion but could not be promoted due to low medical grade - consideration is complete.
So far as clause 24 is concerned, it has only been provided to protect the seniority of the officer who may be able to make the grade in the successive promotion boards.
It has been further argued that if the officer does not make the grade in the three successive promotion Boards as has been mentioned in Clause 10, the officer is placed in Concurrent Review Board.
When he is placed in Concurrent Review Board, he is again entitled to only three considerations and nothing more.
In this regard, my attention has been drawn to Clause 17 of the 1995 Policy which reads as under:-  "17.
All officers who have been considered by three promotion Boards but not promoted, are considered by Concurrent Review Boards.
The procedure for allotment of marks and preparation of Select List for selection of officers for promotion to the acting ranks of Gp.
Capt and Wg.
Cdr.
by the Concurrent Review Boards is exactly the same, as that applicable for the Main Board."
Thus in all, the officer is entitled to six considerations and if he does not make the grade for promotion inclusive of medical grade, the officer is not entitled for any further consideration.
In view of the policy, the officer has been rightly declined any further consideration.
7.
I am afraid the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner cannot be accepted.
The reading of the clauses 10, 17 and 24 of the Policy together would lead one to a conscious decision that the officer had been given six considerations as per the instructions/policy to make the grade to be selected to the rank of Wing Commander.
The consideration as has been referred to in clause 10 of the Promotion Policy would definitely mean total consideration including the medical consideration and if in three chances, the officer is unable to make the grade for purpose of selection to the rank of Wing Commander, he is given the opportunity to be considered by the Concurrent Review Board and while being subjected to Concurrent Review Board, the same terms and the policy is to be adopted as by the Main Board.
Thus, the officer would be entitled to be considered six times in all - three times by main Selection Board and if the officer does not make the grade then three times by Concurrent Review Board including the medical.
In the case at hand, the officer was not cleared for promotion by the Board in the year 1988, thus the first consideration was complete and petitioner not selected.
In 1989 and 1990, he was unable to make the medical grade though he had been cleared for selection by the Promotion Board, as such, not selected.
Thus the three considerations by the Main Board as per clause 10 stood exhausted.
The petitioner was placed for consideration in the Concurrent Review Board and the first consideration took place in the year 1991.
In the year 1991, he was unable to make the grade, the question of medical review did not arise.
In 1992 and 1993, the petitioner was able to clear the Concurrent Review Board but earned low medical category, therefore, not selected.
The last chance was of 1993 but the petitioner could not make the grade.
This was end of the selection of the petitioner to the rank of Wing Commander.
In my view the petitioner has been given six opportunities in accordance with the 1955 policy but unfortunately the petitioner was unable to make the grade may be on account of low medical category or otherwise.
Thus I find no merit in the petition and the same is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.