RL Anand, J - Jaswant Singh has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India and he has claimed a writ in the nature of certiorari for quashment of the letter dated 1941997, Annexure P- 1, vide which his disability pension claim has been rejected by the respondent authorities.
The petitioner has further prayed that a writ in the nature of mandamus be issued directing the respondents to release his disability pension.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he was enrolled into the Army on 2651987.
He was discharged from the military service on 1101996 on medical grounds.
His disability was assessed at 20% for two years.
When the case for release of the disability pension was sent to the office of the CCDA (P), Allahabad, it was rejected on the ground that the disability suffered by the petitioner is not attributable to the army service nor it has been aggravated during his service.
This rejection order was passed on 1941997.
The petitioner filed an appeal against this order which was also rejected.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondent who have filed the reply.
The stand of the respondents is that the disability suffered by the petitioner is neither attributable to the army service not it has been aggravated when the petitioner was serving the army.
The respondents have also tried to defend the order of the CCDA (P), Allahabad.
It is stated that the said authority had every right to see whether the disability assessed by the Medical Board has been rightly assessed or not.
4.
I have heard the counsel for the parties and with their assistance have gone through the record of this case.
5.
It is the common case of the parties that the disability of the petitioner was assessed by the Medical Board at the first instance at 20%.
The matter was referred to the CCDA (P), Allahabad, for the release of the pension.
The authorities at Allahabad never examined the petitioner and formulated a unilateral opinion that the disease suffered by the petitioner was not attributable to the military service.
The accounts people are not experts so far as the medical disability of a soldier is concerned.
It is the job of the medical experts who constitute the Medical Board.
At the time of the enrolment of the petitioner, no disease as opined by the Medical Board was noticed.
Therefore, I do not even agree with the opinion of the Medical Board that the disease suffered by the petitioner is constitutional.
When a person joins the army, a very stringent medical test is taken.
Had there been any deformity in the body of the petitioner, such deformity ought to have been noticed at the time of the enrolment of the petitioner.
There is nothing on the record to suggest in this regard.
6.
In this view of the matter, I hold that the petitioner has suffered the disability, which is attributable to the army service.
In Ujagar Singh v. U.O.I.
& others, 1997(4) RSJ 587, it has been held by this court that the accounts branch dealing with the pension cannot sit over the judgment of the experts in the medical line and comment upon the extent of disability without making any reference to a detailed or higher medical board which can be constituted under the relevant instruction and rules by Director General of Army.
7.
In this view of the matter, I allow this writ petition and directions are given to the respondents to release the disability pension of the petitioner w.e.f.
1101996 within three months from the receipt of a copy of this order, failing which the petitioner shall be entitled to interest @ 12%.
The petitioner shall appear before the Re-survey Medical Board as and when called.
No costs.
Petition allowed.