JS Khehar, J - Laxmi Narain is the husband of the petitioner.
Laxmi Narain was working as a Junior Warrant Officer in the Indian Air Force.
It is admitted that he has left the Air Force and he is, therefore, an ex- serviceman.
He has been issued an identity card bearing No. HRA 02/12748 by the Secretary, Zilla Sainik Board, Gurgaon.
In the instant petition, the claim of Kanta Devi wife of Laxmi Narain is on the basis of the fact that she is dependent upon her husband.
In other words, she is dependent of an ex- serviceman.
2.
The Haryana Staff Selection Commission, hereinafter referred to as the `Commission', issued an advertisement which appeared in The Tribune dated 781998.
Besides a large number of posts, the advertisement invited applications for seven posts of Arts and Craft teachers (female) reserved for ex-servicemen, hereinafter referred as `ESM', in the pay scale of Rs. 1200- 2040.
Since the petitioner fulfilled all the requisite qualifications expressed in the advertisement for appointment to the post of Arts and Craft teacher (female), she submitted an application well before the last date of submission of the application form expressed in the advertisement.
In response to her application form, she was issued roll No. 59346 by the Commission and was invited for an interview to be held on 31101998.
The petitioner appeared for the interview.
During the course of interview, she was asked to file a prescribed affidavit within 10 days to affirm that she is/was dependent of an Ex-serviceman.
In compliance therewith the petitioner submitted an application to the Commission on 5111998.
3.
The Commission addressed letter dated 17111998 to the petitioner informing her that while preparing the result of successful candidates of Arts and Craft teachers (female), it has come to the notice of the Commission that the application form submitted by her did not include a certificate on the prescribed proforma depicting that she was dependent of an ex-serviceman.
She was accordingly advised to get the certificate of dependent on ex-serviceman on the prescribed attached with her application form in the office of the Commission.
She was warned that in case of failure to do so her candidature for appointment to the post of Arts and Craft teacher (female) was liable to be cancelled.
4.
In compliance with direction contained in the letter dated 17111988, the petitioner obtained the certificate of dependent on ex-serviceman from the Secretary, Zila Sainik Board, Gurgaon on 26111998 and immediately thereafter submitted the same in the office of the Commission.
The validity of the certificate submitted by the petitioner is not contested in this case.
Consequently, it is clear that the certificate submitted by the petitioner with regard to her being dependent on ex-serviceman is as per prescribed proforma.
5.
Be that as it may, the petitioner was not communicated an offer of appointment.
As per the averments made in the writ petition, the petitioner enquired about the matter from the office of the Commission and she was told that her candidature has been cancelled.
It is in these circumstances that the petitioner has approached this Court claiming appointment to the post of Arts and Craft teacher (female) against one of seven reserved vacancies for ex- servicemen.
6.
A short written statement has been filed by the State Government wherein it has been conceded that the Commission has not recommended the candidature of the petitioner.
A short written statement has also been filed by the Commission.
A perusal of the same would show that the eligibility of the candidates who responded to the advertisement dated 781998 was to be determined with reference to the last date of submission of the application forms.
As per the advertisement, the last date for submission of the application forms was 791998 and since the petitioner did not submit the certificate of dependent on ex-serviceman on or before 781998, her candidature was liable to be cancelled.
In this behalf, the learned counsel for the respondent has placed reliance on note (i) in the advertisement.
The aforesaid note is being extracted hereunder :  "Unless specifically provided otherwise age, qualifications, experience etc. will be determined with reference to the last date fixed for receipt of applications."
A perusal of the aforesaid note would show that all eligibility conditions including that of age, qualification and experience etc. would be determined with reference to the last date of submission of the application forms.
7.
Learned counsel for the respondent was specifically asked, as to whether there was any requirement to attach all or any of the certificates, including that of dependent ex-serviceman, with the application form, in response to which the learned counsel for the respondent, however, conceded that there was no such requirement except the note extracted hereinabove.
It is obvious that there must not have been any such requirement.
Had there been any such requirement to attach the certificates including that of dependent on ex- serviceman with the application form, the petitioner's application form would have been rejected at the first instance.
On the contrary, the petitioner was issued roll number and invited for interview.
During the course of interview the petitioner was required to file an affidavit depicting that she was dependent on ex-serviceman.
The petitioner duly compiled with the aforesaid direction.
Latter communication dated 17111998 was addressed to the petitioner requiring her to submit a certificate in the prescribed proforma showing that she was dependent on ex-serviceman on 26111998.
The prescribed Authority in the prescribed proforma affirmed that she was indeed dependent on ex-serviceman.
In these peculiar circumstances, it is clear that the petitioner is not guilty of any lapse.
She, indeed, has established that she is dependent on ex-serviceman not only by an affidavit filed by her but also by a certificate issued by the Secretary, Zilla Sainik Board, Gurgaon, depicting that she is dependent on ex-serviceman.
In these peculiar circumstance, it cannot doubted that she was not dependent on ex-serviceman even on the last date of submission of application form i.e. 791998.
She, therefore, fulfilled the eligibility in all respects on the last date of submission of the application form.
Nothing being remiss in so far as the obligations expressed in the advertisement, there was no justification whatsoever for the Commission not to recommend the name of the petitioner when she was admittedly amongst the first seven most meritorious candidates amongst dependents of ex-serviceman, who had applied for the posts of Arts and Craft teachers (female).
The Commission should have recommended the case of the petitioner for appointment.
In not recommending the name of the petitioner the Commission has clearly violated the fundamental rights of the petitioner enshrined under Article 16 of the Constitution of India.
8.
For the reasons recorded above, the instant petition is allowed.
Respondent No. 2 is directed to recommend the name of the petitioner for appointment to the post of Arts and Craft teacher (female) to respondent No. 1.
Respondent No. 1 is directed to issue an offer of appointment to the petitioner to the post of Arts and Craft teacher (female).
At the time of issuing notice of motion in the instant writ petition on 141999, the respondents were restrained from making appointment against one post of Arts and Craft teacher (in furtherance of the advertisement dated 781998).
The petitioner shall be accommodated against the aforesaid post.
Her appointment shall be with effect from the same date as that of other Arts and Craft teachers (female) selected in response to the advertisement dated 781998.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to all consequential benefits in the nature of pay, allowances etc.
Her name shall also be placed as per her position in the merit list determined by the commission at the time of her selection.
Petition allowed.