ML Singhal, J - Satish Chander, Draftsman (Civil) Instructor while posted at Industrial Training Institute, Ferozepur Jhirka was charge-sheeted under Rule 7 of the Haryana Civil Services (Punishment and Appeals) Rules, 1987 by the Director, Industrial Training and Vocational Education, Haryana Chandigarh - defendant No. 2 on 431992 for certain alleged acts of misconduct.
After the so-called inquiry, the Inquiry Officer gave findings in his favour and held the charges not proved.
Despite Inquiry Officer having held charges not proved, he was punished with the stoppage of two annual increments with cumulative effect by the Director, Industrial Training and Vocational Education, Haryana Chandigarh.
He went in appeal to the Secretary to Government, Department of Industrial Training and Vocational Education, Haryana.
His appeal was rejected saying that the same was barred by time.
Rejection of the appeal was conveyed to him by the Director, Industrial Training and Vocational Education, Haryana vide Memo dated 1491995.
Plaintiff Satish Chander filed suit for declaration to the effect that order dated 2051993 passed by defendant No. 2 punishing with him with the stoppage of two annual increments with cumulative effect is illegal, null and void and against the statutory rules governing the service so also the order dated 1491995 passed by the Secretary to Government, Department of Industrial Training and Vocational Education, Haryana rejecting his appeal.
By way of consequential relief, he prayed for mandatory injunction directing them to restore the annual increments of the plaintiff stopped through the aforesaid orders and further to release arrears with interest at the rate of 18 per cent per annum.
It was alleged in the plaint that the punishing authority should have recorded reasons for differing with the report of the Inquiry Officer.
No reason was given by the punishing authority for differing with the report of the Inquiry Officer.
He was not given reasonable opportunity to defend himself.
There was thus violation of the principles of natural justice.
Appellate Authority should have condoned delay.
Appellate Authority without considering his request to condone delay rejected his appeal through non- speaking order.
No opportunity was given to him by the Appellate Authority.
At the relevant time, plaintiff filed suit at Sirsa because at the date of institution of the suit, he was posted at Sirsa and the order rejecting his appeal was conveyed to him at Sirsa.
2.
Defendant-State of Haryana contested the suit of the plaintiff urging that he was found guilty of the charges.
He was granted opportunity of personal hearing before the order punishing him with the stoppage of two annual grade increments with cumulative effect was passed.
Order of punishment was passed after perusing the evidence on the inquiry file and after giving him full opportunity of hearing.
Appeal was rejected being time barred.
There was no question of condoning delay in filing the appeal by the Appellate Authority when no explanation had been given by him for the delayed filing of appeal.
3.
On the pleadings of the parties, the following issues were framed :-  1.
Whether orders dated 2051993 and 1491995 passed by defendants No. 2 and 1 respectively are illegal, null and void, against the principles of natural justice and are liable to be set aside as alleged ?
OPP 2.
Whether the plaintiff is entitled to interest at the rate of 18% per annum on the dues as alleged ?
OPP 3.
Whether the suit is bad for want of notice under Section 80 CPC ?
OPD 4.
Whether the plaintiff has got no cause of action to file the present suit ?
OPD 5.
Relief.
4.
Additional Civil Judge, Senior Division, Sirsa decreed the plaintiff's suit for declaration to the effect that order dated 2051993 passed by defendant No. 2 punishing him with the stoppage of two annual increments with cumulative effect was illegal, null and void and was liable to be set aside and so also the order rejecting his appeal dated 1491995 by the Appellate Authority and for mandatory injunction directing the State of Haryana to restore him the increments stopped through the said orders and to pay him all arrears, in view of his findings, that the punishing authority could not have disagreed with the report of the Inquiry Officer without giving reasons and reasons for such disagreement should have been supplied to the delinquent.
It was found that the disagreement by the punishing authority with the report of Inquiry Officer without giving reasons for such disagreement was not fair and against the principles of natural justice.
It was found that if he were to disagree with the report of the Inquiry Officer reasons for such disagreement should have been communicated to the delinquent, so that delinquent had the opportunity to show that disagreement was untenable, in view of the evidence on record and the findings of the Inquiry Officer holding him not guilty of the charge were sustainable on the evidence on record of the inquiry.
In this case, punishing authority had given no indication to the plaintiff that these are the reasons for his disagreement with the report of the Inquiry Officer and thus the plaintiff had no opportunity to tender explanation before the punishing authority.
5.
Aggrieved from this judgment and decree dated 22101998 of Additional Civil Judge, Senior Division, Sirsa, State of Haryana went in appeal.
6.
Additional District Judge, Sirsa vide order dated 841999 dismissed the appeal.
7.
Still not satisfied, the State of Haryana has approached this Court through this regular second appeal.
8.
I have heard the learned Additional AG Haryana and the learned counsel for the respondent.
9.
It was submitted by the learned State counsel that there was evidence on the record of the inquiry which was sufficient enough to sustain the charge.
Inquiry Officer held the charge as not proved.
Punishing Authority was within its jurisdiction to differ with the report of the Inquiry Officer and hold the charge as proved.
It was submitted that order dated 2051993 was passed by the Director, Industrial Training and Vocational Education Haryana after going through the evidence on the inquiry file and giving personal hearing to the plaintiff.
It was further submitted that the plaintiff's appeal was rightly rejected by the Appellate Authority as the same was time barred and the plaintiff had given no explanation for the condonation of delay in filing the appeal.
Inquiry Officer didn't find the charge proved.
Punishing Authority held the charge proved in disagreement with the report of the Inquiry Officer.
It was within the jurisdiction of punishing authority to disagree with the report of the Inquiry Officer but if the punishing authority were to disagree with the report of the Inquiry Officer, punishing authority should have given reasons in support of the disagreement, so that those reasons could have been communicated to the delinquent and the delinquent got an opportunity to show that reasons for disagreement are not tenable on the evidence on record.
It was held in Darshan Singh ASI v. The State of Haryana and others, 1997(6) SLR 746 (P&H) that "normally the finding recorded by the inquiry Officer is placed before the disciplinary authority.
It is open to the disciplinary authority to disagree with the Enquiry Officer.
However, if the disciplinary authority chooses to disagree with the findings recorded by the Enquiry Officer, it would only be fair that it records its reasons for doing so.
These reasons should be communicated to the employee so that he has an opportunity to show that the reasons are not tenable in view of the evidence on the record.
Rule 7 of the Haryana Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1987 lays down that "if the punishing authority disagrees with any part or whole of the findings of the enquiring authority, the point or points of such disagreement, together with a brief statement of the grounds thereof, shall also be supplied to the Government employee."
10.
Rejection of the appeal by Appellate Authority was equally unjust.
Appellate Authority should have condoned delay and decided the appeal on merit.
In this case, order of Appellate Authority is equally faulty as it is founded on the order of punishing authority, which was without any foundation.
There was only charge of absence proved against the delinquent.
Charge of absence no longer survived when the absence was condoned by the Principal by treating the period of absence as leave of the kind due.
Once the period of absence is treated as leave of the kind due the fact that delinquent remained absent no longer survived was the view taken in State of Punjab v. Chanan Singh, 1988(3) All India Services Law Journal 216 and 217.
11.
In this case, there has been violation of the principles of natural justice inasmuch as the Inquiry Officer had found the charge not proved against the plaintiff while the punishing authority had found the charge proved against him but without recording any reasons for this disagreement with the report of the Inquiry Officer.
12.
For the reasons given above, the judgment and decree dated 841999 of Additional District Judge, Sirsa affirming that the Addl.
Civil Judge, Senior Division, Sirsa dated 22101998 does not call for any interference.
So, this appeal fails and is dismissed and the judgments and decrees of the Courts below are maintained.
Appeal dismissed.