RL Anand, J - The petitioner has filed the present writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India and has sought the directions of this court for the quashment of the order vide which the claim of the petitioner for disability pension has been rejected.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he joined the Army on 1161961.
Upto the year 1980, there was no problem with the health of the petitioner.
In the annual medical examination conducted in the year 1980, some changes were found in the E.C.G.
of the petitioner and he was kept under observation till 1984.
In the year, 1984, he was placed in SHAPE-I Category.
Unfortunately for the petitioner, in the 1986, he was found diabetic besides a case of hypertension.
He was placed in Permanent-2 Category.
The petitioner retired from the Army Service in the month of December, 1989.
The disability of the petitioner was assessed by the Medical Board at 30% composite, for both the diseases.
The petitioner made a representation for the grant of disability pension on 12.4.1990 which was rejected on 1141997.
The petitioner also filed an appeal against the order of rejection though the stand of the respondents is that no such appeal was ever made.
3.
With the above broad allegations, the petitioner has prayed for the grant of disability pension.
4.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents who filed the reply and submitted that the disability suffered by the petitioner is neither attributable nor aggravated by military service.
It was a constitutional disorder uninfluenced by the military service.
It may be mentioned here that in the written statement, the respondents have not come with any plea that since the petitioner had superannuated from service, therefore, he was not entitled to the disability pension.
Be that as it may, this aspect of the case shall also be looked into by me in the later portion of this judgment.
5.
I have heard the counsel for the parties and with their assistance have gone through the record of this case.
6.
Counsel for the respondents has not been able to show from about documentary evidence that the petitioner was suffering from any disease at the time of his enrolment in the Army.
Rather, the facts are that the petitioner started serving the Army in the year 1961 and for 20 years, there was no problem with the health of the petitioner.
So much so, in the year 1984, the petitioner was place in SHAPE-I category.
It is only in the year 1986 that the petitioner became a patient of diabetics and hypertension.
Thus, it can be safely concluded that the disease suffered by the petitioner was attributable to the military service.
The Board has assessed the disability of the petitioner at 30% composite and, in these circumstances, the petitioner is entitled to the benefit of disability pension.
7.
Coming to the second defence of the respondents that the petitioner had retired from service on superannuation and, therefore, he is not entitled to the disability pension, this defence can be rejected on two counts; firstly that there is no such plea in the written statement and; secondly, that Regulation 53 entitles such officers to claim disability pension.
This Regulation states that any officer compulsorily retired on account of age or on completion of tenure, if suffering on retirement from a disability attributable to or aggravated by military service and recorded by service medical authority, may, at the discretion of the President, be granted in addition to the retiring pension admissible, a disability element as if he/she had been retired on account of the disability, according to the accepted degree of disablement at the time of retirement.
8.
Counsel for the respondents submitted with regard to Regulation 53 that this Regulation gives a discretion to the President of India and it is not the right of the petitioner to claim disability pension on account of the fact that he has superannuated from service.
9.
On the contrary, counsel for the petitioner draws my attention to Entitlement Rules 4 and 5 of the Appendix II of the Pension Regulations and submits that these Rules give the right to the petitioner to claim disability pension.
10.
No doubt, Regulation 53 is discretionary but it is clear that a person who has retired from military service on attaining the age of superannuation has been made entitled to the benefit of disability pension.
Rules 4 and 5 also entitle the petitioner to claim the benefit of disability pension.
11.
In this view of the matter, I allow this writ petition and give direction to the respondents to release the disability pension to the petitioner w.e.f.
1.1.1990, within three months from the receipt of copy of this order, failing which the petitioner shall also be entitled to interest @ 12% per annum.
The petitioner is directed to appear before the Re-survey Medical Board as and when called upon by the authorities.
No costs.
Petition allowed.