SB Sinha, J - Re : CAN 2268 of 2000  Having heard the learned Counsel, we are satisfied that there was sufficient cause for the appellants in not being able to file the appeal within the prescribed time.
The application is accordingly allowed and the delay in filing the appeal is condoned.
Let the appeal be now registered if the same is otherwise in form.
Re : CAN 2269 of 2000  2.
Having heard the learned Counsel for the parties, we are of the opinion that the method of recruitment as stated in the circular letter dated 4.12.98 does not mean that only because the appellants have been serving as Gram Panchayat Karmacharis, although not appointed on regular basis, they have a right of promotion and/or absorption.
3.
Mr. Bhattacharya states that there exists a circular of 1994 issued by the State absorbing the services of such Gram Panchayat Karmacharis, but the learned Counsel for the State submits that only the services of Dafadars and Chowkidars have been regularised thereby, and not of the Tax Collectors who were appointed on contract basis.
Our attention in this connection has been drawn to the notification dated 13.11.95 as also the notification dated 2991.
Rule 8 of the West Bengal Panchayat (Recruitment and Conditions of Service of Gram Panchayat Karmee) Rules, 1995 reads thus :  "Provision for Dafadars and Chowkidars - Notwithstanding anything contained in rule 7, all available vacancies in the post of Gram Panchayat Karmees in a district shall be filled by the Dafadars and Chowkidars serving on the 31st March 1994, in any Gram Panchayat within the district who have exercised option for appointment as Gram Panchayat Karmees."
4.
Thus, the appellants being not Dafadars and Chowkidars, the question of their absorption by reason of any statutory rule does not arise.
The learned trial Judge has also arrived at the aforementioned finding of fact.
So far as Tax Collectors are concerned, the matter is covered by the notification dated 2991 which shows that there can be a termination of contract by way of disciplinary action.
Keeping in view the decision of the Apex Court in State of M.P v. Dharambir, (1998) 6 SCC 145 : 1998(3) SCT 301 (SC), we are of the opinion that no case has been made out of directing promotion of the appellants herein, as they had not been absorbed by reason of any statutory rule.
The appeal, which is treated on day's list, and the application are dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.