RS Mongia, J (Oral) - Separate reply, one on behalf of respondent No. 3 and another on behalf of respondent No. 2 has been filed and the same are taken on record.
2.
The petitioner had applied for the post of Clerk.
He has averred in the petition and has also produced a photocopy of the application which he had submitted for appointment as a Clerk.
It may be observed here that as per Annexure P5 which is a letter from the Commissioner, Gurgaon Division, Gurgaon, to the Haryana Staff Selection Commission, it is mentioned that while sending the original application of the petitioner, photo copy of the same had been kept in the office.
In para 10 of the petition, the following averments have been made :-  "10.
That the Commissioner, again brought to the notice of the Staff Selection Commission about the category of the petitioner.
It was further informed by the Commissioner that the petitioner had already mentioned in the application form about his caste, class and category.
He had also attached the certificate issued by the competent authority along with the application.
The letter mentioned above is attached as Annexure P/5."
In para 10 of the reply filed on behalf of respondent No. 3, it has been averred as under :-  "10.
That para No. 10 of the writ petition is admitted.
However, submissions made in the foregoing para-2 are reiterated."
3.
In the application form submitted by the petitioner, against column No. 5, he has clearly mentioned that he belonged to Backward Class category and against column No. 9 as to what documents have been attached, petitioner has mentioned "Backward Class Certificate" apart from other documents.
The petitioner has been mentioned to be at Serial No. 1428 in the merit list amongst the Backward Class category.
It seems that while preparing the merit list, the petitioner was shown amongst the general category candidates and on that post his services were sought to be terminated.
This has led the petitioner to file the present writ petition.
4.
It would be apposite to reproduce the letter dated 832000 Annexure P5 issued by the Commissioner, Gurgaon Division, Gurgaon to the Secretary, Haryana Staff Selection Commissioner which reads as under :-  From L.S.M.
Salinse, IAS Commissioner, Gurgaon Division, Gurgaon.
To  The Secretary, Haryana Staff Selection Commission, S.C.O.
No. 80-81 and 114-115 Sector 8-C, Madhya Marg, Chandigarh.
Memo No. 1-18/B.A.-1/2000/1670 Gurgaon, Dated 832000 Sub : Recommendation of candidates for the post of Clerks under advertisement No. 1/86 and 4/87 - implementation of Supreme Court order dated 1891998 in C.As No. 4900-04 of 1998 with CA No. 8020 of 1995, C.O.C.P.
No. 203 of 1999.
In reference your letter No. HSSC (Confd) 2000/66 dated 2422000 on the above mentioned subject.
2.
While sending the original application of Satish Kumar Clerk, the photo copy of the same was kept in this office and by perusing the same, it is clear that Satish Kumar has attached the backward class certificate along with the application and he has also mentioned in the application that he belongs to backward class category.
Therefore, it is not clear, how he has been selected against general category instead of BC category, while his merit position has been shown 1428 and BC has been written against the same.
Therefore, you are requested to clarify the above points so that further action could be taken."
It is apparent from the aforesaid letter dated 832000, that even the Commissioner was satisfied that the petitioner had applied in Backward Class category.
The petitioner's counsel has also produced the photo copy of the application form which was submitted by the petitioner, which clearly indicated that the petitioner applied in the Backward Class category.
That being so, the question of terminating the services of the petitioner on the ground that he belongs to general category does not arise.
5.
Consequently, we allow this petition and quash the impugned order dated 2422000 Annexure P4 and hold that as per his claim in the Backward Class Category, the petitioner was and is entitled to be appointed/continued on the post of Clerk.
Petition allowed.