ML Singhal, J - Late Hari Singh was Constable on the rolls of the police of District Amritsar on 29.11.80.
He was shown absent in the daily diary though he was actually present in the police lines and when he protested against the false entry in the daily diary, he was shown as having returned to duty on 301180.
On 5181, he was told by the Moharir of the police lines to go for duty to Maharaja Ranjit Singh Hall though it was known to him that he was ill.
He requested the Moharir to send him for medical examination and treatment.
Instead of sending him for medical examination, he marked him absent and showed him to have returned on 19181.
He should have been got treated at government expense but he arranged his treatment on his own from Dr. Jatinder Singh, MBBS, MD and the doctor issued him the prescription slip and the medical certificate.
Departmental inquiry was initiated.
As per plaintiff, there should have been no departmental inquiry as his absence was not intentional.
SSP issued him show cause notice calling upon him to show cause why the punishment of dismissal from service be not imposed upon him.
Vide order dated 19881, SSP dismissed him from service even after he had given his explanation.
Appeal against that order was dismissed by DIG on 101081.
Against the order of DIG, he preferred revision before the DG Police, who accepted the revision on 12782 and reinstated him into service.
He observed that there had been violation of PPR 16.24(i) (vii) and (ix).
He remanded the case back to the punishing authority for passing fresh order as per law.
Punishing Authority did not conduct any fresh inquiry.
A fresh show cause notice was issued to him on 27.1.83 in which some punishments previously inflicted on him were set out.
As per him, the show cause notice did not fulfil the requirements of police rules.
SSP Amritsar without obtaining reply to this show cause notice proceeded to pass an order of dismissal dated 26.2.83 against him taking into consideration the reply filed by him to the earlier show cause notice.
On 29185, the revision-cum-mercy petition dated 12185 was dismissed by IG police.
Hari Singh dead represented by his LRs/heirs filed suit for declaration against the State of Punjab to the effect that order dated 26.2.83 passed by SSP dismissing from service was arbitrary, mala fide passed with a biased mind and in violation of the police rules, against the rules of natural justice and provisions of Constitution of India and was cryptic, illegal, without jurisdiction, void and as such inoperative against him and that he always continued to be in the service of the Punjab Police as Constable as before 26.3.83 and was entitled to all pay and privileges of the post.
2.
Defendent-Punjab State contested the suit of the plaintiff.
3.
On the pleadings of the parties, the following issues were framed :  1.
Whether the order dated 26.2.83 of SSP, Amritsar is illegal, as alleged in the plaint ?
OPP 2.
Whether the suit is bad for non-joinder of necessary parties ?
OPD 3.
Whether notice u/s 80 CPC served by the plaintiff on the defendants is illegal ?
OPD 4.
Whether the suit is not maintainable in the present form ?
OPD 5.
Relief.
4.
Vide order dated 16.5.87 of SJIIIC Amritsar, plaintiff's suit was decreed for declaration to the effect that order dated 26.2.83 passed by SSP dismissing him from service was arbitrary, against the provisions of Constitution, illegal, without jurisdiction, void and as such not operative against him and that he would continue to be in service of Punjab Police as constable as before 26.2.83 with pay, powers and privileges in view of his finding, that when the IG Police had ordered his reinstatement into service, subsequent inquiry on the same charge was violative of his fundamental right namely that he could not be subjected to double jeopardy.
It was found that once an inquiry had been quashed, it could not be reopened and once the plaintiff had been reinstated there could not be his dismissal from service over again on the same cause of action.
It was found that absence of the delinquent was duly explained through the doctor's certificate.
It was further found that dismissal could be awarded only for the gravest act of misconduct proving incorrigibility and in this case, there was no finding by the SSP Amritsar that he was dismissed from service for the gravest act of misconduct proving incorrigibility on his part.
5.
State of Punjab came up in appeal, which was dismissed by Additional District Judge, Amritsar vide order dated 11987.
6.
Still not satisfied, State of Punjab has come up in further appeal to this Court.
7.
I have heard both the sides and have gone through the record.
8.
Learned State counsel submitted that in the show cause notice given to the delinquent after his revision-cum-mercy petition had been accepted by the DG Police, the previous punishments inflicted on him were set out.
According to the previous punishments inflicted on him, he had absented on four occasions for which he was punished with the forfeiture of his approved service of three years, two years, three years and one year.
It was submitted that his absence on previous occasions, which resulted into the forfeiture of his approved service of 3 years, 2 years, 3 years and 1 year shows that absence from duty on 29.10.80 and 5181 to 19181 again from duty was proving incorrigibility on his part.
Rule 162(i) of the Punjab Police Rules reads thus :-  "Dismissal shall be awarded only for the gravest acts of misconduct, or as the cumulative effect of continued misconduct proving incorrigibility and complete unfitness from police service.
In making such an award regard shall be had to the length of service of the offender and his claim to pension."
9.
It was submitted that in the impugned order dated 26.2.83, there is mention that he is habituated of being absent.
Punishments of forfeiture of approved service permanently passed on him on various occasions were not able to reform him which shows that he was incorrigible and could not be a good police official and sooner the department got rid of him better it was.
10.
Learned counsel for the respondent submitted that while passing an order of dismissal, the SSP Amritsar did not advert at all to the length of service and his claim to pension and, therefore, order of dismissal cannot be sustained.
It was submitted that he had joined duty in the year 1970.
In the year 1981, he had put in about ten years of service.
It was submitted that SSP should not have dismissed him from service but should have ordered his compulsory retirement from service keeping in view that he had put in about ten years of service which qualified him for pension.
In support of this submission, he drew my attention to Sukhdev Singh v. The State of Punjab and others, 1983(2) SLR 645 where it was held that "dismissal shall be awarded only for the gravest acts of misconduct, or as the cumulative effect of continued misconduct proving incorrigibility and complete unfitness for service.
In making such an award regard shall be had to the length of service of the offender and his claim to pension."
In Sukhdev Singh's case (supra), the facts were totally different.
The charge of which he had been held guilty was that on a surprise roll-call of the officials of the police lines Ferozepore on 5275 at 946 pm, he was found drunk and when the Lines Officer Sub Inspector Major Singh thought of taking him to the hospital for his medical examination after making an entry to that effect, he slipped away from his presence and thus, could not be subjected to medical examination.
He reported himself for duty at about 1 am in the Police Lines and made a report to that effect on 6.2.75.
It was on account of establishment of this charge that the SSP Ferozepore awarded him the punishment of dismissal.
It was held by the learned Single Judge that a constable while not on duty even if found to be under the influence of liquor, cannot be held to have misconducted himself on that score alone and he does not render him liable for any disciplinary action.
As regards the second limb of charge that he had slipped away from the presence of the Lines Officer and did not subject himself to medical examination, learned Single Judge was of the view that even if this charge is said to have been established against him still the order of dismissal cannot be sustained in the light of the provisions of Rule 162(i) ibid as the SP did not advert to his length of service and his claim to pension before he passed the order dismissing him from service.
In State of Haryana through Collector, Hissar and another v. Lachman Singh, 1992(2) RSJ 398 : 1992(2) SCT 545 (P&H) also, it was held that "where the Punishing Authority does not examine the claim of the delinquent for pension having regard to the length of his service, the dismissal order cannot be sustained in view of the provisions of Rule 162(i) of the Punjab Police Rules."
11.
It was submitted that dismissal from service for this absence from duty could not have been ordered as this absence from service was not intentional.
It was submitted that on 29.11.80, he was very much present and that he was shown absent in the daily diary falsely and when he raised protest about the false entry, he was shown to have returned to the police lines on 301180.
Thereafter, Moharir of police lines on 5181 told him to go for duty to Maharaja Ranjeet Singh Hall.
Plaintiff told him that he was ill and some body else should be sent to Maharaja Ranjeet Singh Hall and instead he should be sent for medical treatment.
He was marked absent.
Dr. Jatinder Singh MBBS MD who treated him stated that he was ill.
Plaintiff's absence was for 15 days and 8 hours from 5181 to 19181.
He was absent for one day and 8 hours from 29.11.80 to 301180.
Plaintiff should have explained each day's and each hour's absence.
In Malkiat Singh v. State of Punjab and others, 1996(2) Judgments Today 648 : 1996(2) SCT 758 (SC) plaintiff-Malkiat Singh's discharge from police service was set aside as it was found that absence on his part was not deliberate as his wife developed complications after delivery.
On the earlier occasion, the absence for one day and in another year for one night could not be considered to be regular absence so that he could be labelled inefficient.
In the case in hand, however, he was absent for a good number of days this time and he had been absent on earlier occasions also for a good number of days and for his absence on earlier occasions he had been punished with the forfeiture of his approved service permanently to a total period of 9 years.
SSP has observed in the impugned order dated 26.2.83 that he was habituated to be absent and for his absence on various occasions, he had been awarded forfeiture of his approved service previously on four occasions and still he did not reform himself.
This shows that he is incorrigible and cannot prove himself to be a good police official.
After taking into account forfeiture of 9 years of his approved service permanently, he was hardly left with any service which could qualify him for pension.
It would have been of no use if SSP had looked to his length of service and his claim to pension while dismissing him from service when he had put in 10/11 years of service till the year 1981 out of which 9 years of approved service had already been forfeited permanently.
12.
It was further submitted that when the DG Police had allowed his revision-cum-mercy petition and ordered his reinstatement into service, he could not have remanded the inquiry back to SSP as the inquiry de novo was vexing him twice over.
Suffice it to say while accepting his revision-cum- mercy petition, DG Police could call upon the Punishing Authority to pass fresh order strictly according to rules i.e. the provisions of Rule 16.24(i) (vii) (ix) of the Punjab Police Rules.
13.
For the reasons given above, this appeal succeeds and is accepted and the judgments and decrees of both the courts below are set aside and the suit of the plaintiff-respondent is dismissed.
No costs.
Appeal allowed.