GS Singhvi, J - The petitioner, who is presently working as Social Studies Mistress in the Government Middle School, Guru Nanakpura, Bathinda, has been compelled to seek intervention of the Court because the respondents have failed to locate/adjust and to correct/revise her account statement for the years 1988-89 to 1996-97 and they have also failed to revise her annual General Provident Fund statement.
2.
In the writ petition, it has been averred that the petitioner is a regular subscriber to GPF of which an account was initially maintained by the Accountant General (A&E), Punjab and which now stands transferred to the Education Department.
It has also been averred that the respondents have not only failed to keep track of her record but they have also failed to make correct entries resulting in financial loss to her.
3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2, it has been averred that only GPF statement of the petitioner has been issued for the year 1995-96 after getting the revised final balance from the Accountant General, Punjab but due to non-availability of missing credits, the old accounts could not be completed.
The respondents have relied on Annexure-R.1 dated 1741998 to show that a sum of Rs. 9678/- has been transferred in the account of the petitioner.
4.
At the hearing of the writ petition, Shri Khosla stated that the accounts of the petitioner could not be compiled because of communication gap between the office of the Accountant General, Punjab and the office of respondent No. 2.
He further stated that due to the attitude of non-cooperation adopted by the office of the Accountant General (A&E), Punjab, the petitioner's account has not been up-dated but efforts are being made to trace out the missing credits and to prepare the credit statement of balance.
5.
In our opinion, there can be no justification for not completing the account statement of the petitioner because this lapse on the part of the respondents has been causing recurring pecuniary loss to her.
Therefore, we consider it to be a fit case in which a direction should be given to the respondents to complete the account statement of the petitioner by tracing out the missing credits and give appropriate financial benefit to her.
Therefore, the writ petition is disposed of with the direction that within two months from today the respondents should complete the GPF account and other papers of the petitioner.
We also direct the respondents to pay costs of Rs. 5,000/- to the petitioner for causing unnecessary harassment to her due to lapse of the concerned authorities including the office of the Accountant General, Punjab.
The Government shall be free to recover the amount of costs from the defaulting officer.
Petition allowed.