RS Mongia, J - The Board of Management of Chhotu Ram Polytechnic, Rohtak is running a Polytechnic College at Rohtak (hereinafter referred to as `the College').
The College is a Government aided institution.
As per the averments, 50 per cent of the expenditure of the College is borne by the Government of India and 50 per cent by the State of Haryana.
Two members on the Managing Committee are nominated by the State Government, one Member by the Government of India and one Member is nominated by all India Council of Technical Education and another member is nominated by the State Board of Technical Education.
2.
The Management of the College had issued an advertisement on July 20, 1997 for various posts of Lecturers, including one post of Lecturer in Mathematics.
The petitioner applied for the post of Lecturer in Mathematics.
The Staff Selection Committee, which included Chairman of the Department of Applied Sciences and Humanities, Regional Engineering College, Kurukshetra, Dr. BS Sindhu, Lecturer in Mathematics, University College, Rohtak, Sh. Randip Singh, Lecturer in English, University College, Rohtak and many others.
The constitution of the Committee has been mentioned in Annexure P.1.
21 candidates, including the petitioner, appeared before the Staff Selection Committee for the post of Lecturer in Mathematics.
The Staff Selection Committee had kept one Ms. Saveen at Sr. No. 1 in the merit list and the petitioner was kept at Sr. No. 2.
The recommendation of the Staff Selection Committee was placed before the Board of Management of the College in its meeting held on October 17, 1997.
The Board of Management approved the recommendation of the Staff Selection Committee.
According to the bye-laws of the College, the appointing authority for the post of Lecturer is the Chairman, on behalf of the Board of Management.
The President of the Board of Management is the Chairman.
Against the post of Lecturer in Mathematics, which was advertised, Ms. Saveen was given appointment.
3.
One post of Lecturer in Mathematics was created in the College on January 19, 1998.
The petitioner submitted an application that he was kept at Sr. No. 2 in the merit list by the Staff Selection Committee and since a post of Lecturer in Mathematics was available, he should be given appointment.
On January 21, 1998, the petitioner was issued appointment letter by the Principal of the College, copy at Annexure P5.
The opening part of the appointment letter and conditions 2(a) and (b) may be reproduced as under :-  "As per order of the President, Board of Management, you are hereby offered a temporary post of Lecturer in Mathematics against the post converted by the Director, Technical Education Haryana vide Memo No. 263/E- 9/208/97/Estt.II dated 19.1.1998 for Plastic Engg.
Deptt.
to Applied Sciences Deptt.
under World Bank scheme subject to the approval of BOM on the following terms and conditions :- 1. xx xx 2(a) You will be on probation for a period of one year in the first instance during which your services will be liable to be terminated by the Principal at any time without any notice.
(b) On confirmation you will be entitled to contribute towards PF and benefits thereof as per rules."
4.
Pursuant to the aforesaid letter, the petitioner immediately joined as Lecturer in Mathematics in the College.
It has further been averred in the petition that the petitioner was allowed the benefit of Contributory Provident Fund w.e.f.
February 1, 1999.
It may be observed here that the petitioner is stated to have made a representation on January 15, 2000 to the Principal of the College that the clause in the appointment letter that the same was "subject to approval of BOM" i.e. Board of Management was superfluous and suplusage and could not have been incorporated in the appointment letter.
The case of the petitioner was put up before the Board of Management in the meeting held on February 18, 2000.
The minutes of the meeting of the Board of Management dated February 18, 2000 have been appended as Annexure P.9.
The resolution reads as under :-  "The Board of Management did not approve the appointment of Sh. Rajiv Kumar, Lect.
in Mathematics in App.
Sci.
Deptt.
Board found his appointment improper as this post was not filled up through advertisement after coming of this post into existence.
Board decided to relieve him with immediate effect i.e. 1822000 (AN).
Board also decided that in future regular appointment on this post should be made only after advertising this post."
5.
The President of the Board of Management, pursuant to the resolution, dated February 18, 2000, issued a letter on the same date i.e. February 18, 2000 (copy Annexure P10), which reads as under ;-  "As per the decision of the Board of Management in its 25th meeting held on 1822000 vide item No. 257 of agenda, your appointment to the post of Lecturer in Mathematics in App.
Sci.
Deptt.
is found improper and Board of Management decided to relieve you from the services of Chhotu Ram Polytechnic, Rohtak.
Consequent upon the decision of Board of Management you are hereby relieved from the services of Chhotu Ram Polytechnic, Rohtak with immediate effect i.e. 1822000 (AN)."
6.
Annexures P.9 and P10 both dated February 18, 2000, have been made the subject-matter of challenge in this writ petition.
Notice of motion was issued.
Reply on behalf of the Management has been filed.
It may be observed here that the Motion Bench while issuing notice of motion had stayed the operation of the order at Annexure P10.
7.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner argued that :-  (i) As per the service bye-laws of the College the merit list prepared by the Selection Committee is valid for a period of six months and if any post comes into existence within the period of six months of the preparation of merit list, such vacancy is to be filled in order of merit already determined; (ii) Even if the bye-laws are held to be not applicable as they were approved later by the Director Technical Education in January, 2000, even then as per the decision of the Board of Management dated April 17, 1986 (Annexure P12), till the service rules were approved by the Directorate, the Government Rules were to be followed.
As per the Government of Haryana instructions, dated October 28, 1993 (Annexure R.3/4) read with earlier instructions dated May 26, 1973, if any post had come into existence within six months of the exhausting of original merit list the appointments against such posts were to be made out of the waiting list; (iii) As per the bye-laws only the recommendations of the Selection Committee were to be approved by the Board of Management and appointments made on the basis of the list so approved by the Board of Management were not required to be further approved by the Board of Management; (iv) The petitioner stood confirmed after one year of probation period and that is why he was allowed to make contributions towards Provident Fund.
As per bye-laws it is only the confirmed employee who can be Member of the CPF.
The reasoning given in the impugned order at Annexure P.9 that the appointment of the petitioner was improper as the same was without advertisement is factually incorrect.
It was after the advertisement issued on July 20, 1997, for one post of Lecturer in Mathematics, that the petitioner was placed at Sr. No. 2 of the merit list.
The petitioner was rightly appointed on the post, which came into existence January 19, 1998.
On the basis of the provisions in the bye-laws, the Principal of the College was required to report the appointment of the petitioner to the Board of Management at the very next meeting after the appointment, but the same was not done.
It was only after two years of appointment that the Board took the decision.
Had the matter been placed earlier before the Board and if the services were validly terminated the petitioner could have joined at some other place; (v) Before terminating the services no opportunity of hearing was granted to the petitioner nor any show cause notice issued.
The impugned action is violative of the principles of natural justice.
(vi) The impugned action has been taken as the Management has changed since the appointment of the petitioner; 8.
Mr. Surya Kant, on behalf of respondent-Management submitted as follows regarding the points raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner :-  (i) So far as point No. (i), raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner, the argument was that the bye-laws on which reliance has been placed by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the merit list is valid for six months were approved by the Director Technical Education only on January 21, 2000 and, therefore, no reliance can be placed on those bye-laws as these were not in existence at the time of selection of the petitioner.
(ii) So far as point No. (ii) is concerned learned counsel argued that the instructions of the Haryana Government regarding the appointment to the post in the college from the waiting list would not be ipso-facto applicable and are not relevant for the purpose of appointment.
It was submitted that the instructions would not be applicable to a newly created post which was neither in existence nor anticipated at the time of selection.
It was further submitted that in the appointment letter it was specifically mentioned that the appointment was subject to the approval of the Board of Management and the Board of Management having decline the approval, the petitioner has no vested right to continue on the post.
(iii) So far as point No. (iii) is concerned, learned counsel argued that since only one post of Lecturer in Mathematics was advertised and the petitioner was being appointed against the newly created post, it had to be made subject to the approval of the Board of Management, as the previous merit list pertained only to one post and was not relevant for purpose of appointment to the newly created post.
This was a specific condition in the appointment letter that the appointment was subject to the approval of the Board of Management.
(iv) So far as point No. (iv) is concerned, learned counsel argued that the petitioner's contention that he stood confirmed and that is why he was allowed the benefit of C.PF w.e.f.
February 1, 1999 as only confirmed employees are entitled to the benefit of C.PF, the Principal of the College had passed order on August 31, 1999 in which it was clearly mentioned that the petitioner may be allowed the benefit of CPF subject to the approval of Board of Management.
So the final decision of the whole matter was to be taken by the Board of Management.
The petitioner was never treated to have completed the period of probation or having acquired the status of a confirmed employee.
(v) So far as point No. (v) is concerned, it is argued that since the very appointment was made subject to the approval of the Board of Management, the appointment itself was in a nebulous state and petitioner had not acquired any vested right to continue.
For non-grant of approval by the Board of Management, no opportunity of hearing or show cause notice was required to be given to the petitioner.
(vi) So far as point No. (vi) is concerned, learned counsel argued that since the petitioner was not appointed legally, his services have been terminated by the present Management.
9.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties we are of the view that there is substance in the arguments of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
The service bye-laws of the College provide as under :-  "Appointing Authority : The appointing Authority for different posts shall be as under :-  (i) Principal on behalf of the Board For all posts of Group C and D as classified in Technical Education Deptt.
(ii) Chairman on behalf of the Board For all posts except Group C and D as classified in Technical Education Deptt.
For posts mentioned above, and appointment letter will be issued by the appointing authority as soon as possible after the selection of the proposed employee by the Staff Selection Committee provided that the appointment is in order, on merit determined by the Committee and the Board has not specified to the contrary in regard to the particular post or class of posts.
However, the selection/merit list shall be valid for a period of six months.
The Principal shall invariably report such appointments to the Board at the next meeting and copy of all appointments shall be sent to the Director Technical Education, Haryana."
10.
As per the aforesaid bye-laws, the merit list is to remain valid for six months.
If any post comes into existence in any manner within the period of six months of the framing of the merit list, according to us, the same has to be filled out of the merit list already prepared.
At the relevant time, the petitioner was not in the know of or bothered as to whether the bye-laws stood approved by the Directorate or not.
However, the fact remains is that in January, 2000 the bye-laws have been approved.
The post had come into existence within six months of the drawing of the initial merit list.
Under the bye-laws, the petitioner could have been given the appointment.
Assuming for the sake argument that the bye-laws having been approved by the Directorate only in January, 2000, would not be applicable to the selection made earlier, the rules etc. of the Haryana Government would be applicable to the College as per the resolution of the Board of Management, dated April 17, 1986, Annexure P12, by which it was clearly resolved that till the service rules are approved by the Directorate, the Government Rules would be followed.
As per the instructions, dated October 28, 1993, Annexure R.3/4, in which earlier instructions of the Haryana Government, dated May 26, 1972, were also reiterated, the petitioner was entitled to appointment to the newly created post which came into existence on January 19, 1998, i.e. within the six months of the framing of the original merit list.
The instructions dated October 28, 1993 are almost identical to the instructions dated May 26, 1972, which came up for consideration before the Apex Court in Virender S Hooda v. State of Haryana, 1999(2) SCT 652 (SC) : 1999(2) SLR 191, in which it was laid down that the vacancies which occurred in the department within a period of six months of the receipt of the recommendation of the Commission, such vacancies had to be filled up from the merit list notified earlier.
Consequently, on the basis of the instructions, dated October 28, 1993, read with the resolution of the Board of Management, dated April 17, 1986, petitioner was entitled to be appointed to the post, which came into existence on January 19, 1998.
11.
For the view we have taken above, it is not necessary to deal with other points, raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner, as we are of the opinion that even if the approval of the Board of Management was required regarding the appointment of the petitioner, it could not have been refused on the ground, which has been mentioned in Annexure P.9 (reproduced above), i.e. that the post against which the petitioner had been appointed was not advertised.
As observed above, the post having come into existence within six months of the drawing up of the previous merit list, the post could be filled, as has been filled by appointment of the petitioner, without advertising the same.
12.
For the foregoing reasons, we allow this writ petition and quash the resolution of the Board of Management, dated February 18, 2000 (Annexure P.9) and the order of the President of the Board of Management, dated February 18, 2000 (Annexure P10), issued on the basis of resolution, Annexure P.9.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.