Syed Bashir-ud-Din, J - Considered.
Admit.
2.
Petitioner has been assigned on stop gap-arrangement the charge of Superintendent, Industrial Training Institute Tral, though earlier in July 1990 he was incharge Superintendent Industrial Training Institute Ganderbal.
Petitioner was to work in his own pay and grade initially for a period of three months or till regularisation (whichever is earlier) under order No. 228 of 1992 dated 17692 of Director Technical Education J&K (annexure-A).
The petitioner is continuing to hold the charge as Superintendent of Industrial Training Institute (ITI) without being regularised hereto.
The Director of Technical Education as also the Commissioner/Secretary to Government (Technical Education), took up the matter with Public Service Commission in so far as clearance has to be given by respondent No. 3 to the regularisation of petitioner (annexure-B).
Again the Director Technical Education-respondent No. 2 took up the matter with Commissioner/Secretary to Government-respondent No. 1 (annexure-C), followed by further communication (annexure-D).
Petitioner made representation to the Director (annexure-E), but it has not evoked any response.
Aggrieved of the inaction of the respondents, petitioner has prayed for his regularisation against the post of Superintendent ITI retrospectively from the date he has been given the charge of the post of Superintendent of Industrial Training Institute.
3.
Respondents 1 and 2 in reply have admitted the writ pleas so far as petitioner being assigned with charge of Superintendent of Industrial Training Institute is concerned.
It is conceded that he is continuing as such Incharge Superintendent to date.
Further it is also admitted that respondents 1 and 2 have taken up the case of petitioner with DPC/PSC and that they have been pursuing the matter and are seized of it.
The correspondence on the subject had not been denied.
However, the respondents canvass that the petitioner cannot claim regularisation as a matter of right, though proposal of filling of posts of Superintendent of various ITIs falling under Promotion quota is under process.
All in-service candidate including petitioner are to be considered for promotion against available posts.
In para 9 of the reply it is stated :-  "In reply to para 9, it is submitted that the respondents as earlier submitted are already considering the proposal for promotion of the in service eligible candidates as Superintendents ITI and proposal in this behalf is under procedural correspondence.
As soon as formalities are completed DPC/PSC will meet for deciding the issue."
As from pleadings and submissions of the counsel for parties, matter can be disposed of at this stage, therefore, the parties were heard and that too on their request.
4.
Petitioner's case for regularisation as Superintendent of an Industrial Training Institute of the State Government, is as submitted by the parties, governed by J&K Industrial Training Recruitment Rules of 1976.
The cadre posts of Superintendents have to be filled by direct recruitment and by promotion from Jr.
Engineer and Formen/Surveyors/Supervisory Instructors subject to eligibility and norms laid down thereto.
The posts are to be filled up in the ratio of 25% by direct recruitment, 25% by promotion from Jr.
Engineers and 50% by promotion for Formen/Surveyors/Supervisory Instructors.
This ratio from the aforementioned feeder categories is subject to eligibility from each stream of feeder category as laid down in the rules.
Petitioner is from the category of three years diploma in engineering from a reccognized institute and having three years experience in supervisory capacity in ITIs.
He is, therefore, eligible for promotion against 25% quota among the Jr.
Engineers.
Letter dated 15992 addressed by Additional Secretary to Government Technical Education to Public Service Commission, Srinagar shows that the petitioner has been found on merit, suitability and satisfactory performance eligible for promotion and for this reason proposal was sent to Public Service Commission for formal clearance of his case so that the same could be regularised by DPC and consequential orders issued by competent authority.
The position has been further clarified by the Director Technical Education in his letter dated 321994 addressed to Commissioner/Secretary to Govt. Education Department Jammu, wherein service biodata and other required details of petitioner have been given and the petitioner's case is recommended for promotion as Superintendent ITI w.e.f.
1.10.93, the date on which one post of Superintendent ITI under promotion quota became available consequent on superannuatory retirement of one Shri ML Raina and that too after all other incumbents ahead of petitioner working on ad hoc basis on these promotional posts stand adjusted.
Contexually even the roster position of direct recruits and promotees is indicated and the position of petitioner for promotion as in-service promotee is also indicated in the list of Superintendent of ITIs.
The inaction of respondent No. 1 to move and initiate the process is not conducive to the health of Public administration.
The Head of Department of Technical Education is under the statutory duty and legal obligation to initiate the process and to take steps including consultation with the PSC in respect of the direct recruit to the service and also for filling up of the civil post of Superintendents ITI from in-service candidates, unless under statutory regulations it was not necessary to consult the Commission in this behalf.
Equally it is incumbent upon the respondent No. 1 to take steps including constitution of Departmental Promotion Committee as long as the provision therefor is in the rules.
Keeping the matter under carpet for long over six years and failing to take any action is not a fair action and protected by law.
After all, incumbents cannot continue in stop-gap arrangement at the level of Superintendents/Principals of ITIs indefinitely.
The practice of resorting to ad hocism and continuing with the ad hoc appointment(s) inordinately is a practice which has to be disapproved by this Court.
5.
The policy and practice of "Ad hocism" for a long period negatives and breaches Articles 14 and 16, after all, prolonged ad hoc appointments are unreasonable and discriminatory and violate constitutional protection.
Provisional appointment though can be resorted to as an administrative exigency, when rules cannot be complied with, but same cannot be continued endlessly jeopardising the rights of the eligible employees governed by specific rules.
Ad hoc appointment on a post by promotion is on no different footing than such appointment in lower cadres of a service in an administrative set up.
(See 1984 Ker.
LT 403 (FB); (1986)2 CCC (23) Gauhati (DB) and 1988 Rajasthan LR 327 (328) (DB))  In State of Haryana v. Piara Singh, (1992)4 SCC 118 : 1992(3) SCT 201 (SC), it is observed :-  "As regards the temporary/ad hoc employees in Govt. service, the normal rule is regular recruitment through the prescribed agency but exigencies of administration may some times call for an ad hoc or temporary appointment to be made.
In such a situation, effort would always be to replace such an ad hoc/temporary employee by a regularly selected employee as early as possible...if for any reason, an ad hoc or temporary employee is continued for a fairly long spell, the authorities must consider his case for regularisation provided he is eligible and qualified according to the rules and his service record is satisfactory...persons continuing in service over a number of years have a right to claim regularisation and the authorities are under an obligation to consider their case for regularisation in a fair manner."
6.
Respondents 1 and 2 have practically admitted the whole case of petitioners except that it is asserted that the petition be dismissed.
After the PSC/DPC is seized of the matter, then inaction and long delay extending over last number of years to take a decision in the matter speaks for itself.
The PSC- respondent No. 3 has not opted to appear or contest the matter.
As against the PSC petition allegations of inaction and failing to give advise on this referred matter is uncontroverted.
Whether present case is of class of cases in respect of which consultation with PSC is necessary or dispensed with in terms of Section 133 of J&K Constitution (Articles 320 of the Constitution) is not made out as explicitly and definitely as one would like, but considering the reply of respondents 1 and 2 it appears such consultation is required.
If it be so, then it is the legal duty of PSC to consider the petitioner's case and communicate its views/recommendations to competent authority, expeditiously.
7.
In result, respondents/competent authority is directed to consider the case of petitioner for regularisation against the post of Superintendent ITI from among the in-service promotee quota from due date in accordance with rules and orders operating in the field and in the light of the material and record available with respondent No. 1.
For the purpose required steps including constitution of DPC and process of consultation with PSC shall be initiated and taken with reasonable despatch.
The decision in the matter shall be taken as far as possible within a period of four months after copy of this order is delivered to respondent No. 1.
No orders as to costs.
Petition is disposed of in terms as above.
Petition allowed.