RL Anand, J. (Oral) - Petitioner Meharban Singh has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India against the State of Punjab, Controller, Printing and Stationery Department, Deputy Controller, Printing and Stationery Department, Punjab School Education Board through its Chairman and Secretary and has prayed for issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari for the quashment of Annexures P2 and P6.
He has further made a prayer that respondents No. 1 to 3 be directed to make medical reimbursement to him.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he was working with respondents No. 1 to 3 earlier.
However, in public interest the Govt. of Punjab passed an order on 981978 vide which it was decided to absorb the employees on permanent basis in the service of Punjab School Education Board (respondents No. 4) w.e.f.
171976.
The pensionary benefits in respect of the Govt. service rendered upto 3061976 were worked out and allowed as per existing rules and Government instructions.
The petitioner alleges that as per the absorption policy the employees are entitled to get all benefits of pension, gratuity etc. as per the latest instructions of the Punjab Government for permanent absorption/transfer of Government employees to Corporations/Companies.
After sending the petitioner with respondents No. 4 and 5, respondents No. 1 to 3 also sanctioned pension regarding the service which was rendered by the petitioner with them.
As per the pension sanctioned, a fixed medical allowance @ Rs. 250/- was given to the petitioner apart from other benefits calculated with regard to pension which was to commence w.e.f.
23.11.1981, vide PPO No. 44008/Punjab.
According to the petitioner, he is being paid Rs. 250/- as fixed medical allowance as per the break-up.
He stood finally superannuated on 31111989 and after his superannuation he suffered heart problem.
He got himself medically checked up from P.G.I., Chandigarh and remained under treatment from 22121997 to 30.12.1997 and after his discharge from P.G.I.
he got treatment from Batra Heart Centre, New Delhi.
On 111998 he approached the respondent No. 3 for reimbursement of medical bills and simultaneously on 811998 he submitted an application to respondent No. 5 inter-alia mentioning that he was indoor patient and spent huge amount on his treatment and, therefore, necessary sanction be given to him so that he may be able to claim the medical reimbursement.
Respondent No. 3, later on, informed the petitioner that he should approach the Punjab School Education Board for medical reimbursement as he has retired from the said Board.
3.
The petitioner felt necessity for getting himself operated upon for open heart surgery.
He was admitted in Batra Heart Centre on 2.2.1998 and was operated upon.
He was discharged on 17.2.1998.
After getting himself operated, he wrote to the Director, Health and Family Welfare, Punjab for giving him sanction with regard to the treatment from Batra Heart Centre.
The said Director vide letter dated 22.6.1998, Annexure P4, issued the requisite sanction.
After obtaining sanction, the petitioner submitted an application on 29.6.1998 to respondent No. 5, with a copy to respondent No. 2, and made a request for medical reimbursement.
According to the petitioner, he spent a sum of Rs. 2,00,106/- from his own pocket, but not a single penny has been reimbursed to him.
Finally, respondent No. 3 asked the petitioner to take reimbursement from respondents No. 4 and 5, whereas respondents No. 4 and 5 informed him to apply for reimbursement to the same very department from where he is getting fixed medical allowance.
With these allegations the petitioner has come in the present writ petition.
4.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
A joint written statement was filed on behalf of respondents No. 1 to 3.
Their stand is that petitioner was appointed as Clerk w.e.f.
3121957 in Printing and Stationery Department.
He proceeded on deputation with the Punjab School Education Board w.e.f.
31.1.1975 along with other staff sanctioned for the Text Book Scheme.
This Scheme was transferred to the Punjab School Education Board on 31.1.1975.
The petitioner took permanent absorption in the Board w.e.f 171976 by giving a written consent and he became the employee of the Board for all intents and purpose.
At the time of permanent absorption of the petitioner in the service of the Board on 171976 the State Government sanctioned him pro-rata retirement benefits as per the rules with a specific condition that he shall henceforth be governed by the service rules and regulations of the Board.
Condition No. (ii) clearly lays down as follows :  "After absorption, they will be governed by rules and regulations of the Board and that they will not claim any protection or privilege accruing from the previous service regulations.
For all intents and purposes the employees will be the employees of the Board."
In view of above condition, the claim of the petitioner for medical reimbursement qua respondents 1 and 3 is patently illegal.
In short, respondent No. 1 to 3 have stated that the petitioner should have claimed the medical reimbursement from the respondent-Board as he is not entitled to any medical reimbursement from them.
A separate written statement was also filed on behalf of respondents No. 4 and 5.
According to these respondents, the petitioner has no locus standi to file the writ petition since he has retired and on his retirement he has been paid complete dues under the Contributory Provident Fund Scheme as pension scheme was not applicable at that time in the Board.
Under the Contributory Provident Fund Scheme no incumbent was eligible for reimbursement of medical expenses in the Board.
The petitioner has been getting pension and fixed medical allowance from the Punjab Government and his claim of reimbursement does not lie against respondents No. 4 and 5.
In short, the defence of these respondents is that as per the Contributory Provident Fund Scheme the petitioner is not entitled to any benefit such as medical reimbursement from the Board.
5.
I have heard Mr. KS Dadwal, Advocate on behalf of the petitioner and Ms. Gurveen H Singh, AAG on behalf of respondents No. 1 to 3.
Nobody has appeared on behalf of respondents No. 4 and 5, though I have gone through the written statement filed by these respondents.
6.
The learned counsel for the petitioner vehemently submitted that the petitioner was earlier working with the Punjab Government in the Printing and Stationery Department.
In the public interest he was absorbed with respondents No. 4 and 5.
He has been getting pensionary benefits from the Punjab Government.
As per the transfer policy, all the benefits of pension and gratuity etc. are being paid by the State Government.
So much so, the petitioner has been getting fixed medical allowance at the rate of Rs. 250/- from the State Government.
In these circumstances.
Punjab Government is liable to pay the medical reimbursement.
He further submitted that vide Annexure P4, dated 22.6.1998, the Director, Health and Family Welfare, Punjab issued ex- post facto sanction to the petitioner for taking treatment from Batra Heart Centre, New Delhi.
It was also stated in the said letter that petitioner may calculate the amount of medical reimbursement from the list already sent vide office letter dated 23121997.
From this letter the learned counsel for the petitioner wanted to take the assistance that once the sanction has been granted by the State for undertaking the treatment, it is not open now for the State Government to say that it is not liable to pay the medical reimbursement.
7.
On the contrary, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of respondents No. 1 to 3 submitted that the petitioner was permanently absorbed in Punjab School Education Board w.e.f.
171976.
As per the conditions of absorption all the employees are to be governed by the rules and regulations of the Board and those employees are not entitled to any protection or privilege accruing from the previous service regulations and for all intents and purpose will be the employees of the Board.
In these circumstance, if there is any liability that is of the Board and not of the State Government.
8.
The stand of the Board I have already incorporated above.
Vide Annexure P6 the petitioner was informed that he is not entitled to the medical reimbursement from the Board as he had retired w.e.f.
30111989.
As per the decision of the Board, the pension scheme came into force w.e.f.
141991 and the officials/officers of the Board are not entitled to free medical treatment.
9.
In these circumstances, the sole point for determination is whether the petitioner is entitled to the medical reimbursement and if so from whom.
In the opinion of this Court the petitioner is not entitled to any medical reimbursement either from the State Government or from the Board itself.
It is the admitted case that the petitioner was absorbed permanently in the Board in the year 1976.
Since the petitioner had served the Punjab Government, therefore, he was released the pension payment order.
It is true that the petitioner was given Rs. 250/- as fixed medical allowance, but there was no agreement between the State Government and the Board that after absorption the State Government shall continue with the liability of the medical reimbursement.
The petitioner was paid a pension of Rs. 1,426/- including Rs. 250/- as fixed medical allowance.
But it does not give the right to the petitioner to claim medical reimbursement for such period when the was not the employee of the State Government.
After the absorption of the petitioner with the Board, he was the employee of the Board for all intents and purposes and the service conditions of the Board are applicable in this case.
The understanding between the Board and the State Government was that after absorption the employees will be governed by the rules and regulations of the Board and such employees are not entitled to any protection or privilege accruing from the previous service regulations.
For all intents and purposes the employees will be considered the employees of the Board.
When the petitioner was absorbed in the Board, at that time benefit of medical reimbursement was not open to him.
This benefit was available to the employees of the Board w.e.f.
141991.
The petitioner retired from the Board on 30111989.
The pension scheme became effective w.e.f.
141991.
In this view of the matter, there is no difficulty on my part in holding that the petitioner is not entitled to medical reimbursement either from the State Government or from the Punjab School Education Board.
There is no merit in this writ petition.
The same is hereby dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.