RL Anand, J. (Oral) - Sumir Nagpal and Kamal Jeet Singh petitioners have filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India praying that a writ of mandamus be issued against respondent No. 1 to declare their result of Matriculation Examination.
2.
The case set up by the petitioners is that they passed Middle Standard Examination from Saint Paul's School, Bathinda, which was affiliated to the Council for Elementary Education (CEE) vide registration No. CEE/AFF EXTN/PB-28/145/97 dated 1541997.
They also passed the 9th class from that very school.
Thereafter they joined Guru Nanak Dev Public Senior Secondary School, Bathinda as students of 10th class.
In March, 1999 they took the examination for Matriculation conducted by the Punjab School Education Board, Mohali, but their result was not declared on the ground that they have passed the Middle Standard Examination from Saint Paul's School, Bathinda, which is not recognized by the Punjab School Education Board.
This is the short case of the parties.
3.
I have heard Mr. RD Sehgal, Advocate on behalf of the petitioners, Ms. Sukhwinder Kaur, Advocate, on behalf of defendant No. 1, Mr. Gur Rattan Pal Singh, Advocate on behalf of respondent No. 3.
In the view of this Court this writ deserves to be allowed on a short ground of principles of natural justice which have not been complied with by respondent No. 1 before withholding the result of the petitioners.
Admittedly, the petitioners submitted their admission forms through their school and those forms must have been scrutinised at the first instance by the school and then by respondent No. 1.
At no point of time respondent No. 1 took the objection that the school from which the petitioners passed the Middle Standard Examination is not recognised by respondent No. 1.
Also respondent No. 1 has not given any notice to respondent No. 3 before withholding the result.
In these circumstances, it is not open to respondent No. 1 to say that the petitioners had passed the Middle Standard Examination from a school which was never recognised or affiliated by the respondent-Board.
4.
In this view of the matter, the writ petition is allowed and directions are given to respondent No. 1 to declare the result of the petitioners within 15 days from the receipt of the copy of the order.
Copy Dasti.
Petition allowed.