RL Anand, J - Sanjay Dhawan has filed the present petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India seeking directions of this Court against the respondents to grant him the disability pension, grant of disability cover on account of Army Group Insurance and for the quashment of the order of the respondent making the petitioner to pay sum of Rs. 60,700/-, which was recovered from him as cost of his training, etc.  2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he joined the Armed Forces Medical College in the month of August, 1985.
He was granted commission on 671990 in the Army.
He remained posted at various places, such as, Delhi, Ladakh and Leh, from 19.7.1990 up to 27.5.1993.
He became suddenly ill and he was discovered to be a case of acute diabetic.
His position became so critical that vide order dated 30.9.1994 Shri R.C. Kochhar, Maj. General Commandant, had to give the following remarks, for the petitioner :-  "This young officer has developed insulin dependent diabetes mellitus.
I have been watching his frequent problems with the ailment.
He is permanent low medical category and has no future in the Armed Forces.
It would be unjust to keep him in the Armed Forces.
Strongly recommended."
The petitioner further alleges that on account of the unfortunate disease, he lost in entire career in the Army.
He could not do his post graduation as all hopes for further promotions were shattered on account of this disease.
After consulting his well wishers and superiors and seeing no hope of his future career in the Army, he submitted his resignation on 2991994, which remained pending till 11121995 when he resignation was accepted.
The petitioner was relieved from service on 1921996.
Further case set up by the petitioner is that he has served the Army w.e.f.
671990 upto 1921996, i.e. more than five years, and during this period he suffered with disability, therefore, he is entitled to disability pension besides that the circumstances under which the petitioner had to resign cannot be held to be voluntary and in this regard the petitioner has also given challenge the Regulation 50 of the Pension Regulations for the Army, 1961.
With the above broad case, the petitioner has sought the reliefs as stated above.
3.
A serious contest has been given by the respondents to the relief claimed by the petitioner and the main defence taken by the respondents is that since the petitioner has resigned from service, therefore, he is not entitled to the disability pension or any other benefit and further as per the agreement, the petitioner was bound to refund the stipend which he had been receiving while he was doing training course.
4.
I have heard the counsel for the parties and with their assistance have gone through the record of this case.
5.
Mr. Randhawa, in his usual vehemence, submitted by bringing to my notice the attending and background circumstances and he tried to make out a case that it was not a case of voluntary retirement.
He particularly drew my attention to the remarks of Mr. Kochhar.
It was submitted by the counsel for the petitioner that there were two options left with the petitioner - with (either ?)
to sever himself from the Armed Forces or to submit voluntary retirement.
The fact that the petitioner had lost his career itself suggests that the resignation of the petitioner was not voluntary but on account of such circumstances which were beyond the control of the petitioner.
6.
Counsel for the petitioner also challenged the vires of Regulation 50 and submitted that grant of disability pension has no nexus with the mode of severance, voluntary retirement or agreement.
He submitted that disability pension is earned by a person on account of accident or such exigencies which make him unfit to serve the Army while the act of voluntary retirement is a positive act on behalf of the doer.
Mr. Randhawa also submitted that on account of the disease, the petitioner was placed in Permanent-3 category.
7.
On the contrary, counsel for the respondents submitted that irrespective of the fact that the petitioner was a patient of diabetics, he could continue in the service.
He could continue even if he was placed in Permanent-3 category.
His act of resignation was a voluntary act.
The petitioner did not want to serve the Army.
He violated the terms of the bond, therefore, he was liable to refund the amount of stipend.
In these circumstances, the petitioner is not entitled to any disability pension.
In support of his contentions, counsel for the respondents also relied upon Regulation 50, which is reproduced as under :-  "An officer who retires voluntarily shall not be eligible for any award on account of any disability : Provided that officer who is due for retirement on competition of tenure, or on competition of service limits or on completion of the terms of engagement or on attaining the prescribed age of retirement, and who seeks pre-mature retirement for the purpose of getting higher commutation value of pension, shall remain eligible for disability element."
A reading of the above would show that the officer who retires voluntarily from the Army is not entitled to any disability pension.
The letter of resignation has not been placed on the record by the petitioner from which it can be inferred that there were any compelling circumstances upon him.
The remarks of Mr. Kochhar do not prove, prima facie, that the petitioner never intended to retire voluntarily or that he had taken this step under the advice of any officer.
In this view of the matter, the petitioner was not entitled to the disability pension at all.
8.
I also do not see any unconstitutional factor in the Regulation-50 which has been incorporated with a purpose that an officer who does not want to serve the nation, he is not entitled to any disability pension.
9.
With regard to the refund of the amount, the petitioner got the commission on 671990.
He submitted his resignation on 2991994 well before the expiry of five years.
He never showed his intention to serve after 2991994.
It always takes some time on behalf of the authorities to accept the resignation.
There could have been force in the contention of Mr. Randhawa, had the petitioner withdrew the resignation prior to the date of its acceptance, i.e. 11121995 or prior to the date of his release, i.e. 1921996.
The petitioner has, in fact, paid the amount to the respondent-authorities and, now, it does not lie in his mouth to say that this amount has been paid under duress.
10.
Even the petitioner is not entitled to the benefit of disability cover as the Army Order lays down that the persons who leave the service at their own risk are not entitled to such cover.
In this view of the matter, I do not see any merit in this writ petition and the same is hereby dismissed.
Petition dismissed.