RL Anand, J - I have heard the learned counsel for the parties.
2.
The dispute in this case is very short.
One Shri Jagjit Singh, who was a Government employee, expired.
The petitioners are the widow and minor daughter.
Respondent No. 1 Smt. Joginder Kaur is the mother of late Shri Jagjit Singh.
Respondents No. 2 Gurpreet Singh is the minor son while Manmohan Kaur and Baljit Kaur, respondents No. 3 and 4, respectively, are the major daughters of Jagjit Singh.
3.
The dispute is with regard to the gratuity, pension, GP Fund and arrears of salary.
4.
So far as the pension and gratuity is concerned this has to go, according to the Rules, to the widow of the deceased i.e. Smt. Swaran Kaur.
5.
It is stated by the learned counsel for the petitioners that Shri Jagjit Singh deceased had nominated either Smt. Swaran Kaur or Gurpreet Singh, respondent No. 2, as his nominees and as such Smt. Swaran Kaur is entitled to receive GP Fund and arrears of salary etc.  6.
On the contrary, it is argued on behalf of the respondents that GP Fund and arrears of salary of the deceased has to go by succession.
Nomination of Smt. Swaran Kaur or Gurpreet Singh, does not deprive the natural legal heirs to inherit the estate of the deceased.
7.
After considering the rival contentions of the counsel for the parties, this Court is of the opinion that so far as pension and gratuity is concerned, this has to go to Smt. Swaran Kaur as per the Government Rules.
So far as GP Fund and arrears of salary is concerned, it has to be shared by all the legal heirs of the deceased.
The law of succession prima facie cannot be superseded by any Rules and Regulations of the Government.
8.
In order to protect the interest of both the parties, it is hereby ordered that Smt. Swaran Kaur can get 1/6th share in the GP Fund and arrears of salary.
Similarly, Joginder Kaur will get 1/6th share in the GP Fund and arrears of salary.
4/6th share of the GP Fund and arrears of salary, will go in favour of Amandeep Kaur, Gurpreet Singh, Manmohan Kaur and Smt. Baljit Kaur, in equal shares.
1/6th share each of Manmohan Kaur and Baljit Kaur shall be released to them subject to security.
1/6th share each of Amandeep Kaur and Gurpreet Singh shall be deposited in a scheduled Bank and shall be disbursed according to the decision of the main trial.
If the decision of the main trial goes against Manmohan Kaur and Baljit Kaur, they will refund the amount along with interest at the rate of 12 per cent.
9.
With these directions and observations, the present petition stands disposed.
Nothing stated herein shall have any expression of my opinion on the merits of the case.
Order accordingly.