RL Anand, J. (Oral) - The controversy is very short though hanging in this court for the last three years.
2.
Petitioner Amrik Singh is seeking the benefit of disability pension by making a prayer for quashment of the order dated 26.8.1992 Annexure P2 and order dated 17111993 Annexure P4 passed by the respondent authorities.
He has further made a prayer that directions be given to respondents to release disability pension to him w.e.f.
31121991.
3.
The facts can be noticed in the following manner :-  In the year 1965 the petitioner joined as Sepoy in the military.
In October, 1990 he submitted leave application which was sanctioned by the respondents and the petitioner was granted leave w.e.f.
8.10.1990 to 24.10.1990.
Unfortunately, on 11101990 he met with an accident and sustained multiple injuries.
Thereafter he was examined by the Medical Board which assessed the disability of the petitioner more than 25%.
He was discharged from the military service on 31121991.
He represented to the respondents for grant of disability pension but they declined his request vide letter Annexure P2.
The petitioner filed an appeal against the said order but again his appeal was dismissed vide order Annexure P4.
In this manner the present writ petition.
4.
The stand of the respondents is that the disability suffered by the petitioner is not attributable to the military service nor it has been aggravated.
Elaborating their stand the respondents submitted that the petitioner was on annual leave which has to be understood differently from casual leave and, therefore, he is not entitled to disability pension.
In support of his contention Mr. Sehgal relies upon a decision of Hon'ble Division Bench in Jarnail Singh v. Union of India, 1998(1) S.L.R.
418 : 1997(3) SCT 484 (P&H)(DB), wherein it was observed that before claiming disability pension, it has to be shown by the petitioner that there was som nexus attributable to the military service.
I have gone through this judgment and on the face of it, it is distinguishable.
5.
On the contrary, the learned counsel for the petitioner relies upon two judgments.
One is Siri Krishan v Union of India, 1997(1) S.L.R.
607, wherein it was observed by the Division Bench that when a military personnel is returning back after availing his casual leave and meets with an accident, such exigency is also attributable to the military service.
The second authority which was relied upon by the learned counsel for the petitioner is Ex-Sepoy Balwant Singh v. Union of India, 1999(3) Services Cases Today 55, wherein the Hon'ble Lordships held that when a military personnel returns to his unit and sustains injuries, even such a person is also entitled to the benefit of disability pension.
6.
In this view of the matter, by following the judgments of Siri Krishan and Ex-Sepoy Balwant Singh (supra), I allow this writ petition by setting aside the orders Annexures P2 and P4 and direct the respondents to grant disability pension to the petitioner within three months from the receipt of the copy of the order.
The petitioner shall appear before the Re-survey Medical Board, if so directed by the respondents.
Petition allowed.