RL Anand, J - Shri Dhir Singh Chhina, through this writ petition, is seeking directions of this court against the respondents, to make the payment of disability pension by virtue of the fact that the disability of the petitioner was assessed at 60% on account of two diseases which are as under :-  (i) ID(i) IHD (Angina Pectoris) Neither attributable to nor aggravated 40%.
(ii) ID(ii) Primary Open Angle Glaucoma both eyes do 20%.
Composite assessment 60% for 2 years.
This disability was assessed for two years.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he was granted commission into Indian Army on 351964.
He was promoted to the rank of Lt.
Colonel by selection on 6121984.
Petitioner suffered a heart attack on 1181994.
He further suffered from Open Angle Glaucoma in both eyes.
Ultimately, the petitioner underwent heart by-pass surgery.
He was superannuated from service on 3181994.
On 391997, he claimed disability pension which was rejected by the respondents in an illegal manner.
Hence the present writ petition.
2.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
The stand of the respondents is practically reflected in short written statement and Annexure R-2.
According to the respondents, so far as the pensionary benefits of the petitioner are concerned, the full pensionary benefits have already been restored to the Officer but the petitioner is not entitled to disability pension because of the fact that the petitioner was relieved from the army on attaining the age of superannuation.
Since he was not relieved from the army on account of invalidation, therefore, he is not entitled to disability pension.
3.
I have heard Shri RS Randhawa, Advocate appearing on behalf of the petitioner and Shri Anil Malhotra, standing Counsel, appearing on behalf of the respondents.
4.
I cannot accept the contention raised by the learned counsel for the respondents but I am inclined to accept the contention raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner who invited my attention to Rule 4 of the Entitlement Rules for Casualty Pensioners Awards, 1982.
According to this Rule invaliding from service is a necessary condition for grant of disability pension and an individual, who at the time of his release under the release regulations, is in a lower medical category than that in which he was recruited will be treated as invalidated from service.
Meaning thereby the moment when officer has been reduced to the category in the medical chart, it will tantamount to invalidation and he will be entitled to disability pension in addition to the routine service pension.
5.
In the present case, the invalidity has been assessed 60%.
In these circumstances, there is no merit in the contention raised by the learned counsel for the respondents that since the petitioner has been relieved from the army on attaining the age of superannuation, therefore, he is not entitled to the benefit of disability pension.
In fact, the petitioner has become invalided by virtue of 60% disabilities suffered by him, for a period of two years, therefore, he is entitled to the disability pension.
6.
Directions are given to the respondents to release the disability pension of the petitioner with effect from 3181994 according to Rules and Regulations, within three months from today, failing which, he will be entitled to the interest at the rate of 12%.
The petitioner shall appear before the Re-Survey Medical Board when called upon by the respondent- authority.
Petition stands disposed of accordingly.
Petition allowed.