PK Misra, J - The Insurance Company has filed this appeal under Section 30 of the Workmen's Compensation Act.
2.
Claim application was filed by the parents of deceased Sukanta Charan Ojha.
It was alleged that Sukanta Charan Ojha while being employed as a Helper in the Dumper bearing number ORU 5963 (Truck) died in an accident involving the said Dumper and another Dumper, as the other Dumper came from backside and dashed against the Dumper ORU 5963, wherein the deceased was trying to open the back Dala.
The deceased was removed to Paradeep Government Hospital and thereafter to Jagatsinghpur Sub-Divisional Hospital, but died on the way.
3.
The owner of the Dumper bearing number ORU 5963 filed written statement admitting that the deceased was a Helper in the dumper further admitting that the deceased succumbed to the injuries in the accident.
It, however, submitted that the liability, if any, should be borne by the Insurance Company as there was valid insurance.
The Insurance Company filed written statement generally denying the allegations made in the claim application and called upon the claimants to prove all the allegations made in the claim application.
4.
The Commissioner for Workmen's Compensation, Cuttack (in short, the "Commissioner") found that the deceased was working as a Helper in the Dumper belonging to present respondent No. 3.
It was further found that the deceased had died in an accident arising out of and in course of employment.
Accordingly, the Commissioner directed for payment of Rs. 87,980/- by the Insurance Company.
5.
In this appeal it is contended that the finding to the effect that the deceased was a workman under the owner and had died in the accident arising out of and in course of employment should not be sustained.
In this connection it is contended that the owner had violated the provisions contained in Section 4-A of the Workmen's Compensation Act, inasmuch as it had not intimated about the accident to anybody.
According to the appellant, non- compliance with Section 4-A would raise a presumption that the deceased was not a workman under the owner.
In this context it has further been submitted that the owner was required under the Motor Transport Workers Act, 1961, to maintain a register of workers.
Since no register has been produced, it should be taken that the deceased was not a Helper.
The counsel for the appellant also relied upon the report of the Investigator engaged by the Insurance Company who reported that the deceased was not working under present respondent No. 3.
6.
Non-compliance by the owner of the provisions contained in Section 4-A of the Workmen's Compensation Act cannot be taken to be a ground to disbelieve the claim of the claimants that the deceased was a worker under respondent No. 3.
The driver of the Dumper has been examined as P.W.2 and the he has stated in evidence that the deceased was working as Helper in the vehicle.
Similar evidence has been given by PW1, the claimant-father of the deceased.
Such oral evidence on the part of P.Ws.1 and 2 has not been shaken in any manner in cross-examination.
Though the Insurance Company has examined the Investigator, it is apparent that the evidence of the Investigator is based on the statements of other persons who have not been examined.
In such view of the matter, since the evidence of O.PW1 is not based on direct knowledge, neither his evidence, nor his report would come to the aid of the Insurance Company.
7.
The contention of the counsel for the Insurance Company that a register required to be maintained under the Motor Transport Workers Act, 1961, having not been produced, adverse inference should be drawn is equally untenable.
The non-compliance by the owner cannot be considered to be a ground to disbelieve the case of the claimants.
The Insurance Company could have summoned the owner or called for such document.
It is not known whether such document was, in fact, maintained or not and, at any rate, violation of the provisions of the Act by the owner cannot be considered to be a ground to disbelieve the other evidence on record, particularly when such other evidence has not been shaken in any manner.
Moreover, it appears from the judgment that the question relating to non-maintenance of register under the Motor Transport Workers Act had not been raised before the Commissioner.
Keeping in view the evidence of P.W.2 himself there may not be any doubt that the deceased sustained injuries in an accident arising out of and in course of employment.
The finding of the Commissioner is essentially a finding of fact based on discussion of relevant evidence on record.
The finding cannot be characterised as perverse or based on no evidence and as such cannot be assailed keeping in view the scope of appeal contemplated in Section 30 of the Act.
8.
The learned counsel for the Insurance Company also challenged the quantification on the ground that age of the deceased had been wrongly fixed.
The Commissioner has referred to the matriculation certificate and calculated the age accordingly.
The appellant has relied upon the post-mortem report.
It is well-known that there is a margin of error of 2 to 3 years regarding age assessed in a post-mortem report.
The finding regarding age is based on the matriculation certificate as well as the evidence of the claimant-father and being apparently a finding of fact cannot be challenged in this appeal.
9.
For the aforesaid reasons, I do not find any merit in this appeal which is accordingly dismissed.
There would be no order as to costs.
The amount deposited in this Court and kept in fixed deposit may be paid to the claimants along with the accrued interest by way of account payee cheque jointly in the names of both the claimant-respondents.
However, such cheque shall be handed over to respondent No. 1 on proper identification.
This be complied with within a period of three weeks.
Appeal dismissed.