Radha Mohan Prasad, J - Petitioner No. 1 is widow and petitioner No. 2 is son of late Sadashiv Chaudhary, who died in harness on 17.7.1984.
The deceased was working as Peon in Teachers Training Mahila Bidyalaya, Bhagalpur and after rendering service for about 23 years 3 months and 17 days he died in harness.
The claim of the petitioners in this writ petition is that they have been kept deprived of full family pension, part of gratuity and the amount of Provident Fund payable to them after the death of the deceased Government servant.
2.
A counter-affidavit has been filed on behalf of Divisional Commissioner, Bhagalpur (Respondent No. 2) and also on behalf of Accountant General, who is permitted to be added as Respondent No. 6.
From the counter-affidavit filed on behalf of Respondent No. 2, it appears that after the death of the employee provisional pension and gratuity amounting to Rs. 16,40275 and Rs. 6,642/- respectively was sanctioned on 7.8.1992 and paid to the petitioner vide receipt (Annexure A).
It is stated that subsequently one Tarakant Choudary, sister's son of the deceased employee filed a petition before the answering Respondent objecting the claim of the petition and claiming that he is legal heir of the deceased employee and hence all retiral benefits should be paid to him.
On enquiry, Respondent No. 2 found that the deceased employee has filed nomination paper in 1971 nominating said Tarakant Chaudhary and Savitri Devi for his GPF amount.
Under such circumstances Commissioner vide order dated 10.7.96, contained in Annexure B, directed the parties to produce succession certificate and only after production of succession certificate payments were directed to be made.
It is alleged that the petitioners did not file succession certificate and as such they were not paid the aforementioned dues.
According to the affidavit on behalf of Accountant General necessary authorisation were issued as per the sanction order received from the sanctioning authority.
3.
Mr. Pandey, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the petitioners submitted that the order passed by the Commissioner, contained in Annexure B is bad law and not tenable in absence of any dispute that the petitioner No. 1 is the legally wedded wife and petitioner No. 2 is son of the deceased employee.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the alleged nomination made in favour of Tarakant Chaudhary cannot come in the way of the petitioner from getting death-cum-retiral dues payable after the death of the deceased employee as it was not valid nomination under the provision contained in Rule 8 of the Bihar GPF.
Rules, 1948 and clause 3(2) of Appendix V to Bihar Pension Rules, 1950, which provide that no nomination can be made in favour of any person other than family members where the subscriber has a family.
The family is defined under clause (c) of sub-rule (1) of Rule 2 of GPF.
Rules 1948 with respect to GPF.
Account and sub-clause (a) of clause 3 of Appendix V dealing with the case of pension and gratuity.
As per the said definitions family means "in case of male subscriber wife and wives and children of a subscriber and the widow and widows and children of a deceased son of the subscriber".
It was, thus, submitted that in absence of any dispute that petitioner No. 1 is widow and petitioner No. 2 is son of the deceased employee were entitled to receive the aforementioned dues.
In view of the aforementioned provisions, learned counsel for the State has not been able to defend the stand of the Respondents for withholding the payment of the remaining post-retiral dues to the petitioner on account of nomination made in favour of Tarakant Chaudhary.
Learned counsel for the State has failed to point out any provision under which a person is required to file succession certificate, in the facts and circumstances aforementioned.
In view of the said specific provisions, plea of the Respondents in keeping the petitioners deprived of the aforementioned legitimate dues now for over 15 years deserves to be deprecated.
4.
Having regard to the aforementioned provisions, this Court is of the view that Respondents have acted mala fide in withholding the payment of the legitimate dues payable to the petitioners after the death of the employee now for over 15 years.
5.
Accordingly, this writ petition is allowed with costs of Rs. 5,000/- to be paid to the petitioners by the sanctioning authority from his pocket.
The Respondents are directed to release the remaining amount of gratuity and finalise family pension and also pay the entire provident fund amount with up-to-date statutory interest for the petition within two weeks of the receipt/production of a copy of this judgement/order.
In the facts circumstances aforementioned, petitioner shall be entitled for penal interest on the remaining amount of gratuity and family pension @ 15% per annum from the date till the payment is made which shall also be calculated and paid within the aforesaid time.
Petition allowed.