Swatanter Kumar, J - The prayer in this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India is for issuance of an appropriate, writ order or direction quashing Annexure P.1 to Annexure P4 whereby the petitioners have been debarred from appearing in any examination for three years.
It is also prayed that the order dated 931999 has been passed by the respondent No. 3 arbitrarily, illegally and without any basis.
The respondents upon notice filed detailed reply justifying their action.
2.
However, during the course of hearing, it was contended by the learned counsel for the petitioners that the order, which was the very foundation of Annexures P/1 to P/4 was never supplied to the petitioners.
They have challenged the order dated 12.3.1999 while the decision of the Committee is dated 931999.
There were certain contradictions also noticed in the pleadings and the questionnaire which the petitioners had answered earlier, as well as in the order passed by the Committee.
Copy of the order passed by the Unfair Means Committee was supplied to the petitioners during the course of hearing.
It was further contended that under the calendar of the Board such order of the committee is appealable, as such this Court had passed an order on 22.12.1999 after hearing the learned counsel for the parties.
The said order reads as under :-  "This matter has been heard at some length.
During the course of hearing, learned counsel appearing for the Board has placed a photocopy of an order, on record, debarring the petitioners for a period of 3 years.
Admittedly, this order is appealable.
Learned counsel for the petitioners wishes to prefer an appeal against the same.
Let the matter be listed on 2412000.
The records have been returned to the learned counsel appearing for the respondent-Board."
3.
I find the request of counsel for the petitioners to be fair.
Resultantly, this writ petition is disposed of with the direction to the concerned appellate authority of the Board to decide the appeal preferred by the petitioners and which had already been received by them within three weeks from the date of receipt of certified copy of this order.
The order so passed shall be communicated to the petitioners personally or through their counsel by registered acknowledgment due.
The petitioners would be at liberty to challenge the order if they so desire, amongst others, on the grounds and causes with had been taken in the present writ petition.
The writ petition is disposed of at this stage without any order as to costs.
Orders accordingly.