Arun B Saharya, CJ.
- The appellant-State of Punjab has challenged in this Letters Patent Appeal judgment 2471991 of the learned Single Judge allowing writ petition of the respondent-workman (hereinafter referred to as the workman) in terms of his own earlier decision dated 411989 in CWP No. 2360 of 1986, Ruldu Ram and other v. State of Punjab .
2.
The respondent-workman was previously employed in the Bhakra Beas Management Board.
He was retrenched and thereupon paid retrenchment compensation and all other terminal benefits.
Thereafter, he was re-employed in the Mukerian Hydel Project on terms and conditions stipulated in Annexure R-1.
He was appointed at the fixed basic pay of Rs. 400/- per month.
It was made clear that fresh appointment in the Mukerian Hydel Project had no concern with the service rendered by him in any other establishment in the past.
No claim for enhancement of initial pay would be entertained on account of his last pay drawn in any other establishment.
The workman was put to notice that if he accepted the post offered to him on the terms and conditions mentioned therein, he could report for duty to the concerned nominated authority.
The workman accepted these terms and conditions and joined as workcharge workman of the Mukerian Hydel Project.
3.
We have perused judgment of the learned Single Judge in Ruldu Ram's CWP No. 2360 of 1986 as well as the Division Bench judgment in LPA No. 634 of 1989.
The LPA Bench had modified the learned Single Judge judgment.
An observation made by the learned Single Judge regarding workmen's entitlement to the benefit of pay protection was clarified to be only a pious wish and the Division Bench directed the State Government to decide the matter expeditiously.
In pursuance of the direction given in Ruldu Ram's case, the competent authority decided the case in the following terms :  "That there is no provision to protect the pay of the work-charged staff.
So, no justification to agree with the proposal of the Administrative Department, whereas the employees have been paid retrenchment compensation and other terminal benefits earned by them on account of previous services."
Since the case of the respondent-workman is concededly similar to that of Ruldu Ram, we find no reason for a different result to apply to this case."
4.
During pendency of the appeal, respondent has filed two applications - (i) CM No. 154 of 1992 and (ii) CM No. 257 of 1998.
By the first application, permission was sought to place on record memo dated 21121990.
This memo, Chief Engineer, Irrigation Works, Punjab, Chandigarh had forwarded to the Secretary to Government of Punjab, Department of Irrigation and Power, Punjab, Chandigarh alongwith his comments on various claims of workmen drawn from different projects, including the retrenchees of the Beas Dam Project and other erstwhile workmen or Ranjit Sagar Dam Project.
Comments furnished in this memo clearly indicate that at some of the projects, the pay was protected whereas at other places some other criteria such as grant of advance increment was adopted; while at some places the retrenchees were given the benefit of higher basic pay based on merit.
It was also pointed out that no uniform policy regarding fixation of pay for the retrenchees consequent upon their re-employment on any other project was invoked.
It is with these comments, the Chief Engineer forwarded the case for decision in pursuance of the judgment of this case in the Letters Patent Appeal in the case of Ruldu Ram and others.
By the second application, permission is sought to place on record Annexures R-1 to R-5 whereby it is said that the Labour Court has given certain relief to some of the persons namely, Prem Dutt, Amar Nath, Banarsi Dass, Mohinder Singh and Satya Paul.
On this analogy, plea is made by learned counsel appearing for the respondent-workman for grant of relief to him too.
No information is, however, forthcoming regarding the nature and terms of employment of any of these named persons.
Whether they were also retrenchees from the Beas Dam Project ?
What were there terms and conditions of employment in the previous project ?
What were the terms and conditions of the offer of employment given to them in the Mukerian Hydel Project ?
Whether they had taken retrenchment compensation and other terminal benefits from the establishment where they were previously employed ?
Answer to these questions is not known.
In these circumstances, it cannot be said that the case of the respondent workman is similar to that of any of the said persons named in the second application.
Curiously enough, in para 6 of the second application, reference is made to their employment in the Pong Dam, which may be wholly different.
Suffice it to note that in pursuance of the memo dated 21121990, which is subject matter of (sic) application, the competent authority has already taken the above quoted decision rejecting claim of similarly placed workmen in compliance of directions given by the Learned Bench in the case of Ruldu Ram.
Claim of the respondent-workman in the present case also must meet the same fate.
5.
For the aforesaid reasons, the above noted two miscellaneous applications are rejected, impugned judgment of the learned Single Judge is reversed, CWP No. 3215 of 1990 filed by the respondent-workman dismissed, and the appeal allowed.
Parties are, however, left to bear their own costs.
Appeal allowed.