KK Srivastava, J (Oral) - The petitioners have approached this Court by means of this Civil Writ Petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India praying for quashing of the impugned order dated April 12, 1999, copy Annexure P-6, passed by respondent No. 5 i.e. Sub-Divisional Education Officer, Jind, declining the claim of the petitioners for regularisation.
The petitioners seek direction to the respondents to regularise their services under the policy of the State Government.
2.
The petitioners, undisputedly have rendered services on their respective posts which are of Class-IV category for the last more than 10 years.
The case of the petitioners was considered by respondent No. 5 and he rejected the prayer of the petitioners for regularisation on two grounds; firstly, the petitioners/employees do not fulfil the eligibility of age limit of 16 to 35 years as prescribed in the Haryana Secondary Education Department Regional Office (Group D) Service Rules (hereinafter referred to as the `Service Rules') and, secondly, no posts are available against which the services of the petitioners can be regularised.
3.
A perusal of the impugned order Annexure P-6 will show that the competent authority declined the case of regularisation of the services of the petitioners for these two grounds only, which have been tick marked against items 2 and 3.
The remaining items have been crossed, inasmuch as the same were not considered as the grounds for rejecting the claim of the petitioners.
4.
Upon the issuance of the notice of motion, respondents No. 1 to 5 filed written statement, wherein the impugned order passed by respondent No. 5 was justified and it was contended that the cases of the petitioners could not be considered for regularisation as they did not fulfil the conditions mentioned in paragraph 2 of the preliminary objections.
These conditions are :-  i) The part-time employee must have possessed the requisite qualifications necessary for the fourth class employee in accordance with the provision made in Service Rules (Class-IV).
ii) If he is recruited through Employment Exchange he must have at least three years experience on his post, and, last iii) If he is recruited through direct recruitment, he should have at least six years experience of the post.
All these conditions were also subject to the availability of regular sanctioned posts in the same institution.
It was also contended on merit that the petitioners worked as part-time employees for a fixed period in a day on fixed pay and they were free to work else-where.
The respondents annexed with the written statement copy of memo No. 13/15-98/ME(5) dated 30121998/2521999 issued by the Director, Secondary Education, Haryana, Chandigarh, on the subject "Regularisation of services of Class-IV Employees working on part-time basis against regular sanctioned posts."
5.
After hearing learned counsel, for the petitioners and the learned Deputy Advocate-General, Haryana, for respondents No. 1 to 5, and going through the impugned order and the record of the case, we find that the case of regularisation of the petitioners on their respective posts was declined by respondent No. 5 specifically on two grounds which have been referred to above.
In our considered view, the respondents cannot now take a different stand for declining the case of regularisation of the services of the petitioners.
Now so far as the two grounds on which the case of regularisation of the services of the petitioners was declined are concerned, we are of the view that the same are not legally sustainable.
6.
The first ground of rejection is regarding the age of the petitioners not being within the age limit of 16 to 35 years.
In this regard it may be pointed out that the petitioners were within the permissible limit of age when they were recruited in the respondent-department and were appointed on their respective posts.
They became over-age and crossed the aforesaid age limit while they rendered service in the department.
In this view of the matter, since the petitioners at the time of their initial appointment were within the permissible age limit, the case for regularisation of their services cannot be declined on the ground that they became over-age while rendering service with the respondent-department.
7.
So far as the second ground is concerned, it is sufficient to point out that the work for the petitioners was with the respondents and they continued to serve and are in service even as on today, and since they have already rendered more than 10 years service, it cannot be said that their services cannot be regularised for non-availability of the required posts.
Once the respondents have engaged the petitioners on work, which is of continuous nature, and permitted them to serve on their respective posts for more than 10 years, it will be unfair for the respondents to decline the case of the petitioners for regularisation of their services for non-availability of posts.
8.
Resultantly, we find that both the grounds which have been taken by the respondents for declining the case of regularisation of the services of the petitioners in the impugned order Annexure P-6 are not sustainable in law and as such the impugned order deserves to be quashed.
The petitioners have rendered sufficient service with the respondents and they deserve to be regularised on their respective posts.
Accordingly, this writ petition is allowed; the impugned order Annexure P-6 is quashed and a direction is issued to the respondents to pass necessary orders regarding the regularisation of the services of the petitioners with effect from the due dates with all consequential service benefits available to them.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.