Arun Kumar Goel, J - By means of this writ petition all the three petitioners have questioned the legality as well as validity of order contained in Annexure F, dated 24101997, whereby petitioner 2 Mohd.
Anees has been ordered to be transferred from the post of Deputy Director Hospitality and Protocol (Stores) and posted as Deputy Director Hospitality and Protocol, Jammu, and in his place one Shri Tariq Ahmed Mir, KAS ETO (C Circle), Srinagar, has been transferred and posted as Deputy Director Hospitality and Protocol (Stores).
In addition to this all the three petitioners have also claimed a direction to respondents to treat them as Members of Kashmir Administrative service (KAS) w.e.f.
25101984 and thereafter grant them all consequential benefits.
2.
In order to properly appreciate and understand the case of petitioners brief facts needs to be examined as stated in the writ petition which are to the following effect :  3.
All the petitioners were initially appointed as Assistant Directors Hospitality & Protocol for a period of six months or till the posts were filled up under the Rules by the Public Service Commission whichever be earlier, such appointments were made in relaxation of their qualification.
A copy of such ad-hoc appointment order is annexed with the writ petition as Annexure A.
4.
In exercise of the powers under Section 124 of the Constitution of Jammu & Kashimir, Governor had made the Jammu & Kashmir Administrative Service Rules, 1979 and by means of Annexure C to writ petition those were amended vide Notification dated 24.9.1993 alongwith other provisions by means of Jammu & Kashmir Administrative service (Amendment) Rules, 1993, and a copy of such amended rules is placed on the file as Annexure C Reason for such amendment appears to be that with a view to remove stagnation in different departmental services of the State as also in order to obtain efficiency and mobility in the administrative service, number of State services were included as a method of recruitment to the service (KAS) and amongst other clauses the J & K Hospitality and Protocol (Gaz) Service (to which petitioners claim to be belonging to) was included as one of the services.
5.
Here it may be appropriate to notice that petitioner 2 Mohd.
Anees had worked for sometime in higher scale as Private Secretary to Member Finance of the Finance Commission appointed by Government of India while he as working as Assistant Director in the Hospitality and Protocol of the State.
6.
By means of Annexure E dated 321997 all the three petitioners were ordered to be posted as Deputy Director in the Hospitality & Protocol Department (hereinafter referred to as 'the Department') on ad hoc/stop-gap basis in their own pay and grade for a period of six months or till posts are filled up on regular basis by Public Service Commission/Departmental Promotion Committee and finalisation of the revised Hospitality and Protocol (Gazetted) Recruitment Rules, whichever is earlier.
While ordering so in terms of Government Order No. 4/H&P of 1997 dated 321997 vide Annexure E, petitioner No. 2 was posted as Deputy Director (Stores) in the Department.
7.
Parties are further not at variance that so far as the post of Deputy Director (Stores) in the Department is concerned, it is a post to be manned by a person belonging to KAS.
8.
Trouble for the petitioner No. 2 started when Annexure F, the Government order No. 1737-GAD of 1997 dated 24101997 was issued whereby one Tariq Ahmed Mir, KAS, ETO Excise Range, Kathua, was transferred and posted in place of petitioner 2, who was transferred and posted as Deputy Director Hospitality and Protocol, Jammu.
9.
Shri Sethi, learned counsel appearing for the petitioners forcefully urged that since the petitioner No. 2 had been manning the post which was required to be manned by a KAS Officer and in terms of Annexure E neither the post has been filled up on regular basis by Public Service Commission/Departmental Promotion Committee and revised Rules in terms of the said Annexure, have not been finalised as such the issuance of Annexure F is illegal and arbitrary besides being contrary to law.
Other line of argument is that the right of petitioners flows from Rules of 1993 (Annexure C) and support was sought from two decided cases of this Court reported in 1988 Kashmir Law Journal 138, Mst.
Mehbooba Akhtar vs. State and 1989 Srinagar Law Journal 337, Khalida v. state of J&K .
Shri Sethi also submitted that the action of respondents in issuing Annexure F qua petitioner No. 2 is liable to be quashed and set aside and status quo ante restored unless the post is filled in strictly in terms of Annexure E and at the same time petitioners may be treated to be inducted in KAS w.e.f.
251084.
10.
On the other hand official respondents 1 to 3 have filed objections and have seriously contested the claim of petitioners.
11.
Shri Singh, learned counsel appearing for respondents 1 to 3 has filed objections and while controverting all the pleas urged on behalf of petitioners submitted that all of them were first appointed as Assistant Directors in the department with effect from 25101984 on ad hoc basis till formal selection was made and such Officers from the Department could be considered for induction into KAS who had been appointed on regular and substantiative basis and were in the pay scale of Rs. 2125-3600.
Thus conduction of the petitioners into KAS was not al all required.
Till the filing of the present writ petition no claim was made by any of the petitioners for being inducted into KAS w.e.f.
25101984 thus the claim made in that behalf is stale besides being illegitimate.
12.
So far manning of the post meant for KAS by petitioner 2 is concerned, it was submitted that it confers no right muchless constitutional or legal right which may entitle the said petitioner to make such claim.
Shri Singh further submitted that an eligible person in accordance with rules has been posted to hold the post of Deputy Director (Stores) in the Department.
Simply because stop-gap arrangement was made would not confer any right to claim that status and or continuance on the said post by petitioner No. 2  13.
So far the claim of petitioners that they may be treated as Members of KAS w.e.f.
25101984 is concerned, it is not only stale and illegitimate but suffers from delay and laches.
In no case petitioners can make that claim in the facts and circumstances which are peculiar as noted hereinabove.
All the petitioners were ordered to be posted as Deputy Director vide Annexure C in the Department on ad hoc/stop-gap basis that too in their own pay and grade.
In case the petitioners had any claim to be declared to be members of KAS then it would have been made at appropriate time.
The matter is being left here only as no foundation has been laid in the writ petition how the petitioner's claim to be Members of KAS after Annexure A attached with writ petition was issued.
In fact even after the issuance of Annexure E no grievance was made by the petitioners in this behalf.
They rose out of slumber when Annexure F was issued.
That being so the claim made in this behalf has no merit and is accordingly rejected so far it concerns all the petitioners.
14.
Another reason to take this view is that there is nothing on record to show that petitioners were in the appropriate grade of pay to stake a claim for being considered for induction into KAS.
Simply because they were allowed to be posted as Deputy Directors vide Annexure E would not confer any right in law to claim that status.
15.
Now coming to the case of petitioner No. 2 that since he was manning the post meant to be held by a KAS Officer, as such he cannot be ordered to work as Deputy Director in the Department at Jammu in the light of two decisions referred to supra.
16.
The case of Khalida vs. State and ors. (supra) only enunciates that once ad hoc appointment was made against clear vacancy subject to selection but for a fixed term and such appointment is to continue till final selection, then the condition of selection is primary to fill the post and till such time is was held that petitioner cannot be removed from service.
Relevant observations made by the learned Judge are in paragraph 11 which are to the following effect:  "11.
Thus, keeping in view the observations made and following the above quoted case law, I am of the opinion that where an ad hoc appointment is made against a clear vacancy subject to selection, the incumbent so appointed has to be continued till such selection is made irrespective of the condition the employee is appointed for a fixed term and subject to "selection" which is earlier.
Because the word "selection" is kept in the order, lest selection may take place before the expiry of term of appointment and it is for that reason condition of "whichever is earlier" is put in the order so that appointment to the post made, may not linger for fixed tenure which is bound to come to an end due to selection.
Thus, the condition of selection is primary for filling the post and not term of appointment which is to be treated immaterial."
So far as the case of Mst.
Mehbooba Akhtar (supra) is concerned, almost identical view has been taken.
17.
The law laid down in the aforesaid two decisions is wholly in-applicable to the facts of the present case because it is not the case of any of the petitioners that the person who, vide Annexure F, has been directed to be posted as Deputy Director (Stores) in the Department is a non-KAS person and is similarly situate like petitioner No. 2.
To put it otherwise the person so transferred and posted in place of petitioner No. 2 is not similarly situate as the said petitioner No. 2.
Rather on his own showing he belongs to KAS.
In the face of this position, the petitioner No. 2 has no right to claim that he must be allowed to man the said post as was urged in that behalf.
Above all simply because petitioners were allowed to be posted as Deputy Directors in terms of Annexure E would not preclude the State Government to bring suitable person to man any of the three posts including that of Deputy Director (Stores) in the Department held by petitioner No. 2.
Thus there is no merit in this contention also.
18.
No other point has been urged.
19.
As a result of the aforesaid discussion, this writ petition has no merit and the same is dismissed.
Interim order dt. 29101997 passed on IA No. 1/97 is hereby discharged.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.