SB Sinha, J - This writ application is directed against a judgment and order dated 8.5.98 passed by the West Bengal Administrative Tribunal, whereby and whereunder the writ application filed by the petitioner herein was disposed of directing -  "In view of the facts and circumstances, we hold that the petition can be disposed of with a direction to the administrative department i.e. Forest Department, Govt. of West Bengal, to furnish all data to the Finance Deptt.
with specific view for arriving at a decision within 30 days from the date of communication of the order and Finance Dearborn is also directed to pass a reasoned order after receiving such data etc. within 30 days determining the inter se seniority of the petitioner.
Other benefits will follow after such determination of inter se seniority and if necessary the petitioner may move the concerned authority."
2.
The basic fact of the matter is not at all disputed.
There are three cadres in the Forest Department in the State of West Bengal, namely (1) Divisional Cadre, (2) Regional Cadre and (3) Directorate Cadre.
The petitioner was appointed as clerk/typist in the Divisional Cadre on 9th August, 1964.
He was appointed as Lower Division Clerk in the Divisional Cadre on 3rd February, 1975.
He was thereafter appointed to vacant post of lower division clerk in the Directorate Office with effect from 4th January, 1977.
Admittedly, such appointment had been made in the Directorate Cadre in excess of 10% quota.
However, the petitioner did not opt for such transfer but it appears from a letter dated 2294 issued by the Principal Chief Conservator of Forests and addressed to the Secretary to the Government of West Bengal, Department of Forest that such transfer was effected for smooth work of the office.
In another letter dated 15794 issued by the said authority to the Secretary to the Government of West Bengal, Department of Forests it has been stated that the petitioner was taken into Directorate Cadre in excess of 10% quota and Rule under which his seniority has already been fixed as explained in the penultimate para of the office letter No. 13899/PNC/2E-207 dated 2992.
Attention was also drawn to Finance Deptt.
No. 3930-F dated 20581 which is a clarification of West Bengal Services (Determination of Seniority) Rules, 1981, wherein at Para 3(ii) Finance Deptt.
has clarified that appointments in excess of quota are not at all irregular and the seniority should be fixed as laid down in rule 6 of 1981 rules between promotion and direct recruit.
Attention was also drawn to sub-rule (10) of the said seniority Rules which deem to have repealed all other Rules made previously.
In the said letter the Deptt.
of Forests was requested to reconsider if the petitioner can be given benefit of the West Bengal Services (Determination of Seniority) Rules, 1981 as his seniority was fixed on the basis of the earlier notification of Finance Department dated 27380.
In the said letter it was stated that in case of cadres of Deputy Ranger/Forester and Forest Ranger retrospective effect of this seniority Rule was given and seniority fixed by earlier order were modified.
3.
Admittedly the petitioner had been promoted as Upper Division Clerk in Divisional Cadre as no promotional post was vacant in the Directorate Cadre with effect from 1.4.81.
It has also been stated that the transfer of the petitioners were effected in the interest of public service.
The only question which, therefore, fell for consideration before the learned Tribunal was as to whether the petitioner's seniority in the Directorate Cadre should have been accounted from 4177 or not.
The Tribunal in its judgment, inter alia held that his induction as L.D.C.
in the Directorate Cadre in excess of the quota was not illegal.
But the tribunal proceeded to hold that, however, keeping in view the fact that he was promoted as UDC in the Divisional Cadre with effect from 1.4.81 he again migrated or was allowed to migrate to Divisional Cadre as UDC  4.
It is not in dispute nor there is any doubt that the petitioner was entitled to be promoted as UDC even at the Directorate Cadre; but he was not deprived from the said benefit keeping in view the fact that he had been transferred in the Directorate Cadre in excess of 10% quota.
The only question which was, therefore, required to be considered was as to whether such transfer was legal or not.
5.
The question, as noticed hereinbefore, is covered by decision of the Finance Department itself dated 20th May, 1981, wherein while clarifying the position as regards the provisions laid down in the West Bengal Services (Determination of Seniority) Rules, 1981, it has clearly been stated that such appointment in excess of quota would not at all be irregular but steps should, however, be taken as early as possible to rectify the imbalance.
As indicated hereinbefore if no step had been taken by the concerned department to rectify the imbalance, the petitioner cannot suffer therefor.
Seniority, as is well known, is a civil right.
A person who was in different cadre must be held to be entitled to his seniority in terms of the provisions of the West Bengal Services (Determination of Seniority) Rules.
The Apex Court in Pran Krishan Goswami & others, v. State of West Bengal, reported in AIR 1985 S.C. 1605, while interpreting the provisions of the said rules and upon analysing the provisions of relevant rules including Rule 6, held.
"Now, if Rules 4 and 6 are read together the scheme becomes clear.
While date of joining is important to decide the question of seniority amongst promotees, it is the year of joining that is relevant when the question of relative seniority is to be determined between promotees and direct recruits.
If direct recruits are appointed and promotees are promoted in the same year, all promotees are to take precedence over the direct recruits, irrespective of the actual date of their joining but as amongst the promotees themselves, the seniority is to be based on the date of joining" 6.
Thus, there cannot be any doubt whatsoever that as the petitioner accepted his transfer to a different cadre and he had been continuously working therein with effect from 4177, his seniority should be reckoned from the date of joining and not from any subsequent date.
7.
In this view of the matter, we are of the opinion that Tribunal committed an error in directing the matter to be considered afresh by the Finance Department.
The Finance Department is not the department where the petitioner had been serving.
Steps for rectifying the imbalance, if any, in terms of the Finance Department's aforementioned clarificatory letter dated 20th May, 1981 could have only be taken by the Forest Department.
In our opinion, keeping in view the fact that it is admitted that the petitioner had been working in the Directorate Cadre since 4177 continuously, opportunity must have come so as to rectify the imbalance in terms of paragraph 3(ii) of the aforementioned clarificatory letter issued by the Finance Department dated 20th May, 1981.
Once Finance Department has issued the aforementioned circular, question of considering the petitioner's case again by the said Department did not arise, particularly in view of the fact that in terms of a Memo dated 12681 as would appear from Memo No. 6227-For/N/4P-7/91 dated 17th August, 1991 when the position was clarified by the Government of West Bengal, Finance Department had declared that the Principal Chief Conservator of Forests, West Bengal would be the competent authority to take decision in the matter.
8.
In this view of the matter we do not find that the Forest Department and/or the Finance department could have any cogent reason in not directing reckoning of petitioner's seniority with effect from 4177.
9.
For the reasons aforementioned, this application is allowed.
The judgment and order passed by the learned Tribunal below is set aside and the original writ application filed by the petitioner is allowed with a declaration that the petitioner's seniority be reckoned with effect from his date of actual joining in the office of the Deputy Chief Wild Life Warden in Directorate Cadre.
There will be no order as to costs.
Application allowed.