AK Sikri, J (Oral) - Rule.
With the consent of the parties matter is heard at this stage.
2.
Charge-sheet dated 271278 was issued to the respondent-workman by the petitioner management.
In reply to the said charge-sheet the respondent- workman submitted letter dated 9179 which reads as under :-  "Most respectfully, I would like to bring to your kind notice the two memos which you had issued vide letter Nos. D/ADM/PF/162/78-79 dated 5179.
I personally admit that I have committed a mistake and that in future I would not do such things.
I hope you will please forgive me."
[emphasis added] Thereafter, by order dated 15/17379 one Shri KP Sarin, Sales Manager was appointed as inquiring authority to inquire into the charges framed against the said workman.
Preliminary inquiry was held on 29.3.79 and in the said inquiry after the charges were read out, the workman admitted having written letter dated 9179 before the Inquiry Officer also.
This letter was treated as unqualified apology submitted by the workman and on the basis of this letter and without proceeding further in the inquiry, the Inquiry Officer returned the finding stating that the charges against the workman as levelled in the charge sheet dated 271278 stood proved and on that basis punishment of downgrading of the petitioner was imposed upon him.
Workman raised industrial dispute and conciliation proceedings were held and thereafter Secretary, Delhi Administration made the reference in the following terms: "Whether the punishment of down grading of Sh. SP Bhargava is disproportionate ?
If so, to what relief is he entitled and what directions are necessary in this behalf ?"
After the reference, matter was adjudicated upon by the Industrial Tribunal No. 1 which resulted in the impugned Award dated 2396.
A perusal of the Award shows that the Industrial Tribunal has examined letter dated 9179 and has come to the conclusion that the said letter does not amount to accepting the charges.
It is further observed that even if he had accepted the charges and tendered the apology, management could have punished him only after a formal departmental enquiry and not on the basis of letter of apology and as the Inquiry Officer did not hold the inquiry, the punishment of downgrading imposed upon him was held to be neither justified nor legal.
Relevant portion of the award reads as under:  "It is, therefore, clear the alleged letter of apology was not the acceptance of the charge that the workman committed fraud or dishonesty by wrongly marking Diwari Lal present while in fact he was not present.
Thus in the alleged letter of apology, the workman had not accepted the charge.
Otherwise also even if he had accepted the charge and tendered the apology the management could have punished him only after a formal departmental enquiry and not only on the alleged letter of apology.
As stated above, it is admitted to the Enquiry Officer that he did not hold any departmental enquiry.
It is, therefore, clear from the above discussion that punishment on the workman by the management by downgrading him was not either justified or legal.
I accordingly set aside the same and order accordingly."
Assailing the aforesaid finding, Mr. Raj Birbal, Sr. Advocate appearing for the petitioner argued that by going into the validity of the inquiry, Industrial Tribunal has exceeded its jurisdiction.
As per terms of reference the Industrial Tribunal was required to go into the question as to whether punishment of downgrading was dis-proportionate to the charge or not as only this aspect was referred for adjudication.
There is force in this submission.
The dispute as to whether the punishment was legal or valid was not referred and the terms of reference clearly stipulate that the Industrial Tribunal was to go into the question as to whether the punishment was "dis-proportionate" or not.
It is the accepted principle of law that the Industrial Tribunal has to confine the adjudication within the terms of reference.
He derives jurisdiction from the terms of reference and, therefore, we cannot enlarge the scope of reference.
3.
Even otherwise the findings of the Industrial Tribunal are unsustainable in law.
In the letter dated 9179 written by respondent-workman, after issuance of charge-sheet, respondent-workman clearly admits the charges and states that he would not commit such mistake in future.
Respondent-workman has referred to the charge-sheet in this letter and in response to that letter he has used the expression that "I personally admit that I have committed a mistake."
Not only this, he admitted having written this letter before the Inquiry Officer also.
Once the charge is admitted, nothing remained to be proved by the petitioner and, therefore, the Inquiry Officer was not supposed to proceed further with the inquiry and recording of findings that charge is proved on the basis of admission was proper and valid.
Therefore, the Tribunal went wrong in observing that the letter dated 9179 does not amount to accepting of charges or that even if it amounts to tendering the apology, still departmental enquiry was required to be conducted.
It has been held by the Apex Court in number of cases that no such enquiry is required once the charge is admitted by the delinquent employee.
Award dated 2396 is, accordingly, setaside.
4.
Since Industrial Tribunal has not at all dealt with the question as to whether punishment of downgrading the workman was disproportionate, which was in fact the matter referred to it, the case is remanded back to the Industrial Tribunal with direction to decide this question after giving an opportunity of hearing to both the parties.
Parties may appear before the Industrial Tribunal on 8th March, 2000.
Since the case relates to the year 1986, it is expected that the Tribunal would dispose of the matter expeditiously and in any event within six months.
Writ petition stands disposed of.
Order accordingly.