RL Anand, J - Petitioner Tasbir Singh has filed the present writ petition under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India seeking directions of this Court against respondents No. 1 and 2 to allow him to continue to serve at Fatehgarh Churian where he has joined on 30.6.1999 on transfer from Civil Hospital, Dera Baba Nanak and cancel his transfer order back to Dera Baba Nanak within a period of one week.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he was transferred to Fatehgarh Churian being a couple case on his own request.
So much so he joined his duties at Fatehgarh Churian on 30.6.199 and thereafter he was ordered to resume his duty at Dera Baba Nanak back within a span of one week and this action on the part of respondents No. 1 and 2 is illegal and against the public policy and it has been so done in order to accommodate respondent No. 3, who has been posted at Fatehgarh Churian.
3.
The plea of the petitioner has been contested by respondents No. 1 to 3.
Respondent No. 3 was earlier posted at Panwan and from Panwan he was transferred to Fatehgarh Churian w.e.f.
131998 on his own request.
4.
During the course of submission, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of respondent No. 3 submitted two things - firstly, that earlier the petitioner was transferred on his own request from Dera Baba Nanak and secondly, the distance from Dera Baba Nanak to Fatehgarh Churian is hardly 28 kilometres.
The policy of the State Government is not that every couple case has to be accommodated at one place.
If the State Government has taken into consideration the inconvenience likely to be caused to the petitioner and has accommodated at a place nearby to the place of posting of his wife, the petitioner should not have any grouse or grumble.
5.
I see merit in the contention raised by the learned counsel appearing on behalf of respondent No. 3.
Transfer is an incident of service.
The policy of the State Government has been formulated in public interest so as not to cause inconvenience to the public servants, but such public servants cannot dictate terms upon their employers.
It has been conceded by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the distance between Fatehgarh Churian is not so much.
It is 28 kilometres only.
In such a situated it cannot be said that the posting of the petitioner at Dera Baba Nanak was inconvenient especially when at one point of time the petitioner himself made prayer for his posting at Dera Baba Nanak.
Moreover, one can cover such a distance in half an hour or 45 minutes by bus or by a scooter very conveniently.
On the contrary, the balance of convenience lies in favour of respondent No. 3, who is going to Fatehgarh Churian from Panwan on his own request after serving for six years at this place.
6.
In this view of the matter, I do not see any merit in this writ petition because there was no mala fide on the part of respondent No. 2 when respondent No. 3 was accommodated at Fatehgarh Churian.
Therefore, the present petition stands disposed of with the observations and directions to respondents No. 1 and 2 that as and when next vacancy arises at Fatehgarh Churian the petitioner may be accommodated so that he may be able to join his family at Fatehgarh Churian where his wife is also posted.
Petition dismissed.