JS Khehar, J - The Engineer-in-Chief, P.W.D.
Public Health Department, Haryana, Chandigarh issued an advertisement dated 27101997 inviting applications for appointment to the posts of Computer Programmer and Assistant Computer Programmer/Junior Computer Programmer.
Both the petitioners responded to the advertisement.
After determining that they fulfilled the conditions of eligibility stipulated in the said advertisement, they were invited for an interview on 28111997.
2.
Both the petitioners were declared successful.
Petitioner No. 1 was issued an order dated 3121997 for appointment to the post of Computer Programmer for a period of six months in the pay scale of Rs. 1400-2600.
In continuation of the order of appointment, another letter dated 11121997 was issued to petitioner No. 1 informing him, inter alia, that his appointment was for a period of six months or till arrival of regularly selected candidate, from the Subordinate Service Selection Board, Haryana, whichever was earlier.
In like manner, petitioner No. 2 was selected and appointed to the post of Assistant Computer Programmer/Junior Computer Programmer for a period of six months in the pay scale of Rs. 975-1540.
In continuation of the letter of appointment, another letter dated 11121997 was issued to him whereby he was informed, inter alia, that his appointment was for a period of six months or till the arrival of regularly selected candidates through the Subordinate Service Selection Board, Haryana, whichever was earlier.
3.
In furtherance of the appointment orders issued to the petitioners, petitioner No. 1 assumed his duties as Computer Programmer on 3121997 whereas petitioner No. 2 assumed his duties as Assistant Computer Programmer/Junior Computer Programmer on 8121997.
They were accordingly paid the salary in the scale in which they were engaged.
In January, 1998, the Haryana Government revised the pay scales of its employees with effect from 111996.
The scale of Rs. 1400-2600 in which petitioner No. 1 was appointed was revised to Rs. 5000-7850 whereas the pay scale of Rs. 975-1540 in which petitioner No. 2 was appointed was revised Rs. 3200-4900.
Although, it is not clear as to whether the revised pay scales where implemented in respect of the petitioners, yet from the narration of the facts in the writ petition, it emerges that in May, 1998, petitioner No. 1 was drawing Rs. 6400/- in the pay scale of Rs. 1400-2600 and petitioner No. 2 was drawing Rs. 4400/- in the pay scale of Rs. 975-1540.
4.
Just before the tenure of six months for which the petitioners had been appointed could expire, the Engineer-in-Chief, P.W.D.
Public Health Department, Haryana addressed a communication dated 26111998 to the Financial Commissioner and Secretary to Government Haryana, PWD, Public Health Department, recommending the continuation of the petitioners on the posts held by them and seeking permission to extend their tenure of appointment in the revised scales (already referred to above) for a further period of six months.
In response to the aforesaid letter dated 26111998, the Government informed the Engineer-in-Chief, PWD, Public Health Department, Haryana through its memo dated 3.11.1998 that it was agreeable to the proposal submitted for continuation of the posts of Computer Programmer and Assistant Computer Programmer/Junior Computer Programmer.
However, the continuation of the aforesaid posts was acceptable on a consolidated/fixed pay of Rs. 5000/- per month for the post of Computer Programmer on contract basis; and likewise, on the consolidated/fixed pay of Rs. 3200/- per month for the post of Assistant Computer Programmer/Junior Computer Programmer on contract basis.
5.
On receipt of the Government's approval, the Engineer-in-Chief, PWD, Public Health Department, Haryana issued two orders dated 20.1.1999 extending the tenure of appointment of petitioner No. 1 for another period of six months, on contract basis, at fixed salary of Rs. 5000/- per months.
In the other communication, a similar order dated 20.1.1999 was passed in respect of petitioner No. 2 whose service was also extended for a period of six months, on contract basis, at fixed salary of Rs. 3200/- per month.
The orders dated 20.1.1999 referred to above have been appended to the writ petition as Annexure P-6 and P-7.
It is these orders, which have been impugned by the petitioners, the instant writ petition.
6.
The only argument addressed by the learned counsel for the petitioners is that the authorities have acted against all principles of equality, justice and good conscious (Conscience ?)
by reducing the emoluments of the petitioners without any change in their duties and responsibilities.
In this behalf it is submitted that petitioner No. 1 who was drawing salary of Rs. 6400/- in May, 1998 has been given fixed salary of Rs. 5000/- per month by the impugned order thereby reducing his emoluments.
Likewise, the salary of petitioner No. 2 in May, 1998 was Rs. 4400/- it has been reduced to Rs. 3200/- per month by the impugned order.
It is submitted that, it is now well recognised that employees appointed on ad hoc basis temporary basis are entitled to at least the minimum wages payable to a regular incumbent of the post.
Accordingly when petitioner No. 1 was appointed against the post of Computer Programmer, he was allowed the minimum of the pay scale of the post i.e. the carry home salary of Rs. 6400/-.
Likewise, when petitioner No. 2 was appointed against the post of Assistant Computer Programmer/Junior Computer Programmer, his carry home salary was Rs. 4400/- i.e. this minimum of the pay scale of the post held by him.
7.
By styling the order of appointment as on contract basis, the authorities have sought to engage petitioner No. 1 on consolidated salary of Rs. 5000/- per month and petitioner No. 2 on consolidated salary of Rs. 3200/- per month.
The initial letters of appointment were issued to the petitioners, after they had responded to an advertisement, and after they had participated in the process of selection, for a period of six months.
The salary to be drawn by them was in the respective pay scales of the posts on which they were appointed.
After the lapse of the initial period of six months, while extending their appointment for another tenure of six months, their appointment had been described as on contract basis.
The solitary aim and object of styling their appointment as on contract basis seems to reducing for the sole purpose of their carry home salary.
It is not disputed before this Court that the duties and responsibilities discharged by the petitioners during their first tenure of six months, and during the second tenure of another period of six months on contract basis had remained absolutely unaltered.
This action on the part of the respondents is certainly unjust and unfair.
It would be reasonable to term this action on the part of the authorities as exploitative.
It is not the function of the Government to make gains at the expense of citizens of the country.
India is a social welfare State.
Mere terminology of the nature of appointment cannot have the effect of depriving an employee of his dues.
Under the Constitution, the people of this country were promised economic and social justice; citizens of the country are vested with the fundamental rights against exploitation; even the directive principles of the State policy require the State to secure a social order for promotion of the welfare of its people.
The instant action of the authorities whereby merely on styling the nature of appointment of the petitioners `as on contract basis' their emoluments have been reduced to a stage even lower than the minimum wages payable to a regular employee.
An ad hoc basis temporary employee is definitely entitled to the same wages as are admissible to regular employee holding the same post.
8.
For the aforesaid reasons, the reduction of pay of the petitioners vide the impugned orders dated 20.1.1999 (Annexure P-6 in respect of petitioner No. 1 and Annexure P-7 in respect of petitioner No. 2) are hereby quashed.
It is accordingly held that the petitioners shall be entitled to draw the wages equal to the minimum of the scales of the pay drawn by regular employees holding the same cost.
9.
No other point was argued or raised.
10.
The writ petition is accordingly allowed in the aforesaid terms.
Petitions allowed.