TS Doabia, J - Counsel heard.
2.
Petition admitted.
With the consent of the parties, the petition was taken for final disposal today.
The circumstances under which this petition has been preferred, be noticed.
3.
The petitioners have come to the Court with a grievance that they were appointed as daily wages workers with respondent No. 2.
It is their case, that they came to be appointed on 2161993.
In this petition, they submit that even if they have been going in the office of respondent No. 2, the above respondent has not been permitting them to mark attendance.
It is under these circumstances, that this petition was filed.
4.
The respondents have put in appearance.
It is admitted that the petitioners were given appointments on 2161993.
The respondents have taken a stand that the petitioners were not given further appointments and their services were terminated.
As to on which date this has been done, has not been indicated in the objections so preferred.
5.
The learned counsel appearing for the petitioner submits that in terms of J&K Daily Rated Workers/Work Charge Employees (Regularisation) Rules, 1994, the petitioners are entitled to regularisation and absorption.
It is submitted that these Rules came into force on 141994, and the petitioners were in service on this date.
6.
However, the learned counsel appearing for the State submits that the very Rules, on which reliance is being placed by the petitioners, imposes restriction on the State from engaging daily rated workers and work charge employees.
Reliance for this is being placed on Rule 7.
It is, accordingly, submitted that w.e.f.
141994 the respondents are not in a position to continue with daily rated workers or work charge employees.
7.
This argument might have prevailed, but for another Rule.
This Rule is Rule 8.
Before proceeding further Rules 7 & 8 are being noticed.
These read as under :-  "Rule-7.
Restriction on engagement of Daily Rated Workers/Work Charged Employees :- (1) With effect from the commencement of these Rules, no field/subordinate officer shall have the power for engagement of Daily Rated Worker or Work Charged Employee in the Department and the existing delegation, if any, in this regard is withdrawn : Provided that the Competent Authority may engage Casual Labour or Seasonal Labour in any of the Departments to be specified by Notification from time to time by the Government and such labour shall be on the Muster Roll for payment of wages and no engagement or appointment order shall be issued.
(2) After the commencement of these Rules the work charged posts shall be created only by the Administrative Departments in consultation with the Finance and Planning Department."
"Rule-8.
Application of rules to existing Daily Rated Workers and Work Charged Employees :- The policy of absorption of Daily Rated Workers and Work Charged Employees shall also apply to such of the existing Daily Rated Workers and Work Charged Employees who may not have completed seven years on 3131994 but may complete by the end of subsequent financial years and their absorption shall be considred in that financial year in accordance with these Rules."
8.
Thus the rules provide for the policy of absorption of Daily Rated Workers and Work Charge Employees.
Employees who may have completed seven years are entitled to regularisation.
Those employees who have not completed seven years of service, but may complete their seven years by the end of subsequent financial years can also be regularised.
Rule 8 takes care of those Daily Rated Workers, who were working with the respondents.
The only exception which has been carved out is that they would be entitled to absorption only on the completion of seven years of service.
It be seen that the words used in Rule 8 are :-  "......seven years on 3131994, but may complete by the end of subsequent financial years....." 9.
The words "subsequent financial years" have to be given full meaning.
The Rule cannot be ignored.
The intention of rule making authority is to continue and regularise any employee who is working as a Daily Rated Worker or Work Charge Employee and has completed seven years of service.
He is to be permitted to continue to work as such, but is to be absorbed only when he completes seven years of service.
10.
The State has not indicated as to when the service of the petitioners were brought to an end.
So, following directions are given :-  i) That the State would examine the Muster Rolls; ii) If the petitioners have worked for a particular period and for that period they have not been paid the wages, then they would be paid the wages; iii) The petitioners would now be taken on Rolls.
11.
The embargo which has been placed by the above Rule applies only in the matter of non-employment of Daily rated workers and work charge employees after 141994.
The petitioners were in service before that date, therefore, they are entitled to the relief.
12.
This petition is disposed of accordingly.
Petition allowed.