Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was working as an Executive Engineer with the Haryana Agricultural University, Hisar.
Vide order dated October 9, 1997, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P4 with the writ petition, the University granted promotional scale of Rs. 4100-5300 to 10 Officers, including two Executive Engineers.
So far as the petitioner is concerned, his claim was considered.
However, the Selection Committee had not recommended him for the grant of the promotional grade due to the "poor service record."
The petitioner represented against this order.
His representative was rejected.
The decision was conveyed to him vide order dated May 10, 1999.
A copy of this order has been produced as Annexure P8 with the writ petition.
Aggrieved by the action of the University, in not granting him the promotion scale, the petitioner has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
He prays that the impugned orders, copies of which are at Annexure P4 and P8, be quashed.
2.
We have heard Mr. KC Bhatia, learned counsel for the petitioner.
He contends that the competent authority could have examined only 10 confidential reports, while in fact 12 have been examined.
This contention is based on the order, a copy of the which is at Annexure P4 with the writ petition.
3.
Admittedly, the promotional scale is admissible on the assessment of 12 years of regular service.
The petitioner's case was duly considered by the Selection Committee.
It had found that the petitioner was not suitable for the grant of the promotional scale on account of his poor record of service.
Thus, he was overlooked.
Even on reconderation, the University has found no reason to take a different view.
There is no infirmity of law which may call for interference in proceedings under Article 226 of the Constitution.
No rule or provisions contained in the University Calendar has been shown to be violated.
No principal of equity has been infringed.
4.
The petitioner's claim having been duly considered and he having been denied the promotional scale on account of poor record of service, we find no ground to interfere under Article 226 of the Constitution.
The writ petition is, accordingly, dismissed in limine.
Petition dismissed.