RL Anand, J - Smt. Santosh Malik has filed the present writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India for issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus praying that the respondents be directed to release the salary to her of maternity leave w.e.f.
4111995 to 451996 and from 28.10.1997 to 28.4.1998 along with interest at the rate of 24 per cent per annum.
2.
Thee case set up by the petitioner is that she was appointed as Lecturer in Hindi on 1121988 and since then she is working on her post regularly and without any break.
On 3111995, she submitted an application before respondent No. 5 and proceeded on maternity leave w.e.f.
4111995.
This leave was sanctioned to her by respondent No. 5.
On 551996, she joined her duties after availing the maternity leave and submitted the birth certificate of the child and requested respondents No. 4 and 5 to release her salary for the maternity period.
The petitioner again went on maternity leave w.e.f.
28.10.1997 to 28.4.1998 and submitted her application for maternity leave on 27101997, which was duly sanctioned by respondent No. 5.
After availing the maternity leave second time she joined her duties on 29.4.1998 and requested the respondents to give her salary for the said maternity leave, but to no effect.
She reminded the respondents several times for the release of salary for the maternity period.
So much so, she sent a legal notice on 2991998, but the respondents did not respond.
This is the case in short of the petitioner.
3.
The notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
Respondents No. 1 to 3 filed a joint written statement and submitted that the petitioner was working as a part-time Lecturer in the institution since 1121998 and there is no statutory provision for extending the benefit of maternity leave to part-time employee.
She cannot be treated at par with regular government employee.
Moreover, the petitioner was working on an unsanctioned post and till today, her post has not been sanctioned.
Therefore, she is not entitled to this benefit.
It is also the stand of these respondents that permission of the government was accorded to the institution to allow the petitioner to work on part-time basis.
The instructions dated 1531988 issued by the State of Haryana regarding the grant of maternity leave are applicable only in case of ad hoc employees and there is no reference of part-time employees in these instructions.
So in these circumstances, the claim of the petitioner is untenable.
4.
A separate written statement was also filed by respondents No. 4 and 5 and a similar defence has been taken as that of respondents No. 1 to 3.
It was further pleaded by these respondents that the petitioner earlier filed Civil Writ Petition No. 15332 of 1998 seeking her regularisation in service, but the same was dismissed by the Division Bench of this Court on 30.3.1999.
The petitioner was appointed against a part-time post on fixed pay and in these circumstances, she is not entitled to he relief claimed for.
5.
We have gone through the record of this case and after perusing the same, we are inclined to dispose of this writ petition in spite of the fact that no assistance is forthcoming on behalf of the parties on account of on-going strike which cannot be held legal from any angle.
6.
The case which has been made out by the petitioner in her petition is that she is entitled to the benefit of maternity leave.
The instructions in this regard are contained in the government policy letter dated 1531998, which lays down as follows:-  "I am directed to invite a reference to Haryana Government, Finance Department letter No. 11/61-IFRII, dated 10883 on the subject noted above and to say that the question regarding grant of maternity leave to female Government employees who have been recruited on ad hoc basis for a limited period, has been under consideration of the State Government for some time past.
After careful consideration it has now been decided that the maternity leave may also be granted to ad hoc female Government employees within the limitations mentioned in Chapeter I of Punjab CSR Vol.
I Part-I particularly rule 12 and 14 ibid.
2.
It may, however, be mentioned that the question of grant of maternity leave to ad hoc female Government employee during the first 6 months of service would not arise, because women candidates for recruitment to State services who at the time of medical examination as first entry into Government service are found to be pregnant of 12 weeks' standing or over are to be declared temporarily unfit until the confinement is over.
In other words, such temporarily unfit persons will not be recruited in service even on ad hoc basis till they are fit for duty after the confinement.
This limitation from medical point of view needs to be kept in view and duly observed."
The reading of the above would show that this benefit of maternity leave is only applicable to the regular government employees or even to those employees who were working on ad hoc basis but this was never made permissible to the part-time officials/officers of the government.
It is not the case of the petitioner that she was in the regular employment of the respondents.
Rather, she made an abortive effort earlier when she filed writ petition No. 15332 of 1998 titled Santosh Malik and another v. State of Haryana seeking her regularisation and the Hon'ble Division Bench was pleased to hold that since the petitioners were working as a part-time Lecturers, therefore, irrespective of the fact that they had completed more than three years of service, they are not entitled to the benefit of regularisation because the policy of the State Government does not extend to those employees who are working in privately managed schools.
Moreover, they are not entitled to the relief as they are working on part-time basis against part-time sanctioned posts.
The ratio of the order passed by the Hon'ble Division Bench can be reproduced as under:-  "We have heard the counsel for the parties and have pursued the record.
Petitioners are working as part-time lecturers in DG Khan Hindu Senior Secondary School, Palwal.
The grievance of the petitioners is that they are entitled to regularisation under a policy of the State Govt. as they have completed more than 3 years on January 31, 1996.
On a consideration of the matter, we find that the petition deserves to be dismissed.
The policy of the State Govt. relates to the work-charged/daily wagers and not to the Lecturers working in privately managed school, that apart the petitioners are the employees of a private recognised school and the policy framed by the State Govt. for regularisation of its employees is not automatically applicable to the privately managed school.
The petitioners are not entitled to the relief as they are working on part-time basis against part-time sanctioned posts.
In view of the above, this petition fails and is dismissed."
In this view of the matter, we have no hesitation in holding that the petitioner has no basis to say that she is entitled to the benefit of maternity leave.
Consequently, we do not find any merit in this writ petition and the same is hereby dismissed with no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.