Amar Dutt, J - Mohinder Singh has filed the present Writ Petition under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India to challenge the orders Annexures P6 and P7.
2.
The petitioner who is a member of Central Reserve Police Force was proceeded against departmentally under Section 11(1) of the CRPF Act, 1949 read with Rule 27 of the CRPF Rules, 1955 when he was posted with 5th Signal BN, Central Reserve Police Force, Mohali.
Sh. Mahesh Kumar, Deputy Commandant was detailed for conducting the inquiry and he submitted his report to the effect that two charges were proved against the petitioner.
On the same evidence, a case FIR 19 of 9.2.1993 was registered against him under Sections 306/506 read with Sections 3/4/5 of the TADA Act and in that case, after trial, he was acquitted by the Additional Judge, Designated Court, Chandigarh.
The Deputy Director (Comman), CRPF, the punishing authority, after considering the inquiry report and the judgment of acquittal, had disagreed with the findings of the inquiry officer and exonerated the petitioner.
The Inspector General of Police (HQ), CRPF, had thereafter suo motu called for the records and after issuing show cause notice to the petitioner proposing the impose punishment of reduction to a lower stage in the time scale of pay for a period of two years, considered the reply filed by the petitioner and imposed the proposed penalty.
Against this order Annexure P6, the petitioner had filed an appeal before the Director General, CRPF, which was rejected by Annexure P7.
The petitioner then filed the present writ petition in which the orders Annexures P6 and P7 have been assailed inter alia on the ground that Rule 29(d) of the CRPF Rules, 1955 does not empower the Director General or Additional Director General or Inspector General or Deputy Inspector General of CRPF to call for the records in case where no punishment has been imposed.
3.
On behalf of the respondents, no written reply has been filed and Sh. Kamal Sharma, Advocate, appearing on behalf of the respondents, has on instructions from the CRPF authorities, placed on record a communication written by Sh. RD Sharma, Commandant, Assistant Director (Legal) to the Additional DIGP, GC, CRPF, Pinjore, indicating that it was not desirable to contest the petition.
4.
To appreciate the argument of the petitioner's counsel, it becomes necessary to examine the provision under which the Inspector General had taken suo moto action against the petitioner.
Rule 29(d) of CRPF Rules, 1955, reads as under:  "29 (d) The Director General or the Additional Director General or the Inspector General or the Deputy Inspector General may call for the records of award of any punishment and confirm, enhance, modify or annul the same or make or direct further investigation to be made before passing of such order."
From a perusal of above, it is clear that the power of review is exercisable only in cases where some punishment has been imposed on the delinquent official.
In a case where no punishment has been imposed, the Rule would have no application and this is probably the reason why the respondents have not filed the reply.
5.
In view of the above, I am of the considered opinion that the Inspector General of Police, CRPF had no jurisdiction to pass the order Annexure P6 and the same has to be set aside.
As a result, the writ petition is allowed and the orders Annexures P6 and P7 passed by the Inspector General of Police, CRPF and the Director (sic) would be entitled to receive all the consequential benefits that may accrue to him as a result thereof.
Petition allowed.