ML Singhal, J - Din Dayal Gaba joined as Sanitary Supervisor on 2581960 in the Health Department of State of Haryana.
He was promoted to the post of Health Inspector vide order dated 2191971 of the District Malaria Officer, Hisar against a vacant post caused by resignation of Arjan Kumar, Health Inspector.
Din Dayal took over as Health Inspector on 25.8.1971 and held this post eversince then.
He was getting regular increments as Health Inspector.
He was allowed to cross efficiency bar twice that came his way as Health Inspector.
He passed the Sanitary Inspector's examination in June 1971 from the Medical College, Rohtak.
He continued as Health Inspector for over 20 years but was not regularised against this post.
He served notice upon the State of Haryana on 11189 under Section 80 of Civil Procedure Code seeking regularisation of his service as Health Inspector.
In reply to that notice, he was informed by the Director General of Health Services, Haryana vide Memo dated 28.11.90 that he stood confirmed as Basic Health Worker with effect from 2.11.66.
He through his counsel again wrote a letter pointing out that he had sought regularisation and confirmation as Health Inspector and not as Basic Health Worker.
Vide order dated 28111990, Director General of Health Services, Haryana directed him to undergo six months promotional training in the State Health and Family Welfare Training Centre, Rohtak.
He represented that his promotional training was not necessary as he had already been working as Health Inspector.
He was informed vide Memo dated 2191 of the Director General of Health Services, Haryana that he was being shown in the cadre of Basic Multi-Purpose Workers (Male) in the record and he was working as Health Inspector in his own pay scale and he would be made regular supervisor only if he underwent the promotional training.
He filed suit for declaration challenging the order dated 28.11.90 of the Director General of Health Services, Haryana conveyed to him vide memo dated 2191 that he could not be called upon to undergo six months promotional training as he was already working as Health Inspector.
2.
During the pendency of the suit, he was reverted as Laboratory Assistant vide order dated 27691 of the Director General of Health Services, Haryana.
He challenged that order also saying that he could not be reverted after a lapse of 20 years when he was holding the post of Health Inspector for over 20 years.
Defendant-State of Haryana contested the suit urging that he was appointed as Sanitary Supervisor and was not promoted as Health Inspector.
District Malaria Officer, Hisar simply posted him against a vacant post of Health Inspector because the previous incumbent Shri Arjan Kumar had put in resignation saying that he should be relieved within 24 hours.
He (Plaintiff) was never allowed the scale of Health Inspector.
Director General, Health Services, Haryana alone was competent to effect promotion to the post of Health Inspector.
It was through mistake/inadvertence that he was allowed to cross efficiency bar of the post of Health Inspector on two occasions.
It was a stop-gap arrangement in which he was put as Health Inspector to look after the work of that post in the emergent situation created by Arjan Kumar's resignation.
3.
Sub Judge 1st Class, Hisar decreed the plaintiff's suit for declaration vide order dated 22.11.93 quashing thereby the order of the Director General, Health Services, Haryana calling upon him vide order dated 28.11.90 to undergo promotional training in the State Health and Family Welfare Training Centre, Rohtak.
He quashed the order reverting him from the post of Laboratory Assistant in view of his finding that after a lapse of 20 years he could not be reverted and he could not be called upon to undergo promotional training as he was already Health Inspector.
4.
In appeal by the State of Haryana, the judgment and decree dated 22.11.93 passed by Sub Judge Ist Class, Hisar was set aside by learned Additional District Judge, Hisar vide order dated 19.7.96 and the plaintiff's suit was dismissed.
5.
Plaintiff has knocked the door of this Court through this appeal.
6.
It is not disputed that the plaintiff-appellant has been continuing as Health Inspector since the year 1971.
He was sought to be reverted in the year 1991 ie after a lapse of 20 years.
Contention of the State of Haryana is that District Malaria Officer, Hisar put him to perform the duties of the post of Health Inspector vide order dated 21971 in the wake of the vacancy caused by the resignation of Shri Arjan Kumar who had imposed a condition in the resignation letter that he should be relieved within 24 hours.
Contention of the State of Haryana is that District Malaria Officer, Hisar was not competent to promote him to the post of Health Inspector.
It was Director General, Health Services, Haryana, who was competent to promote/appoint Health Inspectors.
Their further contention is that it is misnomer to label him as having been promoted to the post of Health Inspector.
Their contention is that when he was not promoted to the post of Health Inspector by competent authority, the mere fact that he performed the duties peculiar to the post of Health Inspector would not give him any right to continue against that post and claim pay allowances etc. of that post.
Suffice it to say, after a lapse of 20 years it will be in equitable and unjust to say that he should step down from the post of Health Inspector to the post of Laboratory Assistant.
In Dr. MS Mudhol vs. Shri SD Halegkra, 1993 (4) Services Law Reporter 364 : 1993(4) SCT 226 (SC) it was held that petitioner was appointed as principal though he was not possessing requisite qualification.
He held the post of principal for 12/13 years when it transpired that he was lacking in essential qualifications required for the post of principal.
It was held by their Lordships that after a lapse of 12/13 years having worked as principal it would be inequitous to interfere in his appointment.
In this case, plaintiff- appellant had all along been drawing the pay of Health Inspector.
He has crossed efficiency bar on two occasions.
It would be wholly unfair and arbitrary to order his reversion from the post of Health Inspector/Multipurpose Health Supervisor (Male) after a lapse of 20 years.
It was submitted by learned Additional Advocate General, Haryana that statutory rules had been framed in the year 1984 and that the post had to be filled up in accordance with the rules.
Since the plaintiff's appointment was not in conformity with the rules, he had no right to continue on the higher post.
Suffice it to say, when he was put to the post of Health Inspector in the year 1971, there were no rules governing the method of promotion to the post of Health Inspector.
Even if he did not have the essential qualifications provided for the post of Health Inspector in the year 1971, he became fit to hold that post after acquiring experience.
It would be improper and unjust to revert him to the post of Basic Health Worker or Laboratory Assistant from the post of Health Inspector which he has been holding for the last 20 years.
It was also not proper for the State of Haryana to ask him to undergo six months promotional training in the State Health and Family Welfare Training Centre, Rohtak when he was already holding the post of Health Inspector.
7.
In view of what has been said above, this appeal succeeds and is allowed and the judgment and decree passed by learned Addl.
Distt.
Judge, Hisar dated 1971996 is set aside and that passed by Sub Judge Ist Class, Hisar dated 22.11.93 is restored and the plaintiff's suit is decreed.
If any recovery has been effected from the plaintiff-appellant in the wake of the judgment and decree dated 19.7.96 passed by learned Addl.
Distt.
Judge, Hisar that will be refunded/restored to him.
No costs.
Appeal allowed.