V K Bali, J - The prayer made in this petition is for issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to release to the petitioner the pensionary benefits after refixing the pension.
2.
In the reply that has been filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been pleaded in paragraph 7 that the pay of the petitioner has been refixed.
The case of the petitioner with service record has been sent to the Accountant General, Punjab, Chandigarh, for refixation of pension and other pensionary benefits vide office memo.
dated October 17, 1998.
It is further pleaded in paragraph 9 of the reply that due to some mistake/clerical error, reversion entry as Assistant Sub-Inspector was made by the Commandant, PRTC, Jehan Khelan, and the same has been got rectified and the pay of the petitioner has been refixed.
There is, however, no plausible explanation with regard to the delay caused in the matter.
3.
In a separate affidavit filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been mentioned that petitioner has died on May 6, 1999, and the payment of revised D.C.R.
has been received by Smt. Malkiat Kaur, widow of the petitioner, in September 1999.
It has further been stated that the revised pension has been refixed and will be released by the concerned Treasury Officer.
4.
After going through the pleadings of the parties and hearing the learned State Counsel, this Court is of the view that the present petition has become infructuous except of the claim of the petitioner with regard to the interest on delayed payments.
As mentioned above, there is no plausible explanation for delaying the post-retiral benefits on refixation of pay.
The mistakes if any, were made by the State and were later rectified also.
The petitioner cannot be blamed for these mistakes in any case.
5.
In view of what has been said above, this petition is disposed of with a direction that the survivor of the petitioner i.e. his widow, shall be entitled to interest calculated at the rate of 6 per cent per annum three months after the revised pensionary benefits fell due to the petitioner till such time the payment was made or shall be made.
A further direction is issued to the respondents to make over the remaining payment to the petitioner's widow, as mentioned in the separate affidavit, within six weeks from today as also interest as has been ordered above.
Petition allowed.