RS Mongia, J - The petitioner was appointed as Ayah on 171992 by an order issued by the authorities in the Command Hospital, Western Command, Chandimandir.
Copy of the order has been appended as Annexure P-2 with the writ petition.
The relevant portion of the appointment order may be reproduced :-  "1.
Refer advertisement in the INDIAN EXPRESS dt. 22 April 92 and interview held on 27 May 92 at Command Hospital (WC), Chandimandir.
2.
You are hereby appointed as Ayah in the pay scale of Rs. 1500-100-2000.
Total amounts will be Rs. 1500/- on the date of appointment physically reporting for duty.
You will be kept on a probation period for one year.
On termination of probation period if you are not selected for regular employment then your services will be deemed to be automatically terminated at the discretion of Executive Committee.
Services can be terminated at any time during the probation period without assigning any reason."
2.
Before completion of one year of appointment, another letter was issued on 1761993 by the respondents appointing the petitioner on ad hoc basis to the temporary post of Ayah.
The relevant portion of the said order reads as under :-  "1.
Reference letter No. 127/1/ADM/HCS dated 01 July 92 2.
You are appointed on `ad hoc basis' (purely temporary basis) to the temporary post of Ayahh in the pay scale of Rs. 1500-100-2000/- (total emoluments including all allowances will be Rs. 1500/- per month) for a period of one year.
Your services can be terminated in accordance with the terms of your employment with either one month's prior notice of pay in lieu and not necessarily for a valid justification."
Certain other orders of appointment followed which have been appended by the respondents as Annexures R-3 to R-5, which are dated 681994, 5101996 and 19121997 respectively.
The last appointment order dated 19121997 states as under (relevant portion) :-  "1.
You have been temporarily appointed as a AYAH in Asha Handicapped Children School, Chandimandir in the pay scale (Total pay packet) of Rs. 2150/- per month for the period upto 30 April 98."
Since the petitioner was not allowed to work after 3041998, she filed the present writ petition.
3.
Notice of motion was issued and reply has been filed.
4.
So far as the respondents' not allowing the petitioner to work after 3041998 is concerned, the respondents stand is that as per the last appointment letter dated 19121997, copy Annexure R-5, the appointment of the petitioner was only upto 3041998 and thereafter the services of the petitioner stood automatically terminated by efflux of time.
The petitioner's case is that after completion of one year of probation from 171992 (the relevant clause of the Appointment letter has already been quoted above), the petitioner stood confirmed and her services could not be terminated unless the post itself is abolished.
As long as the post continues, she has right to continue.
In support of the contention, learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that there is nothing wrong in the work and conduct of the petitioner inasmuch as from 1761993 onwards the petitioner was being appointed for various periods by different appointment letters, which have been referred to above.
If the petitioner's work and conduct during the period of probation was unsatisfactory, the respondents would not have given extensions/reappointment to the petitioner.
5.
Respondents in their reply (para 9) submitted as under :-  "9.
That the averments made in para 9 of the writ petition are wrong, hence denied.
Neither any person has been appointed in place of the petitioner nor petitioner has given any particulars of the person appointed.
It is nothing else except a bald statement.
If the respondents would have work to offer and funds, they would have given appointment to the petitioner.
From bare reading of Annexure P-4, it is clear that answering respondents have nothing against the petitioner.
However, they are helpless in offering fresh appointment to the petitioner."
6.
The petitioner in her replication submitted that one Chandi Thapa was appointed as Ayah in May, 1998.
This averment has been made in the replication to rebut the written statement (para 9).
It has further been mentioned in the replication with which Annexure P-5 has been attached that on 26.2.1999 apart from various posts, two posts of Ayah were advertised for Asha Handicapped Children School, Chandimandir.
This advertisement had been issued by the office of DDMS, Headquarter Western Command, Chandimandir.
There is no rebuttal to the replication on part of the respondents.
7.
From the aforesaid facts, the following conclusions can be drawn :-  1).
The petitioner was appointed on probation for one year vide appointment letter dated 171992, copy Annexure P-2; 2).
There is nothing wrong with the work and conduct of the petitioner inasmuch as various appointment letters followed after 171992.
In other words, the petitioner had successfully completed the period of probation and no termination order was passed as per the stipulation in the order of appointment dated 171992.
Learned counsel for the respondents, however, refers to clause 8 of the appointment letter dated 1761993, which is to the following effect :- "8.
Your appointment given earlier vide letter referred in para 1 will stand terminated w.e.f.
03 July 93 (AN).
"; 3) Another person was appointed as Ayah in May, 1998 after the termination of the services of the petitioner on 3041998; and 4) The post of Ayah still exists as two posts have been advertised on 26.2.1999".
8.
After hearing the learned counsel for the petitioner, we are of the view that for all intents and purposes the petitioner became a regular Ayah.
If the post still exists and the petitioner was being given appointment as Ayah from time to time, clause 8 in the order of appointment dated 1761993 becomes meaningless inasmuch as after appointing the petitioner on probation and the post still existing, her services could only be terminated if her work and conduct during the period of probation was not satisfactory.
The respondents cannot under these circumstances act in such a manner i.e. instead of passing order of regularisation after the period of probation another order of fresh appointment on ad hoc basis was issued terminating the initial appointment given on 171992.
We also fail to see reason for not continuing the services of the petitioner specially when the posts have been advertised and there was nothing wrong in the work and conduct of the petitioner.
We are a welfare State and should not unnecessarily bid fare-well to such employees.
It cannot be lost sight of that unemployment in this country is increasing day by day and terminating the services of the petitioner who has worked since 1992 would not be in the interest of justice specially when there is nothing wrong in the work and conduct of the petitioner.
9.
Nothing said hereinabove would mean that despite there being no post of Ayah, the petitioner has a right to continue on that post.
10.
For the fore-going reasons, we allow the writ petition and direct the respondents to allow the petitioner to continue as Ayah.
11.
If anybody has been appointed pursuant to the advertisement dated 26.2.1999, even then the petitioner would be kept either by terminating the services of the junior Ayah or by creating an additional post of Ayah.
The petitioner would, however, is not allowed salary for the period she has not actually worked.
These directions be carried out immediately.
Copy of this order, attested by the Special Secretary of this Court, be given to Shri Rathee for onward transmission to the concerned quarters.
Petition allowed.