GS Singhvi, J - The petitioner who applied for recruitment as Pharmacist in pursuance of advertisement No. 1/98 issued by the Haryana Staff Selection Commission (hereinafter referred to as `the Commission') has invoked writ jurisdiction of this Court with the grievance that the Commission has arbitrarily refused to consider her candidature even though she fulfils the prescribed qualifications and in this manner her fundamental right to equality in the matter of employment has been infringed.
2.
The facts necessary for deciding the issue raised in the petition are that in the application submitted by her, the petitioner had already indicated her qualifications i.e. Matric, Pre-University, Pre-Medical, B.Sc.
(Medical), Diploma in Pharmacy and B.Ed.
Along with the application form, she enclosed attested copies of the mark-sheets and certificates showing her achievements in sports and certificate of registration with the Haryana State Pharmacy Council (hereinafter referred to as the State Council).
After scrutinising her application and the annexed documents, the concerned official of the Commission wrote the word "Eligible" on her form with the seal containing the dated 671998.
Notwithstanding this, she was not called for interview although other similarly situated persons were interviewed by the Commission.
The petitioner has challenged the Commission's decision not to interview her by describing it as arbitrary, discriminatory and violative of her fundamental right to equality in the matter of employment.
The Commission has defended its decision not to interview the petitioner on the ground that she did not fulfil the conditions of eligibility as on the last date fixed for receipt of applications i.e. 671998.
In the written statement filed by Shri DR Chawla, Secretary of the Commission, it has been averred that the registration certificate issued to the petitioner by the State Council was valid upto 31121996 only and, therefore, she could not be considered for selection as Pharmacist.
3.
We have heard Ms. Jyoti Sareen, counsel for the petitioner and Shri Jaswant Singh, Deputy Advocate General, Haryana and have carefully perused the record.
4.
Shri Jaswant Singh candidly admitted that during the course of scrutiny no defect was pointed out in the application of the petitioner and in fact she was treated eligible.
He also admitted that on the basis of her academic attainments, she would fall within the zone of consideration determined by the Commission by applying the criteria of short-listing.
But, at the same time, he defended the decision of the Commission not to interview the petitioner by arguing that as on 6.7.1988 she was not registered as Pharmacist with the State Council.
He relied on Section 34 of the Pharmacy Act, 1948 (hereinafter described as the Act) and Rule 74 of the State Pharmacy Council Rules, 1951 (hereinafter described as the Rules) and argued that in the absence of renewal of her registration after 31121996, the petitioner was rightly treated ineligible to be considered for selection as Pharmacist.
Learned counsel for the petitioner questioned the legality and correctness of the impugned decision and sought its invalidation on the ground of violation of the principles of natural justice.
Ms. Sareen submitted that after having treated her eligible the Commission could not have refused to interview her alongwith other eligible candidates and in any case, such decision could not have been taken without hearing her.
She made reference to Annexures P12, P.13 and P14 to show that the petitioner had paid the renewal fee to the State Council well within time and the failure of the concerned authority of the Council to sanction the renewal of her registration cannot be made a ground to treat her ineligible.
She further argued that if the Commission had given notice to the petitioner requiring her to produce documents to prove her eligibility with reference to the requirement of registration then she would have produced Annexure-P12 to P14 and convinced the competent authority of the Commission that in view of Section 34(3) of the Act her registration will be deemed to have been renewed by the State Council before the last date fixed for the receipt of applications.
5.
For the purpose of deciding the contentious issue, namely, whether the petitioner was registered/or deemed to have been registered with the State Council as on 671998, it will be useful to notice Section 34 of the Act and Rule 74 of the Rules.
The same read as under :- "Section 34 of the Act : Renewal Fees.
- (1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that for the retention of a name on the register after the 31st day of December of the year following the year in which the name is first entered on the register, there shall be paid annually to the State Council such renewal fee as may be prescribed, and where such direction has been made, such renewal fee shall be due to be paid before the first day of April of the year to which it relates.
(2) Where a renewal fee is not paid by the due date, the Registrar shall remove the name of the defaulter from the register : Provided that a name so removed may be restored to the register on such conditions as may be prescribed.
(3) On payment of the renewal fee, the Registrar shall issue a receipt therefor and such receipt shall be proof of renewal of registration."
Rule 74 of the Rules :  74(1).
The name of every person registered under the Act shall subject to the provisions contained in the Act as to the erasure of the entries and removal of names from the Registrar remain entered therein and registration of such person shall hold good till the 31st December of the year in which registration is made.
(2) Any person desiring to continue his registration shall submit to the Registrar an application previous to Ist April of the year to which it relates and shall forward with such application the fee prescribed in that behalf in Rule 83.
(3) The Registrar may send to any Pharmacist who has not paid his renewal fees on the Ist day of January in the year in respect of which such fee is payable, a demand for payment thereof, which demand shall be by a letter sent by post addressed to the Pharmacist at his address in the Register.
(4) When a renewal fee is not paid before the due date, the Registrar shall remove the name of the defaulter from the Register, provided that a name so removed may be restored to the Register as per Section 37 of the Act on payment of fee and penalty as prescribed in Rule 83."
Reference also deserves to be made to the notification No. S.O.
132/C-A.8/48/S-34/87 dated 4121987 issued by the Governor of Haryana under Section 34(1) of the Act vide which it was directed that for retaining one's name on the register of Pharmacists after 31st day of December, 1987, the renewal fee should be paid annually before the first day of April of the year to which renewal relates.
6.
A conjoint reading of Section 34 of the Act and Rule 74 of the Rules alongwith the notification dated 4121987 shows that for the purpose of renewal of registration the prescribed fee was/is required to be paid before first day of April of the year to which renewal relates.
Section 34(3) provides that on payment of the renewal fee, the Registration shall issue a receipt therefor and such receipt shall be proof of renewal of registration.
It is, thus, clear that the only thing which a registered Pharmacist is required to do for renewal of the registration is to deposit the prescribed fee and obtain a receipt from the Registrar.
The remaining steps leading to the grant of renewal are required to be taken by the Registrar and the officials of the State Council.
If the registered Pharmacist fails to deposit the prescribed fee, the Registrar is required to remove his/her name from the register of Pharmacists.
7.
What has happened in the present case is that 10 days before the expiry of the period of her initial registration, the petitioner paid the renewal fee to the Council which was duly acknowledged by the Registrar of the State Council on 24121996 (Annexure-P12).
She again paid the renewal fee in March 1998 and then in 1999.
Perusal of Annexure-P14 shows that the validity of her registration has been extended upto 31.12.1999.
8.
It is, thus, clear that the petitioner had taken all steps necessary for obtaining renewal of registration and by depositing the required fee, she became entitled to take the benefit of Section 34(3) of the Act.
The fact that the Registrar of the State Council did not cancel her registration on the ground of non-payment of renewal fee supports the petitioner's claim that her registration was subsisting on the last date fixed for the receipt of applications and if the Commission had asked her to produce the documents to prove her eligibility, she would have produced the necessary documents to convince the concerned authorities about her right to be considered for selection.
However, as the Commission did not point out any defect in her application and did not give any notice doubting her eligibility, the petitioner did not get the opportunity to produce the documents relating to her eligibility.
In view of this, it was impermissible for the Commission to refuse to interview her by assuming that she was not eligible.
9.
On the basis of above discussion, we hold that the Commission's decision not to interview the petitioner is arbitrary and violative of her fundamental right to equality in the matter of employment.
10.
In the result, we allow the writ petition and direct the Commission to interview the petitioner for selection as Pharmacist subject to her fulfiling other conditions of eligibility.
This shall be done within three weeks from today.
The result of her interview shall be announced at the end of three weeks period and if she is found meritorious vis-a-vis the candidates already recommended then her name shall be forwarded to the appointing authority for passing appropriate order.
Till then one post of Pharmacist shall not be filled.
Petition allowed.