Nagendra Rai, J - Heard learned counsel for the parties.
2.
The parties agree that the writ application itself be disposed of at this stage.
3.
The petitioner has filed the present writ application for quashing the order dated 1791998, as contained in Annexure-7, by which his transfer to Bokaro as Sergeant Major has been cancelled, as well as the wireless massage dated 22.9.1998 as contained in Annexure-8 by which he has been informed that he has been transferred to Madhepura, as also the order dated 16121998 as contained in Annexure-13, relieving the petitioner from Bokaro.
4.
The facts necessary for disposal of the writ application are that the petitioner, while posted at Siwan, was transferred to Bokaro vide Annexure-1.
Respondent No. 6, who was earlier posted at Bokaro, was also transferred from Bokaro to Naugachia by the same order.
Thereafter, the order, as contained in Annexure-7 was issued, by which the transfer of the petitioner to Bokaro was cancelled and the petitioner was transferred to Nalanda and the transfer of respondent No. 6 was stayed and in pursuance of that order, now the orders, as contained in Annexures-8 and 13, have been issued.
5.
The petitioner has challenged the order of transfer primarily on the ground that the order of transfer made in favour of the petitioner was cancelled wholly on arbitrary ground to accommodate respondent No. 6.
6.
The stand of respondent No. 6, on the other hand, is that when he came to know about the order of his transfer, he represented the matter and the authorities being satisfied about the genuineness of his claim stayed the order of his transfer.
7.
After having taken into consideration the facts and circumstances and after perusal of the various orders, this Court is of the opinion that the issuance of frequent transfer orders not only creates administrative problem but also causes invovenience to the officers concerned.
The petitioner was transferred to Bokaro and the joined pursuant to that order as contained in Annexure-1 and as such there was no occasion to cancel the same within a short time.
Accordingly, the orders as contained in Annexures 7, 8 and 13 are quashed and the petitioner shall be allowed to continue there till further order is passed in accordance with law for his transfer.
So far as respondent No. 6 is concerned, it appears that he was transferred to Naugachia and the person, who was posted there was transferred to Madhepura.
However, his transfer appears to have been stayed by Annexure-7.
In that view of the matter, at present respondent No. 6 is not posted anywhere and as such the order for his posting should be passed immediately by the Director General of Police who is directed to pass the order of posting of respondent No. 6 within one week from the date or production a copy of this order.
8.
It has been stated on behalf of respondent No. 6 in the counter-affidavit that his children have to appear in the examination, which is likely to be concluded by 3151999.
9.
Taking into consideration the aforesaid facts and circumstances, respondent No. 6 may be allowed to continue in the quarter till 30.6.1999.
10.
With the aforesaid observation/direction, this writ application stands/allowed.
Writ allowed.