DK Seth, J - The petitioner was a Platoon Commander in the Home Guard.
His service was terminated by an order dead 7th March, 1996.
This order is subject-matter of challenge in this writ petition.
Mr. Rajeshwari Sahai, learned counsel for the petitioner contends that the petitioner was holding a civil post as has been held in the decision in the case of Suraj Prasad Tewari v. Zila Commandant, Hamirpur, 1998(2) UPLBEC 1484 : 1998 All LJ 2174 : 1998(4) SCT 717 (Allahabad).
Therefore, his service could not be terminated without giving an opportunity as has been held in the case of Jawed Ahmad v. State of UP, 1999(1) UPLBEC 655.
On these grounds he prays that the writ petition be allowed and the impugned order be quashed.
2.
Mr. KR Singh, learned Standing Counsel on the other hand contends that S. 12 of the UP Home Guard Adhiniyam, 1963 empowers an authority to terminate the petitioner's service.
He also contends that the petitioner did not hold the civil post in view of S. 10 of the said Act.
He further contended that for the purpose of discharge or resignation of the petitioner, who was a volunteer and holding the post without any remuneration would not be equated with the same status which was involved in the decision in the case of Suran Prasad Tewari (supra) and Jawed Ahmad & others (supra).
He further contends that the petitioner's service was terminated after holding an enquiry in which he had participated and as such sufficient opportunity was given to him.
He further contends that the petitioner was a person who could not be retained in the force which is a disciplined one.
On these grounds he contends that this writ petition should be dismissed.
3.
I have heard both the learned counsel at length.
4.
Section 10 of the UP Home Guards Adhiniyam, 1963 prescribes that the Home Guard would be deemed to be a public servant but not civil servant.
He would be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of S. 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
The Explanation to S. 10 provides that a Home Guard would not be deemed to be a holder of civil post merely by reason of his enrolment as Home Guard.
This question came to be interpreed in the decision in the case of Gulam Mohammad v. State of UP, Writ Petition Nos. 29824 of 1992 and 27675 of 1992 disposed of on 23rd September, 1992 by a Division Bench comprising of the Hon'ble BM Lal and V Bahuguna, JJ as their Lordships then were.
Relying on a single Judge decision in the case of Abdul Hamid v. State of UP in Civil Misc.
Writ Petition No. 9028 of 1990 disposed of on 28th October, 1991 by Hon'ble SC Mathur, J as his Lordship then was, it was held that a Home Guard cannot compel the State Government or its officers to continue him on duty.
The payment of honorarium to a Home Guard would not change the situation and cannot compel the State Government to continue him on duty.
This very question was also dealt with in the decision in the case of Bibhuti Narain Singh v. State of UP, 1986(2) UPLBEC 1130.
But this judgment had taken a contrary view as has been taken in the case of Abdul Hamid (supra) and Gulam Mohammad (supra).
The decision in the case of Bibhuti Narain Singh was followed in the case of Dashrath Singh Parihar v. State of UP, 1997(1) AWC 376.
In the case of Bibhuti Narain Singh (supra) and Dashrath Singh Parihar (supra), this Court had taken the view that the post of Company Commander is a civil post.
5.
In the case of Suraj Prasad Tewari (supra), the petitioner was a Company Commander.
The learned single Judge in the case of Suraj Prasad Tewari (supra) had proposed to examine the various provisions in the light of the decision in the case of Bibhuti Narain Singh (supra) and Dashrath Singh Parihar (supra) with the observation that since the decisions in the case of Gulam Mohammad (supra) as well as Abdul Hamid (supra) did not notice the decision in the case of Bibhuti Narain Singh (supra), which was earlier in point of time, therefore, it would not prevent the learned single Judge from examining the issue.
After delineating on various issues and relying on various decisions cited in the said judgment, the learned single Judge had found the decision in the case of Bibhuti Narain Singh (supra) more acceptable and had followed the same holding that the post of a Company Commander in the Home Guard is a civil post attracting Art. 311 of the Constitution of India.
6.
In the present case the post is that of a Platoon Commander and not of a Company Commander.
But that would not make a difference with regard to the situation or position.
Thus I do not find any reason to disagree with the decision in the case of Suraj Prasad Tewari (supra).
Therefore, if it is found that the service of the petitioner was dispensed with without affording him an opportunity, in that event the order of termination cannot be sustained and that service of the petitioner could only be terminated after giving him an opportunity or holding an enquiry as against him if there is any stigma attached to the reason for terminating the service of the petitioner.
7.
The impugned order does not disclose that the service of the petitioner was being terminated with any stigma.
But in the counter affidavit, it has been pointed out that the petitioner was not a person fit to be retained in service on account of finding of guilt in an enquiry in which he had participated.
Therefore, according to Mr. KR Singh sufficient opportunity has been given and the principle enunciated in Art. 311 has since been, in fact and in principle, observed before terminating the service of the petitioner.
But the fact remains that the enquiry to which my attention was drawn related to an enquiry against the Company Commander Hari Shankar Singh, District Commandant on the basis of a complaint made by the petitioner.
The report of the enquiry officer is a part of Annexure CA 3 to the counter- affidavit.
A perusal of the said report shows that on the basis of the complaint made by the petitioner, the enquiry was undertaken against Sri Hari Shankar Singh in which the petitioner had submitted his statement, both written and oral.
In the said enquiry it was found that Sri Hari Shankar Singh was not guilty of the allegations made against him.
On the other hand, it was the petitioner who is guilty for the alleged violation.
It has been pointed out in the said report that the petitioner had engaged Home Guards on duty between 17th November, 1992 and 5th December, 1992 and 22nd May, 1991 till 30th May, 1991 without obtaining any direction from the higher authorities according to his own whims and was responsible for not sending the muster roll though he was asked to do so.
It was also alleged that he was an indisciplined person and that he had a meeting with the Secretary of the Chief Minister.
Therefore, he was a person unfit to be retained in the force.
On the basis of this report, another letter dated 14th February, 1996 was issued, by which an appropriate order for terminating the petitioner's service was asked for.
8.
From the above facts, it appears that the enquiry was initiated against Hari Shankar Singh on the complaint of the petitioner.
There was no enquiry in respect of any charges levelled against the petitioner, nor any was ever held.
It is preposterous to conceive that a witness could be held guilty of his own complaint against some one else.
There was no charge sheet issued to the petitioner and there was no enquiry held against him.
Even if the charges mentioned in the report are levelled against the petitioner, in that event the petitioner had every right to be afforded an opportunity to meet the charges by issuing a charge sheet and holding an enquiry against him giving proper opportunity.
9.
Admittedly, the materials disclosed in the counter affidavit inflict stigma on the petitioner.
Therefore, his service could not be dispensed with without holding an enquiry.
The fact that the petitioner was a volunteer and that he did not receive any remuneration, would not change the position in view of the decision in the case of Suraj Prasad Tewari (supra), which had dealt with all other points as has been raised as well as the decision in the case of Jawed Ahmad and others (supra).
10.
Sections 10 and 12 has been considered in the said decision and having relied on the various decisions cited in the case of Suraj Prasad Tewari (supra), it was held that the post of Home Guard is a civil post attracting application of Art. 311.
11.
In that view of the matter, the impugned order dated 7th March, 1996 is liable to be quashed and is, hereby quashed accordingly.
12.
Let a writ of certiorari do issue accordingly.
13.
Since the petitioner is a volunteer and had been serving without any remuneration, therefore, there is no question of payment of back wages.
However, it will be open to the respondents to pass appropriate order after holding an enquiry and giving an opportunity to the petitioner, if it is so advised.
14.
The writ petition is thus allowed and disposed of.
No cost.
15.
Let a copy of this order by issued to the learned counsel on payment of usual charges at the earliest.
Petition allowed.