VM Sahai, J - The petitioner was appointed on daily wages as Chowkidar in newly created Sub-Treasury Office, Jakhania, District Ghazipur under the order of District Magistrate dated 8-1-90 by letter dated 20-1-90.
From 4-3- 92 the respondents stopped taking work from him.
The petitioner challenged the action of the respondents by means of writ petition No. 11544 of 1992 which was disposed of finally on 8-4-92 directing the District Magistrate to dispose of the representation of the petitioner as to whether any termination order was passed by the respondents or not.
The District Magistrate called for a report from the Treasury Officer, Ghazipur who submitted his report on 29-7-92 which was approved by the District Magistrate on 3-7-92 and the representation of the petitioner stood decided.
The respondents on application dated 31-7-92 by the petitioner by an undated letter informed him about the order dated 30-7-92 by which his representation was rejected.
The petitioner challenged the communication made to him by the Treasury Officer, Ghazipur by Annexure IV to the writ petition as well as the order of District Magistrate dated 30-7-92.
The order of District Magistrate dated 30-7-92 by which the representation was rejected was provided to the petitioner on the direction of this Court dated 24-9-92 subsequently on 28-11-92 which has been filed by him along with the application dated 7-5-93.
Petitioner has challenged the order dated 30-7-92 and its communication Annexure 4 to the petition by means of the present writ petition.
2.
In paragraph 3 of the counter-affidavit it has been stated by the respondents that the petitioner was appointed on daily wage for short term as Chaukidar by order dated 8-1-90 and he joined on 23-1-90 on consolidated salary.
His services were not required any more by the respondents, therefore he was orally disengaged.
The petitioner has got no right to claim any appointment being a daily wager.
In paragraph 8 of the counter-affidavit it was stated that the Sub-Treasury at Jakhania started working w.e.f.
2-12-92 and from that date the petitioner's service automatically ceased.
3.
I have heard Shri Siddharth Verma holding brief of Shri.
SK Verma learned counsel for the petitioner and Shri VJ Sahai, learned standing counsel appearing for the respondents.
4.
The petitioner was appointed under the order of the District Magistrate dated 8-1-90 and appointment letter dated 20-1-90 was issued to him which has been filed as Annexure 1 to the petition.
The issuance of appointment letter by the respondents is also not disputed in paragraph 3 of the counter-affidavit.
The respondents admitted that they have issued appointment to the petitioner under the order of District Magistrate dated 8-1-90.
The District Magistrate in his order dated 30-7-92 held that since no appointment letter was issued by the respondents, therefore, it was not necessary to pass any order terminating the services of the petitioner.
The respondents had admitted in paragraph 3 of the counter-affidavit that the petitioner was appointed in pursuance of order dated 8-1-90.
The issuance of appointment letter dated 20-1-90 has not been denied by the respondents.
It does not mention that the appointment of the petitioner was for a fixed period or short term.
Therefore, the order of District Magistrate dated 30-7-92 stating that there was no appointment letter issued to the petitioner is contrary to the record.
Since the petitioner was appointed under the order dated 8-1-90 and appointment letter was also issued to the petitioner on 20-1-90 which was not a fix or short term appointment, therefore, the petitioner's service could not be terminated orally.
The respondents could have terminated the services of the petitioner only by a written order in order dated 30-7-92 the District Magistrate has stated that no work was taken from the petitioner after 30-4-91 whereas in the counter-affidavit it has been stated that the petitioner ceased from working as Chowkidar from 2-12-92 when the new Sub-Treasury at Jakhania started functioning.
Therefore, it is clear that the respondents are taking self-contradictory stand in order to deprive the petitioner of his service.
5.
Admittedly no written termination order was passed by the respondents.
The respondents could not terminate the service of the petitioner by an oral order.
The petitioner was appointed by a written order and his service could be terminated only by a written order.
In absence of any written order terminating the service of the petitioner, the petitioner was illegally prevented by the respondents from performing his duties as Chowkidar.
The action of respondents was illegal and arbitrary and cannot be maintained.
6.
In the result this writ petition succeeds and is allowed.
The order of District Magistrate dated 30-7-92 and its communication Annexure 4 to the writ petition are quashed.
The petitioner shall be reinstated in service and shall also be paid his entire arrears of salary.
The aforesaid directions shall be complied by the respondents within a period of two months from the date a certified copy of this order is produced before the respondents.
Petitioner shall be entitled to his costs.
Petition allowed.