RL Anand, J - The only contention raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner is that the impugned order Annexure P-2, cannot sustain in the eye of law as the said order has been passed in violation of Rule 162 of the Punjab Police Rules, as applicable to the State of Haryana.
The learned counsel, Shri Balhara, submitted that it was obligatory on the part of the punishing authority before passing the order Annexure P-2 to take into consideration the length of service of the petitioner and his claim of pension.
Shri Balhara further submitted that the petitioner joined the service undisputedly on 1331973 and the impugned order was passed on 811993 and in this manner the petitioner virtually served 20 years in the Police Department.
As per the Rules, the petitioner has earned the pension after doing service of 10 years.
The maximum penalty of dismissal has been imposed and the effect of the dismissal is that the petitioner even cannot serve any other Department.
In such a situation the punishing authority ought to have applied its mind as to whether the petitioner should be deprived of his bread and butter even after the passing of the dismissal order.
I concur with the arguments raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
Rule 162 of the Police Rules clearly makes out that "dismissal shall be awarded only for the gravest acts of misconduct or as the cumulative effect of continued misconduct proving incorrigibility and complete unfitness for police service.
In making such an award regard shall be had to the length of service of the offender and his claim to pension."
The legislature has used these words in an obligatory manner upon the punishing authority, which is bound to see whether the petitioner has earned a right to the pension and whether such a public service (servant ?)
should be deprived of his pensionary benefits or not.
It is the admitted position that right to pension is a civil right.
Before a civil right of a public servant is to be deprived, it was obligatory upon the punishing authority to touch this aspect in the impugned order Annexure P-2 dated 811993.
The reading of the impugned order would show that the punishing authority i.e. the Superintendent of Police, Hisar, has not applied his proper mind on this aspect of the case and in this view of the matter the impugned order Annexure P-2 followed by order Annexure P-3, have to be struck down and I order accordingly.
2.
Resultantly, the present petition is hereby allowed.
The impugned orders Annexures P-2 and P-3, are hereby set aside with the observation that it will always be open to the punishing authority to pass fresh order qua the petitioner in accordance with the observations made by this Court in this order and after complying with the procedure of law.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.