Basudeva Panigrahi, J - This writ application has been directed against an order passed by the Appellate Authority in Appeal Case No. P.G.
7 of 1995 against out of the application 48(49)/94-E.3 under Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972.
After the enactment of Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act, 1973 the right, title and interest of all collieries mentioned in the schedule were transferred to and vested in the Central Government by an appropriate notification issued in exercise of the power conferred under the Act.
The right, title and interest of the said collieries were transferred and vested in the Coal Mines Authority Ltd, a Government Company which was subsequently designated as Coal India Limited.
The petitioner is a subsidiary of Coal India Limited and has been managing various collieries in the eastern region.
2.
One Bachulal Hela was an employee of the Mines Rescue Station Committee which was an autonomous body.
The said Company terminated the service of Bachulal Hela with effect from 31st March, 1985.
The management of the company was taken over by the petitioner company with effect from Ist April, 1985.
Since the father of the respondent No. 1 retired before the company was taken over by the petitioner, the question of taking any option from him did not and could not arise.
The petitioner further averred that at no stage there was any relationship between the employer and the employee.
3.
Bachulal Hela raised a dispute by stating that his date of birth was wrongly noted in the records by the erstwhile company but the Ministry of Labour had, however, turned down the representation of Hela.
Thereafter he approached the conciliatory machinery of the Government of India, Ministry of Labour.
They too failed and therefore an industrial dispute had been raised and referred to the Central Government Industrial Tribunal, Asansol.
The dispute centered round between the petitioner and Bachulal Hela as to whether his retirement from service with effect from Ist April, 1986 was justified or not.
During the pendency of the dispute there was a settlement between the company and Bachulal Hela.
The terms of the settlement were as follows :-  "(1) That Shri Bachulal Hela the workman concerned will be sent for determination of his age to the Medical Board of the Government Sanctoria Hospital within 15 days from date.
(2) That the parties shall be bound by the finding of the Apex Medical Board.
(3) That in case according to the findings of the Medical Board the workman concerned Shri Bachulal is found below 60 (sixty) years of age, the workman will be allowed to resume his duty in his original post of Safaiwala.
(4) That for period of idleness from 1485 till date be resumes duty in terms of para (3) above, the workman shall be paid 50% of his wages within 2 (Two) months from the date of he resumes duty.
By the settlement the instant matter and other incidental matters arising out of instant reference shall be fully or finally resolved.
(5) That this settlement will be effective from the date it is accepted by the Tribunal."
4.
Since the terms of settlement were found to be fair and reasonable, the Presiding Officer of the Central Government Industrial Tribunal, Asansol passed the Award in terms of settlement.
Bachulal's age assessed by the Medical Board to be 60 years as on 29th August, 1988.
He filed an application under Section 33-C(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 before the Central Government Industrial Tribunal, Asansol claiming for leave salary dues on account of annual increment and bonus or ex-gratia.
The said application was numbered as LC application 14/92.
5.
The writ petitioner received notice in Form No. O as per sub-rule (1) of rule 11 of Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 on or about 15.4.94 requiring him to appear before the respondent No. 3.
The respondent No. 1's father claimed gratuity for a sum of Rs. 31,70755 plus interest.
The respondent No. 3 calculated the gratuity at Rs. 10,364.92 and it has further directed to pay gratuity from 29th August, 1988 till 31st August, 1988 for the full month as per NCWA-III and IV.
The gratuity for those three days was assessed at Rs. 5055 over and above the amount of Rs. 10,364.92.
During the pendency of the appeal the father of the respondent No. 1 died.
Therefore, he was substituted as the appellant.
The matter was remitted back again to the respondent No. 3 for further investigation of the case, but, however, the respondent No. 3 maintained his previous order.
Thereafter the Appellate Authority on being approached by the respondent No. 1 modified the order by directing the petitioner to pay gratuity to the respondent No. 1 of Rs. 31,09860.
Therefore, being aggrieved by the aforesaid direction of the appellate authority the writ petitioner has filed this case.
6.
The learned advocate appearing for the petitioner has strongly contended that the appellate authority has calculated the gratuity on a wrong premises from 31st March, 1985 still 31st August, 1988 on the assumption of full wage.
It has been submitted that the settlement arrived between the petitioner and the father of the respondent No. 1 has revealed that he would be entitled to 50% of the wages till he resumed duties.
But since he was deemed to have been superannuated without assuming his duties on 29th August, 1988 at the age of 60 as per the report of the Medical Board, he could not have claimed full wages.
7.
The learned advocate appearing for the respondent No. 1, however, by repelling the submission of the petitioner urged that from 31st March, 1985 till 31st August, 1988 the respondent No. 1 was treated to be in employment and, therefore, he is entitled to gratuity for those period.
Another contention has been raised that the petitioner did not have any obligation to pay gratuity to the respondent No. 1's father inasmuch as he was allowed to retire from service with effect from 31st March, 1985.
The petitioner having taken possession on and from Ist April, 1985, therefore, it has no obligation to pay any service benefit to the respondent No. 1.
I found such contention has no substantial merits since the petitioner has given all service benefits to the father of the respondent No. 1 except the gratuity.
There was a settlement between them before the Tribunal.
It is too late to contend that the petitioner has no obligation to pay any gratuity amount to the respondent No. 1.
It is found from the record that a portion of the gratuity amount has been already paid.
In that view of the matter the petitioner shall not be permitted to avoid payment of gratuity amount.
8.
While appreciating the contentions of both parties, it is necessary to quote the definition of `Wages' defined in Section 2 of the Payment of Gratuity Act -  "2(s) Wages means all emoluments which are earned by an employee while on duty or on leave in accordance with the terms and conditions of his employment which are paid or payable to him in cash and includes D.A., but does not include any bonus, Commission, House Rent Allowance, Over-time wages and any other allowance."
9.
In this case the company had unduly terminated the services of the father of the respondent No. 1 before his retirement with effect from 31st March, 1985.
The petitioner-company has assessed his age at 60 years as on 29th August, 1988.
In the above situation the father of the respondent No. 1 would be deemed to have been working till that day, i.e. till he attained 60 years.
Therefore, he should have been given benefit till 31st August, 1988.
The father of the respondent No. 1 since unduly was terminated from attending his duties from Ist April, 1985 till 31st August, 1988, therefore, in the above context he shall be deemed to have performed his duties and it shall also be presumed as wage earned.
10.
The provision of the Payment of Gratuity Act has been made as a benevolent measure to provide some privileges to the workmen.
As per section 2(s) it appears that the wages means all emoluments which are earned by the employee while on duty.
It is to be noted that he should be on duty till 31st August, 1988.
Therefore, in this background I do not find that the appellate authority has committed any illegality by passing the impugned order.
Gratuity is payable on superannuation or on retirement.
Since the superannuation is effective from 31st August, 1988 till that date the father of the respondent No. 1 is entitled to get the benefits.
From the provision of sub-section (5) of section 4 of the Gratuity Act it has appeared that the employee's right shall not affect to receive better terms of gratuity under any Award or Agreement of Contract with the employer so also the reverse.
Therefore, in the above situation even though there was a settlement, there cannot be any provision of curtailment of the Gratuity which the father of the respondent No. 1 was otherwise entitled to.
11.
After due and careful consideration of the facts and in the circumstances, the judgment of the Appellate Authority cannot however, be regarded to have suffered from any vice, such as illegality and material illegality, so that this court could have exercised its Writ Jurisdiction.
12.
Accordingly the writ petition is dismissed but in the circumstances without costs.
Petition dismissed.