Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner is working as Executive Engineer (Horticulture Division) with the Haryana Urban Development Authority.
He claims to be senior to Mr. Jogi Ram, respondent No. 2.
The petitioner's representation to the authority having been rejected vide order dated November 9, 1999, he has filed this petition.
The petitioner prays that the order, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-7 with the writ petition, be quashed.
He further prays that he be treated as senior to respondent No. 2 and that respondent No. 1 be directed to consider and promote him to the post of Superintending Engineer.
2.
We have heard Mr. Surya Kant, learned Counsel for the petitioner.
3. it is admitted that the respondent authority had issued a tentative seniority list on May 1, 1982 of Horticulture Officers.
In this list respondent No. 2 was placed at No. 1.
Petitioner had been placed at No. 2.
According to the writ petition, the petitioner had represented and ultimately issued a legal notice on March 19, 1996.
Since the authority had not taken any decision, the petitioner had filed C.W.P.
No. 17608 of 1998 before this Court.
That writ petition was decided vide order dated November 17, 1998.
The Division Bench had disposed of the petition with a direction to the authority to consider and decide the legal notice dated 1931996.
It was in pursuance of this direction that the impugned order dated November 9, 1999 was passed.
4.
This petition was listed before the Bench yesterday.
Since the tentative seniority list had been issued in May, 1982 and the claim for seniority was being agitated before the bench in the year 1999, we had asked the learned counsel for the petitioner as to why the petition be not dismissed on the ground of delay.
In this context, the counsel was also asked as to whether or not the list, though tentative, which had been issued in the year 1982, had been acted upon.
The counsel had prayed for adjournment to enable him to obtain instructions.
The case was kept for today.
The counsel has now stated before us that the list had been acted upon.
The respondent No. 2 had been promoted from the post of Horticulture Officer to that of Executive Engineer in July, 1986.
The petitioner was promoted as Executive Engineer after almost 5 years in May, 1991.
Thus, it is clear that the impugned seniority list had been effectively implemented and that promotion had been made on the basis thereof.
It is also admitted that the promotion of respondent No. 2 which had been made in July, 1986 was not challenged by the petitioner at any stage.
Resultantly, it is clear that the seniority list framed in the year 1982 had been challenged by the petitioner through a legal notice for the fist time in the year 1996.
There is nothing on record to show that the petitioner had even raised his little finger during the span of 14 years.
It is in pursuance to ex parte direction given by the Bench in the year 1998 that the impugned order was passed.
The factum of delay, thus, stares us in the face.
5.
Irrespective of the above even on merits, we find no infirmity in the action of the authority in treating respondent No. 2 as senior to the petitioner.
A perusal of the impugned order shows that respondent No. 2 had been appointed as a Horticulture Officer with the respondent authority on July 21, 1979.
At that time, he was employed with the State Government.
He, however, had submitted a resignation and accepted the offer of appointment made by the authority.
As against this, the petitioner was taken on deputation by the respondent authority.
He had continued on deputation till June 2, 1981 whereafter he had made a request for his permanent absorption on the post of Horticulture Officer with the respondent authority.
This request was accepted vide memorandum dated August 4, 1981 when he was taken as a fresh recruit with effect from June 3, 1981.
In other words, the petitioner had become an employee of the respondent authority on June 3, 1981.
The respondent was a direct recruit to the post of Horticulture Officer since July 21, 1979.
It is in this situation that the authority has considered the respondent as senior to the petitioner.
Added to this is the fact that the respondent had been promoted as Executive Engineer in July, 1986 while the petitioner had been promoted in May, 1991.
Thus, the respondent had joined service on the post of Horticulture Officer about 2 years prior to the petitioner.
He was promoted as Executive engineer about 5 years before the petitioner.
On both the posts he had served the authority for longer periods.
Consequently, he has been rightly treated as senior.
No rule is shown to have been violated.
6.
No other point has been raised.
7.
In view of the above, we find no merit in this writ petition.
It is consequently dismissed in limine.
Petition dismissed.