Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - C.M.
allowed.
Documents produced with the application are taken on record.
2.
The petitioner was working as a Security Guard at the Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research.
On June 8, 1999 the petitioner submitted a resignation to the Director.
He stated that it may be treated "as 24 hours' notice".
This resignation was forwarded by the Security Officer on the same date.
The petitioner's request was accepted vide letter dated June 17, 1999.
A copy of the office order accepting the petitioner's request has been produced as Annexure P-2 with the writ petition.
Thereafter, the petitioner's wife submitted a representation dated July 13, 1999 praying that the request made by her husband may not be acceded to.
Two days later the petitioner made a similar request vide his letter dated July 15, 1999.
Copies of these two communications have been produced as Annexure P-3 and P-4 with the writ petition.
Thereafter, the petitioner and his wife repeated their request.
Vide letter dated August 18, 1999, the Director informed the petitioner that his request cannot be acceded to.
Aggrieved by the action of the respondent-institute in accepting the petitioner's resignation, he has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
The petitioner alleges that the action of the respondent in accepting the resignation is illegal and that his request for withdrawal could not have been rejected.
He prays that the orders dated June 17, 1999 and August 18, 1999, copies of which have been produced as Annexures P-2 and P-7, be quashed.
3.
We have heard Mr. Maanipur, learned counsel for the petitioner.
He contends that the petitioner's wife was not well and therefore, he had submitted the resignation.
Since the petitioner has not deposited one month's salary, the authority could not have accepted the resignation.
4.
Admittedly, the petitioner had submitted his resignation vide letter dated June 8, 1999.
It was his own request that the letter may be treated as 24 hours notice.
This request was accepted by the authority.
Vide letter dated June 17, 1999 the petitioner's resignation was accepted.
He was informed about it vide endorsement dated June 19, 1999.
It was only thereafter that the petitioner's wife had made the request for allowing him to continue in service.
Subsequently, even the petitioner had made the similar request.
The matter was considered by the Director and the request was declined.
In the process no illegality is shown to have been committed.
5.
Learned counsel has not referred to any rule under which the petitioner may have been required to give 30 days notice.
However, even if it is assumed that he was expected to give the notice it would make no difference in the instant case as failure to give notice would have only entitled the institute to deduct one month's wages of the petitioner.
So far as he is concerned, he cannot say that the resignation could not have been accepted.
Still further, by the impugned order at Annexure P-2 the Financial Advisor had been asked to recover one month's salary from the petitioner's emoluments.
Thus, even the requirement of notice was duly complied with.
6.
No other point has been raised.
7.
There is no merit in this writ petition.
8.
It is, accordingly, dismissed in limine.
Petition dismissed.