Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was appointed as an Air Conditioning Mechanic by the Bhakra Beas Management Board.
A copy of the letter dated June, 1998 is at Annexure P-1.
The appointment was "only upto 30.9.1998".
Vide letter dated August 11, 1998, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-3, the petitioner was informed that he was neither taking interest while performing duty nor had he any knowledge about the job.
He was advised in his "own interest to perform duty carefully and show improvement...." Thereafter, as the petitioner alleges, his service were terminated on September 30, 1998.
However, he has not produced a copy of the order of the alleged termination.
2.
We have heard Mr. Gurnam Singh.
He submits that the action of the respondents in terminating petitioner's services is wholly illegal.
3.
Admittedly, the petitioner had been appointed upto September 30, 1998.
His services were not extended beyond that date.
The obvious reason was as conveyed to him vide letter dated August 11, 1998.
We find no infirmity in the action which may call for interfernce in proceedings under Articles 226 of the Constitution.
4.
Mr. Gurnam Singh contends that the imposition of the condition that the petitioner's appointment shall be only upto September 30, 1998 was itself arbitrary.
We find no ground to sustain such a claim.
Learned counsel concedes that the plant with the respondent board is only for cooling and not for heating.
Thus, the air conditioning work is only during the summer months and not during winter.
If in view of this factual position, the employer had granted employment to the petitioner till September 30, 1998, it cannot be said that the action was arbitrary or unfair.
5.
Mr. Gurnam Singh has referred to the decision of a Division Bench of this Court in Rajni Bala v. State of Haryana, 1993(1) SCT 714.
This was a case of ad hoc appointment of a teacher in the Government Vocational Education Institute.
The factual and legal position in case of educational institutes is totally different from the case of an Air Conditioning Mechanic with the respondent board.
6.
The petitioner had been offered appointment only till September 30, 1998.
He was informed that if this condition is acceptable he may report for duty.
A specific observation in that behalf had been made in paragraph 4.
He had accepted this condition without any objection.
In our view, it would not even be fair to allow him to object to this condition after he had voluntarily accepted it.
7.
No other point has been raised.
8.
No ground for interference is made out.
Writ petition is accordingly dismissed in limine.
Petition dismissed.