SB Sinha, J - These two writ applications being inter-related were taken up for hearing together and are being disposed of by this common judgment.
2.
Lands of the predecessors-in-interest of the petitioners were acquired under the provisions of the West Bengal Requisition and Acquisition Act, 1948 being Act No. II of 1948 by notifications dated 17-10-77 and 13-10-79.
The petitioners relied on a circular letter issued by the State Government, in terms whereof the authorities of the State Government need not refer the matter relating to the employment, in several categories of cases, one of them being -  "(1) the candidates hailing from families who might have been uprooted from their places of residence as a result of the land in question being acquired by the Govt. for development projects like setting up a power plant or a township etc., as in Haldia, only one member from an uprooted family shall be eligible for such special preference for jobs in and around the area acquired."
3.
Mr. Kamlesh Bhattacharya, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner, submits that keeping in view the stand taken by the respondent-authority that such appointments are granted, the petitioners ought to have been appointed.
The learned Counsel in support of his aforementioned contention has also relied upon a decision in Calcutta Port Trust v. Deba Prasad Bag, AIR 1994 SC 2137 : 1994(3) SCT 407 (SC).
4.
Mr. Jayanta Bhattacharya, learned counsel and Ms. Manashi Bhattacharya, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents, submits that the petitioners have no legal right to be appointed.
5.
There cannot be any doubt whatsoever that in terms of the provision of the Act II of 1948 or the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, persons whose lands are acquired are entitled to monetary compensation.
They cannot by reason of acquisition of lands only claim any right to be appointed in violation of the provisions of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
The Acts aforementioned make clear provision as regards the amount the evicted would be receiving by way of compensation.
6.
However, although there is nothing on record to show that the aforementioned circular letter dated 17th October, 1997 as contained in Annexure `C' to the writ application was adopted by the respondent which is a statutory authority constituted under the provisions of the Calcutta Metropolitan Development Authority Act, it appears from the affidavits-in-opposition that such employments in exempted category are granted.
It is stated that the claim of employment under the exempted category is restricted to 30% of the total number of vacancies available within a year.
Out of the said 30% limit priority has to be given to the person seeking job by reasons of "died in harness", "suffering from permanent disability" and "loss of life for participation in political movement".
After fulfilling the requirement of those under priority category the jobs available for "acquisition of land" category would be very nominal in a year or not at all, further the application for job under "acquisition of land" category is not open indefinitely to the persons who were affected.
The applications are to be made within a reasonable time.
But in the present case the petitioners made an application after a long gap."
7.
In the instant case, admittedly, the petitioners were minor at the relevant time and filed their applications for relevant time and filed their applications for appointment in the year 1991.
In the writ application itself it is admitted that the said applications for appointment of the petitioner had been rejected on the ground stated therein as would appear from paragraph 7 of the writ application.
The respondents have further stated that although allegations of the petitioners to the effect that some other persons have been appointed, no appointment could be provided to those persons as they were not entitled to get employment under the Calcutta Metropolitan Development Authority apart from the fact that there had been no sufficient vacancy for their absorption.
It has been contended that the employment of the petitioners on compassionate ground could not be entertained inasmuch there was no vacancy in the respective years for absorption of those persons and they have no legal obligation therefor.
In Calcutta Port Trust (AIR 1994 SC 2137) (supra), it appears that the communication of the State Government had been accepted by a resolution of the Calcutta Port Trust held in a meeting on 27-8-78.
In the aforementioned judgment itself it has been held that the respective cases of the parties were required to be considered by the Screening Committee and such a procedure adopted is a valid one.
Mr. Kamalesh Bhattacharya, learned counsel, has submitted that the respondent should be directed to produce the panel prepared for that purpose.
But keeping in view the fact that admittedly the land belonged to the predecessor-in-interest of the petitioners as admitted, as far back as 1978-79 and the petitioners applied for the said posts in the year 1991, the same itself is sufficient ground for rejecting this writ application.
It is now well-known that appointment on compassionate ground (instant category may of course does not fall thereunder) is an exception to the provisions of Article 16 of the Constitution of India.
An exception to this category may not even fall within such exempted category in view of several Supreme Court decisions but assuming that such a scheme could be made, the same being for a particular purpose, the petitioners could not have slept over their rights for a long time and file an application for appointment only upon acquisition of certain educational qualifications after a period of twelve years.
Such schemes are made for the purpose of grant of immediate relief to the affected families and not for guaranteeing employment to a person in the family apart from monetary compensation awarded for acquiring their land.
8.
For the reasons aforementioned, there is no merit in this application, which is dismissed accordingly.
There will be no order as to costs.
Application dismissed.