VK Bali, J (Oral) - Mast Ram, husband of the petitioner, died on December 19, 1989, while in service.
She had to file Civil Writ Petition No. 10725 of 1992 in this Court for family person and other post-retiral benefits admissible to her on account of death of her husband.
The writ aforesaid came up for hearing on December 14, 1992.
Operative part of the said order reads as under :-  "The writ petition is disposed of with the direction to the respondents to decide the claim of the petitioner for the grant of medical reimbursement and payment of interest on the late payment of General Provident Fund, death-cum-retirement gratuity, ex-gratia payment and deposit linked insurance scheme within two months from the receipt of copy of this order."
It is the case of the petitioner that but for paying interest of GPF the respondents have not paid any interest nor any specific order declining interest on the heads other than GPF was ever passed by the respondents, thus constraining the petitioner to file this petition.
2.
From the pleadings of the parties, it is quite clear that a sum of Rs. 82,560/- on account of death-cum-retirement gratuity was paid to the petitioner in March, 1991 whereas an amount of Rs. 30,000/- on account of ex-gratia was paid to her on September 17, 1990 and insofar as deposit linked insurance Scheme is concerned, the petitioner was paid an amount of Rs. 10,000/- on January 2, 1992.
There is absolutely no justification for delaying these payments to the petitioner.
Nothing at all has been urged by the State counsel during the course of arguments that may at all show any justification in making the aforesaid payments so late.
3.
In view of the fact that payment on various heads, as mentioned above, has been delayed without any justifiable cause, petitioner is held entitled to interest.
In over-all facts and circumstances of this case, respondents are directed to pay interest @ 10% per annum on various amounts, referred to above from March 1, 1990, i.e. about three months after husband of the petitioner died, till the time payment on the aforesaid heads was actually made over to the petitioner.
Parties are, however, left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.