NK Sodhi, J (Oral) - Appellants are Steno-typists working in different departments of the State of Haryana.
They filed a petition under Article 226 of the Constitution for a direction to the respondent to fix their pay in the scale of Rs. 1200-2040 with effect from 111986 besides the special pay already drawn by them.
They sought parity in the pay scales with the Sub- Divisional Clerks on the ground that prior to 111986 they were in the same pay scale.
It may be mentioned that the pay scales in the State of Haryana were revised with effect from 111986 and the grievance of the appellants is that the Sub-Divisional Clerks were given the scale of Rs. 1200-2040 whereas they were given a lower scale with special pay.
2.
It is strenuously contended by the learned counsel for the appellants that the academic qualifications for the post of Steno-typists and Sub- Divisional Clerks is Matriculation and, therefore, the appellants are entitled to the same scale of pay as given to the Sub-Divisional Clerks.
It is also the case of the appellants that in terms of Rule 9(1)(d) of the Haryana Public Works Department Buildings and Roads Branch (State Service Group-C Ministerial Establishment of Subordinate Offices) Rules, the Sub-Divisional Clerks as also the Steno-typists are entitled to promotion to the next higher post of Accounts Clerks/Assistants and, therefore, the posts of Steno-typists and Sub-Divisional Clerks have been equated and for this reason as well the parity in their pay scales with the Sub-Divisional Clerks needs to be maintained.
The claim of the appellants was rejected by the learned Single Judge as according to him the pay scales of Steno-typists could not be equated with the Sub-Divisional Clerks working in various departments of the Government as there is no comparison in the nature of their duties even though the academic qualification for the purpose of entry into service may be the same.
We are in agreement with the learned single Judge that the question regarding the nature of duties attached to each post and the pay scales that should be fixed for each category of employees are matters for the expert committees like the Pay Commissions to determine and this Court in the very nature of things cannot examine those matters.
Merely because more than one categories of employees in different departments were given the same scale of pay prior to 111986 will not justify the appellants to claim that the parity should be maintained even after the revision of pay scales.
The fact that the appellants were drawing the same scale of pay as those of Sub-Divisional Clerks would not lead to the inference that they were put at par by the Government by a conscious decision.
The fallacy in the argument of the learned counsel for the appellants will be noticed immediately when we find that even Wild Life Inspectors were put in the same scale of pay as that of the appellants prior to 111986 and after revision they have been given even a higher scale of Rs. 1350-2200.
If the arguments of the appellants were to be accepted then the Sub-Divisional Clerks should have been given parity in the pay scale with the Wild Life Inspectors as well who were discharing totally different duties in different set of circumstances.
We are of the view that the employees belonging to a particular category could insist on parity in the pay scales being maintained only if at any earlier point of time the Government by a conscious decision had equated the two categories of employees at par for purposes of pay scales after considering their nature of duties and the conditions of their service.
Admittedly, there has been no such decision in the instant case.
However, in the event of Government treating the two categories of employees at par at any point of time wants to give different pay scales to those categories at a later stage, it will be for the Government to give justification for such a departure.
It could only be a co-incidence that some categories of employees including the appellants, the Sub-Divisional Clerks and the Wild Life Inspectors along with some others were given the same scale of pay prior to the revision of scales with effect from 111986.
3.
In the result, we concur with the findings recorded by the learned single Judge and dismiss the appeal.
Appeal dismissed.