PK Mohanty, J - The petitioner assails the order of the District Judge, Cuttack refusing to extend the benefit of rehabilitation employment under the Orissa Civil Service (Rehabilitation Assistance) Rules, 1990.
2.
The short facts of the case are that the petitioner's father Sri Dhuleswar Senapati was working as Process Sever in the establishment of the District and Sessions Judge, Cuttack.
He suffered from serious ailment leading to chronic Duodonal Ulcer as well as Arthritis in knee and remained on commuted leave from 161992 to 31.12.1992 and he was medically certified to be completely incapable, for rendering further service due to such ailment.
Dhuleswar Senapati made an application to the District Judge, Cuttack on 781992 for premature retirement in terms of Orissa Civil Service (Rehabilitation Assistance) Rules, 1990 (hereinafter referred to as "the Rehabilitation Rules") and prayed for employing his son in his place.
The District Judge, however, passed an order that he may take retirement on health ground if he so likes, but no employment in his place can be made, without even referring him to Medical Board and conducting any enquiry.
It is asserted that he being a poor man and having no other earning member in his family and having remained on earned leave, his son ought to have been allowed an employment in his place to save his family from distress.
However, he was compelled by circumstances to join the duty even with his ailing condition and again he has to be on leave from 1351993 to 3061993 and half-day leave from 171993 to 1511994 and his health condition was such that it was impossible for him to join the duty.
The said Dhuleswar Senapati, father of the petitioner was directed by the Registrar, Civil Courts to appear before the Medical Board.
The CDMO, Cuttack issued a certificate that he was permanently incapable for further service, copy of which is Annexure-2.
The District Judge by order dated 26.5.1994 allowed him to retire with effect from 3151994.
An application was again made on 19.9.95 under Rule 8 of the Rehabilitation Rules for appointing the present petitioner who was prosecuting his +2 Arts course in a suitable post.
3.
It is submitted that the petitioner's father said Dhuleswar Senapati had rendered 29 years of service and due to his incapacitation he having opted for compulsory retirement, having five years and ten months of service as on 791992, his application was turned down even though a number of posts in Class-III and Class-IV in the establishment of District and Sessions Judge, Cuttack were available.
The second application has been turned down on the plea that he did not have minimum five years of service by the date he made the second application and as such, no employment could be given.
4.
The opposite parties have filed a comprehensive counter-affidavit stating inter alia that Sri Dhuleswar Senapati, father of the petitioner remained on commuted leave from 161992 to 31.12.1992 and during this leave he made application on 791992 for his invalid retirement on health ground praying inter alia to provide employment to his son.
The District Judge on 23.9.1993 passed the following orders :  "Sri Senapati may take retirement on his health ground, if he so likes, but no employment of his son can be made on the Rehabilitation Scheme."
It is alleged that after communication of the order he did not make any application between 1101992 and 1881993 expressing his intention for invalid retirement, but subsequently on 1991993 filed an application for providing employment under the Rehabilitation Scheme.
It is stated that by the time he made the application on 1991993, the petitioner's father had less than five years of service and as such, his application could not be allowed in view of Rule 9(5) of the Rehabilitation Rules.
According to the opposite parties, the object of the scheme is to save the family of a Government servant from immediate distress in case he suddenly dies or is permanently incapacitated and it cannot be claimed as a matter of right and since the applicant was seeking voluntary retirement on health ground on condition, no order was passed on his application for his medical examination and orders were passed that he may take voluntary retirement, but no employment can be given.
5.
In view of the rival contentions of the parties the moot question that arises for consideration is, as to whether the action of the employer, the District Judge, Cuttack in rejecting his application dated 791992 for invalid retirement on health ground and employment of his son was legal and valid and the second application made by him being at a time when he had less than five years of service, the refusal to accommodate his son under the scheme was justified.
6.
The scheme of Rehabilitation Assistance as contemplated under the Orissa Civil Service (Rehabilitation Assistance) Rules, 1990 is as a compassionate measure to save the family of a Government servant from immediate distress when the Government servant dies or is permanently incapacitated.
The appointment of the family member shall be subject to the provisions contained in Rule 9.
Under Rule 5, in deserving case a member of the family of a Government servant who is permanently incapacitated, may be appointed in any Class-III or Class-IV post by the appointing authority provided, he possesses the requisite minimum educational qualification prescribed for the post without following due procedure for the post under the statutory provisions/rules.
On receipt of an application, the appointing authority is to make a requisition to the Collector of the district in which the family ordinarily reside calling upon a report as to whether the family was in financial distress and the Collector in turn, has to furnish the report after due enquiry.
The appointing authority on receipt of the report is required to consider the same and appoint the applicant if the report is favourable in a suitable vacancy.
Under the Rules, even if a vacancy does not exist under the administrative control of the appointing authority he may forward the application to the head of the Department with suitable recommendation.
Sub-rule (5) of R. 9 of the Rehabilitation Rules contemplates that a Government servant who had sought for retirement on the ground of invalidness within last five years of his service before the date of his normal superannuation, shall not be eligible for rehabilitation employment.
7.
The father of the petitioner made an application to the District and Sessions Judge, Cuttack on 8.9.1992 when he was on medical leave that he has been incapacitated because of his ailment to join the post and as such, he may be permitted premature retirement and his son who has passed Matriculation, may be provided with a suitable employment and that he has no means to give him further studies.
The application was forwarded by the Registrar, Civil Courts to the District Judge.
The letter of the Registrar dated 1101992 indicates that the District Judge allowed Sri Dhuleswar Senapati to retire, if he so likes, but no employment is to be provided.
Such is also the endorsement in the file which was perused by the Court being produced by the Additional Government Advocate.
On a perusal of the relevant file, it appears that a note was submitted to the District Judge while forwarding the application of Sri Senapati that the should produce a certificate from the CDMO, Cuttack and the CDMO be requested to examine Sri Senapati, but unfortunately without considering the application and the office note in its proper perspective in terms of the Rehabilitation Rules, the District Judge has simply allowed voluntary retirement but no employment for his son.
The application has not been rejected on any other ground.
8.
Rule 5 of the Rehabilitation Rules is quoted hereunder :  "5.
Appointment to be made in deserving cases - In deserving cases, a member of the family of a Government servant who is permanently incapacitated or who dies while in service may be appointed to any Class III or Class IV post by the appointing authority of that Government servant provided, he/she possesses the requisite minimum educational qualification prescribed for the post without following the procedure prescribed for recruitment to the post either by statutory rules framed under the proviso to Art. 309 of the Constitution or otherwise irrespective of the fact that recruitment is made by notification of vacancies to the Employment Exchange or through recruitment examination under relevant cadre rules.
At the time of notifying such vacancies to the Employment Exchange or the examining authority, the employer shall clearly mention that the vacancy is proposed to be filled up under rehabilitation assistance scheme and so, sponsoring of candidates by the Employment Exchange or the examining authority is not necessary.
Deserving cases have been defined under sub-clause (a), Rule 2, quoted as follows :  "(a) "Deserving case" means a case where the appointing authority is satisfied, after making such enquiry as may be necessary - (i) that the death or incapacitation of the employee has adversely affected his family financially because the family has no other alternative mode of livelihood; or (ii) that there is existence of indigent conditions in the family after death or invalid retirement of the employee; and (iii) that none of the family members of the employee who has died or has suffered from permanent disability while in service is already in the employment of Government, public or private sector or engaged in independent business with an earning above Rs. 20,000/- a year; and (iv) that the family does not have adequate income from the immovable properties to earn its livelihood."
9.
Rule 8 of the Rehabilitation Rules prescribes the mode of appointment and under Rule 9(1)(b) on receipt of the application, the appointing authority has to send a requisition to the Collector of the District calling for a report as to whether the family is in financial distress and under clause (d) of sub-rule (1) of Rule 8, the appointing authority on receipt of the report is to consider the same in case of a favourable report, appoint the applicant in a suitable available vacancy under his control and under Rule 9, the appointment can be made against the post required to be filled up by direct recruitment.
Sri Dhuleswar Senapati while medical leave, by his application dated 791992 sought for invalid retirement on health ground and for an employment of his son necessarily in terms of the Rehabilitation Rules.
The District Judge allowed premature retirement on health ground as it appears from the records and, therefore, it can be safely said that the District Judge was satisfied about the incapacitation of Sri Senapati to perform the duty due to ill health.
However, it was open to the employers to find out, whether the Government servant was really incapacitated or invalid to perform his duties due to ill health or for any other purpose to obtain an employment for his family members.
But without any enquiry as contemplated in the Rules with regard to the invalidation/incapacitation and need of the family to be saved from the distress as contemplated under the Rules, the application could not have been rejected in limine.
The petitioner's father finding no other alternative perhaps resumed his duties in order to save his family from distress due to his retirement.
But since the situation continued, he had to again remain on commuted medical leave from 13.5.1993 to 15.1.94, during which period he made the second application dated 1991993 for premature retirement and for rehabilitation appointment of his son in any suitable post.
The appointing authority directed him to be examined by the Chief District Medical Officer and he was declared invalid for continuance in service.
Accordingly, he was allowed to retire with effect from 3151994, but the prayer for employment of the petitioner on rehabilitation was rejected on the ground that the Government servant had less than five years of service to his credit under Rule 9(5).
This factual position is not disputed, but the question is whether in the aforesaid facts and circumstances of the case, the application could be treated to have been made beyond the prescribed time.
The answer obviously is No, since the first application which was filed admittedly within the time had been rejected without following the procedure laid down under the Rules and for that the Government servant concerned could not be faulted.
10.
In the facts and circumstances of the case, we are of the considered opinion that the District Judge should have considered the application dated 7.9.92 along with the application dated 1991993 of the father of the petitioner since the earlier application was rejected in limine without proper consideration and in that event, the question of eligibility in terms of Rule 9(5) would not have arisen.
11.
In these peculiar facts and circumstances of the case, we direct the District Judge, Cuttack to consider the applications of the father of the petitioner dated 791992 and 1991993, following the procedure laid down under the Rehabilitation Rules and dispose of the same in accordance with law.
Needless to say that if the applications are considered favourably, the petitioner should be appointed in any of the available vacancies to which he is found eligible.
This exercise should be done within a period of three months from the date of communication of this order.
The writ application is disposed of with the aforesaid observations and directions.
Application allowed.