NK Agrawal, J - This is a petition by Prof. Dr. RR Sharma (Retd.)
under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India seeking a direction to (i) Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh (Post Graduate Institute), (ii) State of Uttar Pradesh, and (iii) The National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal (the Karnal Institute) to re-fix and release the amount of pension at the rate of Rs. 3,550/- per month after 33 years of his qualifying service and also to pay the terminal gratuity.
The name of respondent No. 3 has since been deleted at he request of the petitioner  2.
The petitioner joined service on September 25, 1954 as a Lecturer in the Education Department in the State of Uttar Pradesh.
he applied through proper channel to the Union Public Service Commission and was selected for the post of Lecturer in Physics at the Karnal Institute.
He was relieved from service in Uttar Pradesh on June 30, 1961 (Forenoon).
There was no break in service.
The Karnal Institute was a Central Government's autonomous body.
The petitioner joined service in the Post Graduate Institute at Chandigarh after obtaining permission from the previous employer.
He was relieved on August 31, 1964 (Afternoon) from the Karnal Institute and he joined duty at the Post Graduate Institute on September 1, 1964 (Forenoon).
There was, thus, again no break in service.
He served the Post Graduate Institute till October 31, 1991 and then retired from service on superannuation as Professor and Head of Bio-Physics Department.
3.
Petitioner's case is that he rendered total continuous service for more than 37 years without any break.
He, however, did not receive full pensionary benefits or the terminal gratuity, though he is entitled to superannuation pension after more than 33 years of continuous qualifying service.
The Post Graduate Institute fixed his pension at Rs. 2,905/- per month taking into consideration his service from September 1, 1964 and not from September 25, 1954.
His services in Uttar Pradesh and at Karnal Institute have not been counted.
Pension should have been fixed at Rs. 3,550/-, i.e. at 50% of his basic pay of Rs. 7,100/- per month after taking into consideration the entire period of 33 years of this service.
The period of service from September 25, 1954 to June 30, 1961, is to be considered while calculating the qualifying service.
4.
The petitioner has argued that Rule 13 of the Central Civil Service Rules lays down that the qualifying service of a Government servant shall commence from the date he takes charge of the post to which he is first appointed either substantially or in an officiating or temporary capacity.
Further Sub-rule (3) of Rule 14 specifically says that in the case of a Government servant belonging to a State Government who is permanently transferred to a service or post to which the Central Civil Service Rules apply, the continuous service rendered under the State Government in an officiating or temporary capacity shall qualify.
5.
The petitioner has, on the strength of the aforesaid rules, contended that the Post Graduate Institute has unjustly and unfairly declined to grant him full pension.
It is correct that the Post Graduate Institute wrote to the Uttar Pradesh Government and also to the Karnal Institute requesting for payment of terminal gratuity amounting to Rs. 2,030/- and Rs. 705/- respectively but did not act thereafter.
The petitioner also sent letters to the Uttar Pradesh Government and the Karnal Institute but to no avail.
Both the Uttar Pradesh Government and the Karnal Institute have verified the petitioner's services rendered there.
None of them has, at any stage, denied the factum of the petitioner's service with them.
Thus, there is no dispute regarding the service rendered by the petitioner in Uttar Pradesh and at Karnal.
The Post Graduate Institute was, therefore, not right in not counting the previous qualifying service rendered by the petitioner for pension purposes.
6.
The petitioner has given an instance where the Post Graduate Institute did grant pensionary benefits to its employee on the basis of his past service rendered elsewhere.
In the case of Dr. JG Jolly, Professor and Head of the Department of Blood Transfusion, the Post Graduate Institute took into consideration his past service rendered in Uttar Pradesh before joining the Post Graduate Institute, though the State of Uttar Pradesh did not discharge its liability of making its contribution.
7.
The petitioner has also argued that in the case of Mrs. Amrit Kaur Malhotra, the matter came to this Court and the Post Graduate Institute was directed to allow pensionary benefits to her, treating the entire period of her service.
8.
The petitioner has, therefore, prayed that the Post Graduate Institute may be directed to grant him full pension and death-cum-retirement gratuity with effect from November 1, 1991 (the date of his entitlement for pension) for the continuous and combined service period from September 25, 1954 to October 31, 1991.
9.
The Post Graduate Institute has, in its reply, stated that the pensionary benefits for the period of service rendered by the petitioner at the Institute have already been granted.
He could be granted pensionary benefits for the period of service rendered by him in Uttar Pradesh and at the Karnal Institute, only if the said Government and the authority of Karnal Institute were ready to bear the pro-rata liability.
They have not yet discharged that liability.
10.
Respondent No. 2, has, in its reply, admitted that the petitioner had joined service as a Lecturer in Uttar Pradesh on September 25, 1954 and was relieved from service on June 30, 1961 after he was selected by the Union Public Service Commission as a Lecturer in Physics at the Karnal Institute.
It has been, however, explained that the petitioner is not entitled to claim the pensionary benefits or the terminal gratuity from Uttar Pradesh Government as he had relinquished the charge without completing qualifying service.
No undertaking was given by the Uttar Pradesh Government to discharge the liability in respect of the pensionary benefits or terminal gratuity.
The petitioner never made any claim for such benefit to the Uttar Pradesh Government.
It was a case of new appointment and not a case of transfer or deputation.
Therefore, the Uttar Pradesh Government is not obliged to discharge any liability in respect of pensionary benefits or gratuity payable to the petitioner.
11.
On a consideration of the controversy, it is found that the petitioner has been denied his full pension without any good reason.
There is no dispute to the fact that he has, without any break in service, completed more than 33 years of continuous combined service.
Rules 13 and 14 of the Central Civil Service Rules require full payment of pension and gratuity amount to him.
It appears that the Post Graduate Institute did not sincerely take steps so as to remove the hurdles in the grant of full pension to the petitioner.
It appears to be a case of harassment.
The petitioner is entitled to full pension as he has rendered continuous combined qualifying service of more than 33 years.
The Post Graduate Institute should have vigorously and earnestly pursued the matter with the Uttar Pradesh Government and Karnal Institute so that they discharged their respective proportionate liability with regard to pension and gratuity.
12.
The writ petition is allowed.
The Post Graduate Institute is directed to pay to the petitioner the full amount of pension and the full amount of gratuity counting his qualifying and continuous combined service from September 25, 1954.
This shall be done without any more waiting for the receipt of the proportionate amount from the Uttar Pradesh Government and the Karnal Institute.
The arrears shall be paid to the petitioner within three months from the date of this order with interest at the rate of 12% per annum from November 1, 1991 till the date of payment.
The Post Graduate Institute shall be at liberty to recover the amount of proportionate liability from the Uttar Pradesh Government and the Karnal Institute.
It is further ordered that the Uttar Pradesh Government and the Karnal Institute shall pay the proportionate amount towards pension and gratuity to the Post Graduate Institute within three months from the date of this order.
Costs are assessed at Rs. 10,000/- payable by the Post Graduate Institute to the petitioner.
Petition allowed.