K A Abdul Gafoor, J - The Public Service Commission invited application for appointment to the post of Lower Primary/Upper Primary School Assistants (Malayalam) in Pathanamthitta, Kottayam, Idukki, Malappuram, Wayanad and Kasaragod districts.
The notification was published in the Gazette.
Admittedly by the Public Service Commission, short notifications were also published in the newspapers.
Based on the notification appeared in the newspapers the petitioner submitted her application to all the districts.
A test was conducted in all the districts on the same day.
The petitioner appeared in Idukki district.
The petitioner was successful.
The petitioner was invited for interview.
Petitioner applied for the post in other districts as well in terms of the same notification whereas the notification which appeared in the government gazette contained a clause that a candidate applying for the post in one district shall not apply in another district.
According to the petitioner, she belongs to a remote area in Idukki district and she had no occasion to peruse the gazette.
She did not get the gazette from the Panchayat Office, the only place where the gazettes are available, in that area.
Petitioner, therefore, as she did not find the notification published in the gazette, applied hoping for the employment, in all the districts.
As the test was conducted on the same date in all the districts, obviously the petitioner could appear only in Idukki.
Therefore, the petitioner could not be considered in other districts.
The petitioner's application was rejected on the reason that she had violated the condition contained in the gazette notification, by applying in several districts.
Petitioner represented against.
That representation was directed to be considered in Ext.
P6.
In compliance with Ext.
P6, Ext.
P7 order is passed by the Public Service Commission rejecting the petitioner's application on the ground that she applied for the post in several districts violating the condition in the gazette notification.
It is in the above circumstances, the petitioner has approached this Court with this original petition.
2.
It is an admitted case in the counter-affidavit that the short notification published in the newspaper did not contain such a clause.
But, that short notification invited the attention of the candidates to the gazette notification, "for more details".
When sufficient materials are available in the short notification itself, to submit an application, one need not venture to know "more details" from gazette notification which will not be available except in few government offices.
Therefore, the petitioner bona fide applied, hoping for employment anywhere in the State, to other districts as well.
That shall not stand in the way of deprivation of a right for equal opportunity as guaranteed under Art. 16 of the Constitution of India.
When one applies for a post on the basis of the short notification appeared in the newspapers, that application has to be considered.
Public Service Commission, if any restriction is imposed, shall include such restriction as well in the short notification.
All candidates, when there are lakhs of unemployed youth in Kerala, cannot be expected to go through the Gazette.
Short notification is always meant to know the restriction as well.
As the short notification did not contain the restriction clause, rejection of the petitioner's application is illegal.
That violates the right of the petitioner to be considered for public employment under Art. 16 of the Constitution of India.
Accordingly, Ext.
P7 is quashed and the petitioner's inclusion in the list based on her performance in the test and interview shall be considered.
Original petition is allowed accordingly.
No costs.
Petition allowed.