Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was working as a Junior Engineer at the respondent-University.
He was selected for participation in the 12th World Veteran Athetics Championship, 1997 at Durban.
Necessary Administrative approval was granted by the respondent-University vide its letter dated July 8, 1997, a copy of which has been produced on record as Annexure P-8 with the writ petition.
In pursuance to the approval granted by the University the petitioner had participated in the championship held from July 17, 1997 to July 27, 1997.
He is said to have competed in long distance running - 5000 metres and 10,000 metres.
On his return, the petitioner submitted his bill for travelling allowance etc.
It amounted to Rs. 75,357/-.
An amount of Rs. 37,000/- had been paid to him as advance.
Consequently, he had made a claim for the remaining amount of Rs. 38,357/-.
2.
The petitioner retired from service on March 31, 1998.
While releasing his retiral benefits, the amount of Rs. 37,000/- which had been paid by way of advance was sought to be deducted.
The petitioner was asked as to why the amount of Rs. 37,000/- be not recovered.
However, before the petitioner could furnish his reply to the show cause notice recovery had already been made.
3.
The petitioner has now approached this Court with the present petition praying that the respondents be directed to refund the amount of Rs. 37,000/- and to make payment of the balance amount of Rs. 38,357/- along with interest at the rate of 18 per cent per annum.
4.
Notice of motion was issued.
The respondents have been duly served.
No one has put in appearance on behalf of the respondents.
No reply has been filed.
5.
Admittedly, the State Government, had issued instructions vide letter dated October 24, 1990 regarding the participation of the Government servants in sporting events of International importance.
These instructions had been adopted by the respondent University in the meeting of the Board of the Management held on October 28, 1992.
After adoption the office order dated December 16, 1992 was issued.
In fact even at that time the petitioner was selected and allowed to represent India in the Veteran Athletic Meet in Hong Kong.
Thereafter, in the year 1997, the petitioner was granted permission to participate in the Meet at Durban.
On the faith of the permission granted by the University, the petitioner had actually travelled to Durban and participated in the events.
After his return the University has not paid anything.
In fact, the amount of Rs. 37,000/- which had been actually paid to him, has been deducted from the petitioner's retiral dues.
6.
Keeping in view the fact that the petitioner had been duly permitted by the University to participate in the Athletic Meet, it is bound to make payment of the amount claimed by him.
It is no doubt true that in the order of approval passed on July 8, 1997, it had been observed that the petitioner should file an affidavit that in case the clarification sought from the State Government is received "contrary to the position as contained in the letter of Director of sports and Youth Welfare.... he will refund the entire amount of financial help to be paid to him...." However, till today nothing has been placed on the record to show that the State Government has taken any such decision.
Even in this petition the State Government is a party.
It has not even chosen to appear much less than file a reply.
Keeping in view the fact that the State Government has not taken any contrary decision and that the University had duly permitted the petitioner to participate, it would be unfair now to disallow him the claim for travelling allowance etc.
The petitioner was holding a very junior post in the service of University.
He could not have afforded an expenditure of more than Rs. 75,000/-.
It was only on the faith of the approval granted by the University that he had travelled to Durban.
Now the respondents must bear the expenditure.
7.
Even otherwise, the respondents have not chosen to appear and even file a reply despite service.
8.
In view of the above, the writ petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to make the payment of the amount of Rs. 75,357/- as due to the petitioner within one month from the date of the receipt of a copy of this order.
In case they fail to do so, the petitioner shall be entitled to payment along with interest at the rate of 12 per cent from April 1, 1998 till the date of actual payment.
Since no one has appeared on behalf of the respondents, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.