Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - (Oral) The petitioners were appointed as Safai Karamcharis in May, 1996.
Vide order dated October 3, 1996 the Government observed that "the expenditure of Municipal Council, Batala, on staff is more than the prescribed norms, therefore, the case is rejected.... " As a result, the State Government had declined to approve the appointments of the petitioners.
In pursuance to the aforesaid communication the services of the 7 petitioners were terminated.
Information in this behalf was sent to the Director, Local Government, vide letter dated December 3, 1996.
A copy of this communication has been produced as Annexure P-8 with the writ petition.
Aggrieved by the action of the respondents in terminating their services, the petitioners have approached this Court through the present writ petition.
They pray that the orders of termination of their services be quashed and that they be reinstated with all consequential benefits.
2.
A short written statement has been filed on behalf of the State Government and the Director by Mr. Puneet Goyal, Under Secretary to Government Punjab.
In this written statement it has been inter alia averred that the norms for expenditure on establishment were laid down by the Government.
According to these standards the Council cannot spend more than 35% of its actual income on establishment.
It has been further pointed out that in the present case the expenditure of the Council on establishment was "more than the prescribed norms".
As a result, it is claimed that the action of the respondents in terminating the services of the petitioners is legal and valid.
A reply has also been filed on behalf of the Municipal Council respondent No. 3.
3.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
4.
Mr. Ram Kumar Malik, learned counsel for the petitioners, has challenged the action of the respondents on a two-fold basis.
Firstly, it has been contended that the action is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution as Rajesh Kumar who was lower in order of merit than some of the petitioners at the time of selection has been allowed to continue while their services have been ordered to be terminated.
Secondly, it has been contended that the Committee had not actually created new posts.
Appointments had been made to vacancies which had arisen on account of retirement etc. of the existing employees.
Thus, there was no question of the new posts being sanctioned.
The counsel maintains that the action is founded on a wholly non-existent ground.
5.
Mr. Berry, Deputy Advocate General, Punjab has contended that the action taken by the respondents is legal and valid.
He submits that the Committee has to observe the norms regarding expenditure as laid down by the State Government.
Since the norms had been violated, the Government had no alternative except to disapprove the appointments made by the Committee.
Mr. Chatrath who appears for the 3rd respondent maintains that the selection and appointment was valid.
However, the Committee had terminated the services of the petitioners in faithful compliance with the direction given by the State Government.
6.
Admittedly, the Executive Officer of the respondent-Municipal Council had addressed the communication dated December 3, 1996 to the Director, Local Government.
In this letter it had been mentioned that the 7 posts to which the petitioners had been appointed had "fallen vacant".
It was further stated that "5 other posts of Safai Karamcharis have fallen vacant due to retirement".
He had also pointed out that "the sanitation work is badly suffering.
There is already acute shortage of Safai Karamcharis.
Many new colonies have developed within the municipal limits of Municipal Council, Batala and residents of this area and the staff working at present cannot make good this deficiency".
It is, thus, clear that the Council was not seeking approval for the creation of new posts.
It was, in fact, making appointments against vacancies which had become available on account of retirement etc.
Still further, it deserves mention that after filing the short written statement on September 15, 1997 an affidavit dated December 17, 1997 had been filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2.
In this affidavit it was inter alia stated that "the Government has examined the case and directed the Executive Officer, Municipal Council, Batala that the vacant posts of Safai Sewak may be filled after adopting procedure according to the rules/instructions".
It is, thus, clear that subsequent to the filing of the affidavit the Government itself had desired that the Municipal Council should fill up the available posts.
Thus, the claim made by the Executive Officer in his communication of December 3, 1996 is clearly borne out from the affidavit filed on behalf of the Government.
It also deserves mention that in his letter dated August 21, 1996 the Executive Officer had categorically stated that the appointments of the petitioners had been made by the Council "against the vacant posts of Safai Karamcharis through the Employment Exchange vide resolution No. 3/96 dated 1041996 and there is provision in the Budget for these posts".
It is, thus, clear that the petitioners had been appointed against posts for which provision had been made in the Budget prior to their employment.
Their services had been ordered to be terminated on the ground that the Government had not sanctioned the creation of new posts.
In fact, the Committee had not sought the sanction of any new posts.
The order of termination was passed on the ground that the State Government had refused to create new posts.
This ground was non-existent.
Resultantly, the termination of the services of the peititoners on this ground cannot be sustained.
In view of our finding on this point, it is not necessary for us to go into the question of validity of the termination order on account of violation or Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
7.
Resultantly, the writ petition is allowed.
The action of the respondents in terminating the services of the petitioners is set aside.
They will be entitled to have the benefit of continuity of service.
However, they shall not be entitled to any arrears of salary as they could not have been sitting idle for the last about three years.
In the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case we decline the benefit of back wages.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition Allowed.)