Harjit Singh Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was enrolled in the Indian Army on 14th November, 1962 under the specific condition that he would put in eight years of colour (regular) service to be followed by seven years as a reservist.
He accordingly served as regular army personnel up to 22nd November 1970, whereafter he was transferred to the reserve.
The petitioner was called for Refresher training as per rules in the year 1971 for a period of four weeks and while he was undergoing the training the country was involved in the war with Pakistan in December 1971.
The petitioner was accordingly retained for a period of eight months up to 15th November, 1972 and was thereafter released and allowed to return home.
As the petitioner's tenure as a reservist was to end on 15th November, 1977, he made a representation for the release of his pension.
This request was, however, declined by the respondents on the ground that he had not appeared for the refresher training as per rules after 1974 and he had been declared a deserter on that account and had been dismissed from service under orders dated 20th April, 1978.
The petitioner thereafter filed various representations before the respondents praying that his dismissal order be supplied to him so that he could challenge the same.
After prolonged correspondence, the respondents informed the petitioner vide Annexure P-13 dated 3rd October, 1997 that "as per existing orders documents relating to dismissal of a deserter cannot be provided to the invididual."
The petitioner has accordingly come to this Court praying that he be granted pension on account on the service rendered by him in the Army.
2.
A reply has been filed by the respondents in response to the writ petition and facts alleged by the petitioner have been refuted.
3.
Mr. Sehgal, the learned counsel for the petitioner, has very fairly stated at the Bar that in the face of the dismissal order, the petitioner would not be entitled to pension and that it would, therefore, be appropriate at this stage that the petitioner be supplied a copy of the same so that he may seek such remedy that may be open to him.
He has accordingly urged that as of now, he was confining his writ petition only to his prayer.
4.
Mr. Sharma, the learned Additional Senior Standing Counsel for the Union of India, appearing for the respondents, has not seriously disputed the petitioner's claim to the supply of the order of dismissal dated 20th April, 1978.
However, it is apparent from Annexure P-13 that the documents relating to dismissal may or may not be provided to an individual, but there is no stipulation in Annexure P-13 that the order of dismissal passed on those documents cannot be provided.
5.
This petition is accordingly allowed.
The respondents are directed to supply to the petitioner a copy of the dismissal order dated 20th April, 1978, within a period of two months from the date that a certified copy of this order is supplied to them.
It is made explicit that no decision has been rendered in this writ petition on the petitioner's right to pension and he would be at liberty to challenge the refusal of pension to him even at a later stage.
There will be no order as to costs.
Dasti order.
Petition allowed.