GS Singhvi, J - The petitioner, who applied for recruitment as Sanskrit Teacher (Female) in pursuance of advertisement No. 4 of 1996 issued by the Haryana Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana (re-named as the Haryana Staff Selection Commission) (hereinafter referred to as `the Commission'), has prayed that the respondents be directed to appoint her on one of the advertised posts.
2.
Admittedly, the last date fixed in the advertisement for receipt of applications was 16121996 and as on that date the petitioner did not possess one of the essential qualifications, namely, LTC (OT) in Sanskrit conducted by the Haryana Education Department or an equivalent qualification recognised by the Haryana Education Department.
It is also not in dispute that she appeared in Shiksha Shastri examination conducted by the Education Department of Chandigarh Administration in April, 1997 and the result of that examination was declared in June, 1997.
It appears from the record that the SSS Board entertained the application of the petitioner and issued letter dated 18.6.1997 requiring her to appear for interview on 1571997.
She was also asked to produce evidence showing that she possessed prescribed qualifications.
However, when she appeared for viva voca, the selection committee declined to interview her on the ground that she does not fulfil the essential qualifications specified in the advertisement.
3.
The petitioner has questioned the legality, correctness and justification of the Commission's decision to reject her candidature by alleging that it is arbitrary and discriminatory.
She has relied on the order Annexure P5 dated 21.4.1998 issued by the District Education Officer, Bhiwani appointing Smt. Manorama daughter of Prithvi Singh and stated that having considered and selected Smt. Manorama who had appeared in Shiksha Shastri examination with her, the Commission cannot treat her ineligible.
4.
The respondents have contested the petitioner's claim to be appointed as Sanskrit Teacher on the following two grounds :  1.
The application submitted by the petitioner was not in accordance with the conditions incorporated in the advertisement and, therefore, her candidature was rightly rejected.
2.
In terms of the advertisement and the notice, Annexure P.1, only those candidates could be considered eligible who had already appeared in the final examination of the prescribed qualifications but whose result had not been declared and that the petitioner who appeared in the examination five months after the issuance of that notice cannot take benefit of the same.
5.
At the hearing of the case, learned Deputy Advocate General, Haryana, tried to persuade us to decline the hearing of the petition on merits by contending that the application submitted by the petitioner in pursuance of advertisement Annexure R.4/1 was not complete, inasmuch as, she had not deposited the requisite fee.
To meet with this objection, Shri Singla invited our attention to the photostat copy of the challan through which the petitioner had deposited the fee before submission of the application form.
A careful reading of this document shows that a sum of Rs. 10/- was deposited by the petitioner in the Treasury under Major Head 1151, Sub Major head 1110300.
Admittedly, this is the Head under which the candidates submitting applications in pursuance of Annexure R1 were required to deposit their fee.
We, therefore, do not find any justification to accept the contention of Shri Jaswant Singh that the application of the petitioner was incomplete and was liable to be rejected.
This conclusion of ours is supported by the fact that in the interview letter Annexure P4, the Secretary of the Board did not ask the petitioner to produce proof of having deposited the fee, though she was asked to bring the following documents :  1.
Attested copy of the certificate showing that she has passed Hindi of Matric standard.
2.
Age certificate.
3.
Degree of Shastri (Hons.
in Sanskrit) from recognised University and LTC (OT) in Sanskrit conducted by the Haryana Education Department or its equivalent.
It is, thus, evident that the objection raised by the respondents to the eligibility of the petitioner on the ground that she did not complete the formalities like deposit of fee is an after-thought and merits rejection.
6.
However, what we have said above is not sufficient to accept the petitioner's plea to be considered for appointment as Sanskrit Teacher.
A bare reading of Annexure P.1 dated 29111996, which constitutes the foundation of the petitioner's claim, shows that after the issuance of advertisement, the Board decided to consider the candidature of those who had already appeared in the final examination of the prescribed qualification but whose result had not been declared.
The petitioner, as per her own showing, appeared in the final examination of Shiksha Shastri held by the Education Department of Chandigarh Administration in April, 1997.
It must, therefore, be held that she is not entitled to take benefit of the notice Annexure P.1.
As a logical corollary, it must be held that she is not eligible to be considered for appointment as Sanskrit Teacher on the basis of application submitted in pursuance of the advertisement Annexure R1.
7.
The plea of discrimination raised by the petitioner with reference to the case of Smt. Manorama appears to be attractive but, in our opinion, consideration of candidature of Smt. Manorama or for that reason of Smt. Shakuntla about whom a mention has been made in para 5 of the reply filed on behalf of the Commission, cannot entitle the petitioner to claim consideration notwithstanding the fact that she did not fulfil the condition of eligibility specified in the advertisement and her case is not covered by the notice Annexure P.1.
From the facts brought on record, we are prima facie of the view that if Smt. Manorama and Smt. Shakuntla had not appeared in the final examination held after 29111996, the consideration of their candidature will have to be regarded as violative of the terms and conditions of the advertisement but on the basis of an illegal order passed by the official respondents, we cannot entertain the petitioner's plea that a writ in the nature of mandamus be issued directing the respondents to commit another illegality.
The doctrine of equality in the matter of employment enshrined in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India cannot be invoked for compelling the public authorities to pass illegal orders on the premise that in other cases such orders have been passed by the administrative authorities.
For this proposition, we may refer to the decisions of the Supreme Court in Chandigarh Administration and another v. Jagjit Singh and another, JT 1995(1) SC 445 and M/s Faridabad CT Scan Centre v. Director General Health Services and others, JT 1997(8) SC 171 : 1997(4) SCT 463 (SC).
8.
No other point has been argued.
9.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is dismissed.
However, we hope that the respondent-Commission and other official respondents will take appropriate action in accordance with law in the cases of Smt. Manorama and Smt. Shakuntla.
Petition dismissed.