Harjit Singh Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner, the Gram Panchayat of village Palwal, Tehsil Thanesar, donated about 10 acres of land to the State Government vide Resolution dated 381993 for opening of a Teachers Training Institute in the village on the clear understanding and agreement between the parties that vide additional seats would be reserved in the Institute for candidates belonging to the village.
The respondents issued a prospectus (Annexure P-2) for the academic years 1997-99 making a provisions for five additional seats in each District Institutes of Education and Training/Govt.
Elementary Teacher Training Institutions for the elementary teachers training course for candidates permanently belonging to the village where these were located and whose Panchayats had donated land/buildings as per Government Policy.
It is the petitioner's case that some candidates who had the D.Ed (J.B.T.
Qualification) and others possessing the OT Qualification were granted admission to the course under this prospectus.
The petitioner is, however, aggrieved by the prospectus issued for the academic year 1998-2000, Annexure P-1 to the petition whereby it has now been clarified that the five additional seats had been earmarked in the training Institute exclusively for the D.Ed candidates ignoring the claim of those such as the petitioner having an OT qualification.
It is the petitioner grievance that as this decision was contrary to the express understanding between the parties at the time when the donation of the land was made to the respondent-State.
the exclusion of the OT candidates for admission against the five additional seats reserved for the village was wholly un-called for.
2.
A reply has been filed by the respondents and in paragraphs 3, 4 and 6 thereof, it has been clarified that in the Prospectus (Annexure P-2) for the year 1997-99 the fact that these five additional seats were to be filled in from D.Ed candidates, alone had not found mention due to inadvertence and that the necessary rectification had been made in the Prospectus, (Annexure P-1) for the year 1998-2000.
The allegation that some candidates who had the OT qualification had also been admitted in the session 1997-99, has been denied and it has been pointed out that notwithstanding the fact that an omission had occurred in the said Prospectus, no candidates having any qualification other than the D.Ed had been admitted.
3.
Mr. Dhingra the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner, has based his primary argument on the Prospectus for the year 1997-99 (Annexure P-2) pointing out that the five additional seats for that year had been left open for candidates possessing the D.Ed or the OT, qualification and, a such, the candidates who had the OT qualification were also entitled to seek admission even in this session.
This argument may not strictly be open to the petitioner as the Gram Panchayat is not affected by the restriction yet despite this fact the matter is being disposed of on merits.
The petitioner has objected to the use of the word only in the relevant clause of Annexure P-7.
The relevant clauses under the prospectus Annexure P-2 and P-7 are reproduced below :  Annexure : P-2 "Five additional seats are available in each of the following DIETs/GETTIs, for candidates permanently belonging to the village where these are located and whose Panchayats have donated land/building for the institute as per Government policy."
Annexure P-7 " Five additional seats in D.Ed course only are available in each of the following DIETs/GETTIs, for the candidates who permanently belong to the village where these are located and whose Panchayats have donated land/building for the institute as per Govt.
Policy."
The respondents have, however, clearly pleaded in their written statement that the word "only" introduced in the year 1998-2000 ought to have been there in the Prospectus for the year 1997-99 as well, but it had been left out due to inadvertence.
It has, however, been clarified that no candidate belonging to the OT category had bee admitted in that year notwithstanding the fact that no restriction on such candidates had bee laid down.
Mr. Dhingra has laid a great emphasis on the reply filed by the respondent-State in C.W.P.
No. 1902 of 1997 in which many candidates possessing the OT qualification had claimed admission and in its reply filed the respondent-State had taken the stand that the petitioner was eligible for admission but he had not obtained the requisite merit in the entrance test.
Mr. Dhingra has accordingly argued that the fact that the candidates possessing the OT qualification were also eligible to seek admission had been admitted by the respondents in this writ petition.
To my mind, this argument of the learned counsel lacks merit for the reason that the five additional seats above have been reserved for the D.Ed course but candidates possessing the OT qualification would nevertheless be eligible for admission against the other seats that are available.
The petitioner in that case had claimed admission against one of the open seats.
Mr. Dhingra has also argued that despite the directions of this Court that the record be produced by the respondent-State, no action has been taken on that score and an inference, against the State should therefore, be drawn.
This argument again is without merit for the reasons that admission had been made on the basis of the agreement between the Gram Panchayat and the State of Haryana at the time of the donation of the 10 acres of land and a copy of the agreement between the parties which Mr. Dhingra seeks would be with the Gram Panchayat as well.
Moreover, the written statement filed by the respondent- State is categoric and clear and in the absence of any other material put on record by the petitioner, an assumption that it is based on wrong facts cannot be made.
For the reasons recorded above, there is no merit in the writ petition.
Dismissed.
No costs.
Dasti order.