THB Chalapathi, J - The petitioner in this writ petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of India is seeking issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the official respondents to consider him for the post of Professor in Ras-Shstra in the Government Ayurvedic College, Patiala.
2.
The petitioner joined the service as Vaidya on 1161965.
Thereafter he joined Government Ayurvedic College, Patiala in Anatomy Department as Demonstrator in the year 1978 and later he was promoted as Lecturer on 2041979 in the Ras-Shastra Department.
A seniority list of Vaidyas working in Government Ayurvedic Dispensaries, Pharmacy, Ayurvedic Hospital, Patiala and Ayurvedic College, Patiala was issued in which the petitioner was shown at Sr. No. 72.
He was also promoted as reader in Ras-Shastra (Post-Graduate Department) on 691990.
According to the petitioner, he is entitled to be promoted as Professor in Ras-Shastra since he is senior to respondent No. 4.
Instead of promoting the petitioner, the official respondents promoted the 4th respondent who was junior to the petitioner, to the post of Professor in Ras-Shastra.
That necessitated the petitioner to file this writ petition.
3.
The respondents 1 and 2 have filed a written statement in which they have taken the plea that the petitioner was working in the Post-Graduate Department of the College in which there was no post of Professor in Ras-Shastra whereas the 4th respondent though junior, is working in the Under-Graduate Department in which there is a post of Professor and, therefore, the 4th respondent is entitled to be promoted.
In this context, it is useful to refer to certain orders passed by the Ayurvedic Department Punjab.
The Ist Order is dated 211996 which is Annexed as Annexure P-12.
It reads as follows :-  "To look after the post of Professor Ras-Shastra Shri Adarsh Kumar, Assistant Professor in addition to his own duties till further orders is allowed to work as Professor Government Ayurvedic College, Patiala.
He will work in addition to his own duties."
Thereafter on 2211996, Order dated 211996 (Annexure P-12) was cancelled vide Annexure P-13.
Annexure P-14 is an order dated 2051996 vide which order dated 2211996 was withdrawn and the order dated 211996 was allowed to continue to be in operation and in the order dated 2051996 (Annexure P-14) it has been stated in para 2 as follows :-  "Shri KK Prashar reader of Post-Graduate Department (Ras-Shastra) shall look after the duties of Associate Professor (vacant) and function as In-charge of that Department till further orders."
Vide Order Annexure P-16 dated 1671996, the order dated 2051996 whereby Shri Adarsh Kumar was allowed to work as Professor Ras-Shasra Department was stayed and the petitioner was given over all charge of the Department of Ras-Shastra being senior in all respects.
It is useful to refer the order Annexure P-16 which reads as follows :-  "Vide Office Order No. AY-EI-PB-96/452 dated 20596 vide which Shri Adarsh Kumar, Assistant Professor Ras-Shastra was allowed to work as Professor Ras-Shastra Department is stayed forthwith.
2.
Whereas Shri KK Prashar, Reader Ras-Shastra has stated that Post-Graduate and Under Post-Graduate are the part of the same Department as such Shri KK Prashar in addition to his own duties is made as over-all Incharge of the Department of Ras-Shastra being senior in all respects."
4.
Again on 8111996 order dated 1671996 was withdrawn and the order dated 2051996 (Annexure P-14) was directed to remain in force.
Therefore, the petitioner approached this Court.
5.
From a reading of the above orders, it is clear that the Department itself is not clear whether the Post-Graduate Department and the Under-Graduate Department are separate wings.
The learned Counsel for the State as well as the 4th respondent tried to impress upon me that both the Departments are separate and distinct wings and there is no common cadre and they belong to separate departments and therefore a person working in one Department cannot claim promotion in another Department.
6.
After considering the rules and the material placed before me, I have no manner of doubt that there is no question of separate Departments like Post Graduate Department and Under Graduate Department in Ayurveda.
The entire service is one and the same.
Both the petitioner as well as the 4th respondent are serving the State of Punjab in Ayurvedic Department.
Admittedly, both are working in the Ayurvedic College, Patiala.
After going through the record, I am of the opinion that the posts are interchangeable and both the petitioner and the 4th respondent belong to one service.
The nomenclature is not a determinative factor.
Since the petitioner is senior to 4th respondent, he is entitled to be considered for the post of Professor in Ras-Shastra.
7.
The learned Counsel for the State fairly stated before me that the post of Professor has not been filled up and only temporary arrangement has been made under the various orders.
I, therefore, direct respondents 1 to 3 to consider the claim of all eligible candidates for promotion to the post of Professor in Ras-Shastra and then promote the person who is found most suitable to the post of Professor (Ras-Shastra).
8.
With the above direction, the writ petition is allowed.
However, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.