Harjit Singh Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner, a Scheduled Caste Candidate, took the Entrance Test conducted by the Regional Engineering College, Kurukshetra-respondent No. 3, for admission to the various engineering courses to be run in the State of Haryana.
It is the admitted position that in the private Engineering College, such as respondent No. 4, 50% of the seats were kept as free seats and the remaining 50% as payment seats and that amongst the free seats, 80% of the seats were reserved for the domiciles of the State of Haryana who had passed their qualifying examination from the State of Haryana, whereas 20% of these seat, were to be filled in from the residents of the Haryana State who had passed their qualifying examination from outside the State.
It appears that at the time of the counselling, respondent No. 3, gave a free seat in the respondent No. 4 college to the petitioner under the 80% quota under the mistaken impression that he had passed his qualifying examination from within the State of Haryana.
It appears that this mistake was detected on the day of the counselling itself i.e. 26th September, 1995 and the petitioner was offered a payment seat in the respondent No. 4 College at Radaur as no free seat was available for the petitioner in the light of his lower merit.
The petitioner accepted the admission and also deposited the fee and also furnished a bank guarantee subsequently.
The petitioner has, accordingly, now come to this Court on the plea that some candidates who were lower to him in merit had been given admission to the MM Engineering College, Mullana (Ambala) and to the Vaish College of Engineering Rohtak to free seats in the speciality of Electronics and Communication Engineering whereas the petitioner had been given admission against a payment seat in the respondent No. 4 college.
2.
On notice of motion, a reply has been filed by the respondents and it has been admitted that the petitioner had been initially offered a free seat against the 80% quota in the respondent No. 4 college but when it was found that he was not eligible for admission against this category, he had been offered a payment seat in the respondent No. 4 College and that this offer as also the discipline had been accepted by him.
It has also been pleaded that the petitioner's rank stood at 10027 and the candidate at rank No. 9544 had been granted admission against a free seat in the discipline in question in the respondent No. 4 college.
3.
Mr. RS Mamli, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has, first and foremost, argued that the petitioner had been initially offered a free seat in the respondent No. 4 college by the Admission Committee on the mistaken belief that he was a candidate belonging to the 80% quota and if the respondents had subsequently realised that he fell within the 20% quota, the petitioner was not to blame as in the meanwhile, the free seats in the other Colleges had been filled up by candidates who were lower in merit to him and in that eventuality, he was liable to be accommodated.
4.
Mr. Virk, the learned counsel appearing for respondent No. 3 has, however, controverted the petitioner's stand.
He has pointed out that the petitioner's admission had been rightly cancelled and it was on that account that he had voluntarily accepted his admission against a payment seat in the respondent No. 4 College in the discipline of his choice and he could not, at this belated stage, be permitted to say that the admission was not warranted.
He has also urged that even assuming for a moment that some candidates lower in merit to the petitioner had been admitted in the two Colleges in Mullana and Rohtak, no relief was available to the petitioner on that account as these students had not been identified nor they and the two Colleges impleaded as respondents.
5.
The learned counsel for the parties have been heard at length.
It is the admitted position that the petitioner seeks admission against a free seat in the College at Mullana.
In para 13 of the petition, a vague averment had been made that some candidates lower in merit to the petitioner had been granted admission against a free seat not only in the MM Engineering College, Mullana but also in the Vaish College for Engineering at Rohtak.
The particulars of such candidates are, however, missing and the colleges too have not been impleaded as parties.
As the question relates to the grant of admission against a free seat in contrast to one against a payment seat, the candidate lower to the petitioner in merit would have to be displaced in order to accommodate him.
Mr. Mamli has nevertheless argued that he be permitted to amend the petition to implead the candidates lower in merit who have been accommodated in the two colleges as necessary parties so that effective adjudication can be made in this writ petition.
To my mind, this prayer is not open to the learned counsel at this belated stage.
The admissions to the course in question were made in the year 1995 to a four-year programme and it is probable that those admitted would have completed the course by now.
Moreover, the writ petition, being of the year 1995, cannot be permitted to be amended at this belated stage.
6.
For the reasons recorded, there is no merit in this writ petition and the same is dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.