THB Chalapathi, J - This writ petition has been filed by the seven petitioners, but the same has been dismissed as withdrawn so far as the petitioners 2 to 7 are concerned and only the Ist petitioner is contesting the same.
2.
The petitioner joined the service as a Patwari prior to 1966 and he was promoted as Kanungo on 691987.
In the year 1988, the State of Haryana framed rules namely the Haryana Revenue Department Naib Tehsildar (Group C) Service Rules, 1988 providing further promotion from the post of Kanungo to the post of Naib Tehsildar.
According to rule 9 of the said rules, the appointment to the post of Tehsildar shall be made by direct recruitment and by promotion from amongst the Kanungos and Appendix-B to those rules provides academic qualification and experience required for the post of Naib Tehsildar.
Therefore, according to the petitioner, he was eligible to be promoted as Naib Tehsildar, but subsequently, the Haryana Government issued a Notification amending the rules further wherein it has been provided that a Kanungo should have also passed the Departmental Examination of Naib Tehsildar as specified in Appendix-F which reads follows :-  Appendix `F' [See rule 10 (1)] Rules for the Departmental Examination of Naib Tehsildar :  (1) Departmental examination will ordinarily be held twice a year in the first week of the month of May and November.
The dates will be notified in the Haryana Government Gazette.
Should an extra examination be necessary this will be notified under the orders of the Financial Commissioner Revenue.
Thus the introduction of departmental examination for the Kanungo to be promoted as Naib Tehsildars is under challenge in this writ petition.
3.
The learned Counsel for the petitioner contended that for direct recruitment no such departmental examination is being prescribed and, therefore, the prescription of the departmental examination of Kanungos to be promoted as Tehsildars is discriminatory and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
He further contended that the Appendix `F' cannot be applied to the petitioner since he has been in service prior to 1111966 and, therefore, new service rules cannot be introduced to his disadvantage in view of Section 82(6) of the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966.
The first contention of the learned Counsel for the petitioner cannot be accepted.
It is the prerogative of the State Government to prescribe a qualification for direct recruits and promotees.
It cannot be said that the promotees have to be treated on par with the direct recruits.
The academic qualification prescribed for the direct recruits is Graduation whereas for promotees only matriculation has been prescribed as the qualification.
It has been held by the Supreme Court in CA Rajendran v. Union of India & Ors., AIR 1968 SC 507 that there can be reasonable classification as between the direct recruits and promotees.
Thus the State Govt. can prescribe different qualification and experience for direct recruits and for promotees.
Therefore, the Ist contention of the learned Counsel for the petitioner fails.
4.
The learned Counsel for the petitioner further argued that the State Government cannot impose a condition to the disadvantage of the petitioner subsequent to the accrual of his right for promotion.
In this connection, he relied upon Section 82(6) of the Punjab Re-organisation Act which reads as under :  "Nothing in this Section shall be deemed to affect on or after the appointed day the operation of the provisions of Chapter 1 of Part XIV of the Constitution in relation to the determination of the conditions of service of persons serving in connection with the affairs of the Union of any State : Provided that the conditions of service applicable immediately before the appointed day to the case of any person referred to in sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall not be varied to his disadvantage except with the previous approval of the Central Government."
A reading of above Section clearly shows that it has been provided only for the protection of service conditions that are available to the employees as on 1111966.
It is to be seen whether the right of promotion is to be considered as a condition of service.
If the right of promotion is also considered to be a condition of service and if some qualifications are prescribed for promotion, they may not be varied except in accordance with Section 82(6) of the Punjab Re-organisation Act.
But in this case at the time of Punjab Re- organisation Act, there was no provision for promotion from Kanungos to Naib Tehsildars.
It was only in the year 1988, the rules namely Haryana Revenue Department Naib Tehsildar (Group C) came into force which provide for promotion from the cadre of Kanungos to Naib Tehsildars.
The rules under which the petitioner claims the right to be promoted were not in existence on the date of recognition of the State of Punjab and Haryana.
This right has been conferred and accrued only on coming into force of 1988 rules and the same was not available to him immediately before the appointed day.
Therefore, the State Government can change the terms and conditions for promotion.
I am of the opinion that Section 82(6) has no application to the present case.
5.
In view of the foregoing discussion, I do not find any ground to issue any writ.
6.
The result is, the writ petition fails and is, accordingly, dismissed.
Petition dismissed.