Harjit Singh Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner a domicile of the State of Haryana passed the diploma in Textile Engineering from the Indian Institute of Handloom Technology.
It appears that the State Government in consultation with the All India Council of Technical Education (hereinafter called the Council) made a policy that those candidates, who had obtained a diploma in Engineering ought to be given a chance to improve their qualifications by obtaining a degree qualification.
In accordance with this decision the State Government vide its letter dated 22.10.1996, Annexure P-1, informed respondent No. 4, the Director, Technological Institute of Textile Engineering, Bhiwani that the Government had accorded approval to the creation of 10% additional seats in the degree courses for diploma holders in that Institute.
Despite this direction, the said respondent, however, refused to admit students against these additional seats for the years 1997-98 and 1998-99.
The petitioner has accordingly come to this Court urging that a direction be issued to respondent Nos. 3 and 4 to admit students to the additional seats in the degree classes starting with the academic year 1999-2000.
2.
On notice of motion, two replies have been filed; one by respondent Nos. 1 and 2 and another by respondent Nos. 3 and 4, the main contesting party.
During the course of motion hearing, however, on 8101998, it was found that the Council should also be impleaded as a party.
The Council was accordingly impleaded as respondent No. 5 and a separate reply has been filed by this respondent as well.
3.
The stand taken by respondent Nos. 1 and 2 is that the State Government had in consultation with the Council taken a conscious decision as reflected in Annexure P-1, that 10% seats should be created for the lateral entry of diploma holders into the second year (that is the semester level) in the degree course and that these seats were in addition to the intake at the 1st year level and limited to 10% of that number.
It was pointed out that though this decision had been conveyed to respondent Nos. 3 and 4, vide Annexure P-1 the said respondents had refused to comply with the directive of the State Government and for this defiance, the State Government had issued a notice for the withdrawal of recognition which had been granted to that institution.
"Respondent No. 5, the Council has pleaded that the 10% additional seats had been created by notification No. GSR 320 dated 15.6.1992 issued by the Council in exercise of the powers conferred on it under Sections 23(1) and 10(o) of the All India Council for Technical Education Act, 1987 (hereinafter referred to as "the Act").
It will be seen from the replies filed on behalf of respondents 1 and 2 and 5 that they have supported the cause of the petitioner.
4.
Mr. RK Malik, the learned counsel for the petitioner, has urged only one basic point before me during the course of arguments.
He has pointed out that under Section 23 of the Act the Council had been authorised to make regulations and issue guidelines with regard to the various factors set out in Section 10 thereof and as a scheme for lateral entry had been notified by the Council on 15.6.1992 as per notification No. GSR 320 of even date (which had been published on 11.7.1992) the instructions, Annexure P-1 issued by the State Government pursuant thereto were binding on respondents No. 3 and 4.
He has also argued that respondent Nos. 3 and 4, in their reply, had given no cogent reasons for their defiant attitude and had merely averred that the directives of the State Government were not binding upon them.
5.
After hearing learned counsel for the petitioner and respondents No. 1 and 2, I am of the opinion that this petition deserves to succeed.
6.
The notification No. GSR 320 dated 15.6.1992 of the All India Council of Technical Education, published in the Gazette of India dated 11.7.1992 prescribing guidelines for admission to ongoing degree and diploma programmes is reproduced below :  Guidelines for admission to engineering degree and engineering diploma programmes.
G.S.R.
320 - In exercise of the powers conferred by Section 23(1) of the All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE) Act 1987 (No. 52 of 1987) the AICTE hereby prescribes the following guidelines for admission of students to Engineering Degree and Engineering Diploma programmes in pursuance of Section 10(o) of the AICTE Act, 1987.
GUIDELINES A ENGINEERING DEGREE PROGRAMMES 5.
Lateral entry to engineering degree programmes : Although engineering diploma programmes are conceived of as terminal in nature, some flexibility has to be built in to enable the meritorious amongst diploma holders to obtain engineering degrees.
There is evidence of diploma holders pursuing an engineering programme having performed well, not only in their academic careers but also in their jobs.
A student who has acquired a diploma in engineering through a minimum of three years of institutional study after 10+2 (Secondary School Leaving Certificate Examination) can be considered to be academically equivalent to a student who has passed the first year of a four year engineering degree programme, for which the qualifying examination is at the 12+ level.
Lateral entry for diploma holders will be allowed at the second year third semester level.
Seats in addition to the sanctioned intake at first year level, limited to a maximum of 10% will be reserved for such students.
3.
That in view of the above guidelines every institution including respondents No. 3 and 4 are bound to follow the guidelines of All India Council for Technical Education.
The admissions in an institute are to be made by the `competent authority.'
As per GSR 476 (E) `Competent Authority' means a Government or a University or any other authority as may be designated by the Government or the University or by law to allot students for admissions to various professional colleges in the State.
The guidelines of the Council vide GSR 320 with regard of lateral entry of diploma holders in the degree engineering institutes is to be implemented by the concerned State Govt/Competent Authority."
It will be seen from a reading of this notification that it pertained to the guidelines issued under Section 23 read with Section 10(o) of the Act.
Section 23(1) of the Act provides that the Council may by notification in the official gazette make regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of the Act, and the Rules generally to carry out its purposes.
7.
Section 10 of the Act in so far as it is relevant is also reproduced herein :-  10.
Functions of the Council :- It shall be for the Council to take all such steps as it may think fit for ensuring co-ordinated and integrated development of technical education and maintenance of standards and for the purposes of performing its functions under this Act, the Council may - (a) xx xx xx xx xx xx (b) co-ordinate the development of technical education in the country at all levels; xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx (g) evolve suitable performance appraisal systems for technical institutions and Universities imparting technical education, incorporating norms and mechanisms for enforcing accountability; xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx (i) lay down norms and standards for courses, curricula, physical and instructional facilities, staff pattern, staff qualifications, quality instructions, assessment and examinations; xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx (k) grant approval for starting new technical institutions and for introduction of new courses or programmes in consultation with the agencies concerned; xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx (o) provide guidelines for admission of students to technical institutions and Universities imparting technical education."
A bare reading of the aforesaid Section clearly reveals that very comprehensive functions have been prescribed for the Council and it is competent to issue, inter-alia, guidelines for laying down standards of education, the curricula of study and mode of admissions of students to technical institutions in the State.
It is, therefore, apparent that the guidelines issued vide notification No. GSR 320 dated 15.6.1992 had the authority of law and being statutory in nature bound respondent Nos. 3 and 4 thereunder.
It is also evident from the notification that the Council had felt that some avenues for achieving higher qualifications ought to be provided to bright diploma holders and it was with this object that the scheme for lateral entry to the 2nd year course was laid down.
Even assuming for a moment, therefore, that the State Government could not bind respondent Nos. 3 and 4 vide the communication, Annexure P-1, but as this communication was only a consequence of the notification GSR 320, which had statutory force, respondent Nos. 3 and 4 were obliged to follow the directions given in this Annexure.
8.
This petition is accordingly allowed and a direction is issued to respondent Nos. 3 and 4 to create 10% additional seats for diploma holders in the Institute as per the notification; to advertise and to fill the same in the ensuing academic year.
The costs of the petition are also assessed at Rs. 1,000/-, to be paid by respondent Nos. 3 and 4.
Order dasti.
Petition allowed.