THB Chalapathi, J - The petitioner was appointed as a Constable in the year 1971 in Patiala Range and he was sent for Lower School Course at Police Training College, Phillaur in the year 1981 and completed the training successfully.
According to him, he secured more marks than the 2nd respondent Manjit Singh and the petitioner was placed at Sr. No. 44 and Manjit Singh was placed at Sr. No. 48 and on the basis of Lower School Examination, the name of the petitioner was brought on promotion list C-1 on 1101981 which is meant for promotion to the rank of Head Constable and the petitioner was promoted as Head Constable on 121983 and he was also confirmed as Head Constable on 171989.
He further averred that Manjit Singh was shown junior to him according to the seniority.
For further promotion to the post of Assistant Sub Inspector of Police, the Head Constables have to undergo Intermediate School Course at Police Training College, Phillaur.
Further, according to the petitioner, the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Patiala prepared the list of candidates in the year 1993 to be sent for Intermediate School Course.
In the list, the name of the petitioner was omitted while the name of Manjit Singh, the 2nd respondent was included.
The petitioner, therefore, approached this Court for issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the Ist respondent (DIG of Police Patiala Range) to depute the petitioner to Intermediate Lower School Course for the Session 1993 commencing from November, 1993.
2.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of respondents 1 and 2 in which it is averred that the petitioner was promoted as Head Constable on 121983 while the 2nd respondent was promoted as Head Constable on 1101981.
Therefore the 2nd respondent is senior to the petitioner and no junior of the petitioner in Patiala District was deputed to Intermediate School Course and, therefore, the writ petition is liable to be dismissed.
3.
From the record, it is clear that the petitioner was allotted to Ropar District on its creation whereas the 2nd respondent continued to work in Patiala District.
There is no dispute of the fact that the seniority lists of the Constables and Head Constables are maintained districtwise.
Therefore, the petitioner, who has been allotted to Ropar district, could not be promoted as Head Constable till 121983 in Ropar district whereas the 2nd respondent who continued to work at Patiala had been promoted as Constable on 1101981 i.e. prior to the promotion of the petitioner.
Though the 2nd respondent was appointed as Constable subsequent to the petitioner, he earned promotion as Head Constable prior to the petitioner.
Therefore, in the category of Head Constables the 2nd respondent is senior to the petitioner because of his earlier promotion.
Annexure R-1 shows the seniority position of the Head Constables working in the Patiala Range.
According to the seniority list (Annexure R-1), the petitioner was at Sr. No. 70.
There are several other persons senior to the petitioner who are waiting to be deputed to the Intermediate School Course.
The petitioner cannot make any grievance in regard to sending the 2nd respondent to the Intermediate School Course since he was promoted as Head Constable earlier to the petitioner because he remained in Patiala District whereas the service of the petitioner was allotted to Ropar District.
In view of the date of promotion as Head Constable, as already noticed, the 2nd respondent P-4 is senior to the petitioner.
4.
In this view of the matter, I do not find any merit in this writ petition.
The writ petition is, therefore, dismissed.
However, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.