Harjit Singh Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner, the son of a Naval Officer, belongs to the Backward class (Kumhar Caste), was granted admission against a payment seat in the BRS Institute of Medical Sciences (Dental College & Hospital), Kot Billa, District Panchkula, but seeks a free seat in the same Institution on the basis of reservation.
Prior to 28th September, 1995, 10% seats had been reserved for candidates belonging to the Backward Classes for admission to Medical Colleges.
Vide Annexure P-1 dated 28th September, 1995, this percentage was increased by the State Government to 27% and the Backward Classes were categorised into two Blocks i.e. Block `A' comprising of the 67 old castes and Block `B' consisting of 5 new castes which were freshly included in the category of backward classes.
A gist of the policy decision was circulated to all the respondents including the Kurukshetra University- respondent No. 3 vide memo dated 26th October, 1995 Annexure P-2 to the petition and a direction was issued that these instructions should be strictly complied with.
The Kurukshetra University published a Prospectus on 21st October, 1995, inviting applications for the Entrance Test for admission to the MBBS/BDS courses in the State of Haryana.
The petitioner who fell within the BC (A) Category, took the test on 12th November, 1995 and was granted admission to a payment seat in the respondent No. 4 College as a candidate belonging to the Backward Class.
On enquiry, the petitioner found that respondent No. 4 had granted admission against free seats to three candidates i.e. OP Saini, Manju Verma and Narinder Chhokar who has been categorised as belonging to the Backward Class `B' category, vide policy decision Annexure P-1, in which it had also been decided to increase the extent of reservation for Backward Classes from 10% to 27%.
The petitioner, however, accepted admission to the payment seat on 27th December, 1995 on payment of Rs. 50,000/- as fee.
He also received a letter Annexure P-5 dated 6th of January, 1996 from respondent No. 4 that he should furnish a cash security or Bank Guarantee for the fee of the remaining three years within 15 days of the issue of that letter.
The petitioner's father then made a representation dated 15th January, 1996 to respondent Nos. 3 and 4 requesting them to withdraw the letter Annexure P-5 as it was totally unwarranted.
It appears that the aforesaid respondents persisted in their efforts to secure the guarantee from the petitioner on which he has come to this Court by way of the present writ petition.
2.
It is the petitioner's case that vide Annexure P-1 dated 28th September, 1995, the State Government had taken two decisions touching upon the petitioner's candidature as a Backward Class candidate, firstly to increase the extent of reservation for Backward classes from 10% to 27%; and secondly to categorise the Backward Classes into BC (A) and BC (B) categories and to apportion 16% and 11% seats respectively amongst them but respondent No. 4, the Kurukshetra University which had been instrumental in making the admission had misapplied the directions and while accepting the reservation at 27% had not re-categorised the Backward Classes as BC (A) or BC (B) candidates, with the result that 3 candidates, OP Saini, Manju Verma, and Narinder Chhokar who belonged to the BC (B) category had been granted admission against free seats.
3.
Two replies have been filed, one on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2 and the other on behalf of respondent No. 4.
In the reply filed on behalf of the first set of respondents, it has been clearly pleaded that the instructions Annexure P-1 had been circulated to all concerned with a direction that they should be strictly complied with.
In the reply filed on behalf of respondent No. 4, it has been submitted that the petitioner had accepted admission against a payment seat without demur and had also deposited his fee and put in about three months of study and as such, was estopped from raising any controversy with regard to his admission.
It has also been pleaded that the admission had been made by the said respondent on the basis of the merit list supplied by the Kurukshetra University-respondent No. 3 and that no action had been taken at its own level.
Respondent No. 3, the University, though served, has not put in appearance.
4.
Mr. Surya Kant, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has argued that the instruction Annexure P-1 dated 28th September, 1995 which had been notified by the State Government to all concerned including the Kurukshetra University on that very day bound the parties to its terms an das the Prospectus had been issued subsequently on 21st October, 1995, the University was bound to follow the instructions.
In the alternative, he has pleaded that even if the procedure prior to the issuance of the fresh instructions.
Annexure P-1 had to be followed, the petitioner would, nevertheless, be entitled to admission to a free seat in the Backward Class Category.
5.
The learned counsel for the parties have been heard.
It is the conceded position that the instructions Annexure P-1 had been circulated to the University-respondent No. 4 before the Prospectus had been issued.
It was, therefore, incumbent upon the University to have made a distinction between the two categories of Backward Class candidates.
It appears from the facts narrated above that the University did accept the increased quantum of reservation from 10% to 27% but failed to make the sub-categorisation in line with these very instructions.
It also appears from the record that the respondent-University granted admission on the basis of one consolidated list for both categories with the result that the petitioner was given a payment seat.
It is apparent from para No. 8 of the writ petition that six candidates were given admission against the Backward Class category and they were (i) OP Saini (ii) Manju Verma (iii) Narinder Chhokar (iv) Purn Sharma (v) Manoj and (vi) Rajinder Singh-the petitioner.
It seems to be the undisputed position that the first three candidates, in fact, belonged to the BC (B) category, whereas the last three belonged to BC (A) category.
In this eventuality, if the first three candidates were to be treated as belonging to BC(B) category, the petitioner who was at merit No. 3 in the BC(A) category, would be entitled to admission to one of the three free seats for that category which stood reserved.
6.
It is true that the petitioner had accepted admission against a payment seat in the respondent No. 4 College but it is equally true that he had been representing against the denial of a free seat to him from the beginning.
It is well known that due to the overwhelming demand for medical education, an offer of admission to a Medical College is not to be lightly refused.
The petitioner had, therefore, no choice but to accept the payment seat and to file the present writ petition for seeking his relief.
7.
This petition is accordingly, allowed, the order Annexure P-5 dated 6th January, 1996 is quashed and a direction is issued to respondent No. 4 College to treat the petitioner as a candidate who has been granted admission against a free seat.
It is further directed that the payment made by the petitioner thus far would be adjusted by respondent No. 4 as fee for the course and if any amount is still surplus, the same shall be refused (refunded ?)
to the petitioner within a period of four months from today.
No order as to costs.
Dasti order.
Petition allowed.