Harjit Singh Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was enrolled in the Indian Army on February 9, 1948 and was boarded out on account of being in low medical category 'CEE' permanent vide discharge certificate Annexure P-2, dated December 15, 1959.
It is the petitioner's case that he had made a claim for the grant of disability pension but the same had been rejected vide Annexure P-4 dated April 27, 1960 on the ground that the conditions for the grant of disability pension were not made out and it was not proved that the disease that the petitioner had contracted had arisen during Military service or had been aggravated thereby and that in any case it was not attributable to military service.
The petitioner thereafter filed an appeal against the order Annexure P-4, vide Annexure P-6 dated February 29, 1998 but this too was rejected vide Annexure P-7 dated September 7, 1990.
The petitioner has accordingly come to this Court by way of the present writ petition.
2.
On notice of motion, the respondents have filed a reply and taken a preliminary objection that the petitioner had been discharged from service some 40 years earlier i.e. on December 30, 1959 and as per the Regulations, his record had been destroyed after the stipulated period of 25 years ie on June 29, 1984.
It has, however, been admitted that the long roll maintained by the Signals Records Office did contain the Service particulars of the petitioner, which revealed that he had in fact been discharged from Service on account of medical disability.
A replication has also been filed by the petitioner in support of his case.
3.
It will be seen that the petitioner was discharged from service as he was suffering from Aphalia and Immature cataract of the left eye.
4.
During the course of hearing, the petitioner, who is present in person, has pointed out that he had first been operated on for Aphalia of the right eye in the Military Hospital, Lucknow in the year 1959, which had led to complete loss of eye sight in that eye and also adversely affected the other eye.
Be that as it may, in the absence of the record, it is not possible to examine the petitioner's claim.
However, as this is a case of denial of disability Pension to an aged Soldier, it would be appropriate if the petitioner is examined by a Medical Board so as to ascertain the extent of the disability and in case he fulfils the conditions laid down in Regulation 173 of the Pension Regulations for the Army, 1961, the respondents may consider his claim for the grant of disability pension.
It is accordingly directed that the petitioner will be examined by a Medical Board at the Command Hospital at Chandimandir within three months from the date a certified copy of this order is supplied to the respondents and if it is found that the petitioner is entitled to a disability pension, the same would be granted to him prospectively from the date the Medical Board finds him eligible.
5.
No costs.
Petition allowed.