NK Sodhi, J - In response to an advertisement published in `The Tribune' on 7.6.1992 the petitioner applied to the Bhuna Co-operative Sugar Mills Ltd, Bhuna District Hisar (for short the society) for the post of Office Superintendent.
The qualification prescribed for the post were `Graduate with ten years experience in general and office administration,.
He was interviewed for the post on 31.7.1993 by the Selection Committee and was selected.
He was given a letter of appointment on 1181993.
The Board of Administrators of the society under the Chairmanship of the Deputy Commissioner, Hisar in their meeting held on 26101993 approved the appointment of the petitioner which had earlier been confirmed by the Chairman of the society.
By an order dated 12.8.1994 passed by the Managing Director of the society the petitioner was further promoted to the post of Personnel Officer which promotion was also confirmed by the Board of Administrators in their meeting held on 991994.
It may be mentioned that prior to the appointment of the petitioner as Office Superintendent he was working with the society as a Cane Clerk with effect from 22.11.1992.
The Registrar, Co-operative Societies summoned the record regarding the appointment of the petitioner as Office Superintendent and was of the view that he (petitioner) was not eligible for the post and, therefore, his appointment could not be sustained.
By a communication dated 3011996 addressed to the Managing Director of the society the Registrar directed the former to remove the petitioner from service after serving him with a show cause notice.
The society was further directed to send a compliance report to the Registrar.
Thereafter the Managing Director examined the record of the petitioner pertaining to his appointment and also his qualifications and after affording an opportunity of hearing to him came to the conclusion that his appointment as Office Superintendent and his subsequent promotion as Personnel Officer could not be sustained as he was not eligible.
By an order dated 831996 the petitioner was reverted to the post of Cane Clerk on fixed wages on which post he was working before his appointment as Office Superintendent.
Feeling aggrieved by this order the petitioner preferred an appeal before the Commissioner and Secretary to Government of Haryana, Co-operation Department under section 68 of the Punjab Co-operative Societies Act who by order dated 12111996 dismissed the same holding that the petitioner did not have the requisite experience for the post of Office Superintendent at the time when he was selected by the society.
It is against this order that the present writ petition has been filed under Article 226 of the Constitution.
The order of reversion dated 931996 passed by the Managing Director has also been impugned in the writ petition.
2.
I have heard counsel for the parties and am of the view that the writ petition deserves to succeed.
It is not in dispute that the petitioner was appointed to the post of Office Superintendent by way of direct recruitment though prior to his selelction he was working as a Cane Clerk on fixed wages with the society.
Having been directly recruited to the post of Office Superintendent, he could not be reverted to any lower post.
If he was not eligible for the post his services could be terminated in accordance with law but the respondents could not revert him as Cane Clerk.
The view that I have taken finds support from the judgments of the Apex Court in Nyadar Singh v. Union of India and others, AIR 1988 SC 1979 and Hussain Sasansaheb Kaladqi v. State of Maharasthra, AIR 1987 SC 1627.
For the foregoing reasons, the writ petition is allowed and the impugned order of reversion dated 93 1996 and also the appellate order upholding the same is quashed.
It will, however, be open to the competent authority to proceed in accordance with law.
No costs.
Petition allowed.