Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - Respondent No. 1, Jarnail Singh, approached the Controlling Authority under the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 with a petition.
The Controlling Authority, on examination of the matter, found that the respondent was entitled to an amount of Rs. 1,15,000/-.
His claim having been upheld, the Municipal Committee has filed the present writ petition.
2.
The solitary contention raised by Mr. Kamal Sharma, learned counsel for the petitioner, is that under the provisions of the Act, persons who had drawn salary of more than Rs. 1,000/- do not fall within the definition of an "employee" and cannot claim the benefit of the provisions of the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972.
Is to so ?
3.
Admittedly, the respondent had retired from service on April 30, 1995.
The amount of gratuity had fallen due to him on May 1, 1995.
The provisions of Section 2(e) had been amended by Act No. 34 of 1994 w.e.f.
May 24, 1994.
The amended definition reads as under :-  " `employee' means any person (other than an apprentice) employed on wages, in any establishment, factory, mine, oil field, plantation, port, railway company or shop, to do any skilled, semi-skilled or unskilled, manual, supervisory, technical or clerical work, whether the terms of such employment are express or implied, and whether or not such person is employed in a managerial or administrative capacity, but does not include any such person who holds a post under the Central Government or a State Government and is governed by any other Act or by any rules providing for payment of gratuity."
A perusal of the above provision shows that the limitation regarding salary is no longer there.
Only such persons as are employed with the State or the Central Government are excluded from the operation of the Act.
The respondent, admittedly, does not fall in that clause.
4.
We also find that the matter has been considered by their Lordship of the Supreme Court in Municipal Corporation of Delhi v. Dharam Prakash Sharma and another, 1998 Factory Law Reports 178 : 1999(2) SCT 297 (SC) and Jotindra Nath Roy v. Surendra Bikram Singh Agarwal, 1996(2) SCT 620 (SC).
According to the former decision, the employees of the Municipal Committee are entitled to the payment of gratuity under the 1972 Act.
5.
In view of the above, we find no merit in this writ petition.
It is, consequently, dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dimissed.