RL Anand, J - Ex-Constable Rameshwar Dayal has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India seeking direction against the respondents for setting aside the Order Annexure P-4 dated 461992, Order Annexure P-6 dated 1121993 and Order Annexure P-7 dated 881994 and has prayed that after quashment of these orders petitioner may be deemed to be in service throughout and he may be awarded all the consequential benefits.
The case of the parties can be summarised in the following manner :-  2.
The petitioner joined the Punjab Police in the year 1965 and he was allocated to the Haryana Police force on 1111966.
As per the stand of the department, the petitioner was dismissed from service vide order Annexure P-4 dated 461992 on the ground that petitioner remained absent from duty for a continuous period of 280 days.
The petitioner also filed an appeal against that order, and the appeal was dismissed by the appellate authority and his revision was also dismissed.
3.
The sole point which survives for determination is that whether the impugned order dated 461992 which has been confirmed by the Appellate Authority and the Revisional Authority can be sustained in the eyes of law or not ?
4.
I have heard Sh. IS Balhara, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner and Sh. Ashok Chaudhary appearing for the respondents and with their assistance, I have gone through the records of this case.
5.
It is the common case of the parties that the petitioner joined the service in the year 1965 and on the date of the passing of the dismissal order i.e. on 1461992 he had put in about 28 years service and in this manner he had qualified himself for the purposes of pension.
Rule 162 of the Punjab Police Rules lays down as follow :  "Dismissal shall be awarded only for the gravest acts of misconduct or as the cumulative effect of continued misconduct proving incorrigibility and complete unfitness for police service.
In making such an award regard shall be had to the length of service of the offender and his claim to pension."
6.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has two fold contentions, firstly that the order dated 461992 cannot be sustained in the eyes of law in view of the proved illness of the petitioner and secondly he submits that even if assumed for the sake of arguments that the impugned order dated 461992 and the subsequent orders passed by the Appellate Authority and the Revisional Authority are taken to be correct in exercise of the first part of the Police Rule 162, still these orders cannot be sustained in the eyes of law as none of the authorities had taken note of the claim of the petitioner with regard to his pension and also with regard to the length of service which he has put while serving the police department.
In support of his contention Mr. Balhara relies upon a judgment of this Court rendered in Mahipat v. State of Haryana, 1994(4) S.L.R.
311 : 1994(3) SCT 337 (P&H) where His Lordship was pleased to hold as follows :-  "On a plain reading of the rule, it emerges that the dismissal from service shall be awarded after finding that the act of misconduct attributed to the delinquent is of gravest nature or there is a cumulative effect of continuous misconduct proving incorrigibility and complete unfitness for police service.
After recording the findings of the gravest act of misconduct or cumulative misconduct proving incorrigibility and complete unfitness for police service, the authorities before awarding the severest punishment of dismissal would take into consideration or give due regard to the length of service of the delinquent and his claim for pension.
Concedingly, herein, there is nothing on the record to show that the Punishing Authority or the Appellate Authority addressed themselves with regard to the length of service either specifically or impliedly.
There is nothing on the record to even remotely suggest that the Punishing Authority was alive to the fact of taking into consideration the length of service while awarding the punishment."
On the contrary, the learned counsel for the respondents submit that the impugned order which has been affirmed by the Appellate Authority and Revisional Authority has taken note of the fact about the length of the service of the petitioner.
7.
After considering the rival contention of the parties, I am of the considered opinion that there is sufficient force in the arguments raised by Mr. Balhara.
From the impugned order Annexure P-4, I will be able to show just now that the Punishing Authority did not take into consideration about the length of the service of the petitioner.
There is an object with regard to the drafting of the Rule 162.
The Legislative wisdom, in the first part of this order was pleaded to state that the order of dismissal should be passed for the gravest acts of misconduct or as the cumulative effect of continued acts of misconduct proving incorrigibility and complete unfitness for police service.
The second part of the order is more important.
The Legislature wanted that the person who has put in his valuable span of life in the police department should not be deprived of his pensionary benefits unless and until the Punishing Authority has applied its mind.
With regard to that we all know that after retirement of a public servant his bread and butter runs on pension.
If the public servant is being deprived of such a valuable right or valuable benefit on which he would like to spend his remaining life, the Punishing Authority must apply his mind so as to deprive such a person of his bread and butter.
In the present case, when the punishing authority wanted to award the punishment, it has stated as follow :  "As regards punishment, I have also given personal hearing to the defaulter.
He could not add anything to what he has already submitted in his written explanation.
Having heard the defaulter and considered the whole matter, I am convinced, that the defaulter has exhibited highest indiscipline which amounts to a grave misconduct unbecoming of a police officer of his rank.
I am constrained to say that in the context of the present-day law and order problems with which we are faced, the police department cannot afford to keep on its rolls such indisciplined and irresponsible persons, who can be away from their duty at will without prior approval or intimation.
I have no doubt in my mind that the misconduct alleged and proved against the defaulter is of the gravest kind.
There is no mitigating circumstance, what-so-ever, on the record of this case in favour of the defaulter.
Accordingly, the defaulter is found totally unfit to be retained in service and he is, therefore, hereby dismissed from service with immediate effect.
A copy of this order shall be delivered to the defaulter, free of cost and the order be booked accordingly."
8.
A reading of the order would show that the Punishing Authority never applied its mind and it has not given any specific finding as to why the petitioner should be deprived of his right of pension.
In these circumstances, the impugned order Annexure P-4 cannot be sustained in the eyes of law with which the consequences are to deprive the petitioner of his pensionary benefits.
Even the Appellate Authority and the Revisional Authority has not touched this aspect irrespective of the fact that the petitioner has taken a specific plea in this regard in the grounds of appeal.
This would show that there was non-application of mind on the part of the Appellate Authority and the Revisional Authority when the quasi Judicial orders were being passed through which the order of the Punishing Authority dated 461992 was affirmed.
No law to the contrary has been cited by the learned GP In these circumstances, the writ petition is hereby allowed.
Impugned orders Annexure P-4, Annexure P-6 and Annexure P-7 are hereby struck down and quashed with the clear observation that allowing of this writ petition will be debar the department from passing fresh order but only in pursuance of the provisions of Rule 162 of the Police Rule, if they so desire.
9.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.