Harjit Singh Bedi, J. (Oral) - This judgment will dispose of Civil Writ Petition No. 1687 of 1985 (Roshan Lal and another v. The Haryana Agricultural University, Hissar and others) and Civil Writ Petition No. 5791 of 1985 (Raghbir Singh v. The Haryana Agricultural University and another).
The facts have been taken primarily from Civil Writ Petition No. 1687 of 1985.
2.
The petitioners passed their matriculation examination from the All India Vidwat Sammelan (AIVS), Aligarh and that being the basic qualification, obtained admission in the Veterinary Compounder and Stock Assistant Course in the Haryana Agricultural University, Hissar in the academic years 1974-75 and 1978-79 respectively.
This admission was granted to the petitioners on the basis of their educational qualification as also interview conducted by the Selection Committee constituted by the University consisting of the Dean of Veterinary Sciences and the Class Incharge of the Stock Assistant and Veterinary Compounder Course.
The original certificates of the matriculation examination passed by the petitioners were duly verified and checked by the Selection Committee and no objection to their validity was ever raised.
The petitioners also filled their examination forms and were duly issued roll numbers and on their success in the examination, were awarded the requisite certificates and on that basis were appointed to the posts of Veterinary Compounder and Stock Assistant in the Department of Animal Husbandry, Haryana.
In the year 1985 (when the petitioners had already been in employment for 9 and 5 years respectively) they were served with show cause notices Annexure P-1 and P-2 dated 1911985 issued by the University informing that the matriculation examination of the AIVS Aligarh, which was the qualifying examination for admission to the Veterinary Compounder and Stock Assistant Courses, which they had joined and completed, had not been recognised by any Board/University and that they should show cause as to why their admission to the course should not be cancelled.
The petitioners submitted their replies to the notices but received orders dated 13.3.1985, Annexures P-4 and P-5 respectively that the University had decided to cancel the Diploma certifications issued to them and that they should return the same to the University failing which the matter would be reported to the police.
The petitioners have accordingly come to this Court impugning the orders, Annexures P-4 and P-5.
3.
Notice of motion was issued on March 29, 1985 and an order of status quo regarding service was also made.
The petition was admitted to final hearing on May 21, 1985 and it was directed that services of the petitioners would not be terminated on the ground on which these were sought to be terminated.
It is the admitted position that the interim order continues to be in force even today.
4.
A reply has been filed on behalf of respondent-University and the stand taken in the impugned orders has been reiterated.
It has been pointed out that the petitioners had got admission to the Veterinary Compounder and Stock Assistant Course in the years 1974-75 and 1978-79 respectively but on enquiry it had been found that the matriculation examination of the AIVS, Aligarh was not a recognised one and as such the petitioners were not entitled to the admission on that basis.
5.
After having gone through the record and hearing the learned State counsel, I am of the opinion that this petition deserves to succeed.
It is not disputed by the respondents that the case of the petitioners had been scrutinised by the representatives of the University at the time when they had been granted admission.
Their forms were re-scrutinised at the time when they had appeared for the annual examination and on both these occasions, no fault was found with their validity.
It is not the case of the respondents that the A.V.I.S was a non-existent or a shady institution, as the intermediate course of the said institution stood duly recognised.
The petitioners also passed out of the course within a year or two and also joined service.
As per para 2 of the present writ petition, the petitioners had, by 1985, been working on their respective posts for about 9 and 5 years respectively.
It is, thus apparent that as of today, they would have completed approximately 23 and 19 years service on account of the interim orders made in their favour.
For this primary reason, I am of the opinion that it would be wholly unnecessary to go into the controversy raised by the respondents.
Moreover, it is apparent that the University, had, after a gap of many years, sought to cancel the admission granted to the petitioners to the Veterinary Compounder and Stock Assistant Courses and this, to my mind, was not justified.
6.
For the reasons recorded above, the writ petitions are allowed and the orders, Annexures P-4 and P-5 are quashed.
As the learned counsel for the petitioners has since passed away, a copy of the order be sent to them under registered cover free the cost.
No costs.
Petitions allowed.