Harjit Singh Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner, Ashok Rana, having the requisite basic qualification, appeared in the Entrance Test for admission to the LL.B.
(Professional Course) held on 8th June, 1998.
On the declaration of the result thereof, it transpired that he had obtained 70 marks out of 150 in the Entrance Test and was placed at serial No. 194 in the merit list of successful candidates.
On the determination of the final merit list, however, it was found that the petitioner had been relegated to merit position No. 252 from 194 on the basis of the criteria for determining the merit that had been notified by the University in the Prospectus.
Resultantly, he has been denied admission to the course.
The petitioner thereafter submitted a representation to the Vice Chancellor on 25th July, 1998 on the ground that the merit had not been correctly determined as per the criteria laid down in the prospectus and had it not been so, he would have gained admission to the course.
This representation was considered by the Board of Control as also the Vice Chancellor of the University and ultimately, rejected by a speaking order Annexure R-1 dated 3rd August, 1998 and the decision was conveyed to the petitioner as well.
Aggrieved thereby, the petitioner has come to this Court challenging the denial of admission to him.
2.
On notice of motion, a reply has been filed by the respondents and it has been pointed out that the criteria for determination of merit had been laid down in the Prospectus which bound the authorities as also the petitioner and that this criteria had been applied by the University uniformly in the case of all candidates.
It has also been pleaded that the petitioner's case had been given serious consideration by the University on the basis of his representation but had ultimately been rejected at the highest level vide Annexure R-1.
3.
Mr. Ashok Rana, the petitioner in person, has urged that the merit had been incorrectly determined inasmuch as that 50% marks from the percentage of marks obtained by a candidate in the academic performance had been counted whereas part-C(i) of para 1 of the Prospectus had provided only 25% weightage on this account and this weightage was to be given for the academic achievement/performance at the qualifying examination and added to the score of the candidate in the Entrance Test so as to determine his final merit in each case, whereas 75% weightage would be retained for the marks in the Entrance Test.
4.
As against this, Mr. Anupam Gupta, the learned Counsel appearing for the University has pointed out that the petitioner had only reproduced a part of the scheme for admission in the writ petition leaving out some relevant portions and if the scheme given in Part-C(i) of para 1, was read as a whole, it would be evident that the petitioner's merit had been correctly calculated.
It has also been argued that the petitioner had, on the basis of the illustration given in the scheme, been awarded 9498 marks out of 200 which included 70 out of 150 for the Entrance Test and 2379 marks out of 50 for the qualifying examination and 119 marks as Panjab University Weightage.
It has also been pleaded that the petitioner did not make the merit and so such, was not entitled to admission.
5.
After hearing the learned Counsel for the parties, I am of the opinion that this petition lacks merit.
If sub-para-C(i) of para 1 is read in isolation the petitioner may have some case to plead but this para has to be read alongwith with the illustration which forms part of the scheme.
The method of determining the merit has been given as under :-  "Total marks for determining merit would be 200.
75% (150 marks) for the qualifying examination.
Illustration : Suppose a candidate obtained 360 out of 600 marks in the qualifying examination and 80 out of 150 marks in the Entrance Test, his merit will be as under :-  Marks for qualifying examination  = 30 Marks in Entrance Test  = 80 Total marks = 110 out of 200" Admittedly, the petitioner's merit as also that of others has been evaluated in accordance with the procedure prescribed.
To my mind, therefore, no fault can be found with the action taken by the respondent-University.
Dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.