NK Sodhi, J - This is a petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution for a mandamus to direct the Haryana Tourism Corporation (for short the corporation) to give regular appointments to the petitioners and a regular scale of pay.
2.
Petitioners 1 to 51 joined different courses in the Institute of Catering at Panipat and Food Crafts Institute at Faridabad and on completion of their courses the corporation appointed them as job trainees on different posts like Waiters, Kitchen trainees, Counter Incharge etc. Their training period was two years from the date of joining and it could be extended for anther six months if they failed to complete the training satisfactorily.
During the period of training they were given a fixed stipend.
The letter of appointment contained a stipulation that on the completion of the training it would not be obligatory on the part of the corporation to offer them any employment nor would it be obligatory on their part to accept any employment with the corporation.
It was further stipulated that `you will, however, be considered for appointment on some regular post subject to the availability of post on the completion of your successful training.'
These petitioners joined the corporation on the dates mentioned against their names in para 5 of the writ petition and most of them have been working since the year 1991 onwards.
They have successfully completed their training and are continuing to work on a fixed stipend till date.
Petitioners 52 to 65 are working as daily wagers with the corporation with effect from the dates mentioned against their names in para 8 of the writ petition.
It will be seen that they are continuing since the year 1988 onwards.
The prayer made in the writ petition is for a direction the corporation to give regular scale of pay.
Petitioner 52 to 65 are seeking regularisation of their services.
3.
In the reply filed by the corporation, it is pleaded that petitioners 1 to 51 have no right to invoke the jurisdiction of this court as they are working as trainees.
It is further pleaded that in terms of the stipulation contained in their letters of appointment the corporation is under no obligation to give appointment to any of them and since there is no regular post available with the corporation they cannot be considered/appointed on any post.
It is also averred that petitioners 52 to 65 are working on daily/contract basis and in the absence of any regular sanctioned posts their services cannot be regularised.
4.
During the course of arguments Shri KK Gupta, learned counsel for the corporation stated that regular posts have since been sanctioned by the corporation and the cases of petitioners 52 to 65 are being considered for regularising their services against those posts in order of their seniority and subject to their suitability.
In view of this statement of the learned counsel, it is not necessary to issue any direction to the corporation in regard to these petitioners.
5.
As regards petitions 1 to 51, I am satisfied that some directions need to be issued.
It is true that in the appointment letter there is a stipulation that on the completion of their training the corporation was not under any obligation to offer them any employment but it was stipulated that they would be considered for appointment on a regular post provided the posts were available.
In the written statement filed by the corporation it is averred that no sanctioned posts are available and, therefore, these petitioners could not be considered for regular appointment.
However, during the pendency of the writ petition 139 posts of Waiters in the pay scale of Rs. 2610-3540 have been advertised in the Times of India, New Delhi dated March 27, 1999 inviting applications from the eligible candidates.
Now that 139 posts of Waiters exist there is no reason why the corporation in terms of the stipulation contained in the letter of appointment should not absorb the petitioners against those posts particularly when they have not only successfully completed the training but have also worked with the corporation for more than three years.
6.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed and a direction issued to the corporation to absorb petitioners 1 to 51 against the advertised posts if they are eligible for the same.
This direction will not apply in the case of petitioner 21 who has since withdrawn from the case.
The corporation will be at liberty to fill up the remaining vacant posts from the open market as advertised.
No costs.
Petition allowed.