Iqbal Singh, J - The only point for consideration in this petition is - whether there is compliance of the principle of audi alteram partem before passing the impugned orders Annexures P-2 to P-4 by respondent Nos. 3 to 5 ?
2.
The petitioners in this case are working on the posts of Bill Clerks, Meter Reader and Ledger Clerk in Public Works Department, Public Health (G.W.
), Government of Punjab, on Muster Roll basis for the last many years.
They are not being paid regular pay scales.
3.
In view of the instructions dated 16121996 (Annexure P-1) issued by the Department of Finance, Punjab Government, bonus was granted for the years 1992-93, 1993-94, 1994-95 and 1995-96 to those government employees who were having six months of continuous service for the said years.
Accordingly the petitioners were paid bonus in accordance with para 2 of instructions (Annexure P-1).
The respondents are now recovering the said amount of ad hoc bonus paid to the petitioners in terms of para 3(i) and (ii) of the said instructions (Annexure P-1).
The sole grievance of the petitioners is that they were not heard by the respondents before ordering the recovery of ad hoc bonus from them.
Accordingly, they have come to this Court by way of this petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of India praying for issuance of a writ of certiorari quashing the orders dated 29.6.1998 (Annexure P-2), dated 1571998 (Annexure P-3) and dated 1771998 (Annexure P-4).
4.
We have heard Mr. JS Virk, Advocate, learned counsel for the petitioners and Mr. Rupinder Khosla, learned Deputy Advocate General, Punjab.
5.
The cardinal principle of law is that no order affecting the interests of a person should be passed without affording him an opportunity of hearing by way of issuing a show cause notice or otherwise, as provided under the rules governing the service of such persons.
The petitioners had been granted ad hoc bonus in view of the instructions dated 16121996 (Annexure P-1).
Before passing the orders of effecting the recovery of ad hoc bonus from the petitioners, they were bound to be afforded an opportunity of being heard, which has not been done in the present case.
Therefore, the principle of natural justice has not been followed by the respondents in the present case.
6.
Consequently, this petition succeeds and is allowed on the ground of non- compliance of principle of natural justice with liberty to the respondents to pass a fresh order in accordance with law after hearing the petitioners.
Petition allowed.