KA Abdul Gafoor, J - The petitioner has approached this Court seeking a direction for disposal of Exts.
P15, P16 and P17 in the light of Ext.
P14 and to correct the date of birth entered in the petitioner's SSLC book as 13.10.1942 and to grant consequential benefits.
The petitioners seeks a direction not to retire the petitioner on the basis of the date of birth entered in his service book as 1091941.
He seeks continuance beyond the age of retirement reckoning that date on the strength of Ext.
P4.
He also seeks a declaration to the effect that his correct date of birth is 272.
(sic).
2.
Ext.
P5 is a request to Govt. made on 1581991 to correct the date of birth in service record.
Ext.
P1 is similar request dated 951994 to Govt.
But in Ext.
P17 dated 3061994 the petitioner has requested before Commissioner for Govt.
Examinations to correct his date of birth in his school records.
3.
The petitioner attempted to correct his date of birth entered in his school record and service book since long.
In Ext.
P13 dated 27.12.1968 the Deputy Commissioner for Govt.
Examinations examined his application and rejected it.
The petitioner appealed against it.
That resulted in Ext.
P4 stating that correction of date of birth cannot be allowed solely dependant on extract of the birth register.
The petitioner was also informed that if there is any error in converting Malayalam Era into Christian Era and if there is consequent mistake in the entry of date of birth, the petitioner shall approach the Commissioner for Govt.
Examinations.
But the petitioner again approached Govt. with Ext.
P9.
The petitioner obtained Ext.
P11 dated 2651980, a certificate of birth.
The petitioner thereupon applied again to the Commissioner for Govt.
Examination for correction of date of birth in school register.
That resulted in Ext.
P12.
It is stated that his application was admitted and he was instructed to approach Govt. to seek condonation of delay.
But pursuant to Ext.
P12 the petitioner did not pursue his case to get condonation of delay.
In spite of that he applied for correction of date of birth in service record.
That was replied in Ext.
P13 by Govt. that as SSLC book is not corrected there is no ground for consideration of his request for correction in the service book.
These documents are not challenged by the petitioner in this OP The petitioner continued his effort for correction of service record as per Ext.
P15 and Ext.
P16 as mentioned above.
As the Commissioner has already taken a decision as seen from Ext.
P12 that there was delay in petitioner's application, there arises no consideration of his application by the Commissioner as is made in Ext.
P17 for correction of date of birth in school records.
4.
Admittedly by the petitioner, he has not obtained the correction of date of birth in the SSLC book or school records.
As per instruction `1' under Rule 143 Part III KSR entry in the service book regarding the date of birth should indicate on what evidence the date of birth was accepted.
The instruction also provides that "in the case of persons who have attended a recognised school/college the school leaving certificate or an authenticated extract of the admission register of the school or college where the employee last studied" shall be considered as satisfactory proof of date of birth.
The first page of his service book is produced as Ext.
R1(a).
It shows that his date of birth has been recorded in the service book as 1091941 as verified from the SSLC book.
The petitioner has attended a recognised school and he is having a SSLC book.
So long as that date of birth continues in the SSLC book, that alone shall be considered as satisfactory proof of date of birth in terms of instruction No. 1 in Rule 143 part III KSR.
In the case of persons who have attended recognised school or college, unless that record is corrected, no one can correct the date of birth entered in the service book in variation with the date of birth contained in the school records or SSLC book.
In Sukumaran v. State of Kerala, 1997(1) KLT 570 : 1997(3) SCT 141 (Kerala) I have already taken a view that "going by the statutory provision under Rule 143 Part III KSR, in the case of the petitioner the date of birth in his school leaving certificate alone shall be taken for the purpose of entering the same in the service book."
When this rule is there, naturally unless the entry of date of birth in the school record is corrected, the petitioner cannot claim correction of date of birth in the service book.
Therefore the petitioner's contention that his request for correction shall be allowed inspite of the entry of the date of birth in the SSLC book, cannot be accepted.
5.
The petitioner also did not seek condonation of delay as directed in Ext.
P12.
He allowed Ext.
P12 to become final.
Govt. is the authority to condone the delay in making the application.
The petitioner did not attempt to get the delay condoned.
In such circumstances it cannot be directed that the entry of date of birth in School records or SSLC books shall be corrected as claimed by the petitioner, even though he has to his credit Ext.
P11 to show that he has a different date of birth as registered at the time of his birth.
OP fails and is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.