K.Ramamoorthy, J - The short facts necessary for the disposal of the writ petition could be related as under.
The petitioner was working as Sub Inspector upto April 1983.
By order dated 1031983 the petitioner was promoted to the rank of Inspector.
The petitioner had passed the Promotion Courses required for the purpose of eligibility of promotion as Inspector.
In January, 1984 the petitioner was reverted to the post of Sub Inspector.
Subsequently, the petitioner was compulsorily retired from service.
2.
The petitioner has challenged the order of reversal on the ground that he was promoted on rank basis and cannot be reverted and this is illegal.
The case of the respondents is that as per the rules the petitioner in the promotion post was to be on probation.
His performance was not satisfactory and, therefore, he was reverted and he was not confirmed in the post of Inspector.
Under Rule 19 of the CIFS Rules 1969 the petitioner had to undergo probation for a period of two years.
Therefore, according to the respondents, the petitioner had no right to the post of Inspector as if he had been appointed on permanent basis.
3.
The learned counsel for the petitioner Mr. Puri submitted that the petitioner was not even served with order of reversal.
That is not correct.
The petitioner himself had made a representation and a copy of the representation is available on the file produced by the respondents.
Therefore, the order of reversion cannot be challenged by the petitioner on the ground that it was not communicated to him.
The petitioner cannot claim to have been appointed without any probation and, therefore, the order of reversion was in accordance with law and the petitioner cannot challenge the same.
4.
The petitioner has challenged the order of compulsory retirement on the ground that there is stigma attached to the petitioner and, therefore, the order of compulsory retirement is vitiated.
5.
I have perused the filed.
The respondents had watched the performance of the petitioner and in view of the fact that the performance was not satisfactory the order of compulsory retirement was passed.
In my view, the petitioner has not made out any case for interference.
6.
The learned counsel for the petitioner Mr. Puri submitted that his retirement benefits have not been given to him except payment of Rs. 1,25,000/- which was made as per the order made on 3131995 by the Court.
The petitioner's right to get retirement benefits on the basis of compulsory retirement cannot be denied.
7.
The learned counsel for the respondents Mr. Sohail Dutt submitted that the respondent have always been ready and willing to pay the petitioner whatever that is due to him.
On this aspect about the claim of the petitioner for retirement benefits, there can be no dispute.
The respondents shall pass appropriate orders fixing the pension of the petitioner and such orders shall be passed on or before 30.6.1999.
8.
The reliefs claimed by the petitioner in the writ petition are rejected.
Writ petition stands disposed of.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.