RS Mongia, J (Oral) - The petitioner who was working as a Headquarter was ignored for promotion to the rank of Principal on February 14, 1996 when some of his juniors were so promoted.
The case of the respondents is that some departmental enquiry was pending against him.
However, from the facts we find that the petitioner was for the first time charge-sheeted on June 13, 1996 for holding a departmental enquiry under Rule 8 of the Punjab Punishment and Appeal Rules, 1970 i.e. for major punishment.
As per the petitioner, a regular enquiry was held.
However, the petitioner retired on May 31, 1997.
2.
Learned counsel for the respondent after consulting the official files states that the decision to charge-sheet the petitioner had been taken on May 6, 1996 on the basis of which charge-sheet dated June 13, 1996 was issued to the petitioner for major penalty.
It is further stated by the learned counsel for the respondents that on the basis of the enquiry held pursuant to charge- sheet dated June 13, 1996, no final decision has yet been taken.
However, he further states that wrongly a memorandum was issued to the petitioner on May 8, 1998 under Rule 10 of the Rules for imposing a minor punishment.
In fact a show-cause notice for imposing punishment should have been issued.
Be that as it may, we are not concerned about the later part regarding what action is being taken on the basis of the enquiry held against the petitioner.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner contends that the fact remains that on the date the petitioner was ignored for promotion factually no departmental enquiry was pending against him as the departmental enquiry can only be said to be pending if actually a charge-sheet is served, which was served on June 13, 1996.
In support of this contention, learned counsel for the petitioner has relied upon an Apex Court judgment in Union of India v. KV Jankiraman etc. etc., 1991(5) SLR 602 : 1991(3) SCT 317 (SC).
It is further submitted that till date no further action has been taken to punish the petitioner on the basis of the charge-sheet dated June 13, 1996.
4.
Learned counsel for the respondent, however, argued that since now the matter has been inquired into against the petitioner on the basis of the charge-sheet dated June 13, 1996 and on February 14, 1996, the matter was being processed as to whether the petitioner was guilty of misconduct or not.
The petitioner was rightly ignored for promotion on February 14, 1996.
5.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, we are of the view that the petitioner could not have been ignored for promotion on February 14, 1996 inasmuch as the record of the petitioner had to be considered upto the date the Departmental Promotion Committee considered the matter regarding promotion.
The Departmental Promotion Committee proceedings, as per the respondents counsel took place on November, 10, 1995.
The case of the petitioner was kept in a sealed cover.
We are of the view that on account of allegations against the petitioner which ultimately culminated in the charge- sheet dated June 13, 1996, the case could not be considered under the sealed cover method.
In Jankiraman's case (supra), it was held that unless a charge-sheet is served on the delinquent official, the question of considering the case by sealed cover method would not arise.
6.
For the foregoing reasons, we allow this writ petition and direct the respondents to open the sealed cover and then take action as per the recommendations of the Departmental Promotion Committee kept in the sealed cover.
If the petitioner is promoted, the necessary consequences shall flow therefrom.
These directions be carried out within a period of three months.
7.
As a matter of abundant caution, we may observe that this judgment would not come in the way of the respondents to take action in accordance with law on the enquiry report that may have been submitted by the Enquiry Officer against the petitioner.
Petition allowed.