Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner has approached this Court with the grievance that a person junior to him, respondent No. 4 has been appointed as a clerk, vide order, dated June 4, 1998, without the consideration of his claim.
He prays that the order regarding the appointment of the fourth respondent be set aside and that a direction for consideration of the petitioner's claim be issued.
2.
Separate written statements have been filed on behalf of the official and private respondents.
3.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
4.
It is the admitted position that the petitioner is a Graduate while respondent No. 4 is a mere matriculate.
It is also not disputed that the petitioner was appointed as a literate labourer on daily wages on June 17, 1986 while respondent No. 4 had entered service on similar basis on July 1, 1986.
It is further the admitted position that both of them were made regular with effect from April 1, 1993.
In the inter se seniority in the cadre of literate labourers the petitioner's name appears at Sr. No. 10 while that of the fourth respondent is at Sr. No. 11.
In view of this factual position, it cannot be disputed that the petitioner is better qualified and senior to respondent No. 4.
Yet, his claim for promotion/appointment to the post of clerk was not considered when the order dated June 4, 1998 was issued.
5.
The only explanation for this lapse given on behalf of the respondents by Mr. Bishnoi is that the fourth respondent has already been assigned the duties of a clerk.
Admittedly, the impugned order was passed without considering the claim of the petitioner.
Being senior the petitioner had a right to be considered before any one junior to him could be promoted to a higher post.
This was not done.
In this situation, the action of the respondents in ignoring the claim of the petitioner has to be held to be illegal and violative of Art. 16.
6.
On behalf of respondent No. 4, it has been pointed out that he had started working as a clerk on April 1, 1993.
A certificate dated September 29, 1998 issued by the Senior Superintendent, Government Livestock Farm, Hisar, has been produced.
Apparently, this certificate has been procured for the purpose of filing the written statement.
Otherwise the learned counsel is unable to refer to any order by which the fourth respondent may have been appointed as a clerk by the competent authority.
It is conceded on behalf of the respondent Nos. 1 to 3 that no order appointing the fourth respondent as a clerk had been issued by the competent authority in the year 1993.
In this situation, the mere fact that the fourth respondent had been allowed to discharge the duty of a higher post by an incompetent authority, shall not vest him with a right to continue on the post.
In any event the claim of the petitioner having not been considered the appointment of the fourth respondent on a higher post cannot be sustained.
7.
In view of the above, the writ petition is allowed, the appointment of the fourth respondent to the post of clerk vide order dated June 4, 1998, is set aside.
It is directed that the petitioner's claim shall be considered for promotion with effect from that date.
It is, however, clarified that in case the department can accommodate the petitioner without disturbing the fourth respondent, it shall be at liberty to do so.
However, the petitioner's seniority above the fourth respondent shall not be disturbed.
No costs.
Petition allowed.