GS Singhvi, J - The petitioner has prayed for issuance of a writ in the natural of certiorari to quash the order, Annexure P-5, dated 3121997 issued by the General Manager, Haryana Roadways, Fatehabad, terminating his services from the post of Helper.
2.
The facts necessary for deciding the issue raised in this case are that the petitioner joined service as Clerk-cum-Salesman in Mini Bank, Tohana, in the year 1976.
After ten years, he was appointed by transfer in Cooperative Credit Society, Himatpura.
After another four years and eight months his services were terminated by the employer with effect from 3.10.1990.
This action of the employer became subject matter of reference No. 31 of 1991.
The Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Hissar, answered the reference in favour of the petitioner on 1121995.
The operative portion of the award passed by the Tribunal reads as under :-  "In view of my findings on the above issues the termination of services of Atam Parkash is held as illegal.
The same is hereby set aside.
As the petitioner has already taken up job in Haryana Roadways, the relief of reinstatement has become redundant.
He shall, however, be entitled to back wages from the date of termination till the date of joining the Haryana Roadways i.e. 3111991.
The management is directed to pay back wages to the petitioner within a period of three months from the date of publication of award, failing which, the petitioner shall be entitled to interest at the rate of 15% from the date of this award till the date of actual payment.
The reference is answered accordingly, with no order as to costs."
3.
As is clear from a bare reading of the operative portion of the award, the petitioner had in fact joined service as Helper on daily wages in Haryana Roadways at Fatehabad, in the year 1991.
After three years he was appointed on as hoc basis in the pay scale of Rs. 750-940.
This was the reason why the petitioner did not press for his reinstatement in the proceedings which were pending before the Industrial Tribunal.
However, after about a year and four months of the pronouncement of award the respondent No. 4 issued notice dated 841996 to the petitioner requiring him to show cause as to why his services be not terminated on the ground that he was overage at the time of initial appointment in the service of Haryana Roadways and after receiving his (petitioner's) reply, the respondent No. 4 passed the impugned order terminating the petitioner's service.
4.
We have heard Shri BR Gupta, learned counsel for the petitioner and Shri Jaswant Singh, learned Deputy Advocate General and have perused the record of the case.
5.
There is no dispute between the parties that the petitioner was appointed as Helper on daily wages at the rates fixed by the Deputy Commissioner, Rohtak, for the period from 121991 to 1921991.
He continued to work as daily wager till the issuance of order Annexure R-1, dated 1111994, vide which he was appointed as ad hoc Helper in the regular pay scale of Rs. 750- 940.
This shows that after having allowed him to serve as daily wager Helper for a period of three years the competent authority appointed him in the regular pay scale and as on the date of issuance of impugned order he had completed service of almost seven years.
The respondents have neither alleged nor they have proved that the petitioner secured employment by making misrepresentation or by concealing any information from the competent authority.
Thus the petitioner cannot be held responsible for the mistake allegedly committed by the respondent Nos. 3 and 4 in engaging the petitioner as daily wager in the first instance and then appointing him in the regular pay scale.
The fact that the petitioner gave up his claim for reinstatement is also writ large on the face of the record.
If, in the background of these fact, we examine the correctness of the impugned order, there is no difficulty in holding that respondent No. 4 has gravely erred in terminating the services of the petitioner.
In first two pages of the impugned order, the concerned officer has made reference to the facts relating to the employment of the petitioner and the allegation that he was overage at the time of initial appointment.
Reference has also been made to the opinion of the Law Officer.
After this, the respondent No. 4 recorded virtually one line conclusion that the services of the petitioner deserve to be dispensed with.
This is clearly discernible from the following extract of the impugned order :-  "I have carefully seen/considered the written reply of Shri Atam Parkash, Helper and the proof of the earlier service and the file of the case and other documents.
Additionally, on 3111997 and 1231997, I have heard personally Shri Atam Parkash, Helper.
From that it is clear that Shri Atam Parkash, Helper, was overage at the time of appointment.
Therefore, I order the termination of the services of Shri Atam Parkash, Helper with immediate effect."
6.
In our opinion, the impugned order suffers from patent arbitrariness inasmuch as the respondent No. 4 has not applied his mind to the various important aspects of the case while dispensing with the services of the petitioner.
He has completely over-looked the fact that the petitioner gave up his right of reinstatement because he had, during the pendency of the proceedings before the Tribunal, got employment as Helper and was drawing pay in the regular pay scale and further that the petitioner was not guilty of playing fraud or making misrepresentation.
Non-consideration of these factual factors has resulted in substantial failure of justice.
We are also of the opinion that due to arbitrary exercise of power by the respondent No. 4 the petitioner has been deprived of his livelihood and, therefore, an appropriate direction deserves to be issued for his reinstatement.
7.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is allowed, the order Annexure P-5 is quashed.
The respondents are directed to reinstate the petitioner in service forthwith.
He should report for duty within seven days.
The competent authority shall pass order reinstating him in service within next three days.
However, keeping in view the statement made by Shri BR Gupta, counsel for the petitioner, we direct that the petitioner shall not be entitled to wages for the intervening period i.e. from the date of termination from service to the date of reporting back for duty in compliance with this order.
However, this shall not be construed as denying the benefit of regularisation of service and other service benefits which may be admissible to the petitioner under the relevant rules.
Copy of this order be given Dasti to the counsel for the petitioner as well as the learned Deputy Advocate General by the Bench Secretary after due attestation under her signatures.
Petition allowed.