Bashir-ud-Din, J - Heard.
2.
Petitioner is posted as Live Stock Assistant, in Animal Husbandary Department at Leh.
The Director Animal Husbandary, (Respondent No. 2) transferred CL Kisoo, Vaterinary Assistant, Nimoo, Leh (Respondent No. 4) and attached him to Directorate of Animal Husbandary.
In his place Mohd.
Sultan Shah, Live Stock Asstt.
has been ordered to work.
Chief Animal Husbandary Officer, Leh (Respondent No. 3) has not relieved Kisoo and disallowed Shah to join in his place.
The Director issued further directions to Chief Animal Husbandary Officer Leh to implement the order and relieve Kisoo and allow Shah to join and function in his place.
As the Chief Animal Husbandary Officer has failed to implement the orders, therefore, petitioner has come in this writ with the prayer that the writ be issued to the Respondent No. 3, to implement the order and restrain Kisoo to continue to discharge duties as Veternary Assistant.
2.
It is manifest that in the Writ, administrative orders, instructions are sought to be implemented.
The Writ jurisdiction cannot be allowed to be used for implementation of administrative instructions, internal adjustments ordered by departmental heads and transfer orders when no rights stand violated and/or legal obligations are infringed.
The non-compliance with the order of superior officer by a subordinate is a matter for the department and touches squarely the control, supervision and discipline in the department.
No rights of the petitioner are violated in this case.
Interference with such matters by the Court in Writ jurisdiction is the least one would expect, notwithstanding the fact that non-compliance and failure to implement the order of a major head of the department by his subordinate is a serious matter, in so far as it erodes authority, affects discipline, breeds in- efficiency, promotes incompetence, opens up avenues of corruption and malpractice and above all nails the system itself.
Given all this still it is essentially prime concern of the Executive and its concerned department.
It is for the competent authority(ies) to see that the orders of superiors are implemented and complied with.
3.
It is again a matter for the Executive/Competent authority to see what disciplinary action should be taken, if a subordinate has the courage and guts to flout order of his superior at his whim and caprice.
4.
In the totality of facts and circumstances and for the aforesaid reasons, the Writ Petition is dismissed in limine, leaving the question of implementation of the impugned order and its non-compliance by one of the respondents (Respondents No. 3) to be looked into and taken care of by competent authority of the Executive.
5.
Connected C.M.Ps.
shall also stand disposed of accordingly.
Petition dismissed.