Syed Bashir-ud-Din, J. - Mr. G Mustaffa, GA, has entered appearance and taken notice on behalf of respondents.
Admit.
2.
On the consensual submissions of the counsel for the parties, case is taken up for final disposal.
3.
Petitioner, who joined in the office of Director, Technical Education of State, as Workshop attendant in October, 1992.
On her promotion to Junior Grade Instructor, in the grade of 1200-2050, was on transfer, posted as Junior Instructor Cutting & Tailoring ITI Kargil, vide order dated 13.1.1993, of Director of Technical Education.
After serving her term in ITI Kargil, she was transferred to Kashmir Division on 171094, with a direction to report in the Directorate of Technical Education, Srinagar for posting in any ITI, in Kashmir Division (Annexure-B).
Petitioner joined and reported in the Directorate of Technical Education in Kashmir Division, but, thereafter, she was not given any posting.
Her salary was withheld.
However, after filing SWP No. 943/95, in which direction was issued for payment of salary to her (Annexure-C), she got her salary.
Respondent No. 2, Director Technical Education, despite instructions to his Deputy, Respondent No. 3, to give petitioner posting (Annexure-D), the respondents has not given her posting, though Respondent No. 3 passed instructions on 2751995, asking the Superintendent, Industrial Training Institute Ganderbal, Respondent No. 4, to draw petitioner's salary against the post of Senior Instructor, while she was asked to attend ITI Srinagar, (Annexure-E).
4.
On the instructions of Respondent No. 3, and pursuant to his communication dated 1521996 (Annexure-F), she withdrew the Writ petition with liberty to file a fresh petition, but even so, she was not given the posting and her pay is not being released regularly.
Her pay is withheld for months together.
For the above inaction and ignorance of the duties by the respondents, the petitioner is seeking a Writ/direction for her adjustment and release of her salary.
5.
Mr. G Mustaffa, GA, has admitted that the appointment and thereafter the promotion of the petitioner is on a clear vacancy and on substantive basis and without any fetters.
Her transfer to Kashmir Division is without any pre- condition.
In terms of the Government Order, Edu-47-Edu(Tech) of 1994 dated 17101994 she joined and reported in the office of Directorate of Technical Education Srinagar for her posting in any ITI in Kashmir Division.
It was the duty of Director Technical Education to post her in any ITI of Kashmir Division, against available vacancy of Junior Instructor in the grade of 1200-2050.
The Director, instead of posting her as Junior Instructor against the available post in any ITI of Kashmir Division, posted her temporarily in ITI Srinagar, till the post of Junior Instructor is vacant in near future.
For purpose of salary, some post of Senior Instructor available in ITI Ganderbal was ordered to be operated upon.
Even so, the petitioner, laments her grievance, that she has been neither paid salary regularly, nor she is given any work or posting in any ITI of Kashmir Division despite clear orders of the Government.
6.
There is substance in the contention of the petitioner, that she was forced to withdraw the earlier petition.
Annexure-F reveals, that the Deputy Director, did threaten the petitioner to withdraw the writ petition as otherwise her pay dues will be withheld.
The conduct of the Deputy Director is objectionable and unbecoming.
Much-less one comments on this aspect of the case, the better it is.
All the same the fact is that, the pay/salary is right of an employee which he or she earns for the work rendered and the authority cannot deprive him or her of such renumeration under any pretext so long he or she is not blame worthy.
After all, to receive the salary is a right of the employee enforceable in the Court under Article 226 corresponding to Section 103 of the Constitution of Jammu and Kashmir State.
Withholding of pay or failure to disburse the pay without any reason or may be because of administrative difficulties, amounts to punishment.
The pay can be withheld only in due course of law on certain recognized grounds, at least not attracted to this case.
Similarly, a Government servant cannot be prevented wrongly from discharging his or her duties.
7.
Every employee has to be given some posting and assigned duties commensurate with his or her status, class or grade.
Circumstances have to be created and steps taken to enable an employee to function and render service commensurate with the benefits he/she has to receive in a particular grade.
It is not appropriate to continue an employee without giving the employee proper posting and work.
In case the employee is not given posting and work to his/her status, obviously, the employee is not treated properly and in that situation has to be paid either for no work or for less work or for work not commensurate with her status in the applicable grade or class of service.
8.
If an employee is to be paid, work has to be taken from the employee and he has to be assigned normal official work as contemplated under the applicable rules and orders of the competent authority.
9.
In the result, direction is issued to Respondent Nos. 2 and 3 to give petitioner posting in accord with the status as Junior Instructor in the grade of Rs. 1200-2050 and forthwith to disburse her unpaid earned salary.
The order of posting to be given to the petitioner by the competent authority shall be informed of all relevant circumstances including the one that the petitioner is a lady, who has already served full term in District Kargil.
10.
Writ petition is accordingly disposed of alongwith connected C.M.Ps.