Syed Bashir-ud-Din, J. - Mr. Muzzafar has appeared and taken notice for respondents.
2.
On the request of the counsel for the parties they were heard.
3.
Admit.
4.
Considered.
The writ petition itself merits to be disposed of as on consensual submissions of counsel for the parties.
Petitioners in all shown 19, have petitioned for the relief that they may be extended the benefit of SRO 64 of 1994 in the matter of continuance, earning of wages and regularisation of services as and when due on terms and conditions as provided in the SRO.
Petitioners 1 to 19 have in terms of writ averments alleged that they have been appointed/engaged as daily rated workers in Indo Bulgarian Project Zainapora, Shopian, Kashmir w.e.f.
1492 and are working under the State Govt. and the Horticulture department respondents to the petition.
5.
Annexure to the writ petition reveal that the petitioners have been engaged as daily rated workers and continued to be so employed through out and are completing 7 years only on 141999.
6.
Rule 8 of J&K Daily Rated Workers/Work charge employee Regularisation Rules 1994 (SRO 64 of 1994) reads as under :-  "Application of rules to existing Daily Rated worker and work charged Employees : The policy of absorption of Daily Rated workers and Work Charged Employees shall also apply to such of the existing Daily Rated Workers and work charged Employees who may not have completed seven years on 3131994 but may complete by the end of subsequent financial years and their absorption shall be considered in that financial year in accordance with these rules."
It is obvious that the rules contemplate, other conditions applying, regularisation/absorption of daily rated workers/work charge employees engaged by the Govt. even in post 1994, financial years.
The benefit under the SRO is extended even to those daily rated workers and work charge employees who may not completed 7 years on 131994, but may complete 7 years period by the end of subsequent financial year(s).
It in terms provides continuance of daily rated workers and work charge employees even beyond 31st of March, 1994.
7.
I am supported in my view by Single Bench Authority of this court reported as 1995 SLJ 51.
8.
For these reasons the writ petition is allowed to the extent that the respondents are directed to continue with the services of the petitioners 1 to 18 provided the petitioners answer the description of daily rated workers and work charge employees and that their regularisation shall be considered on conditions and terms of SRO 64 of 1994 from the date they are due for such regularisation and further that the petitioners 1 to 19 shall be paid for the period they have worked and work in accordance with the rules and orders.
9.
CMP 1346-1347 are disposed of accordingly.
Petition allowed.