THB Chalapathi, J - This appeal is preferred against the decree and judgment of the learned Additional District Judge, Faridabad, confirming the decree and judgment of the learned Sub Judge First Class, Faridabad in case No. 188/90 dated 1321991.
2.
The plaintiff was posted as SDO (Material and Lining) Sub Division Faridabad.
On 10581, the plaintiff-respondent was transferred to Kurukshetra.
Accordingly, he was relieved at Faridabad and when he wanted to join at Kurukshetra, he was told that the transfer order of Sat Pal in whose place he was posted, was stayed by the Government itself, therefore, the plaintiff could not join at Kurukshetra to which place he had been posted.
The plaintiff could not also rejoin at his old place i.e. at Faridabad because his successor had already joined at Faridabad.
Ultimately, it was only on 19882 the plaintiff was transferred to Rajasthan Lining Sub Division at Palwal and accordingly he joined at the new place of his posting on 20882.
Thereby the petitioner was kept in waiting from 29.9.81 to 20882 for a period of 11 months.
Thereafter, when the plaintiff claimed his salary, an office note was issued by the respondents that he was not entitled to salary during the waiting period.
That necessitated the plaintiff to file the suit.
In the suit, the defendant i.e. State of Haryana failed to file any written statement.
On the basis of the material placed before the learned trial Court, the suit was decreed.
Aggrieved by the same, the defendant preferred an appeal which has been dismissed, hence this second appeal.
3.
From the facts narrated above, it is clear that the plaintiff- respondent was made to wait for his posting orders for no fault of his.
It is not the case of the Government that the plaintiff did not join his duty at a new place of posting on his own.
In fact, it is uncontroverted fact that the plaintiff went to Kurukshetra, the place of his posting to join there.
When he wanted to join there in place of one Sat Pal, who was then working as SDO, the plaintiff was told that the orders of transfer of Sat Pal (SDO) were stayed by the State Government.
Therefore, he could not be allowed to take charge at Kurukshetra.
The plaintiff also could not re-join his duties at Faridabad because his successor had already taken the charge at Faridabad, his old place of posting.
The department slept over the matter for 11 months and it only issued the order of transfer to the plaintiff transferring him to Rajasthan Lining Sub Division at Palwal.
The order was issued by the Government only on 19882 and the plaintiff joined at Palwal on 20882.
Thus, the plaintiff was made to wait for receiving his posting order.
The delay in issuing the posting orders was due to the fault of the department only.
For that the plaintiff cannot be made to suffer.
In the view of the matter, I do not find any ground warranting interference both the decrees and judgments of the Courts below.
This appeal, therefore, fails and is accordingly dismissed with costs assessed at Rs. 1000/-.
Appeal dismissed.