GS Singhvi, J - The petitioner, who was appointed as ad hoc Chemist for 6 months by an order dated 2051997, has prayed for quashing of order Annexure P-4 issued by respondent No. 2 terminating his service after expiry of the extended tenure of his appointment.
2.
It appears from the record that for effective implementation of the prohibition policy introduced w.e.f.
171996, the Government of Haryana vide its letter No. 23/16/1996-4 H.B.-III dated 24121996 sanctioned the creation of 15 posts of Chemists for already existing State Leave Excise Laboratories in the Health Department and for opening of the Excise Laboratories in five new districts.
For the purpose of making appointment on these posts, respondent No. 2 sent requisition to the employment exchange.
The petitioner and other candidates recommended by the selection committee were appointed as ad hoc Chemists for 6 months or till the availability of the candidates recommended by the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana.
By an order dated 211998, the term of their ad hoc appointment was extended by six months.
In the meantime, government revoked the prohibition policy necessitating termination of the services of the persons who were appointed on ad hoc basis against the posts created for implementation of the prohibition policy.
3.
The petitioner has challenged the impugned order on the ground that it is violative of his fundamental right to equality guaranteed under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India and also on the ground that it is contrary to the conditions of appointment.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner made strenuous efforts to convince us that the reasons assigned in the impugned order for terminating the petitioner's service, namely, revocation of the policy of prohibition should be treated as irrelevant and extraneous because the order of appointment issued by respondent No. 2 did not contain a stipulation that he was being appointed as Chemist against the post created for implementing the prohibition policy.
He argued that in view of the terms and conditions subject to which he was appointed, the petitioner cannot be deprived of his right to remain in service till the availability of candidates selected by the SSS Board.
His last submission is that the petitioner should be ordered to be adjusted and allowed to remain in service against the posts of Chemist which are lying vacant.
5.
We have thoughtfully considered the submissions made by Shri Puneet Bali but are not inclined to agree with him.
A combined reading of orders Annexures P-3 and P-4 does not leave any room for doubt that the petitioner was appointed as Chemist against one of the posts created for State Level Excise Laboratories in the Health Department.
The Government had sanctioned these posts because of the enormous increase in the work of analysis of samples of liquor seized by the authorities of the Excise Department.
The tenure (tenor ?)
of the order of appointment and the tenure of his appointment are clearly indicative of the temporary nature of post against which the petitioner was appointed.
The right of the petitioner to remain in service was co-terminus with the currency of the prohibition policy and, therefore, in the wake of revocation of the said policy, the petitioner could no longer remain in service.
As a matter of fact, respondent No. 2 would have been fully justified in terminating his service w.e.f.
31.3.1998 the date on which the government issued notification withdrawing the prohibition.
It, however, appears that in view of the extension of six months granted on 211998, respondent No. 2 allowed him to continue in service till the issuance of the impugned order.
However, we do not find any justification to entertain the petitioner's plea that he should be allowed to continue in service, irrespective of the fact that he was appointed on ad hoc basis for a fixed term of 6 months and no extension in the tenure of his appointment has been granted after September, 1998.
6.
We also do not find any substance in the argument of Shri Bali that the petitioner should be allowed to continue against the vacant posts of Chemist which are available in 10 districts of Haryana.
Against such posts persons, who have acquired the requisite qualification after the appointment of the petitioner, have a right to be considered and there is no justification for issuance of a direction to the government which will indirectly affect the right of consideration which is guaranteed to all eligible persons under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
In this respect, it will be useful to refer to the decision of the Supreme Court in Ashok Kumar and others v. The Chairman, Banking Service Recruitment Board and others, 1996(1) SCT 660 (SC) : JT 1995(8) SC 276.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.