Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was recruited as Beldar on September 13, 1989 on daily wages.
Vide Order dated May, 2, 1997 his services were regularised on that post.
The petitioner claims that he has been actually performing the duties of a clerk-cum-typist.
Thus, he is entitled to be regularised on that post.
Is it so ?
2.
We have heard the learned Counsel for the parties.
3.
It is the admitted position that the petitioner had been initially appointed as Beldar by the competent authority.
It is conceded by the counsel for the petitioner that the Superintending Engineer is the competent authority for making appointment to the post of a clerk.
It is also not disputed that no order was ever passed by the Superintending Engineer by which the petitioner might have either been promoted to the post of a clerk or assigned the duties of that post.
It is alleged by the counsel that the duties had been assigned to the petitioner by the Executive Engineer.
In pursuance to the direction given by the Executive Engineer, the petitioner has been working on this post for the last few years.
4.
From the facts on record, it is clearly established that the competent authority had not passed any order which may entitle the petitioner to claim regularisation on the post of clerk-cum-typist.
In fact, it is the admitted position that definite qualifications have been laid down for the post of clerk-cum-typist.
No test was conducted.
No selection was made.
No order of appointment was issued.
In such a situation allowing the claim of the petitioner or anyone else like him would only mean regularising the irregular.
It would be unfair and would lead to the violation of Article 16 of the Constitution of India.
We cannot persuade ourselves to accept the claim of the petitioner in such a situation.
5.
Mr. Suri, learned Counsel for the petitioner has referred to the order of their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Amrit Lal v. The State of Haryana, The counsel is not able to give us the number of the case.
We have perused this order.
It appears that Amrit Lal was working as a water pump operator Grade- II (Class III) on daily wages prior to his regularisation on a class IV post.
His right to regularisation on a Class III post was contested only on the ground that he did not fulfil the qualifications.
It was observed by their Lordships that "a further certificate dated 321995 to the effect that the appellant (inter alia) possessing the prescribed qualifications and is a matriculate" was issued.
Thus the real issue which arose in the case before their Lordships was not similar to the one arising in the present case.
Herein there is no order by the competent authority appointing the petitioner to a Class-III post.
6.
Before parting with the case it may be observed that even though the petitioner claims that he has been working as clerk-cum-typist it has not been disputed that he was paid the wages of only a Class IV post.
This only lends support to the contention on behalf of the respondents that the petitioner had, in fact, been never appointed as a clerk-cum-typist.
Some officer had locally permitted him to work on the post temporarily.
This action was without any authority under the Rules and cannot confer any right on the petitioner.
7.
In view of above, we find no ground to sustain the petitioner's claim regarding the regularisation on a Class III post.
8.
Resultantly, the writ petition is dismissed.
However, there shall be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.