Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The appellant was recruited as a clerk in the Pepsu Road Transport Corporation on July 13, 1971.
He was promoted as an Assistant in the year 1979.
In 1983, he was promoted as a Section Officer.
While working as such, the appellant was charge-sheeted on September 7, 1988.
An enquiry followed.
The Enquiry Officer held that the charges were not proved.
The disciplinary authority, however, disagreed with the findings recorded by the Enquiry Officer and issued a notice to show cause to the appellant.
He was called upon to explain as to why he be not removed from service.
The reasons for differing with the Enquiry Officer were communicated to the appellant.
After consideration of his reply, the authority passed the order dated May 17, 1991 by which the appellant was ordered to be reverted from the post of Section Officer to that of Assistant.
It was also directed that he would not be paid anything beyond the subsistence allowance that had already been disbursed to him for the period of suspension.
The appellant submitted an appeal which was rejected by the appellate authority vide order dated July 1, 1992.
2.
Aggrieved by the orders dated May 17, 1991 which had been affirmed by the appellate authority vide order dated July 1, 1992, the appellant approached this Court through a petition under Article 226 of the Constitution.
It was contended before the learned Single Judge that the disciplinary authority was bound by the findings recorded by the Enquiry Officer.
That being so, the impugned orders could not be sustained.
It was also contended that the order of reversion was illegal as the period for which the appellant had to work on the lower post had not been specified.
Lastly, it was contended that the order holding that the appellant was not entitled to full wages for the period of suspension was illegal, as an opportunity had not been afforded.
3.
The learned Single Judge rejected the first and second contentions.
However, the third contention was accepted.
It was held that the order restricting the payment of wages to the payment of subsistence allowance could not be sustained as no opportunity had been given to the employee in that behalf.
Thus, the petition was partly allowed.
4.
Not satisfied with the judgment of the learned Single Judge, the appellant has filed the present Letters Patent Appeal.
5.
Mr. BS Walia, counsel for the appellant has contended that the impugned order of reversion is vitiated as the period for which the order was to operate has not been specified.
This, the learned counsel contends, is violative of Regulation 26 (wrongly mentioned as 27 in the grounds of appeal).
Secondly, it has been contended that the order suffers from the vice of discrimination as others who are similarly placed were exonerated.
The claim made on behalf of the appellant has been controverted by Mr. RS Ahluwalia, counsel for the respondents.
Regulation 26 is in the following terms :-  "Reduction to a Lower Stage : When an employee is reduced to a lower post or time scale or to a lower `grade or to a lower stage in a time scale, the authority ordering the reduction shall state the period for which it is effective and whether on the expiry of that period, it will operate to postpone future increments or effect the employee's seniority and if so to what extent."
A perusal of the above provision shows that an employee can be either reduced in rank or his pay or grade can be reduced.
In the very nature of things, when an employee is reduced to a lower scale of pay or to a lower stage in a time scale, it would be necessary to indicate the period for which the order of reduction shall operate.
This would be necessary to enable the authority to release the increment on its becoming due.
To illustrate, if the pay of an employee has been reduced to the minimum in a scale, it would be necessary to specify the length of time for which this penalty shall operate and as to when the future increment shall be released.
However, this consideration shall not normally apply to a reduction to a lower post.
The reason is that whenever a higher post becomes available, the employee who has been reduced in rank shall have a right to be considered.
It is possible for an authority to say that an employee shall remain reduced to a lower post for - say five years.
This would imply that if any promotional chance becomes available during the period of five years, the employee shall not be entitled to be considered in view of the order of punishment.
However, if the period has not been specified, the employee shall be entitled to claim consideration at the first available opportunity for promotion.
6.
This is precisely what the respondents have claimed in para 10 of the written statement.
It has been pointed out that the appellant had a right to be considered for promotion at the next available opportunity.
Thus, there was no violation of Regulation 26.
If the period had been specified, the appellant would not have been entitled to be considered for promotion during the said period.
However, no period having been specified, the appellant would be entitled to be considered for promotion at the first available opportunity.
Resultantly, the first contention is rejected.
7.
Equally lacking in merit is the second contention.
Two wrongs will never make a right.
If some employee has been wrongly exonerated, it would not entitle the appellant to claim that even he has a right to be let off.
Still further, a charge of discrimination has to be proved by the person who alleges discrimination.
The onus to prove that the action was violative of Article 14 or that it suffered from the vice of discrimination was on the appellant.
Nothing has been pointed out to show that the appellant was similarly situated vis-a-vis any other employee and that despite their being equally placed, they have been unequally treated.
Such a contention does not appear to have been even raised before the learned Single Judge.
8.
In view of the above, there is no merit in either of the two contentions as raised on behalf of the appellant.
9.
No other point has been raised.
10.
No ground for interference is made out.
Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed.
However, we make no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.