RS Mongia, J (Oral) - The petitioner was working as a Head Constable.
He was promoted as an ASI in his own rank and pay vide order dated 351995.
The petitioner was suspended in contemplation of a departmental enquiry vide order dated 7111997 (Annexure P.2).
The suspension order reads as under :-  "On 6111997, the undersigned made a surprise checking of PP Ramgarh, PS Sahnewal at about 1100 pm night.
ASI Ranjit Singh No. 491/Ldh, Incharge was found present and was in drunkard condition.
On checking Ashok Kumar son of Mary Ram, r/o Guru Nanak Pura, No. 7026, City Kotwali Bathinda, Satpal Gupta s/o Parkash Chand Gupta r/o H.No.
1982, Gali Kamal Cinema, Bathinda, Shri Ravinder Gupta, son of Om Parkash Gupta r/o House No. 1016, Subhash Gali, Bathinda, owners of Anmol Recording Company, Bathinda and Shri Ram Sahai Tiwari s/o Shri Shiv Parshad Tiwari r/o Kura, PS Distt.
Gurdaspur, Punjab employee of Anmol Recording Co along with vehicle No. PB-03E-5869 (White Maruti Car) were found detained in the Police Post.
ASI Ranjit Singh No. 491/Ldh told the undersigned that some duplicate cassettes have been recovered from their possession and they have been detained under the directions of DSP, Sahnewal.
On enquiry from DSP Sahnewal, he showed his innocence in this regard.
From enquiry of above detained persons, they disclosed that their gold ornaments and cash/watches were taken into possession by ASI Ranjit Singh and harassed them by detaining for about three hours in the Police Post.
During my enquiry, one person in civil clothes was also standing outside the Police Post who was told to be a SPO by ASI Ranjit Singh whereas the said person was real brother of ASI Ranjit Singh.
On verification the cassettes were found genuine.
SHO PS Sahnewal Ludhiana have also brought to my notice such his bad activities alongwith his brother in civil dresses.
In this way, ASI Ranjit Singh No. 491/Ldh, I/C PP Ramgarh has harassed the innocent people only to get money by illegal means and has shown misconduct, negligence and bad performance which deserves punishment.
For this act of misconduct, ASI Ranjit Singh No. 491/Ldh is hereby placed under suspension with immediate effect.
During suspension period, he will get subsistence allowance as admissible under Rule 72 of Punjab CSR Vol.
I, Part-I.
He is transferred to Police Lines, Ludhiana where he will remain present and will attend all parades and roll calls etc. Shri Pritpal Singh, PPS, SP/City-I, Ludhiana, will hold regular departmental enquiry against this ASI and will submit his findings within two months by holding day today proceedings.
Book the order."
2.
Thereafter followed a charge-sheet dated 8111997 (copy Annexure P-4) to the petitioner, which is in the following terms:  "Against you, ASI Ranjit Singh No. 471/Ludhiana there is a charge that when you were posted a Chowki Incharge at Ramgarh (PS Sahnewal) then on 6111997 during night at 1100 pm Shri Varinder Kumar, IPS, Superintendent of Police Local, who was working as Senior Superintendent of Police, Ludhiana that day made surprise checking of your Chowki and found that you were in a drunkard condition in the Chowki and you detained a Maruti Car No. PB-03-5869 alongwith Ashok Kumar son of Mary Ram, resident of Guru Nanak Pura, House No. 7026, Bathinda, Satpal Gupta son of Shri Parkash Chand Gupta, resident of House No. 1982, Gali Kamal Cinema, Bathinda, Shri Ravinder Gupta son of Om Parkash Gupta, resident of House No. 1016, Subhash Gali, Bathinda, all owners of Anmol Recording Company, Bathinda and their worker Ram Sahai Tewari son of Shri Shiv Parshad Tewari.
Regarding these persons you told the SP Sahib that some duplicate cassettes have been recovered from their possession and have been detained under the directions of DSP Sahnewal.
On enquiry from the DSP Sahnewal, he showed his innocence in this regard.
From enquiry of above detained persons, they disclosed that their gold ornaments and cash/watches were taken into possession by you and harassed them by detaining for about three hours in the Police Post.
Besides this when an enquiry was made by the SP Sahib about a person who was standing outside the Chowki in civil dress then you told him that he is an SPO whereas on verification it was found that he was not an SPO and whereas the said person was real brother of ASI Ranjit Singh.
On enquiry the cassettes were found genuine.
SHO, PS Sahnewal Ludhiana has also brought to the notice of SP Sahib about his bad activities alongwith his brother in civil dresses.
Therefore, you have harassed the innocent people only to get money from them by illegal means and have shown misconduct by giving wrong information to your senior officer.
Therefore, you ASI Ranjit Singh No. 491/Ludhiana have misused your powers being a police officer and have illegally harassed the good citizens, you have also tried to mislead your senior officer by giving wrong information and were found in a drunkard condition while on duty and have given a proof of your disobedient servant which is not appreciable and deserves punishable."
3.
As per the averments in the writ petition, while the petitioner was in the process of submitting his reply to the charge sheet, he got severe pain in spine and got himself examined from Dr. Mohd.
Yamin, Joint Replacement and Arthoscopic Surgeon, Reader, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Dayanand Medical College and Hospital, Ludhiana, and also sent his leave application to the Superintendent of Police, Ludhiana (Headquarters) on 2811998, for one month and thereafter sent leave applications for extending the leave.
It is not averred in the writ petition that any reply has so far been filed to the charge-sheet or that the petitioner has rejoined the duties.
It is further not mentioned in the averments in the writ petition that any of the leave applications was ever sanctioned.
Be that as it may, the Director General of Police passed an order on 911998, asking the appropriate authority to withdraw the own rank and pay of the petitioner.
On the basis of that order of the Director General of Police, the impugned order was passed by the appropriate authority on 121998 (Annexure P-8).
These two orders, i.e. Annexures P-8 and P-9 have been impugned in the present writ petition.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner argued that the petitioner has been deprived of the own rank and pay as ASI merely because the enquiry is pending against him and that he is under suspension and further that some Head Constables, who are junior to the petitioner, are still being allowed to enjoy the own rank and pay as ASI.
5.
After hearing learned counsel for the petitioner, we find no merit in this writ petition.
A person holding a particular rank on own rank and pay basis has no right to continue and enjoy that rank.
Even if a person is under a cloud and no enquiry is held, even then that rank can be taken away from such a person.
From the facts as narrated above, it is evident that an enquiry is pending against the petitioner on the basis of which a charge-sheet has already been served upon him.
It is not necessary for the employer to keep a person on a rank to which he has no vested right during the pendency of the enquiry.
Even it has been held by the Apex Court that if enquiry is started, the same can be stopped and action taken in accordance with law or as per the conditions of appointment letter.
As observed above, the petitioner has no right to continue on own rank and pay as ASI.
So far as the question that juniors are continuing on the same rank, we find that if the petitioner has no right and especially when enquiry is pending against him, he cannot compare himself with any one else.
Petition dismissed.