RS Mongia, J - The petitioner was appointed as a Science Master on 5121988.
At that time he had the qualification of B.Sc.
B.Ed.
He is stated to have passed the MCom examination held in June, 1993 from Himachal Pradesh University and a provisional certificate was issued to him in that regard by the Himachal Pradesh University on 1.6.1994 (Annexure P/5).
In September, 1993, respondent No. 1 is stated to have issued a circular to all the Heads of the Departments asking them to forward the cases of candidates for the post of Lecturers who had acquired higher qualifications and were appointed as Science Masters prior to 31.12.1990.
It is further stated, which is not denied by the respondents, that in October, 1994 the official respondents had again asked for the record of the eligible candidates for the posts of Lecturers.
The name of the petitioner was forwarded by the concerned respondents and he also appeared in the interview held on 28.10.1994 but his name was not in the list of selected candidates.
As per the averments, 98 candidates were selected vide order dated 20111995.
The petitioner filed the present writ petition on 16.5.1997 claiming that there was no reason to ignore the petitioner from being selected as he was fully qualified and his record was also good.
It may be observed here that during the pendency of the writ petition, the petitioner was promoted as a Lecturer in Commerce on 1481997.
This fact has been mentioned in para 12 of the written statement.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has placed on record a photo copy of the promotion order (in vernacular) which states that the petitioner and others were being promoted as left out cases.
The reason given for not promoting the petitioner when the others selected candidates were selected and promoted is that the petitioner did not have MCom.
degree in September, 1993.
2.
Learned counsel for the petitioner argued that when cases were sent for all the eligible candidates in September, 1993, though the petitioner had appeared in the MCom.
examination but his result was not with him.
No action was taken regarding those candidates whose names were forwarded in September, 1993 and again the names were asked for in October, 1994 and that the petitioner was duly considered as by that time his result had been declared and even a provisional certificate in that regard (annexure P/5) was made available.
It is not disputed on the part of the respondents that there is nothing against the petitioner so far as his record is concerned.
3.
It has been argued that since the petitioner has now been promoted during the pendency of the writ petition, his date for the purpose of seniority, should be considered as the date when other persons whose names were recommended in October, 1994 were so appointed.
4.
Learned counsel for the respondents has not been able to apprise this Court as to on what basis, the petitioner has now been promoted in 1481997 as a "left out case".
The petitioner's name was duly recommended in October, 1994, there was nothing against him.
He was duly qualified in October, 1994 having obtained the degree of MCom.
from Himachal Pradesh University.
If the petitioner can now be promoted on the basis of the same record, there is no reason why he should not have been promoted with effect from the date, the persons whose names were recommended in October, 1994 were appointed.
The very words "left out case" in the order of promotion dated 1481997 would go to show that the petitioner was one of those persons who had been left out from promotion earlier.
5.
For the foregoing reasons, we allow this writ petition and direct the respondents to consider the date of appointment of the petitioner as Lecturer in Commerce as the same date which has been assigned to the persons who were selected and recommended for appointment on 20111995.
However, this date will be only considered for the purpose of seniority and fixation of pay but the petitioner would not be entitled to any arrears.
Petition allowed.