GS Singhvi, J - The petitioner has prayed for issuance of a writ to quash the selection made by the respondent No. 3 for recruitment of Science Masters/Mistresses.
2.
There is no dispute between the parties that the petitioner had applied for recruitment as Science Mistress in pursuance of the advertisement Annexure-P1 issued by the Chairman, Departmental Selection Committee (Teaching), Punjab- cum-Director, Public Instructions (S), Punjab.
She was interviewed by the Departmental Selection Committee but her name does not figure in the list of selected candidates.
3.
The petitioner's grievance is that the Departmental Selection Committee has arbitrarily ignored her merit and less meritorious persons have been selected and in this manner, her right to equality in the matter of employment which is guaranteed by Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution has been infringed.
4.
The respondents have contested the writ petition on the following grounds :-  i) that the petitioner was not qualified to be considered for selection because she did not possess the essential qualifications as on the last date fixed for the receipt of applications; and ii) that the last candidate selected in her category has secured 5959 marks whereas she has secured only 5249 marks and, therefore, she cannot claim appointment as of right.
5.
At the hearing of the writ petition, Shri Jasbir Singh fairly and candidly conceded that the petitioner did not possess one of the essential qualifications i.e. B.Ed.
as on 1521996 i.e. the last date of fixed for the receipt of the applications.
In view of the statement made by the learned counsel and also in view of the uncontested averments made in para 1 of the preliminary submissions, we do not have any hesitation in recording a finding that the petitioner was not eligible to be considered for selection for recruitment as Science Mistress and the apparent mistake committed by the Departmental Selection Committee to interview her cannot confer any right upon her to claim appointment.
It is a settled proposition of law that eligibility of a candidate for recruitment to the public service is to be determined with reference to the date specified in the Recruitment Rules.
If the rules are silent, the date specified in the advertisement has to be taken into consideration for determination of eligibility of the candidates.
If the rules as well as the advertisement are silent, then the last date fixed for the receipt of the applications constitutes the touch-stone for determination of the eligibility of the candidates.
In this regard, we may refer to the recent decision of the Supreme Court in Ashok Kumar Sharma and another v. Chander Shekher and another, 1997(2) SCT 123 (SC) : JT 1997(4) SC 99.
6.
We also find substance in the plea of the respondents that the petitioner cannot complain of discrimination by contending that candidates less meritorious than her have been selected because it is an admitted fact that she secured only 5249 marks and the last selected candidate of her category secured 5959 marks.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.