Harjit Singh Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was appointed as a Statistical Assistant in the Economics and Statistical Department on temporary basis on 3151982.
Vide Annexure P-1 dated 531984, the Transport Department, Haryana, invited applications from various departments to fill up some posts of Statistical Assistants in that department by way of transfer.
The petitioner who fulfilled the qualifications prescribed, applied for the post and his name was recommended by the Economics and Statistical Department to the Transport Department, and he was, ultimately, selected for the said post and vide Annexure P-2 dated 351984 was relieved from his parent department to join the transferee department.
The petitioner was, however, vide Annexure P-3 dated 21.7.
(sic) recalled to the Economics and Statistical Office, Haryana at the instance of the Advisor of the Department and it was directed that he be posted in the Head Office on the post that he had vacated way back in 1984, Annexure P-3 has been impugned in the present proceedings.
2.
On notice of motion, a reply has been filed by the respondents and it has been admitted that the petitioner was a temporary hand in the office of the Economics and Statistical Advisor and that he had been appointed in the Transport Department by transfer on the basis of the requisition Annexure P-1 issued by the said Deptt.
It has nevertheless been pleaded that as the petitioner still retained his lien in the parent department, the order Annexure P-3 recalling him thereto had been validly made.
3.
Mr. Malik, the learned Counsel for the petitioner has raised two arguments before me.
He has first urged that the petitioner was only a temporary hand in the office of the Economics and Statistical Advisor, Haryana, and on his appointment by transfer, his lien if at all it had existed stood terminated and as the appointment given to the petitioner was not in the nature of a deputation, he could not have been recalled by the order Annexure P-3.
He has also urged that the said order has been made at the instance of the Government on account of the strained relations between the petitioner's father and Ch.
Bhajan Lal the incumbent Chief Minister of the State.
4.
Mr. Ajay Jain, the learned counsel for the respondents has, however, pointed out that it was clear from Annexure R-1 filed with the reply that the petitioner's lien continued to exist in the parent Department and he had even been considered for promotion and as such, the impugned order was valid in law.
He has also urged that the allegations of mala fide had been denied and in any case, Ch.
Bhajan Lal, not having been impleaded as a party, no case of bias could be made out against him.
5.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the opinion that this petition deserves to succeed.
6.
It is the conceded position that the petitioner was only a temporary employee in the office of Economics and Statistical Advisor, and his application for appointment by transfer in the Transport Commissioner's Office was accepted and this movement was acceded to by the parent department and he was relieved from duty vide Annexure P-2 dated 351984 to join his new appointment.
It has not even been suggested by the respondents that the petitioner had been sent on deputation to the new department and the only evidence to the effect that he continued to remain on the roll of the parent department is Annexure R-1.
To my mind, this document does not come to the aid of the respondents for the reason that on the appointment by transfer in the Transport Department, the petitioner had severed all connections with his earlier department.
7.
It is also clear that while issuing notice of motion, on 2971992, this Court had stayed the operation of the impugned order Annexure P-3 and it is the conceded position that the petitioner continues to remain on the rolls of the Transport Department as of now.
8.
This petition is, accordingly, allowed and Annexure P-3 is quashed.
There will, however, be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.