THB Chalapathi, J - The petitioner filed this writ petition seeking a direction to the respondents to promote him from the date when his juniors were promoted.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as Clerk in the respondent department in the State of Punjab on 2021961 and was promoted as Senior Clerk on 131179 and as a temporary Assistant on 9584 with condition that he should pass the test to be conducted under the Assistant Grade Examination Rules, 1984 (hereinafter referred to as the Rules).
According to the petitioner, his juniors, namely, Baldev Raj and Jagdish Lal were promoted in the year 1979.
The representation of the petitioner was rejected on 15482.
He did not approach this Court when his juniors were promoted or immediately after rejection of his representation in 1982.
He accepted his promotion as Assistant on 9584 with a condition that he should pass the test within the stipulated period under the Rules.
Undisputedly, the petitioner did not pass the test.
Therefore, the petitioner was reverted as Senior Clerk by an order dated 281087.
Challenging the order of reversion the petitioner filed this writ petition and also he is seeking a declaration that he is entitled to be promoted from the date his juniors were promoted.
3.
There is no dispute of the fact that the juniors of the petitioner were promoted in the year 1979.
The petitioner did not take any steps to challenge the promotion of his juniors.
Even after his representation was rejected in April, 1982, the petitioner did not take any steps.
Further, from the written statement filed by the respondents, it is clear that the petitioner was considered for promotion along with his juniors but was found unfit for promotion on the basis of his annual confidential reports for the year 1973-74 and his juniors were promoted on the basis of their service records.
Therefore, the petitioner cannot claim to be entitled for promotion from the date when his juniors were promoted.
4.
The petitioner was promoted in the year 1984 after the Rules came into force.
While promoting the petitioner as Assistant, a condition was stipulated in the order of promotion that he should pass the test under the said Rules.
Admittedly, the petitioner did not pass the test as contemplated under the Rules.
Therefore, the order of reversion dated 281087 was passed.
The petitioner cannot make any grievance of his reversion since he has not passed the test.
After considering the averments made in the petition and also in the written statement filed by the respondents, I do not find any merit in this petition.
5.
This writ petition is accordingly dismissed.
However, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.