SS Sudhalkar, J - The petitioner had joined military service on 921962 and he was discharged on compassionate ground on 371969.
He joined civil service i.e. service as Physical Training Instructor on 2371969 after being relieved from the military service.
The petitioner has, in this petition, claimed benefit of said military service towards pension, seniority and increments in civil service.
2.
Notice of motion was issued.
Written statement has been filed.
3.
The contention of the respondents is that the petitioner is not entitled to the benefit of military service because only those persons who are either recruited or discharged during the emergency are entitled to the said benefits.
It may be mentioned that emergency was declared on 26101962 and it was lifted on 12.1.1968.
4.
The claim of the petitioner regarding grant of benefit of the military service towards seniority appeared to be belated and the petitioner was given an opportunity to explain so to why he should not be non-suited on the ground of laches alone.
Learned counsel for the petitioner after seeking adjournments, conceded that he did not press for the benefit of military service towards seniority and prayed that his claim for the benefit of said service towards increments and pension be considered.
5.
We have here learned counsel for the parties.
6.
The question that remains to be considered is when the petitioner had joined military service before the declaration of the emergency whether he could be granted the benefit of military service.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has relied on the judgment of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 10292 of 1989 (Moti Singh v. District and Sessions Division, Bhatinda and another), decided on 1311992.
In the said judgment, the learned Single Judge observed that the provision which defines the military service in the Punjab Government National Emergency (Concession) Rules, 1965 (hereinafter referred to as "the Rules") does not differentiate between a person who was enrolled or commissioned in the Indian army prior to the proclamation of emergency or thereafter.
Rule 2 of the Rules defines military service as under :  "2.
Definition :- For the purpose of these rules, the expression `military service' means the service rendered by a person who had been enrolled or commissioned during the period of operation of the proclamation of emergency made by the President under Article 352 of the Constitution of India on the 26th October, 1962, in any of the three wings of the Indian Armed Forces (including the service as Warrant Officer) during the period of the said emergency or such other service as may hereafter be declared as military service for the purpose of these rules.
Any period of military training, followed by military service shall also be reckoned as military service."
On reading the above rule, we agree with the observation of learned Single Judge.
The petitioner remained commissioned in the Army during the period of emergency and there being no express bar to include those who joined prior to the proclamation of emergency in the military for the benefits of said service, we do not accept arguments of learned counsel for the respondents that the benefit of military service cannot be granted to the petitioner.
7.
As a result, the petition is allowed and the respondents are directed to consider the period of military service rendered by the petitioner for the purpose of increments and pension.
These directions be carried out within a period of three months from today.
However, we direct that the arrears so calculated shall be confined to three years and two months prior to the date of filing of the present writ petition which was filed on 15797.
Petition allowed.