THB Chalapathi, J - The petitioner was enrolled as a Police Constable in November, 1989 and he successfully competed his training.
Thereafter he was attached to 5th Battalion and he served there till 11121991 and he was discharged from service under rule 1221 of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934 on the ground that he was habitual absentee.
2.
According to the petitioner, his discharge from service without issuance of any chargesheet, or Show Cause Notice and without conducting any inquiry is arbitrary, against rules and bad in law.
He further averred that he is not habitual absentee and, therefore, the authorities erroneously exercised their power under Rule 1221 of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934.
Therefore, the order of discharge is liable to be quashed.
3.
There is no doubt that during the period of probation of 3 years, the petitioner can be discharged from service if he is unlikely to prove himself to be an efficient police officer and at the same time if the Constable is discharged from service on the ground of misconduct then the order of discharge cannot be sustained.
The order of discharge is annexed with the writ petition as Annexure P-1.
It shows that the petitioner absented himself from duty for 38 days on different occasions during the period 23rd June, 1991 to 31st October, 1991 and he did not report for duty from 24th November, 1991 till 10th of October, 1991.
Thus he continuously remained absent from duty for a period of 17 days.
When the Annexure P-1 itself shows that the discharge is based on the ground that he was habitual absentee, then it amounts to stigmatised order.
In such circumstances, a regular inquiry has to be conducted and he can be discharged from service only after conducting the inquiry.
In this context, it is useful to the decision of the Apex Court in Rajinder Kaur v. Punjab State and another, AIR 1986 SC 1790, wherein it has been held that where the impugned order of discharge was made on the basis of misconduct, it amounts to an order of dismissal from service and, therefore, the order is in contravention of the provisions of Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India and is liable to be set aside.
When the order of discharge (Annexure P-1) clearly shows that the petitioner was discharged from service on the ground that he absented himself from duty habitually, then it cannot be said that it is only an order of discharge simpliciter.
4.
There is no denial of the fact that the order of discharge has been passed without serving any chargesheet and without seeking any explanation from the petitioner and without holding any inquiry.
Thus, it is clear that the impugned order of discharge from service was not made in accordance with rule 1221 of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934 and it was made by way of punishment.
I am, therefore, of the opinion that the impugned order Annexure P-1 is liable to be quashed.
5.
The result is, the writ petition is allowed and the impugned order (Annexure P-1) is set aside.
The petitioner is directed to be reinstated forthwith.
But in the circumstances of the case, I direct that the petitioner shall be paid only 50% of the back wages from the date of his dismissal till the date of reinstatement.
However, it is made clear that it is open to the respondents to proceed against the petitioner in accordance with the rules departmentally.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.