Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - On December 7, 1984, the State of Haryana advertised 18 posts of Child Development Project Officers.
A qualification of "M.Sc.
Home Science with specialisation in Nutrition or Child Development or Extension Education or Master's degree in Social Work from a recognised University" was the condition of eligibility.
It was also required that the candidate should have passed "Hindi upto Matric standard".
In response to this advertisement, a total of 144 applications were received.
Out of these applicants, 54 candidates fulfilled the conditions of eligibility, the qualification laid down in the advertisement.
The eligible candidates were called for interview on February 16, 1985.
13 candidates viz. respondent Nos. 3 to 15 who were already working on ad hoc basis were not eligible.
Despite that they were called for interview on February 25, 1985.
Vide order dated March 11, 1985, a copy of which has been produced on the record as Annexure P.2, they were granted appointments alongwith the other candidates.
Aggrieved by this order, five persons approached this court through CWP Nos. 2506 and 1333 of 1985.
The former case was initially allowed vide judgment dated July 24, 1986.
The impugned appointments were quashed.
However, review applications were filed.
These were allowed.
Ultimately, vide order dated November 11, 1987, the learned Single Judge dismissed CWP No. 2506 of 1985.
The unsuccessful candidates have filed LPA No. 466 of 1988.
CWP No. 1333 of 1985 has also been listed for hearing along with this case.
2.
Mr. RK Malik, counsel for the appellants has contended that respondent Nos. 3 to 15 were ineligible as they did not have the qualifications specified in the advertisement.
Learned Counsel submits that the plea raised by the respondents that the educational qualifications had been relaxed could not have been accepted as there was no provision in the advertisement for the relaxation of the qualifications.
He further submits that the power of relaxation could not have been invoked as it cannot be said that any hardship was being caused to the persons who were not qualified.
For the purposes of direct recruitment, a person must fulfil the prescribed qualifications.
If he/she does not fulfil the requisite criteria for eligibility, the person is ineligible to be considered.
It has been further contended that reasons as required under the rules were not given.
Lastly, it has been submitted that respondent No. 16 was appointed despite the fact that her application had been received after the expiry of the last date viz. December 26, 1984.
With regard to respondent No. 17, it has been contended that she was granted two marks for experience despite the fact that she had none.
3.
The claim made on behalf of the appellants has been controverted by the counsel for the respondents.
It has been pointed out that a conscious decision to relax the rigour of the academic qualifications had been taken.
According to the counsel, the private respondents had been considered against posts besides those which had been advertised.
Thus, the stipulations made in the advertisement were not attracted.
Lastly, it has been contended that they have continued in service for more than 15 years.
It shall be extremely harsh if they are now thrown out of service.
Thus, it has been prayed that their appointments may not be interfered with.
4.
It is the admitted position that respondent Nos. 3 to 15 did not have a Post Graduate Degree in the subjects/specialisations mentioned in the advertisement.
Still further, on a perusal of the records, we are unable to hold that the Government had taken a conscious decision under the statutory rules to relax the qualifications.
In fact, on a perusal of the official file produced by Mr. Bishnoi, counsel for the Department, we find that there is no reference to the statutory rules or the provisions of Rule 17 which provides for relaxation in the note put up by the Director.
Despite that, it is contended that the order of relaxation had been passed by the Minister.
5.
We have reservations on this contention.
Strictly speaking, it cannot be said that the appointments were in conformity with law.
Firstly, there was no stipulation in the advertisement that the qualifications can be relaxed.
If such a stipulation had been made, others who were similarly placed, could have submitted their applications.
No stipulation having been made, they were deprived of the chance to compete.
Secondly, on the material placed before us, we are not satisfied that there was an order of relaxation.
In this view of the matter, the challenge made by the appellants to the selection and appointment of respondent Nos. 3 to 15 to the posts of Child Development Project Officers is not without merit.
6.
Despite the above, we feel reluctant to interfere with the view taken by the learned Single Judge.
The reason which compels us to do so is that the respondents have in fact continued on these posts for the last more than 15 years.
In this situation, it would be extremely harsh to them and their families if they are now thrown out of service.
They would have admittedly become over-age for other posts.
We are conscious of the fact that mere delay should not be a ground for putting a seal of approval on illegal appointments.
Nor should such a concession encourage the Department to appoint ineligible persons in future.
However, in the peculiar circumstances of this case and without intending to lay down a precedent, we choose not to interfere so as to avoid hardship to respondent Nos. 3 to 15.
7.
Faced with this situation, Mr. Malik, counsel for the appellants contends that the Department has granted seniority to the ineligible candidates even over and above the persons who were eligible and had been duly selected for direct recruitment.
8.
This statement is not disputed by the counsel for the respondents.
It has been admitted that certain persons out of respondent Nos. 3 to 15 have been treated as senior to some of the eligible candidates on the basis of their position in the merit list prepared by the selection committee.
Simultaneously, it is also contended on behalf of the respondents, the Government as well as the private candidates that respondent Nos. 3 to 15 had in fact been appointed against posts which were beyond the advertised posts.
9.
The counsel concede that the selection committee had prepared one merit list.
The appointment have been made and the seniority has been fixed on the basis of the position in the merit list.
Thus, it cannot be said that respondent Nos. 3 to 15 had been appointed against posts other than those which had been advertised.
10.
In view of this position, we consider it appropriate to direct that none out of respondent Nos. 3 to 15 shall be placed above the candidates who possessed the qualifications and were appointed in the year 1985 vide order dated March 11, 1985.
They will be placed at the bottom of the merit list of the candidates who were found eligible and were selected.
By this process, it shall be ensured that ineligible candidates are not able to steal a march over the eligible candidates who had been rightly selected and appointed.
We note that the challenge to the appointment of respondent Nos. 16 and 17 was not pressed.
11.
No one has appeared for the petitioners in CWP No. 1333 of 1985 to raise any contention.
12.
In view of the above, CWP No. 1333 of 1985 and LPA No. 466 of 1988 are disposed of with the observation that even though, the appointments of respondent Nos. 3 to 15 were not in conformity with law, we are not interfering on account of the lapse of time.
They will, however, not be entitled to seniority over the candidates who were eligible and were selected for appointment in the year 1985.
Their seniority shall be fixed at the bottom of the batch.
No costs.