THB Chalapathi, J (Oral) - This writ petition is filed challenging the order of discharge of the petitioner from service as Constable in the Police Department of Haryana.
2.
The petitioner was recruited as a Constable on 1st October, 1989.
After seeing the performance of the petitioner, the authorities concerned came to the conclusion that he is unlikely to improve himself to be an efficient police officer.
Therefore, the petitioner has been discharged from service in exercise of the powers conferred upon the authorities under rule 1221 of the Punjab Police Rules.
The order is simpliciter in nature.
It does not attach any stigma.
3.
The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that on a representation made by him, DIG (HAP) gave the reasons for passing the order of discharge against the petitioner.
According to him, the said order dated 1212911 shows that the order of discharge came to be passed because of the grave misconduct of wilful absence from duty on the part of the petitioner.
The petitioner cannot take advantage of the reasons given in the order of the D.I.G., Haryana Armed Police, Madhuban (Karnal), since no appeal or representation is provided against the order of discharge.
The said order has been passed by an authority which is not competent to go into the matter.
Therefore, it cannot be said that the original order of discharge attaches stigma.
It has been held by the Supreme Court in State of UP v. Krishna Kumar Sharma, 1997(II) SCC 437 that the averments in the counter affidavit do not alter the nature of the order of termination which was termination simpliciter in accordance with the Rules.
It cannot, therefore, be said that the order of discharge amounts to a stigmatised order.
One has to look at the order of discharge only whether it attaches any stigma.
It is not disputed that the authority which passed the order of discharge is competent to pass such an order under rule 1221 of the PP Rules.
In this view of the matter I do not find any ground warranting interference with the impugned order.
The writ petition fails and is accordingly dismissed.
Petition dismissed.