Harjit Singh Bedi, (Oral) - The petitioner passed the MBBS Course from the Government Medical College, Patiala and was married to one Dr. Surinder Singh, resident of Panipat, in January, 1997.
She applied for taking the Common Entrance Test for admission to the Post Graduate Degree/Diploma course in the Pt. BD Sharma Post Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences, Rohtak (hereinafter called the "Institute") and on the declaration of the result of the entrance test, was placed at Serial No. 46 in order of merit by securing 67625 marks.
Two candidates who had also qualified in the test however did not join the Course, with the result that her merit position came up to 44.
It is the conceded position that 90 marks in all had been provided for the entrance test with weightage of 10 marks for students who had done their MBBS from the Institute and 5 marks for students who were residents/domiciles of the State of Haryana.
The petitioner's case is that though she had originally been a domicile of the Punjab State, she had, on her marriage to Dr. Surinder Singh in January, 1997 (and long before the last date fixed for the submission of forms for taking the entrance test) she had become a domicile of Haryana and, as such, was now entitled to a weightage of 5 marks on that basis.
The petitioner accordingly appeared for the counselling on 26th/27th March, 1998 and produced a domicile certificate, Annexure P-2 dated 431998 before the Admission Committee.
This certificate was, however, not entertained on the ground that it had not been issued in the proper format.
The petitioner was accordingly denied the weightage of 5 marks and was unable to get admission to the course.
This action has been impugned herein.
2.
On notice of motion, a reply was first filed by Dr. SB Siwach, Dean of the Institute, on 30th April, 1998 and two objections were taken therein; firstly, that the domicile certificate Annexure P-2 was not acceptable for the reasons that it was not in the prescribed format and secondly, that it had not been issued by the District Magistrate/GA to DC or the Sub Divisional Officer (Civil) of the district/sub divisions to which the petitioner belonged as provided by Government instructions dated 3rd October, 1996.
A second written statement was filed by Dr. SB Siwach on 17th August, 1998, in which the break up with regard to the available seats was given and the two grounds for rejecting the petitioner's certificate Annexure P-2 were reiterated.
3.
Mr. Kulbir Narwal, the learned counsel for the petitioner, has argued that Annexure P-3 was an extract from the prospectus issued by the University with regard to admission to be made for the Post Graduate Degree/Diploma Course and in clause 6 of Annexure "A" thereof, it had been provided that the wives of persons who were bona fide residents of Haryana, irrespective of the fact that they had belonged to any other State before marriage were to be treated as Haryana domiciles.
He has urged that the format of the certificate had also been given in Annexure "C" of the prospectus and this too had been appended as Annexure P-4 to the petition.
He has argued that the certificate, Annexure P-2 contained all particulars that were required under Annexure-C although the exact words may not have been used and reference to the letter of 3rd October, 1996 had also not been made.
Mr. Narwal has also produced in Court today a copy of the aforesaid letter and clause (vi) given therein corresponds verbatim to clause (vi) in Annexure P-3 under which the petitioner had applied as being the wife of a person who was bona fide resident of Haryana.
Mr. Narwal has accordingly urged that the mere fact that there was no reference to the letter dated 3rd October, 1996 in the certificate Annexure P-2 could not have the effect of denying the petitioner her legitimate claim.
4.
Mr. Ajay Jain, the learned counsel appearing for the respondent-State has, however, pointed out that the certificate, Annexure P-2 had been issued by the City Magistrate who was not authorised to do so under the Government instructions dated 3rd October, 1996 or under the Prospectus, Annexure P-3.
He has also urged that as the proforma of the certificate required to be submitted by the petitioner was also given in the prospectus itself, no deviation from the prescribed proforma was permissible and as such, the petitioner had been rightly denied the 5 mark weightage as being a domicile of the State of Haryana.
5.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the record.
Clause (vi) of the letter dated October 3, 1996 is reproduced below :  "(vi) The wives of such persons who are bona fide residents of Haryana irrespective of the fact that they had belonged to any other State before marriage."
This clause was reproduced verbatim as clause (vi) in Annexure P-3.
It is, therefore, evident that the petitioner was a domicile of Haryana State.
The domicile certificate Annexure P-2 produced by the petitioner and the proforma given in Annexure-C to Annexure P-3, in the prospectus, are reproduced below :  "Haryana Domicile Certificate  It is certified that Vinnet Kaur wife of Shri Surinder Singh is a resident of House No. 50/10, Raj Colony, Panipat.
Her husband is resident of Panipat for the last more than fifteen years is a resident of Haryana State.
This certificate has been issued on the basis of the report of Secretary, Nagar Parishad, Panipat.
Seal Sd/- City Magistrate, Panipat.
431998."
Annexure-C  Haryana Bonafide resident/domicile resident/domicile certificate  I certify that Mr/Miss/Mrs.
.................... son/daughter of Shri ..................
Address ..................... is a bona fide resident/domicile of village/town .............. PO ............. Tehsil .............. and a domicile of the Haryana State as per instructions contained in Chief Secretary Haryana's letter No. 62/17/95 of GSI dated 3101996.
Dated ........... District Magistrate/GA  Place .......... to DC or Sub Divisional Officer (C)  ...................
Certificate from no other authority will be accepted.
Certificate should be from the General Assistant to Deputy Commissioner/District Magistrate or Sub Divisional Officer (Civil) of the District to which the candidate belongs.
NOTE : The certificate of Haryana domicile/residence issued prior to more than three months from the last date of receipt of applications will not be accepted."
A perusal of the two documents reproduced above clearly indicate that the only flaw, if any, in the petitioner's certificate, Annexure P-2, which is described as `A Haryana Domicile Certificate' was that there was no reference to the letter dated October 3, 1996.
It is also evident that the provisions of the letter dated 3rd October, 1996, including clause (vi) and reproduced in Annexure P-3 were almost identical but for minor modifications to suit the various courses in question.
As clause (vi) of Annexure P-3 as also clause (vi) of the letter dated October 3, 1996 clearly qualified the petitioner as being a domicile of the State of Haryana, the mere fact that there was no reference to the letter dated October 3, 1996 in Annexure P-2 would, to my mind, be of no effect, as the substance rather than the form has to be seen.
6.
Mr. Jain's second objection with regard to the competence of the City Magistrate to issue the domicile certificate must now be dealt with.
In this connection, we had summoned the relevant information from the Deputy Commissioner, Panipat, and in his communication dated 12th May, 1998, addressed to the Advocate General, Haryana, the Deputy Commissioner intimated that the office of General Assistant to Deputy Commissioner had now been re- designated as City Magistrate by the Government of Haryana.
It is, therefore, obvious that the certificate issued by a City Magistrate was deemed to have been issued by the GA to DC and as per Annexure P-3 as also the letter dated October 3, 1996 the GA to the DC was an authorised officer.
7.
It has been pointed out by Mr. Jain that as of now no seat in the Post Graduate Degree/Diploma Course was available against which the petitioner could be admitted and the course in question had long since started.
The petitioner, nevertheless, cannot be denied admission on the grounds pleaded by the respondents for the reasons set out above.
8.
This petition is accordingly allowed and a direction is issued that the petitioner will be treated as a domicile of the State of Haryana and be given 5 marks weightage on that account and, in case, it is found that she was entitled to admission in the Post-Graduate or the Diploma Course, as per her merit and application for the admissions made in 1998, she will be granted admission in the next academic year without ado.
This arrangement has been made for the reason that there is no seat available in the course in question as of now, and secondly, that the course in question has long since started.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.