Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - Can a person claim increments for the period during which he has been practising law and has not been serving the employer ?
This is the short question that arises in this miscellaneous application.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The respondent was working with the Haryana State Co-operative Development Federation Limited.
On May 9, 1990 he informed the Managing Director that he wanted to start practice as a lawyer.
He gave three months' notice "for resignation which may kindly be accepted on August 9, 1990."
This request was accepted by the employer on June 15/29, 1990.
The respondent was relieved of his duties.
On August 3, 1990 the respondent addressed another communication to the Managing Director.
He requested that he may be allowed to withdraw the resignation which had to be accepted on August 9, 1990.
He was informed that his resignation had been accepted in the meeting held on June 29, 1990.
Aggrieved by this action, the respondent had approached this Court through a petition under Article 226 of the Constitution.
3.
The learned Single Judge having accepted the petition, the Federation had filed a Letters patent Appeal.
The Bench hearing the appeal found that the respondent had tendered his resignation to start legal practice.
He had obtained a licence to practice law on July 3, 1990.
It was further observed that "the submission of the letter dated August 3, 1990 for permission to withdraw the resignation was a device for use at a later stage.
The respondent conducted the cases......
Yet, the fact remains that the respondent was gainfully employed."
In these circumstances it was held that the respondent was not entitled to the salary "for the period during which he was practising as an Advocate."
The petition was, accordingly, disposed of vide order dated April 18, 1998.
It was, however, observed that the respondent shall be entitled to the benefits of continuity in service.
4.
Now a Civil Miscellaneous Application has been filed by the respondent.
He prays that "the judgment may be clarified to the extent that the applicant-respondent was granted benefit of continuity of service but was deprived from (of) arrears of salary only for the period during which he remained out of job and the said period shall be considered as duty period for all intents and purposes for grant of pension and annual increments etc....."  5.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties.
We have also perused the application and the reply thereto which has been filed on behalf of the Federation.
6.
An increment is granted to an employee in token of his serving the employer satisfactorily for a period of one year.
In a case where the employee had actually tendered a resignation and had left the service so as to start legal practice, the relationship of employer and employee had virtually terminated.
In any case, even if the employee's claim is subsequently accepted, the fact remains that he had not served the employer in any manner whatsoever.
The employer had no occasion to watch his performance or to conclude that he had satisfactorily performed the duties.
In the present case, it is the admitted position that the respondent-applicant was actually practising law and conducting cases in Courts.
In this situation, he cannot be held entitled to the benefit of increments in service for the period in dispute.
7.
Mr. Ram Kumar Malik, learned counsel for the applicant, points out that the benefit of continuity in service had been granted.
This is undoubtedly so.
However, the limited purpose for granting this benefit was to ensure that the benefits which may have accrued to the applicant for the services rendered by him prior to June 29, 1990 may not be obliterated.
It was to ensure that the employee was not treated as a fresh entrant in service.
It was never intended to convey the impression that he was entitled to the benefit for the purpose of increments.
So far as the request in respect of pension is concerned, the Federation has conceded the applicant's claim.
In view of the above, the claim made by the applicant for the issue of a direction that he is entitled to the increments for the period in question is declined.
The application is, accordingly, disposed of.
No costs.