Amarjeet Chaudhary, A.C.J - The question posed for the consideration of this Full Bench is - "Whether by transfer from one range to another, right of a police personnel for being considered on the basis of seniority in the parent range for being deputed to attend the Upper School Course would be prejudicially affected ?
If so, would it amount to legal mala fide action ?"
A few facts which are not disputed may be briefly noticed.
2.
The petitioner was enlisted as a Constable on October 5, 1981 in the Punjab Armed Police.
On January 30, 1987, he was promoted to the rank of Head Constable.
The petitioner qualified the Intermediate School Course which commenced with effect from July 1, 1993.
The respondents selected persons for attending the Upper School Course w.e.f.
April 15, 1994.
However, the petitioner's claim was not considered as he had been transferred from the Punjab Armed Police and relieved of his duties on March 8, 1994.
Admittedly, the petitioner had not been confirmed in the District Police.
It is in the background of these facts that the question as posed at the outset has to be considered.
3.
The conditions of service governing the police personnel are broadly laid down in the Punjab Police Rules.
The seniority of lower subordinates viz. the constables and the Head Constables in maintained at the District level.
It is also the admitted position that the Armed Police forms a separate cadre.
It is distinct and different from the district cadre.
While the District Superintendent of Police is the appointing authority for the personnel in the District, the Commandant is the competent authority in case of the personnel belonging to the Armed police.
The members of the force are deputed for the Intermediate and the Upper School Courses on the basis of their seniority in the cadre.
On this basis, even the petitioner was entitled to be deputed for the course in the order of his seniority.
However, his right is sought to be defeated on the ground that he had been transferred from the Armed Police to the District Police and relieved of his duties on March 8, 1994.
Thus, the primary question which falls for consideration is - Does a Member of the Police Force lose his right to be deputed for the promotion course merely by his being transferred from one cadre to another ?
While it has been contended by the counsel for the petitioner that the department cannot defeat the right of an employee by ordering his transfer, it has been submitted on behalf of the respondents that the seniority has to be seen on the date of deputation for the course and if a person has already been transferred to another cadre, he has no right to be considered vis-a-vis others who were initially junior to him.
4.
After hearing counsel for the parties, we find that there is no specific rule providing for the transfer of an employee from the Armed Police to the District Police.
Equally, there is no provision to the effect that an employee loses his right to seniority merely by his transfer to another cadre.
However, it seems clear to us that if a person had worked for more than 10 years and attained a certain position in the seniority list by virtue of his confirmation or length of service, his rights cannot be obliterated by a purely unilateral act of transfer.
If such a course of action were permitted, it would lead to inequitable and unfair results.
It may even suffer from the vice of arbitrariness and be violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
5.
There is another aspect of the matter.
The special provisions governing the police force are contained in the Punjab Police Rules.
In respect of matters regarding which no provision has been made in the Police Rules, the members of the force like the other employees working in connection with the affairs of the State are governed by the provisions contained in the Punjab Civil Services Rules.
Rule 12 of these rules specifically provides that the provisions of the Punjab Civil Services Rules apply to the government employees who are under the "administrative control of the Punjab Government and whose pay is debitable to the Consolidated Fund of the State of Punjab".
Rule 2.35 of these rules defines `lien' to mean "the title of a government employee to hold substantively, either immediately or on the termination of a period of absence, a permanent post, including a tenure post, to which he has been appointed substantively".
Furthermore, provisions have been made in Chapter III (Rules 311 to 317) to inter alia protect the rights of a person who has been substantively appointed to a post.
In Rule 3.15, it has been specifically provided that "a government employee's lien on a post may, in no circumstances, be terminated, even with his consent, if the result will be to leave him without a lien or a suspended lien upon a permanent post."
Thus, an employee who has been confirmed on a post and has acquired a lien thereto, cannot be deprived thereof even with his consent.
In other words, once an employee is confirmed, he acquires a lien.
This lien shall be maintained and he shall not be deprived thereof even with his consent till he acquires a lien in accordance with the rules on another post.
6.
Thus, on a perusal of the rules, it appears that a person who holds a post substantively acquires a lien.
The benefits which ensue by virtue of this lien cannot be taken away by the unilateral act of transfer.
This view is also supported by precedent.
An almost similar question had come up for consideration before a learned Single Judge of this Court (Jawahar Lal Gupta, J) in Kartar Singh and another v. State of Punjab etc. CWP No. 15009 of 1993 : 1994(4) SCT 328 (P&H) which was decided on June 2, 1994.
The learned Judge had inter alia held that the petitioners having not been confirmed in the District Police had retained their lien in the Armed Police.
They were, thus, to be deemed to have continued and their rights for promotion etc. were thus, protected.
Similarly, in Gursewak Singh v. State of Punjab etc., CWP No. 10910 of 1995, THB Chalapathi, J speaking for the Bench, had observed that "when the petitioner was transferred from the one unit to another unit, his rights in his parent unit cannot be taken away and they have to be protected.
When the juniors working in the Punjab Armed Police are deputed for Upper School Course, the said benefit cannot be denied to the petitioner as the petitioner continues to be on the rolls of the Punjab Armed Police on notional basis though this services have been transferred or deputed to the District Police, Patiala".
We affirm the view taken in these two decisions.
7.
In view of the above, we answer the question posed at the outset as follows :-  The unilateral act of transfer by the department of a member of the Police Force from one cadre to another cannot affect his seniority or right to be considered for being deputed for the course or promotion.
8.
What is the position in the present case ?
The petitioner had admittedly joined the Punjab Armed Police in the year 1981.
He had acquired a lien in the cadre when he was transferred to the District Police in March 1994.
His lien was never terminated.
Thus, his rights in the parent cadre were duly protected.
Still further, the Division Bench had, by an interim order, directed that the petitioner shall be allowed to attend the Upper School Course.
During the pendency of the case, the petitioner has already completed the course.
In view of the above, the writ petition is allowed.
The petitioner shall be entitled to the benefits which may become due to him on account of retention of his lien in the Punjab Armed Police.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.