GS Singhvi, J - This petition has been fled for quashing the order Annexure P-7 issued by the Chief Engineer, PWD, Public Health (GW) Branch, Patiala, reverting the petitioner from the post of Junior Engineer.
2.
In brief, the facts of the case are that the petitioner, who joined service as Assistant Pump Driver was promoted as ad hoc Junior Engineer (Civil) on 13111986.
The tenure of his promotion was six months.
It was clearly mentioned in the order of promotion that on the basis of purely temporary and provisional promotion, he will not acquire night to seniority and regular appointment on the post of Junior Engineer.
On completion of the tenure specified in the order of promotion, the Chief Engineer issued the impugned order reverting him to the post of Assistant Pump Driver.
3.
The petitioner has challenged the order of reversion on the ground of arbitrariness, discrimination and non-compliance of the Punjab Department of Public Works (Public Health Branch) Junior Engineers Class-III Service Rules, 1984 (hereinafter referred to as `the 1984 Rules').
4.
The respondents have contested the prayer made by the petitioner on the ground that he does not have the right to hold the post of Junior Engineer and the order of reversion passed in accordance with the terms and conditions incorporated in the order of promotion cannot be invalidated on the ground of violation of the 1984 Rules which were merely draft rules.
The respondents have also averred that the Punjab Public Works Subordinate Service (Buildings and Roads Branch) Rules, 1934 (hereinafter referred to as `the 1934 Rules') are applicable to the services of the department.
5.
While issuing notice of motion on 2851987, this Court had stayed the petitioner's reversion and as that order has not been vacated so far, the petitioner has been continuing on the post of Junior Engineer.
6.
Arguments in this case were heard and order was reserved on July 22, 1998 along with other connected petitions because the Advocate General, who appeared on behalf of the respondents, gave out that this petition is similar to Civil Writ Petition No. 3736 of 1987.
However, while dictating the order, we felt that this case has no similarity with other petitions.
Therefore, the case was listed for fresh hearing.
7.
On 2111998, the case was adjourned to 9111998 on the request of Shri J.S.
Bhatti.
On the next date of hearing, we enquired from the learned counsel for the parties as to how the petitioner can be treated eligible for promotion as Junior Engineer on the basis of part-time diploma acquired by him.
On November 10, 1998, the Executive Engineer appeared on behalf of the Chief Engineer, Public Health (GW), Patiala but he could not show whether part-time diploma is recognized by the Government of Punjab for the purpose of recruitment on the post of Junior Engineer.
Today Shri Chamkaur Singh, Chief Engineer, Public Health (GW), Patiala, Punjab has appeared.
He has stated that recruitment to the service in Public Health Department used to be regulated by the 1934 Rules and the new rules have been promulgated in the year 1991.
He, however, conceded that the 1934 Rules do not contain provision for recruitment on the post of Junior Engineer by promotion from among Assistant Pump Drivers having the qualification of part-time diploma.
He also conceded that exercise for adjudging the suitability of eligible persons for recruitment of Junior Engineers in accordance with the 1991 Rules has not been undertaken.
8.
In view of the above, we dispose of the writ petition with the direction that the case of the petitioner shall be considered for promotion to the post of Junior Engineer in accordance with the 1991 Rules.
If he is found eligible and suitable keeping in view his seniority in the cadre of Assistant Pump Drivers, then he be promoted as Junior Engineer on regular basis, else he should be reverted to the post of Assistant Pump Driver.
Appropriate order shall be passed by the competent authority within four months of the submission of certified copy of this order.
Order accoridngly.