OP Sharma, J - The petitioner, a police Constable was dismissed from service for remaining absent without leave.
He challenges the order of dismissal on the ground that neither any enquiry was held nor any opportunity was provided to him to explain the charge of unauthorised absence, the only ground on which he has been removed from service.
2.
The order impugned is sought to be justified by the respondents on the ground that a number of notices were issued to the petitioner to resume duty but he did not comply.
Since his defiance was creating indiscipline as his conduct was unbecoming of a police officer, he was removed from service by invoking Rules 187 and 208 of the Police Rules.
3.
The admitted facts of the case are that the petitioner was enrolled as Police Constable in the year 1987.
He proceeded on ten days casual leave commencing from 7.3.1993.
He was scheduled to resume his duty on 18.3.1993 but failed.
He was also permitted to leave the station.
The order impugned was issued on 2241993.
It reads as under :  "The order relates to the removal of Const.
Bachan Lal No. 377 of `F' Copy of this battalion.
Brief facts of the case are that aforesaid Constable proceeded on 8+2 days casual leave on 7.3.1993 and was due to report back on 18.3.1993.
But he failed to do so.
As such a signal was sent to him vide this office No. OB/5204 dated 1041993, through concerned police station directing him to report at Bn.
Hqr.
immediately failing which severe action against him will follow.
But the Const.
did not bother to resume his duties till 15.4.1993, as such another attendance notice was sent to him vide this Office Order No. 5659 dated 2041993.
But even then the Const.
did not report at Bn.
Hqr.
till date.
This clearly indicates that the Const.
is not willing to serve the department any more.
Even if he may be willing, he will not prove a good Police Const.
Perusal of his service record reveals that the Const.
is appointed on 21111987.
He has earned 2 Major Punishments for his unauthorised absence during the last Five years.
Besides he has availed 164 days earned leave and his period of absence at various occasions i.e. 6-1-1-, days has been treated as dies non to mend himself.
Further the Const.
has managed to get his following period of absence regularised.
1.
10.7.91 to 31.7.91 22 days 22.8.91 to 16.11.91 including to 8293</< TD>  85 days 3.
3.1.93 to 8293 including 7 days C/L.
37 days Besides, as per his annual remarks the Const.
is an average type and has been dismissed from service for dereliction of duty vide Govt. Order No. Home- 310/Camp./Sgr/90 dated 631990.
Thereafter reinstated in service.
This all indicates that the Const.
is liability on the department and it is of no use to retain such irresponsible person on the rolls of this Bn.
unnecessarily.
Absenting unauthorisedly from leave amounts to loss of appointment as envisaged under rules 187 and 208(g) of J&K Police Manual.
Keeping in view the aforesaid facts, it is hereby ordered that Const.
Bachan Lal No. 377 of `F' Coy of this Bn.
is hereby removed from service w.e.f.
18.3.1993 the date he has absented unauthorisedly from leave and his period of absence is treated as dies non.
The const.
will deposited all the Govt. articles in the Bn.
store issued to him from time to time."
4.
Admittedly Rule 187 of the Police Rules could be invoked only within a period of three years from the date of enrolment i.e. probation period.
Since the petitioner was enrolled in 1987, he had completed more than five years service and as such rule 187 could not be invoked.
Moreover the petitioner has been removed from service and not discharged under Rule 187.
Such an order could be passed only after holding enquiry because it is a major punishment.
The order is even otherwise not sustainable because the petitioner has been removed from service on the ground that :  (i) he was earlier dismissed from service by order dated 631990 and thereafter reinstated; (ii) he is a liability for the police department being irresponsible person; and (iii) his conduct over the years indicates that he will not prove a good police Constable.
Such an order could not be passed even in case of a probationer as laid down in State of Haryana and another v. Jagdish Chander, AIR 1995 SC 984 : 1995(2) SCT 427 (SC), holding that :  "It would thus be clear from the order of discharge that it is not an order of discharge simpliciter.
On the other hand, the SP considered the record and found him to be habitual absentee, negligent to his duty and indisciplined.
The findings of habitual absence and indiscipline necessarily cast stigma on his career and they would be an impediment for any of future employment elsewhere.
Under those circumstances, the principles of natural justice do require that he should be given an opportunity to explain the grounds on which the SP proposes to pass an order of discharge and then to consider the explanation submitted by the Police Officer.
Then the SP is competent to pass appropriate orders according to the Rules.
Since this part of the procedure had not been adopted, the order of discharge is vitiated by manifest error of law."
Mr. Jandial has also relied on the decision of this Court in Abdul Rehman Mir v. State, 1997 SLJ 350, holding that :  "In the present case respondent No. 3 had admittedly discharged the petitioner under rule 187 and had further stated in the order that he was "unlikely to come (become ?)
a good police officer."
This by itself attaches a stigma to him.
An absence from duty need not necessarily render a police official unfit for the service in all events and circumstances.
Such absence can be explained away also in certain causes and yet the official may be found fit for service.
But, where an unauthorised absence is taken as basis to determine the likelihood or unlikelihood of the police official, to become good official or a bad official, it certainly attaches a stigma where the official is discharged specifically on the ground that he was not likely to become a good police official."
5.
However, with respect to the learned Judge, the proposition has been stated too widely ignoring the fact that Rule 187 of the Police Rules is a condition of service and any discharge on the ground stated therein cannot be said to be a stigma.
It is only when some thing more than what is permitted by the rule is made the ground of discharge as in Jagdish Chander's case that the proposition may hold good.
Not otherwise.
The case of the petitioner is however squarely covered by the judgment in Jagdish Chander case.
So the petition is allowed and the order impugned quashed.
However, respondents shall be at liberty to hold enquiry in the absence of the petition and decide the same in accordance with Article 128 of the Civil Service Regulations within a period of three months.
Failure to hold any such enquiry shall result in automatic reinstatement of the petitioner.
Petition allowed.