TS Doabia, J - Petitioner who was selected for the post of constable in the police department was sent to police training school.
While he was posted there he is said to have committed an act which fell in the mischief of theft.
Departmental enquiry was initiated against the petitioner.
Petitioner was found guilty of the charge.
He was dismissed from the service.
Petitioner preferred an appeal.
Appeal was dismissed.
Further revision was preferred before Inspector General of Police, the same was also dismissed.
it is in these circumstances, petitioner has come to this Court.
2.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that before passing the order in question, no charge sheet was served on him.
It is again urged that show cause notice which was served on the petitioner asking him as to why he should not be removed from service did not envisage the punishment of dismissal as contemplated under Section 126 of the Constitution of Jammu and Kashmir.
It is urged that in para 3 of, the show cause notice, the petitioner was asked to show cause within a period of one week.
In this show cause notice he was called upon to appear for personal hearing on 9th of December, 1991.
This letter was issued on 7th of December 1991.
It is thus urged that one week's time was not given to the petitioner.
It is in these circumstance, it is urged that Superintendent of Police Jammu was in undue haste in removing the petitioner from service.
It is urged that when notice was issued on 7th of December 1991 and petitioner was asked to appear on 9th of December 1991 then period of one week's time cannot be said to have been given by any mathematical calculation.
It is also urged that it was proposed to remove the petitioner from the service but the petitioner was visited with the extreme penalty of dismissal.
In addition to the above it is urged that no charge sheet was served on the petitioner.
For this specific reliance has been placed on paras 6 and 7 of the petition.
For facility of reference these parts are reproduced below :-  "6.
That thereafter without framing any charge sheet and without serving any summary of allegations on the petitioner and without giving the petitioner any statement of facts Dy.
S.P.D.A.R.
Shri Dhram Singh Chib was asked by respondent No. 3 to conduct enquiry against the petitioner.
7.
That the petitioner was arrested from Udhampur on 24th of November 1991 and brought to Jammu where the petitioner was kept in quarter guard arrest at Police Lines Jammu upto 10th of December 1991 from the show cause notice Annexure A-4 of respondent No. 3 that the record of enquiry minus the report of the enquiry officer were not given to the petitioner pari passu the show cause notice, as such same was not in accordance with Rule 33 of the Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules 1956, (hereinafter referred to as 1956 Rules) as well as the provisions of Police Rules.
Moreover, the said show cause notice was served while the petitioner was under arrest of the police.
Again, although under rules reasonable period has to be afforded to the person concerned to show cause yet after issuing the notice on 7121991, the respondent No. 3 without awaiting the reply of the petitioner passed final order annexure A-3.
3.
It is pertinent to note that although the notice gave a week's time to the petitioner to show cause yet before the expiry of that time the respondent No. 3 hurried to pass the impugned order dated 10.12.1991 Annexure A-3."
4.
Thus assertion made by the petitioner is that he was not given any show cause notice and this fact has not been denied.
In the above situation a conclusion can be arrived at that the petitioner was not given reasonable opportunity as contemplated by section 126 of the Jammu and Kashmir Constitution.
In this situation order of dismissal passed by the Sr.
Superintendent of Police is held to be vitiated as having been passed without due application of mind.
The same is set aside.
Petitioner would be entitled to reinstatement.
He would start getting salary with effect from the date he produces copy of this order before Sr.
Superintendent of Police Jammu.
The aforementioned officer if he proposes to proceed further into the matter may serve a specific charge sheet either on that date or on any other date.
In case such a decision is taken the aforementioned officer would be at liberty to indicate the date on which the petitioner is to put in appearance before enquiry officer.
If it is proposed to hold further enquiry then not only specific charge sheet would be served but enquiry officer would also be named.
The question as to whether the petitioner is entitled to any back wages is again left to the decision of the appointing authority.
A specific order be passed in this regard.
If the petitioner was not gainfully employed elsewhere his claim for back wages be also looked into.
This petition is accordingly allowed and disposed of in the manner as indicated above.
Petition allowed.