HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - The present case pertains of retiral benefits to the petitioner on account of the death of her husband, Ajaib Singh, while in service on 21st January, 1994.
The petitioner's case is that her husband had joined service as Clerk-cum-Store Keeper in the Department of Industries in the State of Punjab, on 18th July, 1967.
It is further the case of the petitioner that she was entitled to all the benefits enumerated by her in paragraph 8 of the writ petition and that, despite the fact that she had submitted her pension case in February, 1994, the amounts mentioned in paragraph 12 of the writ petition had been paid whereas the other retiral benefits enumerated in paragraph 13 of the writ petition still remained outstanding.
2.
This petition was admitted on 14th January, 1998.
Notice was accepted on behalf of the respondent-State by Mr. MS Gill, Additional Advocate General, Punjab, and a direction was issued that the written statement be filed within four weeks and the case to be listed for hearing.
The written statement has not been filed and the State remains unrepresented before me today.
I, therefore, deem it appropriate that this petition be disposed of with a direction that the case of the petitioner would be decided by the authorities positively within three months from the date that a certified copy of this order is supplied to the respondents with respect to the pensionary benefits enumerated in paragraph 13 of the writ petition.
The learned counsel for the petitioner undertakes to supply a copy of the writ petition, along with all annexures, to the Director of Industries, Punjab, within one week from today.
3.
The petitioner has also claimed interest on the delayed payment mentioned in paragraph 12 of the writ petition.
In the light of the fact that the respondents have not put in a reply despite the passage of almost two months so as to controvert the allegations made in paragraph 12 of the petition, I deem it appropriate that the respondents shall also pay to the petitioner interest at the rate of 12 per cent per annum from April 1, 1994 to the date of actual payment.
4.
In the light of what has been held above, this petition is disposed of leaving liberty to the petitioner to approach this Court once again the case she feels dissatisfied with regard to the decision of the respondents on the retiral benefits enumerated in paragraph 13 of the writ petition.
No costs.
Dasti order.
Petition allowed.