TS Doabia, J - Petitioner husband was employed as daily wage earner, with State of Jammu and Kashmir.
He has since died.
His wife is seeking appointment on compassionate grounds.
This is being sought under SRO 43 of 1994.
Petitioner submits that she has submitted a representation.
Copy of representation so submitted by her has been placed on the record.
State counsel has put in appearance.
It is stated that appointment is being denied on the ground that SRO 43 of 1994 would be applicable only to regular Government employees.
Merely because, husband of the petitioner was entitled to regularisation would not clothe her with requisite qualifications.
2.
In my opinion SRO 43 of 1994 merely talks of a person who is a Government employees.
It is not for the benefit of regular employees or temporary Government employees alone.
Petitioner's husband was working on daily wages.
He was performing duty in connection with affairs of State of Jammu and Kashmir.
He would as such be entitled to the benefits of rules contained in SRO 43 of 1994 referred to above.
As a matter of fact Chief Engineer Mechanical Engineering Deptt.
has made a recommendation in favour of the petitioner.
Recommendations were made to the effect that husband of the petitioner who has rendered seven years of services and was entitled to regularisation, is held entitled to benefit of compassionate appointment.
3.
In Saroj v. State of Haryana, 1997(1) SCT 229, the widow of the deceased ad hoc employee was seeking appointment on compassionate grounds.
This was denied on the ground that compassionate appointment can be granted only in case of death of an employee who is working on regular basis.
This plea was rejected.
The fact that deceased was entitled to seek regularisation was taken note of.
The widow was held entitled to regularisation.
The position in this case is similar.
The petitioner is held covered by SRO 43 of 1994.
4.
This aspect of the matter has been considered in detail in SWR No. 488 of 1998.
After taking note of relevant provisions and judicial precedents, it has been concluded as under :-  (i) in the matter of making compassionate appointment the paramount consideration is to see that the members of the deceased family are provided with relief which would mitigate the financial crisis.
(ii) the word `acquire' devotes (denotes ?)
a conscious act.
An effort is made to obtain something.
Eligibility on account of death is an event which can never be acquired.
(iii) the period of six months limitation prescribed in the Rule 3 would apply only to acquisition of eligibility qua educational, technical and other qualifications.
(iv) that the rules of 1994 are not retrospective.
This would govern only those cases where death has taken place after 2221994.
The old cases would be continued to be governed by the Old Rules.
(v) that the Government is within its rights to relax any of the Rules and if the Government comes to the conclusion that financial crisis is still being faced by the family and as that is the basic factor which guides the authorities in making compassionate appointment, the Government can still make appointment notwithstanding the prescription of the period of limitation.
(vi) that in all cases what is required to be seen is that the hardship which the family is suffering is required to be mitigated.
If the family is not suffering any hardship then notwithstanding the presence of all other criterias, the appointment can be denied.
If the family is suffering from hardship then compassion has to be shown.
Rules can be relaxed.
State has to show benevolence.
5.
This petition is accordingly allowed.
Respondents are directed to take notice of observations made above.
They would also take notice of SWP No. 488/98.
Petitioner would supply copy of the order passed in this case and also in SWP No. 488/98 to the respondents.
They would process the case for further orders.
Let it be done within a period of four months.
The period of four months would begin from the date a copy of order passed by this court along with writ petition and annexures thereof are made available by the petitioner to the respondents.
If for any practical reasons it is not possible to take a decision within above mentioned period, respondents would be at liberty to seek extension of time.
But in that eventuality they would have to explain each and every day's delay.
Disposed of accordingly.
Petition allowed.