RL Anand, J - Shri Pritpal Singh has filed the present writ petition under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India seeking directions of this Court in the nature of writ of certiorari for the quashment of the order dated 391997 Annexure P15 passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal and it has been further prayed that a mandate be issued to the respondents to cancel the termination order of the services of the petitioner and further directions be issued to the respondents to reappoint the petitioner on the post he was serving at the time of termination of his services.
2.
Some of the facts can be noticed in the following manner :-  The petitioner was initially appointed as a clerk on 23121987 in the scale of Rs. 950-1500.
He started officiating as Senior Clerk in the scale of Rs. 1200-2400 in the office of Divisional Manager, Ferozepur w.e.f.
19.11.1990 and was posted at Jammu.
He applied for Commercial Apprentice through proper channel and this post carried pay scale of Rs. 1660-2800.
According to the petitioner, he appeared in the written examination held for the purpose of selection and was selected as Commercial Apprentice.
He underwent training as Commercial Apprentice at Zonal Training School.
He was allowed to attend the Training School.
He was required to produce his documents in original before Panel No. 215 RRB/Jat 298/91.
It was also inquired into from the petitioner as to whether he was willing to undergo T-13 Course.
On expressing his willingness, his name was approved for this course also.
Later on, for some extraneous reasons the selection of the petitioner as Commercial Apprentice was cancelled by the Senior Division Commercial Manager, Ferozepur vide his letter dated 2291992 stating therein that the petitioner had committed fraud and that he had not qualified the written test nor he was subjected to any interview.
The grouse of the petitioner is that his selection was cancelled on whimsical grounds and while doing so, principles of natural justice have not been complied with.
The petitioner challenged the order before the Central Administrative Tribunal vide Original Application No. 1220-JK/92 which was decided on 1651996.
The Tribunal did not take into consideration the contention of the petitioner that before terminating the services of the petitioner he was not heard.
The petitioner alleges that the respondents not only cancelled his selection as Commercial Apprentice but also dismissed him from service in view of the alleged fraud to which he had no connection what- so-ever at any stage.
The petitioner made a representation to the Divisional Manager on 2.10.92 that he be given post where he was working before his selection as Commercial Apprentice but to no effect.
The petitioner had completed 35 years of age and became ineligible for any other post.
When the petitioner saw no response coming from the side of the respondent he again knocked the door of Central Administrative Tribunal vide OA 483-JK of 1995 decided on 391997.
The petitioner was deprived from the post on which he was working before his selection as Commercial Apprentice.
Thus, the petitioner has given challenge to the order dated 391997 Annexure P15 on the grounds that the respondents had acted in arbitrary and unreasonable manner and they have violated the provisions of Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution of India and the principles of natural justice have not been complied with and that the Central Administrative Tribunal was not right in holding that since the petitioner had secured the post of Commercial Apprentice on the basis of the forged letter of the Railway Recruitment Board Jammu, therefore, he is not entitled to work at this earlier post of Clerk.
3.
Notice of the petition was given to the respondents.
Respondents No. 1 to 3 have filed a joint written statement.
They have taken the plea of delay and laches by way of preliminary objection.
On merits, the stand of these respondents is that the petitioner was initially appointed as Clerk on 23121987 but he was never promoted as Senior Clerk.
He was working purely on ad hoc basis as officiating Senior Clerk in a higher grade of Rs. 1200- 2040.
It has been admitted by these respondents that the petitioner applied for the post of Commercial Apprentice through proper channel.
He appeared in the written test on 2841991 at Jammu Tawi and he was called for interview on 2881991 on his being eligible but he was not finally selected.
The appointment letter was issued to the petitioner to the post of Commercial Apprentice on the basis of a forged letter.
When it was confirmed by the Railway Recruitment Board that panel No. 215 dated 2981991 was bogus and was fraudulently constituted and that the name of the petitioner was never borne on the original and authenticated panel No. 215 in those circumstances the services of the petitioner were terminated from the post of Commercial Apprentice.
It is further stated by the respondents that the petitioner had fraudulently accepted to undergo the training on the basis of the bogus panel which completely shows involvement of the petitioner in this bogus and forged panel.
The petitioner demitted his original post of clerk and officiating Senior Clerk before joining as Commercial Apprentice, his name was, therefore, struck off from the strength of the clerks and as such, he had no lien upon these posts.
The petitioner is not entitled to the relief on account of laches as he demitted his post as clerk in the year 1992.
Thus, in short, the stand of the respondents is that since panel No. 215 was not validly constituted, the petitioner being the beneficiary, he does not get legal right to work as Commercial Apprentice and that the petitioner demitted his office as clerk on joining as Commercial Apprentice in the year 1992, therefore, he is not entitled to the post of clerk/officiating Senior Clerk on account of delay and laches.
4.
We have heard Shri DP Singh, Advocate on behalf of the petitioner and Shri Deepak Thappar, Advocate appearing on behalf of the respondents and with their assistance, have gone through the record of this case.
5.
The petitioner has given a challenge to the order of the Central Administrative Tribunal, Annexure P15.
The claim of the petitioner has been declined by the Tribunal and the operative portion of the order is contained in para 4 which I would like to reproduce as follows :-  "4.
The respondents have admitted that earlier the applicant was a clerk with the respondent Railways.
However, we are of the view that he had demitted that office when he secured the position of Commercial Apprentice on the basis of a forged letter of the Railway Recruitment Board, Jammu.
This being found out and necessary action taken, this Tribunal will not intervene to take him back on his earlier post of clerk.
The applicant has not come to the Tribunal with clean hands.
Moreover, the cause of action arose to the applicant in 1992 and the present application was filed on 851995 after a lapse of three years."
It is common case of the parties that before joining as Commercial Apprentice, the petitioner was discharging the duties against the substantive post of clerk and he was promoted as officiating Senior Clerk in the higher grade than that of a clerk.
There is no evidence on the record to indicate that the petitioner before joining as Commercial Apprentice had demitted his office so as to give right to the respondents to reject his case.
The action of demitting on the part of an employee requires the voluntary act with the intention that such employee has relinquished his interest on the post against which he was working.
The petitioner simply was relieved by the employer so that he may join as Commercial Apprentice.
It is the case of the respondents that at one time when he was working as Senior Assistant, the other appointment was given to the petitioner so that he may be able to join as Commercial Apprentice.
Thus, it can be concluded that the petitioner was simply relieved enabling him to work on his new assignment.
If a voluntary act is found lacking on the part of the petitioner indicating that he had no intention to revert to his original post, it cannot be concluded that the petitioner demitted his office.
Till the petitioner was confirmed in the cadre of Commercial Apprentice, his lien to his parent post cannot be extinguished.
We are not convinced with the plea of the respondents that the petitioner's claim was defeated on account of delay and laches.
When the services of the petitioner as Commercial Apprentice were terminated, he challenged that order.
He made several representations to the department agitating his claim that his right to the original post may be protected.
The request was not accepted.
As a result of which the petitioner had to again approach the Tribunal.
The Tribunal again rejected the case of the petitioner on the ground that the petitioner had demitted his original post.
We are of the opinion that the impugned order passed by the Tribunal suffers from infirmity as there was hardly any material or data before the Tribunal to give finding or to come to the conclusion that the petitioner demitted the post of clerk.
On this score, the order Annexure P15 is liable to be set aside and we order accordingly.
6.
The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents then submitted that the petitioner does not deserve even the post of clerk/Senior Clerk on account of his effective involvement when he obtained forged orders so as to get the benefit of post of Commercial Apprentice.
Mr. Thappar submitted that the petitioner was the beneficiary and his involvement in obtaining forged orders can be reasonably inferred and in these circumstances, the respondents were not only justified in terminating the services of the petitioner from the post of Commercial Apprentice but also by not allowing the petitioner to join as a clerk.
We are in agreement to a limited extent with Mr. Thappar that the petitioner is not entitled to lay claim to the post of Commercial Apprentice on account of the issuance of the forged orders of panel No. 215 which was never validly constituted but we are not inclined to accept the contention of Mr. Thappar that the petitioner is not even entitled to the post of clerk/officiating Senior Clerk on account of his demitting the office.
We had already held above that this aspect of the case has not been rightly appreciated by the authorities or by the Tribunal.
The requisite requirements so as to hold that the petitioner demitted his office are not discernible from the record.
To get himself relieved from a particular post so as to enable himself to join a better post, will not amount to demitting of the office.
We are not in favour of a person who has tendency to commit fraud or indulge in forgery.
If the respondents feel that the petitioner was directly or indirectly involved in getting bogus orders of forged panel, it would always be open to the employer to enquire into the alleged conduct of the employee leading to the obtaining of the illegal orders.
However, we are of the considered opinion that the impugned order deserves to be quashed and that the petitioner is entitled to his substantive post.
7.
In the light of the above discussion, the present writ petition is hereby allowed.
The impugned order Annexure P15 stands quashed.
The respondents are directed to reinstate the petitioner on the substantive post which he was holding before joining the training as Commercial Apprentice.
However, the petitioner shall not be entitled to wages for the intervening period and the respondents shall be free to make appropriate enquiry into the allegations of manipulations and fraud which led to the inclusion of name of the petitioner in the panel of candidates selected for the post of Commercial Apprentice and this order of reinstatement shall not be construed as precluding the respondents from taking appropriate decision in the matter.
In the peculiar circumstances of the case, we are not passing any order as to costs.
Petition allowed.