TS Doabia, J - Petitioners 1 to 12 came to be appointed as teachers in District Udhampur.
So far as petitioner No. 13 is concerned, she came to be appointed as Junior Librarian.
This happened between February 1985 and September 1989.
They continued to work on ad hoc basic.
Later their services came to be regularised.
This happened on 18th of October 1989.
Order issued in this regard is placed on the record as Annexure `A'.
For facility of reference this is reproduced below :  "In pursuance of Government Order No. 1220-GAD of 1989 dated 11989 sanction is accorded to the regularisation of ad hoc appointees appointed upto 12/86 as per Annexure `A' and `B' to this order.
These ad hoc appointees be treated to have been appointed on regular basis on probation w.e.f.
11989 subject to the fulfilment of all required formalities and also the provisions of the above Government Order issued by the General Adm Department."
Petitioners submits that they should be deemed to have been regularised w.e.f.
20th of December 1985.
Basis for this argument is that employees who were working in Kashmir province came to be regularised w.e.f.
aforementioned date.
It is urged that there is no justification not to treat the petitioners on the same lines.
It is submitted that there is no distinction between teachers belonging to Jammu province and Kashmir province.
It is further submitted that in order dated 18th of October 1989, it is mentioned that persons whose services are to be regularised would be deemed to have been regularised w.e.f.
11th of September 1989.
2.
Thus duly ground on which regularisation is being sought w.e.f.
11th of September 1989 is that some employees in Kashmir province came to be regularised w.e.f.
11th of September 1989.
As to why this has not been done in the case of the petitioners is not clear.
3.
Even though this writ petition is pending in this court for almost five years and even though this was admitted on 1st of April 1998, counter has not been filed.
Petitioners can be regularised against the regular posts.
Taking into consideration the above factual position and taking note of submission made in the writ petition, a direction is given to the State to treat the same as representation.
If posts were available and regular vacancies existed then claims of the petitioners for regularisation be considered w.e.f.
from the date others were regularised.
Let a decision be taken within a period of three months from the date of receipt of this copy.
Disposed of accordingly.
Petition allowed.