HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioners, after completing their Higher Secondary or Pre-University Examinations from recognised Boards or Universities also completed Diplomas in General Nursing and Mid-wifery from various recognised institutions and on the strength of their academic qualifications, were appointed as Staff Nurses Senior Grade-II at the respondent-Institute.
The petitioners have got over three years' experience on regular posts as staff nurses.
The respondent-Institute conducts various educational programmes through the college of nursing attached to it and as a consequence of those programmes, various degrees are awarded by the Panjab University.
The petitioners applied for taking the entrance test to be held by the College of Nursing for the B.Sc.
Nursing (Post-Basic) - 2 years' programme on the basis of its affiliation to the Panjab University, Chandigarh.
The applications were, however, rejected and in a communication dated 2951997 (Annexure P-1), addressed to petitioner No. 1 he was told that he was not eligible for the course in question as he had not passed the 10+2 or an equivalent Examination.
The petitioner represented against the rejection of his application vide Annexure P-2 and also wrote to the Registrar, Panjab University, Chandigarh, requesting that the conditions of eligibility for the course of B.Sc.
Nursing (Post Basic) be intimated.
The University vide its letter dated 6th June, 1997, Annexure P-3 to the petition, wrote to the petitioner giving the conditions of eligibility.
The respondent-Institute however still refused to accept the applications of the petitioners for admission to the entrance test.
Aggrieved thereby, the petitioners have come to this Court impugning Annexure P-1.
2.
The only plea of the petitioners is that they were fully eligible for entry into the B.Sc.
(Post Basic) - 2 years course as they fulfilled the requisite qualifications laid down in Regulation 7 of the Panjab University Calender, Volume II, 1995.
3.
On notice of motion, two replies have been filed - one on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2 (the P.G.I.)
and the other on behalf of respondent No. 3 (the Panjab University).
In the reply filed by respondent Nos. 1 and 2 it has been pointed out that an amendment had been made to Regulation 7 ibid dealing with the admission to the course in question vide a resolution of the Syndicate of the University in its meeting held on 12th December, 1987, and it had been passed that the amendment would be enforceable within six years thereafter.
It has been pointed out that the petitioners had not cleared any examination after their Higher Secondary or Pre-University Examination as required by the amendment, with the result that they had been rendered ineligible to gain entry to the course.
The petitioners' stand has been virtually accepted in the reply filed by respondent No. 3 and it has been clearly stated therein that as the petitioners had passed the Higher Secondary/Pre-University examination before 1986-87 and had the requisite experience they were eligible for admission to the course in question.
4.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties in the light of their respective written statements.
As would be evident the fate of the case would hinge on an interpretation of Regulation 7.
The same is reproduced below :  "7.
The first examination shall be open to a candidate who - a) has passed - i) not less than one semester previous to first semester examination of November/December, Higher Secondary or Pre-University examination of Panjab University before 1986-87 or an examination recognised by the Syndicate as equivalent thereto; ii) +2 examination of 10+2 system of education or an examination recognised by the Syndicate as equivalent thereto."
5.
The stand taken by Mr. Rajive Raina on behalf of the petitioners based on the reply filed by respondent No. 3 is that as the petitioner had admittedly cleared the Higher Secondary/Pre-University Examination of Panjab University prior to 1986-87, they were fully eligible for the course in question as regulation 7(a)(i) and (ii) had to be read disjointedly and the candidate had to fulfil either of the two conditions in order to be eligible.
Mr. Raina in this connection has placed reliance on paragraph 2 of the reply filed by respondent No. 3 to contend that the Panjab University being the examining authority as also the authority to whom the College of Nursing had been affiliated, was the only body competent to determine the eligibility of the petitioners and that respondent Nos. 1 and 2 (the P.G.I.)
had really no say in the matter.
The stand taken by Mr. Raina is supported by Mr. Anupam Gupta appearing for the University.
6.
Mr. Arun Nehra, the learned counsel for respondent Nos. 1 and 2 has, however, argued that there was admittedly some vagueness in Regulation 7(a)(i) and it would be appropriate, therefore, to refer the case once again to the Syndicate so that a properly drafted regulation could be re-introduced.
7.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the opinion that this petition deserves to succeed.
It is the admitted position that the petitioners had passed the Higher Secondary or Pre-University Examination of Panjab University before 1986-87.
The first part of Regulation 7(a)(i) which determines the time gap of a semester or two with regard to the passing of the Higher Secondary or Pre-University examination and the entrance test would not be relevant in the present case for the reason that the entrance test that the petitioners wanted to take was in the year 1997 and the time gap visualised had long since passed.
Moreover, even assuming, as has been contended by Mr. Nehra, that there was some ambiguity in the drafting of Regulation 7 with regard to clause (i) and more particularly the words "not less than one semester previous to first semester examination of November/December", the petitioners cannot be penalised for no fault of their making and must in fact get the benefit of any ambiguity.
Moreover, it is evident from the reply filed by respondent No. 3 that the petitioners are fully eligible in terms of the aforesaid regulation as interpreted by the Panjab University, which is the examining body to which the College of Nursing stands affiliated and, as such, must also determine the petitioner's eligibility.
8.
For the reasons recorded above, this petition is allowed, Annexure P-1 is quashed and a direction is issued to respondent Nos. 1 and 2 to permit the petitioners to take the test for the next course of the B.Sc.
(Post Basic) -2 years course in case they make an application for the aforesaid purpose.
There will, however, be no order as to costs.
Dasti order.
Petition allowed.