GS Singhvi, J - This is a petition for issuance of a writ directing the respondents to assign seniority to the petitioner above the respondents No. 3 to 6 in the cadre of Sub Divisional Engineers.
2.
The facts on which there is no dispute between the parties are that the petitioner joined service of the Government of Punjab on 361976 as Sectional Officer.
His candidature was considered by the Secreening Committee for promotion to the post of Sub Divisional Engineer in accordance with the Punjab Engineering Service Class-II, P.W.D., Public Health Rules, 1969 but he could not be promoted because only 10 posts were available for the year 1979 and he was placed at No. 11.
On the recommendations of the Committee, 9 persons senior to the petitioner were promoted as Sub Divisional Engineers and one post was kept vacant for Bikramjit Singh who was facing a departmental enquiry.
Later on, Om Dutt Joshi, who was also senior to the petitioner in the lower cadre, was approved by the Screening Committee for promotion as Sub Divisional Engineer.
The petitioner as well as the respondents No. 3 to 6 were promoted as Sub Divisional Engineers vide government order dated 2341982 against the vacancies of 1981.
3.
The petitioner has claimed seniority over respondents No. 3 to 6 on the ground that when he was adjudged suitable by the Screening Committee for promotion against the vacancies of 1979, the respondents No. 3 to 6 were not even eligible to be considered for promotion as Sub Divisional Engineers because they had not passed AMIE  4.
We have heard Shri VK Sharma and Shri Rupinder Khosla and have carefully perused the record of the case.
5.
The respondents have objected to the maintainability of the writ petition on the ground of delay and laches.
Shri Rupinder Khosla argued that the petitioner should be non-suited because he has challenged the order dated 2341982 after a gap of 5 years and there is no explanation for this long delay.
Learned counsel for the petitioner could not offer any explanation for this delay.
Therefore, we are inclined to accept the submission of the learned Deputy Advocate General that the petition should be dismissed on the ground of delay and laches.
If the petitioner was to file a civil suit in the year 1987 for grant of a declaration that he is senior to the respondents No. 3 to 6, the same would have been dismissed as barred by limitation and by exercising jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, we cannot allow the petitioner to bye-pass the law of limitation.
For taking this view, we draw support from the law laid down by the Supreme Court in State of Madhya Pradesh v. Bhailal Bhai and others, A.I.R. 1964 SC 1006, M/s Tilokchand Motichand and others v. HB Munshi and another, A.I.R. 1970 SC 898 and Roshan Lal and others v. International Airport Authority of India and others, A.I.R. 1981 SC 597.
6.
We are also of the opinion that the petitioner deserves to be non-suited because he has not challenged the legality and correctness of the order dated 2341982 in which the non-official respondents were placed above him.
He has not prayed for quashing that order.
7.
On merits also we agree with Shri Khosla that the respondents No. 3 to 6 have been rightly shown senior to the petitioner because they were placed above him in the order of promotion issued by the government on the recommendations of the Screening Committee.
The petitioner has not proved that he was senior to the respondents No. 3 to 6 in the lower cadre and any error has been committed by the official respondents in reflecting their inter-se seniority position in the order of promotion.
Thus, there is no valid ground to hold that the petitioner is senior to the respondents No. 3 to 6.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.