HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner's husband, late ASI Mahender Singh was at the relevant time posted in the Police Station Gannaur, district Sonepat.
On 27th March, 1994 he was called to visit village Umedgarh in connection with a complaint that had been made by one Ved Kaur alleging that some threat had been held out to her son Vinod Kumar by some residents of the village on which F.I.R. No. 50 dated 2731994 Police Station Gannaur had been registered.
From the facts as made out from a copy of F.I.R. No. 51 dated 2731994, which has been produced before me in Court, it appears that as ASI Mahender Singh accosted the miscreants and made an attempt to arrest them, he was abused in a filthy manner by one of the miscreants Dr. Virender, and while he was encircled and caught hold of by some others one of whom named Anand took out the ASI's service revolver from its holster and fired four shots at him killing him at the spot.
It is the petitioner's case being the widow of the deceased ASI that as her husband had died on account of the special risk attached to his duties as a police officer, she was entitled to an additional pension on that account as envisaged by Rule 826(7)(i), (8) read along with Rule 833 of Chapter VIII, Part-I, (Volume II) of Punjab Civil Services Rules, as applicable to Haryana, (hereinafter called the "Rules").
Reliance has also been placed on the case of Head Constable Mohindner Singh who had been granted a special risk pension as he had been killed at the time of duty.
2.
On notice of motion, a reply has been put in by the respondents and the petitioner's claim to the special risk pension has been denied on the ground that ASI Mahender Singh had been killed in the course of an investigation into an offence and not in an encounter and, as such, the case referred to by the petitioner in the writ petition i.e. the case of Head Constable Mahinder Singh (who had been killed in an encounter) was not applicable.
It has been pleaded that all the pensionary benefits due to the petitioner as the widow of the deceased ASI Mahender Singh had been given to her as detailed in Annexure R-1.
3.
Mr. RS Dhankar, the learned counsel for the petitioner has referred to the rules aforementioned and has argued that the petitioner was entitled to the special risk pension on account of the death of her husband ASI Mahender Singh in the course of the discharge of his duties as the payment of the pension was authorised by the rules in question.
4.
Mr. Jain, the learned counsel for the respondent-State has, however, denied the petitioner's claim on the basis of the written statement that has been filed.
5.
As would be evident, the matter would have to be decided in the light of Rules 826 (7)(i)(8) and 833 ibid which are reproduced below :  "8.26 For the purpose of the rules in this Section unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context.
(1) xxx xxx xxx xx  (2) xxx xxx xxx xx  (3) xxxx xxx xx x  (7) "Special risk" means -  (i) a risk of suffering injury by violence;  (ii) xxx xx xx xx xx xx  (iii) xx xxx xx xx xx xx  (8) Violence means the act of a person who inflicts an injury on a Government employee -  (i) by assaulting or resisting him in the discharge of his duties; or in order to deter or prevent him from performing his duties; or (ii) because of anything done or attempted to be done by such Government employee or by any other public employee in the lawful discharge of his duty as such; or (iii) because of his official position.
833.
Subject to the provision contained in Note 2 below rule 8.34(2) award shall be made to the widow and children of a Government employee as follows :  (i) If a Government employee is killed or dies of injury received as a result of special risk of office.
(a) a gratuity of the applicable amount specified in Schedule III (FD Notification No. 3-2(ii)-USF(C)-84/12412, dated 10th December, 1984) B to this Section; and (b) a pension the amount of which shall not exceed the applicable amount specified in Schedule III; (ii) If the Government employee is killed or dies of injuries, received as a result of risk of office a pension the amount of which shall not exceed the applicable amount specified in Schedule III."
It would be evident that clause (7) defining `special risk' must be read along with clause (8) which defines `violence' to get its true meaning and import.
Special risk, therefore, means an assault or injury made or given to a government employee while resisting or presenting him in the discharge of his duties.
Rule 833 provides the manner in which pension with respect to a widow and children of a government employee who has been killed on account of special risk is to be tabulated.
From the facts set out above as given in the petition as also in F.I.R. No. 51 referred to above, it is apparent that ASI Mahender Singh had gone to village Umedgarh in response to a complaint that had been filed by Ved Kaur on which a case F.I.R. No. 50 had been registered against Dr. Virender and others.
It is also evident that when ASI Mahender Singh made an attempt to arrest the accused of F.I.R. No. 50, he was abused and assaulted by them and his revolver was snatched away and used against him to cause his murder.
It is, therefore, clear that ASI Mahender Singh had been killed in the course of the discharge of his duties and in an attempt to prevent him from carrying them out and that he had incurred a special risk on that account which had led to his death.
I am, therefore, of the opinion that the petitioner being the widow of the late ASI, Mahender Singh would be entitled to a pension under Rule 833 of the Rules.
6.
This petition is accordingly allowed and a direction is issued to the respondent-State of Haryana to refix the petitioner's pension in the light of this judgment and to make the payment of the arrears due to her on that account within a period of six months from the date that a certified copy of this order is supplied to them.
The petitioner shall also have her costs which are assessed at Rs. 1000/-.
Petition allowed.