KS Kumaran, J - Petitioner-Sukhdeep Kaur Bains who has passed MBBS examination from Government Medical College, Amritsar by completing her course from 1992 to 1996 and having done her internship from 111997 to December, 1997, with the intent to undertake further studies (MD) had approached the Director of Sports Department, Punjab (hereinafter referred to as the second respondent), with a request to countersign the sports gradation certificate (Annexure P-1) dated 2561997 issued to her by the Director of Sports, Chandigarh (third respondent).
The second respondent did not deem it fit to countersign the sports gradation certificate and returned it to her vide annexure P-2 dated 741998.
The said letter reads as follows :-  "Sub : Sports Gradation Certificate for counter-signature.
With regard to your request dated 1721998.
2.
Your case for countersignature has been examined, which does not cover under the policy issued by the department.
Therefore, your Gradation Certificate is returned herewith along with this letter."
Aggrieved by the same, the petitioner has approached this Court under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India for the issuance of an appropriate writ in the nature of certiorari/mandamus quashing the impugned order Annexure P-2 dated 741998 and directing the second respondent to countersign the gradation certificate.
According to the petitioner, she had taken part in the football game at various levels from 1986-87 onwards till about the end of 1994, as detailed in paragraph-3 of the writ petition.
The petitioner has alleged in paragraph-4 of the writ petition that her parents are Punjab Government employees, her father being a Punjab Government employee is working on deputation at Chandigarh as a Teacher in the Government Senior Model School, Sector 37, Chandigarh, while her mother is working as a Teacher in Ropar District.
2.
The petitioner contends that football is one of the recognised games and the States of Punjab, Haryana and the Union Territory of Chandigarh have reserved seats for renouned (renowned ?)
sports persons.
She further contends that in order to get admission to MD Course in Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar from the seats reserved for sports persons, she has to get the sports gradation certificate from Director of Sports, UT Chandigarh (third respondent) counter-signed by the second respondent, as per the prospectus issued by the said University.
3.
According to the petitioner, she was accordingly issued the sports gradation certificate-annexure P-1 by the third respondent and she had submitted the same to the second respondent vide letter dated 1671997 for counter-signatures, but, the same was returned by the second respondent as mentioned above.
The petitioner contends that the action of the second respondent in returning the sports gradation certificate without countersigning is arbitrary, illegal and unjust.
4.
After notice of motion, reply was filed on behalf of respondents 1 and 2 namely the State of Punjab and the Director of Sports, Punjab, and this writ petition was admitted to the Division Bench for hearing.
5.
Respondents 1 and 2 have alleged in their reply that the petitioner has not submitted documentary proof regarding the posting of her father in Chandigarh on deputation in the Punjab Government service which is an essential document as per the gradation policy dated 10121997 (annexure R- 1), though the petitioner has attached a certificate with regard to her mother working in District Ropar and not at Chandigarh (annexure R-2).
These respondents while admitting that the petitioner had submitted her application for counter-signature of the gradation certificate, they have denied that she applied on 1671997.
According to these respondents, petitioner had submitted to them the sports gradation certificate issued by the third- respondent vide her application dated 1721998 which was received by them on 331998.
They contend that the case of the petitioner was examined and it was found that she had represented Chandigarh in Open Senior National Women Football Tournament 1994-1995, whereas, according to the Punjab Government Gradation Policy, the second respondent-Department counter-signs the certificates of only those sports persons who represent Chandigarh in National School Games during the stay of their parents posted in Punjab Government Service at Chandigarh.
These respondents have further averred that though the petitioner studied at Amritsar Medical College during 1992 to 1996, she had not represented Punjab in Open Tournaments.
Therefore, these respondents contend that they had acted according to the rules and policy framed by the Punjab in returning the sports gradation certificate without counter-signing it.
6.
We have heard counsel for both the sides and perused the records.
7.
The Department of Sports, Punjab has issued letter dated 10121997 (annexure R-1) regarding their policy for issuing sports gradation certificates for purposes of the reservation of seats for sports persons in technical/medical institutions.
The relevant portion of this policy is as follows :-  "For certification, Sports Department Punjab only consider the cases who fulfil the following requisites :- 1.
For gradation Sports Department Punjab will only entertain the claim of domicile of the State who actually participated in the competitions as nominee of Punjab Team.
This will leave out the Sports residents of other States, Punjab domiciles or even of Punjab and Chandigarh who do not represent Punjab in any competition as Punjab nominee.
2.
Claim of the resident of Union Territory of Chandigarh will only be entertained for counter-signature of Certificate issued by the Department of Sports, Union Territory of Chandigarh for National School Games only provided parents belong to the Punjab State Service and are posted at Chandigarh during the period of which gradation is being claimed for their wards.
For Junior and Senior National Championships, they must play as nominee of the State of Punjab as is the case of para-1 above."
The learned counsel for respondents 1 and 2 contends that a reading of paragraph-2 extracted above clearly shows that any claim of a resident of Union Territory of Chandigarh for counter-signature of the certificate issued by the Department of Sports, Union Territory of Chandigarh will be entertained (i) for National School Games only, provided parents belong to the Punjab State Service and are posted at Chandigarh during the period of which gradation is being claimed for their wards; (ii) for Junior and Senior National Championships if sports person play as nominee of the State of Punjab.
He further contends that the petitioner, who has played football in the Senior National Championships from Chandigarh, but not as the nominee of the State of Punjab, cannot claim that her sports gradation certificate issued by the Union Territory of Chandigarh should be counter-signed by the second respondent.
The contention of the learned counsel for the respondents is that this concession is given to the sports persons who represent the State of Punjab in Open Junior and Senior National Championships.
A reading of paragraph-2 extracted above supports the contention of the respondents that the sports person should have played the game as a nominee of the State of Punjab in case the sports person has participated in the Senior National Championships, although there is no restriction where the sports person has taken part from the Union Territory of Chandigarh in National School Games.
That is why these respondents 1 and 2 contend that the case of the petitioner is not covered by this policy dated 10121997 and, therefore, petitioner's request for counter-signature was rightly declined.
8.
But the learned counsel for the petitioner, on the other hand, points out that this policy dated 10121997 (annexure R-1) specifically provides that the same will come into force with effect from 111998, whereas the petitioner had participated in football in the year 1994-95, as is evident from the sports gradation certificate annexure P-1 issued by the third- respondent on 2561997 and, therefore, the case of the petitioner should have been considered in terms of the policy that was in force during that period, and not in terms of the policy-annexure R-1 which had taken effect from 111998 only.
We agree with the learned counsel for the petitioner in this respect.
The Sports Gradation Certificate issued by the Director of Sports, Chandigarh on 2561997 (annexure P-1) shows that the petitioner who is a resident of Chandigarh, has been adjudged as Grade D-I Sportswoman in Football for having participated in the XIX Senior National Women Football Championship 1994-95.
Therefore, the contention of the respondents that she would be governed by a policy which came into force on 111998, cannot be accepted.
9.
A copy of the previous policy of the Punjab Government dated 481992 has been placed on record.
The contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that it is only this policy which will govern the case of the petitioner.
The Note appended to this policy dated 481992 reads as follows :-  "Note : For certification, Sports Department Punjab only entertains the claims of residents in the State and the Union Territory of Chandigarh (The later is only entertained for counter-signatures of certificates issued by Department of Sports, Union Territory, Chandigarh).
This leaves out the sportsmen residents of other States or even of Punjab who do not represent Punjab or any institution in Punjab in any competition."
As rightly contended by the learned counsel for the petitioner, a reading of this Note shows that the Department of Sports, Punjab was bound to entertain only the claims of residents in the State of Punjab and the Union Territory of Chandigarh, and not of the sportsmen-residents of other States or even of Punjab who do not represent Punjab or any institution in Punjab in any competition.
But, so far as the claim of the residents of Union Territory of Chandigarh is concerned, such claim is entertained only for counter-signature of the certificate issued by the Department of Sports, Union Territory of Chandigarh.
This provision is found within brackets wherein there is no restriction as found in the policy dated 10121997 (annexure R-1) that the sports gradation certificate issued by the Department of Sports, Union Territory of Chandigarh in respect of National School Games only will be entertained for counter-signature, and that for Junior and Senior National Championships, the sports person should have played as a nominee of the State of Punjab.
In the absence of such a provision restricting the claim to those who have represented Punjab State, the claim of the petitioner for counter- signing her sports gradation certificate cannot be rejected on the ground that she had played in the Senior National Games only from the Union Territory of Chandigarh, and not as the nominee of Punjab State.
10.
But the learned counsel for the respondents, on the other hand, contends that though the petitioner may have participated in the game concerned during 1994-95, she had made a request to the second respondent to counter-sign her gradation certificate only as per annexure R-3 dated 1721998, by which time the policy dated 10121997 (annexure R-1) had taken effect and, therefore, her claim for counter-signature will have to be considered in terms of the policy annexure R-1.
In this connection, the respondents have also taken the plea that the petitioner had not sent any letter dated 1671997, as alleged by her, requesting the second respondent to counter-sign the sports gradation certificate, but had only sent a letter dated 1721998 which was received by them on 331998.
Of course, the petitioner has not produced any acceptable evidence to show that she had approached the second respondent on 1671997 itself, though there is such an allegation in paragraph-8 of the writ petition.
Similarly, though the petitioner has alleged that annexure P-1/A dated 921998 is a reminder sent by her, this has also been denied by the respondents in their reply and there is also no indication in annexure P-1/A that it is a reminder.
But, in our view, the date when the petitioner sent the application for counter-signature is irrelevant and immaterial to decide the question as to which of the policies is applicable to the case of the petitioner, because, the petitioner in this case does not require a fresh sports gradation certificate from the second respondent namely, the Director of Sports Department, Punjab.
She has already been issued a sports gradation certificate i.e. annexure P-1 dated 2561997 by the Director of Sports, UT Chandigarh.
As pointed out already, she had taken part in the game during 1994-95.
What the petitioner requires is the counter-signing of the sports gradation certificate already issued to her on 2561997 with respect to her participation in the year 1994-95.
The policy dated 10121997 annexure R-1 was not there either when the petitioner took part in the games in 1994-95 or when the sports gradation certificate was issued on 2561997.
This policy annexure R-1 specifically states that it will take effect from 111998 only, and it does not say or indicate in any other manner that it will have retrospective effect.
Therefore, it is only the policy/order which was in force at the time when the petitioner took part in the game, that will have to be taken into consideration for deciding her request for countersigning her gradation certificate.
That being so, it is only the policy/order dated 481992 that will govern the case of the petitioner's claim for counter- signature.
We have already pointed out that there is no restriction in the policy/order dated 481992 that the sports person who takes part in the Junior/Senior National Championships, should have done so as a nominee of the State of Punjab.
Therefore, we are of the view that the date on which the petitioner applied for counter-signature is immaterial inasmuch as her claim for counter-signature had to be considered under the policy/order dated 481992 which was in force when she played the game.
11.
Another contention put forward by the respondents is that the petitioner had not produced any documentary proof regarding the posting of her father in Chandigarh on deputation in Punjab Government Service, and she had attached only the certificate regarding her mother working in District Ropar and not at Chandigarh and, therefore, her claim could not be entertained.
We are of the view that this contention of the respondents cannot also be accepted.
In paragraph-4 of the writ petition, the petitioner has specifically stated that her parents are Punjab Government employee, that her father being a Punjab Government employee, is working on deputation at Chandigarh as a Teacher in the Government Senior Model School, Sector 37, Chandigarh, whereas her mother is working as a Teacher in Ropar District.
The objection taken by the respondents is that no documentary proof has been provided by the petitioner about her father being a Punjab Government employee, working on deputation at Chandigarh, though her mother is working in District ropar and not in Chandigarh.
If the respondents had any doubt, they could have called upon the petitioner to provide the proof.
Even in the reply to para-4 of the writ petition, the respondents have not specifically stated that the father of the petitioner is not a Punjab Government employee working on deputation at Chandigarh.
The petitioner has even furnished information that he is working as a Teacher in the Government Senior Model School, Sector 37, Chandigarh.
Respondents have not stated that he is not accordingly posted as alleged by the petitioner, but have only stated that she has not produced any documentary proof.
Further, the order annexure P-2 simply says that the petitioner is not covered by the policy.
It does not say that her father being a Punjab Government employee is not posted at Chandigarh or that her mother is posted in District Ropar and, therefore, the petitioner's claim for counter- signatures cannot be accepted.
Without passing a speaking order, while rejecting the petitioner's claim, the respondents cannot now take up these grounds in their reply.
The petitioner's mother is working in District Ropar which is situated in Punjab itself.
The petitioner's father is working at Chandigarh and Ropar being very near to Chandigarh, the petitioner and her family reside in Chandigarh.
The fact that the petitioner's mother is posted in District Ropar, situate in Punjab itself cannot be put up against the petitioner.
12.
The petitioner, in para-4 of the writ petition, has stated that her parents are Punjab Government employees and that her father is working on deputation at Chandigarh.
She has also mentioned in the cause-title of the writ petition that she is a resident of Chandigarh.
But the respondents have not specifically denied that they are residents of Chandigarh.
On the contrary, they have specifically admitted in para-1 of the reply that she is presently residing at Chandigarh.
We have already held that petitioner's claim for counter-signature will have to be considered in terms of the policy/order dated 481992.
The Note appended to this policy/order dated 481992 only provides that the claims for certification are entertained only with regard to the residents of the State and the Union Territory of Chandigarh.
It does not say that the parents should belong to Punjab State Service and should be posted at Chandigarh.
When there is no such condition, the respondents are not justified in raising this objection that the parents of the petitioner should be employees of the Punjab Government posted at Chandigarh at the time when the request for counter-signature was made.
Even in annexure R-1, the condition that the parents should be employees of the Punjab State posted at Chandigarh, has been imposed only in respect of the sports person who has participated in National School Games only.
There is no such restriction or condition with regard to those sports persons, who had taken part in the Junior or Senior National Championships.
Therefore, these contentions of the respondents cannot also be accepted.
13.
Taking into consideration all these aspects, we are of the view that the second respondent ought to have countersigned the sports gradation certificate of the petitioner, and the order rejecting her claim-annexure P-2 dated 741998 has to be quashed.
14.
In the result, the petition is allowed quashing the impugned order- annexure P-2 dated 741998.
We direct the second respondent to countersign the Sports Gradation Certificate of the petitioner.
The petitioner shall immediately present the same with covering letter to the second respondent who shall countersign and return the same within five days from the date of its presentation.
In the circumstances of the case, we make no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.