Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner, who retired from service on April 30, 1975, has filed this petition with a prayer that the injury pension, as granted to him, be enhanced from Rs. 15/- per month to Rs. 19/- per month till December 31, 1985, and from Rs. 248/- per month to Rs. 375/- per month with effect from January 1, 1986.
A few facts as relevant for the decision of this case may be briefly noticed.
2.
The petitioner was working as a Senior Clerk in the Punjab Civil Secretariat.
On partition of the country, he shifted to India.
During the riots, he suffered an injury on the left hand which resulted in a permanent disability.
The Government, by a special order, decided to give him `injury pension' at the rate of one-fifth of the salary.
The petitioner was drawing a salary of Rs. 95/- per mensems.
However, the injury pension was fixed at Rs. 15/-.
The petitioner claims that it should have been actually Rs. 19/- per month.
He cites the case of Jagjit Singh who was similarly placed, and claims that the State had arbitrarily denied him the pension at the rate of Rs. 19/- per mensem.
The petitioner got different promotions and ultimately retired as a Superintendent on April 20, 1975.
After his retirement, his injury pension was enhanced to Rs. 248/- per mensems with effect from January 1, 1986.
The petitioner claims that in view of the order dated January 31, 1990, he should have been granted a pension of Rs. 375/- per mensem instead of Rs. 248/- per mensem.
Thus, the total claim of the petitioner is enhancement of injury pension from Rs. 15/- per mensem to Rs. 19/- per mensem from 1947 to December 31, 1985, and from Rs. 248/- per mensem to Rs. 375/- per mensem with effect from January 1, 1986.
The petitioner claims that his repeated efforts - representations to different authorities having borne no fruit, he had approached this Court as a last resort.
He consequently prays for the issue of an appropriate writ or direction to the respondents to revise his injury pension with all consequential benefits.
3.
The respondents have controverted the petitioner's claim.
It has been inter alia averred that the petitioner is getting a regular monthly pension of Rs. 2404/- with effect from October, 1994.
However, with regard to the petitioner's claim to injury pension, it has been averred that the matter being old, the record is not available.
It has been admitted that the petitioner had made representations from time to time.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondent No. 3, it has been pointed out that Jagjit Singh had been initially allowed injury pension at the rate of Rs. 375/- per month.
However, subsequently, it has reduced to Rs. 248/- per month.
Learned counsel for the parties have been heard.
The short question that arises for consideration is - Is the petitioner entitled to the revision of the injury pension as claimed by him ?
4.
Admittedly, the petitioner had received injury during the 1947 riots.
It is not disputed that a decision to grant him pension at the rate of one-fifth of the pay drawn by him had been taken.
It is also admitted that the petitioner as well as Jagjit Singh were drawing a salary of Rs. 95/- per mensem.
Thus, both were entitled to be paid Rs. 19/- per mensem by way of injury pension.
Indisputably Jagjit Singh was granted Rs. 19/- per mensem.
Yet, the petitioner was paid only Rs. 15/-.
Why ?
There is no explanation.
Still further, vide order dated January 31, 1990, the State Government had issued a clarification that "with effect from 1-1-1986, the minimum pension by whatever name the same may be called shall be Rs. 375/- per mensem."
The issue of this letter has not been disputed.
Yet, the petitioner was paid Rs. 248/- per mensem and not Rs. 375/- per mensem.
Admittedly, Jagjit Singh had been granted Rs. 375/- per mensem initially as injury pension.
However, when the petitioner made the same claim, even the pension of Jagjit Singh was reduced.
Two wrongs never make a right.
The respondents should have revised the pension of the petitioner from Rs. 248/- to Rs 375/-.
Instead of doing that, they reduced the pension of Jagjit Singh from Rs. 375/- to Rs. 248/-.
It has been stated that this was done without even granting an opportunity.
The action was unfair and illegal.
5.
Mr. Chhinna contends that the claim is being made after a long lapse of time.
The contention is misconceived.
The admitted position is that the petitioner had made various representations.
Still further, pension is a continuing right and whenever less amount is paid, a fresh cause of action accrues.
Still further, it is the admitted position that no third party interests have come into existence.
The State Government had only retained the money which rightly belongs to the petitioner.
In such a situation, an objection like that of delay cannot be sustained.
No other point has been raised.
6.
In view of the above, it is declared that the petitioner shall be entitled to his injury pension at the rate of Rs. 19/- per mensem instead of Rs. 15/- per mensem with effect from the date it was granted to him.
He will continue to get the injury pension at that rate till December 31, 1985.
With effect from January 1, 1986, the injury pension would be enhanced from Rs. 248/- per mensem to Rs. 375/- per mensem.
The arrears that may accrue shall be worked out and paid to the petitioner within three months from the date of receipt of a certified copy of this order.
He shall also be entitled to interest at the rate of 6 per cent from the date of accrual to the late of actual payment.
In case the payment is not made within three months as stipulated above, the rate of interest shall be 12 per cent.
No costs.
Petition allowed.