RS Mongia, J (Oral) - The appellant herein, Shri Vijay Kumar Sharma, was working as a Clerk in Mehar Chand Polytechnic, Jalandhar, since June 18, 1975.
The said Polytechnic, is under the management and control of DAV Managing Committee, New Delhi.
He was put on probation for a period of twelve months w.e.f.
June 19, 1975, and was confirmed w.e.f.
June 19, 1976.
Vide order dated November 4, 1995 appellant Vijay Kumar Sharma was served with a three months' notice informing that his services would stand terminated w.e.f.
February 4, 1996.
Initially, the notice was kept in abeyance.
However, vide order dated October 12, 1987, the appellant was informed that his services would stand terminated w.e.f.
July 31, 1987.
This order was challenged by the appellant before the Deputy Commissioner with a petition under the provisions of the Punjab Privately Managed Schools Employees (Security of Service) Act, 1979.
The Deputy Commissioner held that he had no jurisdiction.
This petition was withdrawn by the appellant to be presented before Director, Technical Education and Industrial Training, Punjab.
He could not succeed there as even the Director, Technical Education and Industrial Training, held that he had no jurisdiction to go into the matter.
The appellant thereafter filed C.W.P.
No 1866 of 1989 in this Court.
De hors of any details, suffice it to mention that the writ petition was allowed on March 30, 1995 by a learned single judge.
The concluding portion of the same reads as under:  "In view of this authoritative pronouncement, it has to be held that condition No. 3 in the offer of appointment in so far as it provided for termination by three months' notice after confirmation, was wholly illegally and cannot be sustained.
Resultantly, even the order passed thereunder suffers from the vice of arbitrariness and cannot be sustained.
No other point has been urged.
As a result, the writ petition is allowed.
The impugned order of termination passed by the respondents on October 12, 1987, a copy of which is annexed as Annexure P-10 is quashed.
Mr. SS Mahajan, learned counsel for the respondent submits that since the petitioner has not performed the duties of the post of Clerk in the Institution, he should not be paid any arrears of salary for the period from the date of termination till his reinstatement.
He, however, undertakes that the petitioner shall be reinstated within one month from today.
The position taken by Mr. Mahajan is very fair.
Since the petitioner has not performed the duties of the post, he is not entitled to any salary.
However, he shall be reinstated within one month from today.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs."
2.
Pursuant to the aforesaid judgment, the appellant was reinstated and taken back in service.
This letters patent appeal has been filed by the appellant with two fold grievances: (i) that the learned Single Judge fell in error by not granting back wages inasmuch as the appellant was deprived from performing his duties by the illegal and arbitrary action of the respondent- College authorities, and (ii) the respondents have passed an order on November 19, 1995, vide which the respondent-Management has not considered the period from July 31, 1987 to April 19, 1995, as on duty for any purpose.
A copy of the resolution by the respondents dated November 19, 1995, has been placed on the file.
C.M.
application No. 790 of 1998 was moved by the appellant praying that he should be given his due seniority on his reinstatment and considered for promotion accordingly.
Notice of this application was issued to the respondent.
No reply has been filed.
3.
With the consent of the parties' counsel, we have heard them on merits of the LPA as well as both counsel prayed that the LPA itself may be disposed of.
4.
The facts leading to the filing of the present LPA have already been noticed above.
So far as the first grievance made by the learned counsel for the appellant is concerned, we find no merit in the same.
There was a condition in the order of appointment of the appellant that his services could be terminated with three months' notice.
The respondents had acted under that condition while terminating the services of the appellant.
No doubt the said condition has been held to be bad and it was thereafter that the learned Single Judge held that the order of termination was illegal.
In these circumstances, we do not find any error in the judgment of the learned Single Judge where he refused to give back wages to the appellant.
Learned counsel for the appellant has fairly stated on the basis of an affidavit filed by the appellant that during the period he was out of service with the respondents, he has earned about Rs. 80,800/-.
This is another consideration which is weighing with us to uphold the judgment of the learned Single Judge in so far as it relates to the non-grant of the back wages.
5.
Coming to the second grievance, we find merit in the same.
Moment the termination order was set aside by the learned Single Judge, the result was that the appellant was to be treated in service as if termination order was never passed.
Naturally, all consequences would flow from setting aside of the order of termination and reinstatement.
As observed above, in given circumstances, some of the benefits can be withheld and in this case, back wages have been withheld by the learned Single Judge, which we are upholding.
However, the appellants under the circumstances of the case cannot be denied other consequential benefits which arise from setting (aside) the termination order and his reinstatement.
He would be entitled to all other consequential benefits like fixation of pay on the date of his reinstatement, increments, seniority, consideration for promotion to the next higher ranks when any juniors might have been promoted.
etc.  6.
For the foregoing reasons, while upholding the judgment of the learned Single Judge, we further hold that the appellant would be entitled to all other consequential benefits arising out of his reinstatement as have been indicated above.
The LPA stands disposed of accordingly.
The aforesaid directions be carried out within a period of three months.