HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner applied for admission to the BDS Course in the Christian Medical College, Ludhiana as a Scheduled Caste candidate for the course commencing from August, 1998.
The written test for admission was conducted on 3151998, and as per the Admission Calendar (which forms a part of the prospectus Annexure R.1/2 issued by the College) the applications in form `E', that is the form to be filled in after the success in the written examination, were to be submitted by 861998.
It was also provided that the provisional lists of the selected and wait-listed candidates would be put up on the Notice Board of the Christian Medical College, Ludhiana on 30.6.1998 and that the candidates who had been provisionally selected for interview, would be so informed by registered letter as they were required to report to the College for the checking up of their original certificates and submission of fees on 1471998.
It was also provided that in case no intimation of a candidate's result was received by him/her by 871998, such a candidate was required to contact the College to ascertain the correct position.
It is the petitioner's case that despite the stipulation in the Admission Calendar, the result of the BDS Entrance Test was not displayed on the Notice Board on 30.6.1998 and that as a matter of fact, intimation with regard to petitioner's success in the written test and her merit as a wait- listed candidate was received by her on 1771998 through a registered letter dated 271998 i.e. after the date fixed for the interview that had already been held on 1471998.
The petitioner has further averred that though her result had not been declared by 1471998, she had, nevertheless, attended the respondent-College at the date and time of the interview on 1471998 and that she had projected her claim, though without success, whereas candidates lower to her in merit were allowed admission.
Aggrieved thereby the petitioner has come to this Court by way of present writ petition.
2.
On notice of motion issued to the respondents, a reply has been filed by the Principal of the Christian Dental College, Ludhiana.
The broad averments made by the petitioner have been denied and it has been submitted that as per the Admission Calendar afore-referred, Annexure R-1/2, the result of the BDS Entrance Test had been declared and put on the Notice Board of the College on 30.6.98 at three different places.
It has also been pleaded that letters under registered cover had been prepared for despatch to the successful/wait-listed candidates including the petitioner on 3/471998 calling upon them to appear for the interview on 1471998 but as all the letters could not be posted on those dates due to administrative reasons, some of the letters to some of other candidates had been despatched by courier as in the meanwhile, a postal strike had started throughout the country.
It has further been highlighted that the interviews were held as scheduled on 1471998 from 830 A.M. to 300 P.M. with respect to candidates on the merit list and it was only after 3 PM that the candidates on the waiting list were called for the counselling for the unfilled seats up to 5 P.M.
It has also further been pleaded that the Principal of the Christian Dental College as also the Registrar were present in the office at the time of the admission which was attended by a large number of students and their parents and the name of each candidate including that of the petitioner was called out repeatedly to attend the interview but the petitioner did not do so as she was not present at that time, with the result her case was not considered for admission.
3.
A replication was also filed by the petitioner and it has been averred that the call letter for the interview could not be delivered to her in time as there was a postal strike from 771998 to 16.7.1998.
It has also been alleged that the respondent-College did not deliberately send the letter to the petitioner by courier as in the other cases with the deliberate intention of depriving her of a seat in the college.
It has further been submitted that the petitioner was present in the College on 1471998, but as she had not received a call letter for the interview, her name had not been called out at the time of the counselling.
It has also been submitted that the vacancies in the BDS Course were filled up even on 781998 as would be evident from Annexures P-6 and P-7 filed alongwith the replication, and the petitioner was, therefore, entitled to a consideration against such a seat.
4.
A rejoinder to the replication has also been filed by the respondents and it has been averred that the petitioner had sought to improve her case in the replication by pleading for the first time that only such candidates had been called for interview who had received call letters and as such different version of the event put forth by the petitioner at different times told heavily on her credibility.
It has, however, been admitted that some vacancies in the BDS were filled up on 781998 from the waiting list but it has been explained that as the petitioner had not attended the first counselling on 1471998, she had forfeited her right to seek admission to the BDS Course.
5.
At the very outset, it may be noticed that the writ petition as originally framed pertained to a challenge to the selection to the MBBS as also BDS courses but on 1081998, Mr. Atma Ram, the learned counsel for the petitioner made a statement before the Division Bench that he was confining the present writ petition to the BDS course only and liberty be given to him to challenge the selection to the MBBS Course in other proceedings.
This request was acceded to.
6.
Mr. Atma Ram has raised two broad arguments before me, firstly that the respondent-College was seriously remiss in not informing the petitioner within time that she had cleared the entrance test for the BDS so as to enable her to attend the interview on 1471998, despite the fact that the College was well aware that there was a strike in the Posts & Telegraphs Department from 771998 to 16.7.1998 and that the mala fide of the respondent was clear from the fact that other candidates lower in merit (including some on the waiting list) had been called for counselling by letters despatched by courier.
It has also been highlighted in this connection that despite the stipulation to the effect in the prospectus that the list of successful candidates including those on the waiting list would be displayed on the Notice Board on 30.6.1998, no such action had been taken.
Extending his argument further, Mr. Atma Ram has pointed out that as per her averments, the petitioner had been present in the College on 1471998 at the scheduled time for interview and as she was present, her case ought to have been considered for admission despite the fact that she had not received a call letter.
It has, secondly, been argued that as one seat had fallen vacant in the BDS course as a result of shifting of a candidate from the BDS to the MBBS course from amongst the Scheduled Castes and as this round of counselling had been held on 2671998, the petitioner should have been considered against this seat as well.
7.
As against this, Mr. Patwalia, the learned counsel appearing for the respondents has urged that there was no mala fide in the action of the respondents in sending intimation about the counselling to the petitioner by registered post and by courier to the others as in the meanwhile, a postal strike had started throughout the country.
He has also highlighted that on page 18 of the prospectus Annexure R-1/2, it had been clearly provided that in case a candidate did not receive any communication with regard to his/her standing in the entrance test by 871998 due to a postal delay, or for any other reason, such a candidate was required to make an enquiry about his position from the office and to request for a duplicate interview letter as per the merit.
He has urged that no such action had been taken by the petitioner.
Mr. Patwalia has then pointed out that the petitioner had evidently not been present in the College on 1471998 as averred by her and had she been present, she would have answered the call for interview as her name had been repeadly called out for the purpose.
He has also urged that the present petition raised seriously disputed questions of fact which could not be decided in these proceedings.
Dealing with Mr. Atma Ram's second argument, it has been reiterated that in case, a candidate who had been successful in the entrance test did not appear for interview at the date and time stipulated, such a candidate forfeited his right to admission and in that eventuality, the petitioner's candidature could not be considered for the seats that had been notified for admission on 2671998 and filled in on 781998.
8.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the record and am of the opinion that there is no merit in the writ petition.
9.
It has first and foremost to be borne in mind that seriously disputed questions of facts have been raised which cannot be determined in these proceedings.
I am also of the opinion that even on the arguments raised by Mr. Atma Ram, no interference is called for in favour of the petitioner.
It has been explained by the respondents that a communication had been addressed to the petitioner vide Annexure P-4 dated 271998 by a registered cover and as per her case, received by her on 1771998 that is after the date fixed for interview.
An obligation, however, rested with the petitioner as well to make an enquiry from the office of the respondent-College with regard to her standing in the merit list as specifically and categorically provided on page 18 of the Prospectus Annexure R-1/2.
The relevant portion of the Prospectus is reproduced below :-  "In case an applicant has not received any communication by 871998 due to postal delay or otherwise, he/she should find out from the Registrar's Office if his/her name is in the provisional selected list/waiting list or not, and that if he/she is called to Ludhiana for checking of original certificates etc., and should request the office for a duplicate letter.
No other means of communication shall be entertained."
The prospectus, therefore, dealt with precisely the situation faced by the petitioner and as it had the force of law, she was bound by its provisions.
To my mind, however, even this argument really becomes meaningless in view of the categorical averment of the petitioner that despite the fact that she had not received the interview call letter, she had been present in the respondent's College at the time of the interview on 1471998 between 830 A.M. to 3 PM This, as also the ancillary argument raised by Mr. Atma Ram, that the petitioner, though present, has still not been called for interview once again raises a disputed question of fact as the positive case put up by the respondents is that the petitioner's name had, in fact, been called out repeatedly for appearance before the Admission Committee but she had not done so.
As a matter of fact from a reading of the writ petition as also the replication filed by the petitioner, it is apparent that the petitioner's stand with regard to her presence on 1471998 and her conduct on that day is somewhat ambivalent as in the writ petition she had stated that she had been present in the college at the time of the interview though her name had not been called out, whereas in the replication, she has put up a new case and averred that though she had been present, but the names of only such candidates had been called out who had received the interview call letters.
It is also evident from the written statement that the names of the successful as also the wait-listed candidates had been put on the Notice Board at three different places on 30.6.1998 as per the admission programme and there is absolutely no reason to doubt the integrity of the respondents on this score, the more so, as no case of mala fide against them has been spelt out or even suggested.
10.
Mr. Atma Ram's final argument again lacks merit.
In this connection, reference needs be made to page 18 of the Prospectus Annexure R-1/2 once again and to the specific provisions dealing with both the selected and wait-listed candidates.
The relevant extracts are quoted below :-  Provisional list of selected candidates.
20 candidates selected for BDS admission shall be informed under registered post regarding their provisional selection.
They will be called to Ludhiana for checking of their original certificates and testimonials etc. on 14th July, 1998 and thereafter submit College fee 1998-99 alongwith original certificates on the same day, the 14th July, 1998 by 3 PM otherwise the offer will be withdrawn.
The candidates must bring all the relevant certificates, papers and testimonials in original with them and must be present at a time which will be communicated to them by registered post.
No other communication except by post will be made to the candidates in this connection.
Candidates whose original certificates, papers and testimonials are not found in order, his/her name shall be cancelled from the Provisional List of selected candidates.
Provisional Waiting List Candidates  A few candidates from the Waiting List shall be called to Ludhiana on 14th July, 1998 at 3 pm If there is any vacant seat in a category, the offer shall be given at 3 pm on 14th July, 1998 in order of merit, at the Registrar's Office.
If the candidate does not claim the seat, the offer shall be withdrawn and seat shall be offered to the next candidates immediately in order of merit as per rules.
Thereafter, the original certificates shall be checked for only selected candidates from waiting list and if certificates are found to be in order, the candidate shall be allowed to pay college fees 1998-99 immediately on the same day 14th July, 1998 at 3 pm otherwise, the offer shall be withdrawn.
11.
It is clear from the aforequoted provisions that in case candidate on the merit list did not attend the interview, such a candidate would forfeit his/her right to a seat.
It is evident that a similar provision exists with regard to wait-listed candidates as well and it is clearly stipulated that if a candidate does not claim a seat that has been offered, the offer shall be withdrawn and the seat shall be offered to the next candidate immediately in order of merit.
To my mind, the lists of successful wait listed candidates such as the petitioner had been put up on the Notice Board on 30.6.1998 and assuming that the registered letter despatched to the petitioner had been received by her after the date of interview, as noticed above, an obligation still rested on her to have made an enquiry from the Registrar's Office as to her standing in the entrance test by 871998.
Admittedly, she had made no such enquiry.
12.
No other point has been urged before me.
13.
For the reasons recorded above, this petition stands dismissed.
There will, however, be no order as to costs.
Dasti order.
Petition dismissed.