VK Bali, J (Oral) - Petitioner complains of raw deal meted out to him by the respondents who first ignored him for promotion when general promotions were made and preferred his juniors primarily on the ground that he did not have a good service record and for the second time when they were asked to consider the matter after adverse remarks contained in report of the petitioner had been expunged on the ground that criteria for promotion had, meanwhile, changed.
2.
Brief facts of the case reveal that petitioner joined in the respondent- bank as Land Valuation Officer on 5121967.
He was promoted to the rank of Field Officer in February 1978.
The respondent/bank promoted 22 Junior Accounts/Field Officers as Officiating Managers in their own pay scale on 5.8.1985.
Petitioner was also promoted as Officiating Manager and it is the case of the petitioner that his promotion was approved by the Board of Directors.
The services conditions of employees of the respondent bank are governed by the staff Service Rules of the respondent-bank.
Prior to 23.8.1993 when 1974 Service Rules were amended, only requirement for promotion to the post of Manager was that the incumbent should have atleast five years experience as Assistant/Junior Accountant/Senior Scale Stenographer/Field Officer etc.
However, after 23.8.1993 when 1974 Staff Service Rules were amended, the minimum qualification for post of Manager was prescribed as graduate.
Even though the petitioner alongwith others was promoted as Officiating Manager, the case with regard to regular promotion of the petitioner was placed before the Board of Directors of respondent-bank vide agenda item No. 11 on 821994.
The name of the petitioner was included in the list of eligible Field Officers/Junior Accountants for promotion to the post of Manager.
As per seniority list petitioner was shown at Serial No. 52 whereas respondent Nos. 4 and 5 were shown at Serial Nos. 53 and 54.
In this consideration for promotion alongwith others petitioner was, however, ignored on the pretext that there were adverse entries in his service record.
This has been so mentioned while ignoring the petitioner as would be evident from perusal of Annexure P-4.
Pursuant to the decision Annexure P-4, Junior Accountants/Field Officers including respondents 4 and 5 were promoted.
When petitioner came to know that he has been ignored for promotion on account of adverse entries contained in his confidential records which were never communicated to him, he filed representation against the said adverse remarks and it is conceded position that the adverse remarks contained in his confidential reports were expunged vide order Annexure P-6 dated 241996.
The order aforesaid reads as follows :  "The Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Haryana Chandigarh has expunged the adverse entries in the ACRs of Sh. Dharam Pal Panwar Acting Manager, PARDB, Ballabgarh for the year 1983-84, 1984-85 and 1985-86 due to reasons :-  (i) The adverse entries in ACRs have been conveyed very late.
(ii) During the year 1985-86 adverse entry of integrity has been conveyed without giving any specific instances contrary to the instructions.
Your are further requested to take up the promotion case in the next meeting of BODs."
3.
While passing order Annexure P-6, the Registrar Cooperative Societies not only expunged the adverse remarks contained in the ACRs of the petitioner but further directed the respondent-bank to put up promotion case of the petitioner in the next meeting of the Board of Directors.
It is pursuant to this order that the matter was taken up by the Board of Directors vide agenda item No. 14 in the meeting that was held on 1711997.
The petitioner was once again ignored for promotion this time, however, on the ground that as per amended provisions the minimum qualifications for the post of Manager is graduate whereas as per the unamended service rules, it was only matric.
Pursuant to the decision taken by the Board of Directors, the case of the petitioner for promotion was rejected vide order dated 1331997 (Annexure P- 10).
The facts as have been fully detailed above have not been disputed.
On the admitted facts as have been detailed above, Mr. Surya Kant, learned Counsel appearing for the petitioner vehemently contends that respondent-bank ignored the petitioner for promotion on both occasions as referred to above on wholly untenable grounds.
For the first time the petitioner was ignored on the ground that there were adverse remarks in his confidential reports and the said reports were never communicated to the petitioner.
It is further the contention of the learned counsel that when adverse remarks contained in the confidential reports of the petitioner were expunged, the petitioner could not be ignored on the ground that the rules laying eligibility criteria for promotion had since been changed.
4.
As mentioned above, even though the basic minimum facts as detailed above have not been disputed it is still worthwhile to mention the ground taken by respondent 3 and respondents 4 and 5 who have filed separate written statements in opposing the prayer of the petitioner.
It is pleaded on behalf of respondent No. 3 that order dated 21.8.1985 were not actually promotion order of the petitioner on the post of Manager.
As per the provision of the Staff Service Rules of the respondent-bank, there is no provision of ad hoc promotion.
It was purely a temporary arrangement in the interest of institution.
The petitioner was asked to work on the post of Manager temporarily till the promotion of the petitioner was to be approved by the Board of Directors of respondent/bank.
As per Staff Service Rule 9.1 the appointing authority of the Managers is Board of Directors.
It was on 821994 that the Board of Directors considered the case of promotion of the petitioner alongwith other similarly situated Field Officers and Junior Accountants for promotion to the post of Manager and the petitioner was not found eligible for promotion meriting the service record and qualifications of the petitioner and was rightly ignored for promotion on the post of Manager.
As per Staff Service Rule 97 the appointments by promotion are being regulated by the answering-respondent.
Sub-section (b) of rule 97 of the Staff Service Rules says that appointing authority shall be guided by the service record, qualifications and length of service of the employee in that category for promotion.
The criteria for promotion in the bank is seniority- cum-fitness.
On 821994 when the Board of Directors considered the merits of the petitioner for promotion to the post of Manager, he was having adverse remarks for three years.
Therefore, as per the facts available on the records, petitioner was not considered fit for promotion.
His juniors in the seniority list were considered and on their being found more meritorious they were promoted.
It has then been pleaded that the adverse remarks were conveyed to the petitioner for the year 1983-84 on 2331987, 1984-85 on 2331987 and 1985-86 on 3051989.
All these remarks were conveyed by registered post and from record it has not been found that the same have been returned unserved.
Petitioner never represented against adverse remarks.
It is then the case of the respondents that when the matter came up for consideration of promotion of the petitioner for second time as directed by the Registrar Cooperative Societies vide Annexure P-6, it was found that the minimum qualifications for the post of Manager has since been raised to graduation from matriculation, inasmuch as the petitioner was not a graduate, a decision was taken so as not to promote the petitioner.
5.
Petitioner has filed rejoinder to the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents wherein by way of affidavit he has pleaded that confidential reports for three years ie 1983-84, 1984-85 and 1985-86 said to have been conveyed to him and were never received by him.
As a matter of fact when the Board of Administrators in their meeting held on 821994 considered the case of other officiating Managers for their regular promotions as Managers and ignored the petitioner, only then he came to know that he has been ignored on account of some alleged adverse entries.
The petitioner, therefore, immediately made a representation against the same by way of an appeal before the Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Haryana who vide order dated 241996 (Annexure P-6) accepted the same and expunged the adverse remarks.
It has further been pleaded in the writ as also the rejoinder that the persons junior to him who were promoted are matriculate and in that connection it has been mentioned that persons who were promoted earlier were also matriculate and in that regard it has been specifically pleaded that persons mentioned at Sr. Nos. 4, 6, 7, 9 and 10 mentioned in Annexure P-4 were only matriculate.
6.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and going through the records of the case, this Court is of the clear view that petitioner could not be ignored for his promotion on the basis of un-communicated adverse remarks in his confidential reports reference whereof has been given above.
It is the positive case of the petitioner that he was never conveyed adverse remarks and that he had no knowledge of such adverse remarks till such time he was ignored for promotion.
Assuming it, however, that the said remarks were conveyed to the petitioner after 3/4 years as is the case of the respondent, the Registrar of the Cooperative Societies vide order Annexure P-6 has expunged the same on the grounds including the one that the same were conveyed to the petitioner at the late stage.
Conveying of adverse remarks at the late stage is also one of the grounds on which order Annexure P-6 has been passed.
This order has attained finality and cannot be questioned at this stage.
If petitioner was ignored for promotion for there being adverse remarks in his confidential report which was either not communicated to him or communicated at a stage when he could not put in a meaningful representation and for that reason the same were quashed or expunged, it shall be deemed that no such remarks were there in existence at the time when petitioner was ignored for promotion.
The respondent/bank was, thus, enjoined to consider the case of the petitioner from a date when he was wrongly ignored.
In second reconsideration as is mentioned above, the petitioner was ignored for the reason that by that time the eligibility criteria for promotion had since been changed.
The petitioner is matriculate whereas minimum qualification for promotion is graduate.
It could not be disputed during the course of arguments that if the case of the petitioner was wrongly ignored for promotion, at the time when different set of rules were applicable, on reconsideration, respondents cannot take into consideration the rules that might have come into existence at the time when the matter with regard to promotion was reconsidered.
A vested right and accrued to the petitioner and that could not be taken away by subsequent change in rules.
A clear vacancy was available when the petitioner was wrongly ignored for promotion to the post of Manager.
At that time, persons junior to him as also others who were matriculate were also promoted.
The respondents at this stage cannot plead lack of eligibility of the petitioner to promote him to the post of Manager.
7.
For the reasons stated above, we allow this petition.
Consequently, we quash orders Annexure P-9 and Annexure P-10 and direct the respondents to promote from a date when his juniors were promoted i.e. 821994.
8.
Counsel representing respondents vehemently contends that the petitioner cannot score in the merit of seniority from those who even though juniors were promoted when petitioner was ignored.
We need not have to go into this question as petitioner has not claimed seniority over and above the respondents.
It shall now be open to the respondents-bank to determine seniority of the petitioner vis-a-vis others who were juniors to the petitioner and were promoted earlier when petitioner was wrongly ignored.
Let this exercise be done within three months.
The seniority of petitioner and the said respondents would be determined in accordance with law.
Petition allowed.