R S Mongia, J - Petitioners are all working as Statistical Assistants in the Haryana Roadways.
They stake their claim for promotion as Superintendents Roadways over and above and in preference to respondent Nos. 2 to 6.
It has further been prayed that the promotion orders of the said respondents as Superintendents dated March 8, 1996 (Annexure P.1).
December 30, 1996 (Annexure P2) and February 20, 1997 (Annexure P.3) be quashed.
2.
Briefly the facts of the case are that the petitioners before joining the Haryana Roadways in the Transport Department as Statistical Assistants had been working as Statistical Assistants in some other departments of the State of Haryana and there was no break in service when they joined the Haryana Roadways.
The details of the petitioners regarding their appointment as Statistical Assistants may be noticed as under-  Sultan Singh, Petitioner No. 1.
+ 20.4.1982 to 2.5.84:3.5.1984 to upodate: Worked as SA in ESA Deptt.Worked as SA in Haryana Roadways.
Balbir Singh, Petitioner No. 2.
+ 6.6.77 to 29.6.78:11.7.79 to 31.5.821.6.82 to 25843584 to uptodate Worked as SA in Animal Husbandry Deptt.Worked as SA in DRDA, Sirsa.Worked as SA in ESA Deptt.Worked as SA in Haryana Roadways.
Jogi Ram, Petitioner No. 3.
+ 1.10.82 to 31.5.841.6.84 to uptodate Worked as SA in Milk Commissioner Office.Working as SA in Transport Department.
Paramjit Rekhi, Petition No. 4.
+ 1.10.81 to 5.5.89 Worked as SA in Welfare Deptt.
of SC and BC 5.5.89 to uptodate Working as SA in Haryana Roadways.
3.
The service conditions of the Assistants and Statistical Assistants are governed by the statutory rules, known as `The Haryana Transport Department (Group `C') Haryana Roadways Service Rules, 1995' (hereinafter referred to as "Group-C Rules").
The service conditions of the post of Superintendent are governed by the statutory rules known as `The Haryana Transport Department (Group `B') Service Rules, 1992' (hereinafter referred to as the "Group-B Rules").
As per Rule 9 of Group-C Rules, the recruitment to the service is to be made in the following manner :-  "9.
(1) Recruitment to the service shall be made -  Ministerial Staff  (a) -- -- --  (b) in the case of Statistical Assistant -  (i) by promotion from amongst Assistant, Manager-cum-Accountant, Accountant or Junior Auditor; or (ii) by direct recruitment; or (iii) by transfer or deputation of an official already in the service of any State Govt. or the Govt. of India: (c) in the case of Assistant, Accountant, Junior Auditor and Manager-cum- Accountant.
(i) by promotion from amongst Junior Scale Stenographer, Steno-typist, Clerk, Ledger Keeper, Accountant, Preventive Maintenance Clerk, Cashier, Assistant Cashier, Computer, Counter-Clerk, Store-cum-Stock Clerk: or (ii) by direct recruitment : or (iii) by transfer or deputation of an official already in the service of any State Govt. or the Government of India:" It may be observed here that the posts of Statistical Assistants and the Assistants are in the pay scale of Rs. 1,600-50-2,300-EB-60-2,660 and Rs. 1,400-40-1,600-50-2,300-EB-60-2,600 respectively.
Appendix `B' to the Rules gives the qualifications, which are required for the various posts.
The qualifications which are required for the post of Statistical Assistants and the Assistants may be noticed hereunder :-  1. xxxx  2.
Statistical Assistant :- i) At least Graduate from a recognised University with Economics or Mathematics or Commerce or Business Administration or Computer Science.
i) Matriculation with Hindi or its equivalent with Hindi from a recognised Education Board.
ii) At least 2 years experience in compilation and collection of statistical data ii) Five years experience on the post of Asstt., Assistant Manager-cum-Accountant, Accountant, Jr.
Auditor or combined experience as such of Haryana Roadways.
iii) Hindi upto Matric Standard.
^ 3.
Assistant :- (i) Graduate from a recognised University.
i) Matriculation with Hindi or its equivalent with Hindi from a Recognised Education Board.
(ii) At least five years experience in Govt., Semi-Govt. office in clerical capacity ii) At least five years experience as Junior Scale Stenographer, Steno-Typist, Clerk, Ledger Keeper, Assistant Acctt.
Preventive Maintenance Clerk, Cashier, Assistant Cashier, Computer, Counter-Clerk, Store-cum-Store Clerk or combined experience as such of Haryana Roadways.
iii) Hindi upto Matric standard.
iii) Passes such test for the post of Asstt.
as may be prescribed by the competent authority.
(iv) Passes such test as may be prescribed by the authority.
^ Rule 9 of Group-B Rules lays down the mode of recruitment to the post of Superintendent Roadways, which is quoted below :-  "9 (1) Recruitment to the Service shall be made :-  (g) in the case of Superintendent (Roadways):  (i) by promotion from amongst the Statistical Assistant or Assistant in Roadways: or (ii) by transfer or deputation of an officer already in the service of any State Govt. or the Govt. of India."
Appendix B gives the qualification and experience required for promotion to the post of Superintendent, which are in the following terms :-  (8) Superintendent, (i) Matric.
(Roadways), (ii) Twelve years experience on any of the post of Statistical Asstt.
or Assistant in Roadways or Combined experience as such."
4.
So far as the private respondents herein are concerned, they were working as Assistants in the Haryana Roadways.
S/Sh.
Ram Chander (Respondent No. 2), K R Bhatia (Respondent No. 3) and Asha Ram (Respondent No. 4), who were working as Assistants, were promoted as Superintendents vide order at Annexures P.1 dated March 8, 1996.
Respondent No. 5-Manohar Lal, Assistant was promoted as Superintendent vide order dated December 30, 1996 (Annexure P2), whereas Respondent No. 6-Hans Raj Chawla, who was working as Assistant, was promoted as Superintendent vide order dated December 20, 1997 (Annexure P.3).
5.
Respondent No. 5 had not appeared, despite service on any date of hearing.
However, Respondent No. 6 had appeared in person on August 20, 1997, but thereafter he did not appear on any date of hearing.
6.
The argument of the learned counsel for the petitioners was that the post of Statistical Assistant under the Group-C Rules is a promotional post from the post of Assistant.
Under Group-B Rules, both Statistical Assistants and the Assistants in the Roadways having the requisite experience mentioned in Appendix-B to the Rules (already reproduced above), are eligible for promotion to the rank of Superintendent.
The qualifications are that a person having experience of 12 years as Statistical Assistants or Assistants in the Roadways or combined experience as such are eligible for promotion to the rank of Superintendent.
Since, according to the learned counsel for the petitioners, the post of Statistical Assistant is not only promotional post from the rank of Assistant, but is in the higher scale, then while considering the eligible persons for promotion to the post of Superintendent Roadways, first the candidates belonging to the higher post i.e. Statistical Assistants should be considered and exhausted before considering the case of Assistants.
In support of this contention, learned counsel for the petitioners relied upon a judgment in Rameshwar Dass and another v. State of Haryana and others, CWP No. 4196 of 1983, decided on July 13, 1992, delivered by one of us (R S Mongia, J).
Learned counsel for the petitioners has pointed out that this judgment was cited before a Division Bench in Haryana State Coop.
Inspectors and Sub Inspectors Association v. State of Haryana, 1994(3) R.S.J 664 : 1995(3) SCT 1 (P&H) and the Division Bench upheld this judgment.
It was further submitted that while counting 12 years of service, required for promotion as Superintendent, the service rendered by the petitioners as Statistical Assistants prior to their joining as Statistical Assistants in Haryana Roadways is liable to be counted.
Since the private-respondents were all Assistants when they were promoted vide orders at Annexures P.1 to P.3, the petitioners being eligible and occupying the higher post of Statistical Assistants had a prior and preferential right of consideration.
In paragraph 5 of the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been averred as under:-  "5.
That in reply to para No. 5 of the petition, it is submitted that as per Haryana Transport Department (Group B) Service Rules, 1992, the eligibility for the post of Superintendent by way of promotion is Matriculation with 12 years experience on any of the post of Statistical Assistant or Assistant or Combined experience of both.
As such, at the time of granting promotion, it was required to be seen as to who was senior on the basis of eligibility for these posts and that Respondent Nos. 2 to 6 were senior in eligibility as the eligibility of respondents Nos. 2 to 5 was to be counted from the year 1974 and that of Respondent No. 6 from the year 1976, since when they were working as Assistants, whereas in the case of the petitioners, the eligibility was to be considered from the year 1984 and 1989, when they joined the Transport Department and as such, on the basis of eligibility and their seniority the orders of promotions in respect of Respondent Nos. 2 to 6 were passed and issued by the competent authority.
It may be further added here that respondent Nos. 2 to 5 acquired 12 years experience as Assistant on 2486, 4486, 27286, 19.8.86 and Respondent No. 6 on 1188, whereas the petitioners have acquired 12 years experience in the Transport Department on 2596, 2596 and 31596, whereas the petitioner No. 4 will acquire 12 years experience on 452001.
It may further be added here that Respondent Nos. 2 to 4 were promoted as Superintendents vide orders dated 831996, Annexure P.1, when the petitioners had not even completed 12 years' requisite experience under the statutory rules and hence have no locus standi to file the present petition against Respondent Nos. 2 to 6.
The petition thus deserves to be dismissed on this short ground alone.
7.
It is not disputed and is rather admitted on the part of the respondents that there is no notification or any other rule by which any ratio might have been fixed amongst the Assistants and Statistical Assistants for filling the posts of Superintendents by promotion.
Even no roster has been fixed.
In absence of any of these it was held in the judgment, cited by the learned counsel for the petitioners in Rameshwar Dass's case (supra), that if there are more than one categories, which are eligible in the feeder cadre for promotion and amongst those categories one is a promotional post as compared to the other category, then the candidates belonging to the promotional post have preference over the candidates belonging to the category of lower cadre and the persons belonging to the higher category must be exhausted first.
It is also not disputed that the post of Assistant is a post in the feeder cadre for promotion to the post of Statistical Assistant.
If both Statistical Assistants and the Assistants are eligible for promotion as Superintendent, then the eligible Statistical Assistants would steal a march over the eligible Assistants.
8.
We do not agree with the submission of the learned counsel for the petitioners that the service rendered by the petitioners as Statistical Assistants prior to joining the Haryana Roadways should also be counted for purpose of seeing the eligibility for promotion as Superintendent in the Roadways.
The qualifications for the eligibility, which have been quoted above, clearly envisage that 12 years experience on any of the posts of Statistical Assistants or Assistants has to be in the Roadways and not anywhere else.
Consequently, the service rendered by the petitioners, even as Statistical Assistants, prior to joining Haryana Roadways cannot be counted for purpose of promotion as Superintendents.
The question then arises is that even if the petitioners service as Statistical Assistants is to be counted from the date they joined as such in the Haryana Roadways, did they have the requisite experience on the day respondents were promoted as Superintendents.
Petitioner No. 1 had joined Haryana Roadways as Statistical Assistant on May 3, 1984 and others had joined later on.
None of them had 12 years experience as Statistical Assistant in the Haryana Roadways on March 8, 1996, when order at Annexure P.1 was passed promoting Respondent Nos. 2 to 4.
However when Respondent No. 5 - Manohar Lal was promoted on December 23, 1996, petitioner Nos. 1 to 3 had more than 12 years experience as Statistical Assistants.
They had right to be considered for promotion prior to Respondent No. 5.
Similarly on February 20, 1997, when respondent No. 6-Hans Raj Chawla was promoted, petitioner Nos. 1 to 3 had more than 12 years experience.
Of course petitioner No. 4 did not have 12 years experience in Haryana Roadways as Statistical Assistant, when any of the respondents were promoted vide Annexures P.1 to P.3.
As observed above, petitioner Nos. 1 to 3 had a right to be considered for promotion earlier than and in preference to respondent Nos. 5 and 6 when they were promoted vide orders dated December 23, 1996 and February 20, 1997 (Annexures P2 and P.3 respectively).
It is evident from the stand taken by the respondents in paragraph 5 of the written statement, quoted above, that they were only considering the respondents in preference to the petitioners as they had completed 12 years experience in Haryana Roadways earlier than the petitioners and since both the Assistants and Statistical Assistants were eligible, they had given the promotion to the respondents.
This stand is not well based.
On the date promotions are to be made, both eligible Statistical Assistants and the Assistants are to be considered subject to rider that firstly the Statistical Assistants would be considered as they hold promotional post and if none is found suitable amongst them, then the eligible Assistants may be considered.
Admittedly, in the present case when respondent Nos. 5 and 6 were promoted from the post of Assistants to the post of Superintendents, the names of petitioner Nos. 1 to 3 were not considered.
This was, according to us, in violation of the Rules and Article 16 of the Constitution of India.
9.
For the foregoing reasons, we allow this writ petition, quash the promotion orders of Respondent Nos. 5 and 6 dated December 30, 1996 (Annexure P2) and February 20, 1997 (Annexure P.3) and direct the official respondents to consider the case of Petitioner Nos. 1 to 3 for promotion to the post of Superintendents against the posts which were occupied by Respondent Nos. 5 and 6 with effect from the date Respondent Nos. 5 and 6 were so promoted.
If any two of petitioner Nos. 1 to 3 are found suitable for promotion w.e.f.
the date respondent Nos. 5 and 6 were promoted, they would be entitled to all consequential benefits on their promotion.
However, in peculiar facts and circumstances of this case, they would not be entitled to arrears of pay.
Let these directions be carried out within three months of the receipt of a copy of this order either from this Court or a certified copy thereof from the petitioners whichever is earlier.