Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioners were appointed as Pujaris at the Shri Mata Devi Shrine vide orders dated September 8, 1991.
These appointments were made on a fixed pay of Rs. 50/- per day.
Subsequently, the State Government issued instructions for regularisation of the services of persons working on ad hoc basis.
Even instructions for regularising the services of persons appointed on daily wages are alleged to have been issued.
In pursuance of these instructions, the petitioners represented that their services be regularised.
The respondents having not passed any order in their favour, the petitioners approached this Court through CWP No. 4061 of 1997.
This writ petition was disposed of vide order dated May 14, 1997.
The third respondent was directed to consider and decide the representations submitted by the petitioners by passing a speaking order.
In pursuance of these directions, the Chief Administrator of the Board considered the matter.
Vide order dated August 4, 1997, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-10 with the writ petition, the petitioners' claim for regularisation of their services was rejected.
Aggrieved by this order, the petitioners have filed the present writ petition.
2.
We have heard Mr. Ashok Sharma Nabhewala, learned counsel for the petitioners.
He has contended that when the Board had taken over the Management of the Shrine, no qualifications had been laid down.
Even now only draft rules have been framed.
Consequently, the condition of qualifications cannot be imposed on the petitioners for the regularisation of their services.
3.
A perusal of the impugned order shows that at the time of submitting their applications for the job of Pujaris the petitioners had claimed that they possessed the following qualifications :-  (1) Petitioner No. 1 - Pragya Vishard - Shastri.
(2) Petitioner No. 2 - 10th Pragya  4.
While considering the petitioners' claim for regularisation of their services, the third respondents called upon the petitioners "to produce proof of their qualifications".
He finds that they "failed to produce the proof of qualifications as mentioned by them in their applications given at the time of seeking appointments as Pujaris in the Board".
He further found that petitioner No. 1 "could not produce the proof of having qualifications of Shastri.
Shri Satish Kumar Sharma (who is petitioner No. 2 before us) produced the certificate of Prathma which is not equivalent to Pragya or 10th class as mentioned by him in his application".
In view of this factual position he found that the petitioners "misled the Administration by giving wrong information regarding their qualifications at the time of their appointment.
The demand made by them in their representations dated 14.6.1996 and 2.2.1997 cannot be accepted.
They cannot be given the benefit of regularisation of their services in the absence of prescribed qualifications".
5.
The petitioners have not averred in their writ petition that they had not made a representation to the effect that they possess the qualifications as mentioned in the order.
If they made a false representations as found by the Authorities, we find no ground to interfere under Article 226 of the Constitution.
6.
Even otherwise we are unable to assume that a person is entitled to be appointed or regularised as a Pujari in a Temple without having sufficient proficiency in Sanskrit or possessing the qualifications as desired by the Board.
If the Board has insisted upon the fulfilment of certain minimum qualifications before considering a person suitable for regular appointment as a Pujari, we cannot say that the action is either arbitrary or illegal.
It is true that the learned counsel for the petitioners has pointed out that the Rules have not yet been finalised.
These are only at the draft stage.
However, it has not been shown that the petitioners possessed the qualifications prescribed in the Draft Rules.
In such a situation, the contention that the Board was not competent to lay down the qualifications or that the conditions of the qualifications cannot be insisted upon while considering the claim for regularisation, cannot be accepted.
7.
Mr. Ashok Sharma has referred to the decision of their Lordships in Bhagwati Prasad and others v. Delhi State Mineral Development Corporation, AIR 1990 SC 371.
This was the case of two workmen.
It was found that workers who did not possess the initial minimum prescribed educational qualification at the time of appointment have acquired proficiency by practical experience to effectively discharge their duties which was a sure guide to assess the suitability.
On this basis it was held that the petitioners having been allowed to work for a considerable length of time, it would be hard and harsh to deny them the confirmation in the respective posts.
The case of a workman who can acquire proficiency by practice cannot be applied to the case of a Pujari unless he shows that he has basic knowledge of the Scriptures and the language viz. Sanskrit so as to be able to properly recite the Shalokas and Mantras.
8.
No other point has been raised.
In view of the above, we find no merit in this writ petition.
It is consequently dismissed in limine.
Petition dismissed.