SJ Mukhopadhaya, J - The writ petition was filed by petitioner, Shri Brij Kumar Prasad against the order dated 991995, by which while he was dismissed from service, it was ordered to recover excess amount from the petitioner, which was paid to one Sri N.G.
Ghose beyond his actual date of retirement.
During the pendency of the writ petition, the appeal against the order of dismissal was rejected by Memo No. 774 dated 1041996.
2.
In view of order, I intend to pass in this case after hearing the parties it is not necessary to discuss all the facts, except the relevant one.
3.
The petitioner was posted as Accounts Assistant under the respondent-Bihar State Electricity Board (Board for short).
While so posted, in the year 1981, a fresh (duplicate service book) was opened with respect to one Sri N.G.
Ghose, Switch Board Operate Grade-I.
In the said service book, the entries were made by petitioner as Assistant, who recorded 1171936 as date of birth of Shri Ghose on the basis of medical certificate.
The said service book after such entry was signed by the competent authority, one Shri Lalan Prasad Rai, (respondent No. 9 herein) the then Assistant Engineer, at present Executive Engineer.
Later on from other record, it came to the notice of the authorities that the date of birth of Shri Ghose was 1091919 and he was to retire on 1091979.
However, on the basis of fresh (duplicate service book) and the date of birth recorded therein, he was allowed to continue for further nine years and immediately on such knowledge, the Board retired Shri Ghose from service on 311989.
Subsequently, after some fact-finding enquiry and correspondences between the officers, the petitioner was suspended on 16121991 followed by charge-sheet dated 3061992, initiating departmental enquiry.
The main charge (No. 1) was that the petitioner opened the service book of Shri Ghose in July, 1981 and recorded his date of birth as 1171936 on the basis of a medical certificate, without prior approval of competent authority, whereas on the basis of seniority list, date of birth of Shri Ghose was 1091919, who should have retired from service on 1091979.
The second and third charges were also co-related with the first charge alleging negligence of duty, illegality and corruption by extending the period of service of Shri Ghose causing loss to Board's exchequer.
The petitioner submitted show-cause reply and denied the allegation.
In one of the reply, he intimated that he had not opened the service book, but the same was opened by Shri Lalan Prasad Rai, the then Assistant Engineer.
The petitioner merely assisted the sad Assistant Engineer by making entries in the service book on the basis of records submitted by Shri Ghose.
The original service book having mis-placed, a direction was issued from the Office of Executive Engineer to open a fresh/duplicate service book of Shri Ghose.
The service book of Sub-divisional workman was opened by Assistant Electrical Engineer under the rule and petitioner was directed to assist the said authority and at his instance, he made entry and the date of birth was recorded on the basis of medical certificate, which was sent by Assistant Engineer to Executive Engineer for approval.
Later on, Assistant Engineer signed the service book being the competent authority and the petitioner merely put initial having made entries therein as an Assistant.
Day to day departmental enquiry was conducted in which the petitioner took part.
The Assistant Electrical Engineer, who had signed the service book of Shri Ghose as Competent Authority (Sri Lalan Prasad Rai) initially a show- cause notice was issued to him but later on, in the departmental proceeding of the petitioner, he was made main prosecution witness.
After departmental enquiry, the Enquiry Officer submitted report on 1281994 and held the petitioner guilty for all the three charges.
Thereafter the Secretary of the Board by memo dated 10101994 served a show-cause notice on the petitioner enclosing therein the enquiry report to which petitioner replied on 1111994 (vide Annexure-17).
Similar stand was taken by the petitioner in his show-cause reply.
Thereafter the impugned order of dismissal dated 991995 was passed.
4.
While the writ petition was preferred, it was pleaded by petitioner that he had preferred appeal against the order of dismissal but it was not decided.
Along with the counter-affidavit respondent-Board enclosed a draft Memo No. 774 dated 1041996 to show that the appeal preferred by petitioner was rejected by the said order.
5.
Earlier when the case was taken up for hearing, it came to my notice that the charge-sheet dated 3061992 and second show-cause notice dated 10101994 were issued by the Secretary of the Board, whereas impugned order dated 991995 was issued by Addl.
Secretary and the appellate order dated 1041996 was issued by the Joint Secretary, both lower in rank than the Secretary of the Board.
It was in the aforesaid circumstances, this Court directed the Board to file supplementary counter-affidavit making it clear as to who was the appointing authority and appellate authority of the petitioner.
6.
In the second counter-affidavit, the respondent-Board has made it clear that the Secretary of the Board was the appointing authority and Chairman of the Board was the appellate authority of petitioner, who was Accounts Assistant.
It is stated that KN Choudhary, Additional Secretary, who issued the order of punishment was Incharge Secretary.
On his proposal, the Member (Administration) ordered to dismiss the petitioner and Ramautar Pandey.
The appellate order was passed by Chairman of the Board but communicated by the Joint Secretary.
7.
The Counsel for the Board also produced the original file relating to departmental proceeding in which the orders were passed.
After perusal of the original file, I find that the appointing authority, Secretary of the Board vide his order dated 19895 did not pass any final order of punishment made the following proposal:  (i) Three annual increments of both the above persons be withheld with cumulative effect; (ii) They may be released from suspension with immediate effect but they may not be paid anything beyond subsistence allowance so far received by them for the period spent under suspension; (iii) They be debarred from further promotion and promotion benefit for another period of ten years.
(See page N/209).
8.
The Member (Administration) thereafter observed that the charges levelled against the petitioner and Shri Pandey are extremely serious, Therefore, both of them deserved extreme punishment and accordingly ordered to dismiss both the petitioner and Shri Pandey and to recover excess amount from the petitioner earlier paid to Shri Ghose with further order not to pay anything further for the period of suspension.
On the basis of such order of the Member (Administration), impugned order dated 991995 was issued.
9.
From pages N/238-239, I further find that on the appeal petition, no decision was taken on merit by the appellate authority.
The Secretary by his note dated 2011996 observed as follows :  "There is no new point.
The applicant has been dismissed from service after due departmental proceeding and second show cause.
The appeal application may be rejected."
The aforesaid note was forwarded to Member (Administration), who .... (sic) forwarded to the Chairman (Appellate Authority), who signed on 23.1.1996 with his note "Yes I agree".
10.
From the aforesaid fact, charge-sheet, enquiry report and office note, the following facts emerge :  (i) None of the authorities, including enquiry officer, disciplinary authority and appellate authority decided the issues raised by the petitioner, namely, whether the petitioner opened the service book and merely assisted the competent authority or the service book was opened by the competent authority.
Shri Lalan Prasad Rai, the then Assistant Engineer.
(ii) The disciplinary authority did not choose to pass any harsh punishment like dismissal from service and recovery of amount of nine years excess payment which was made to Shri Ghose.
The punishing authority proposed to pass a lesser punishment but the Member (Administration) who was neither disciplinary authority, nor appellate authority passed harsh order of punishment of dismissal from service.
(iii) The appellate authority, Chairman, did not choose to apply his mind, nor passed any reasoned order in the appeal petition but merely agreed with a cryptic note of the Secretary.
11.
For the reasons stated above, I set aside the impugned order of punishment dated 991995, as well as, the appellate order dated 1041996 and remit the matter to the Secretary of the Board to decide the issue No. 1 aforesaid and then pass appropriate order in his respect, immediately, within a period of three months from the date of receipt/production of a copy of this judgment.
Till such decision is taken and order is passed by the Secretary of the Board (Disciplinary Authority), the petitioner will not success any salary from the Board, nor he would be allowed to re-join the office.
After decision of the Secretary, the petitioner will act in accordance with law.
12.
The writ petition is allowed, with the aforementioned observations/directions.
However, on the facts and circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.