NK Sodhi, J - Panipat Co-operative Sugar Mills Ltd (for short the society) has two units - (i) the sugar mill and (ii) the distillery unit where potable liquors were manufactured.
It is common case of the parties that both the units are independent and the employees in the two units are not inter- changeable and that the society maintains separate seniority lists of the employees in each unit.
Petitioner claims that he was initially appointed as an Attendant in the Sugar Mill on 1681973 and thereafter he was shifted to the Distillery Unit where he was appointed a Clerk Grade-III on 111975.
Since the employees are not inter-changeable from one unit to the other, the petitioner was treated as a fresh appointee in the Distillery Unit with effect from 111975 and his seniority was accordingly determined.
Respondent 2 was initially appointed in the Sugar Mill on 7121964 and thereafter transferred to the Distillery Unit as a Clerk Grade-III on 1671970.
Respondent 3 was appointed a Clerk on 471972 in the Sugar Mill and later transferred to the Distillery Unit in the year 1976.
2.
In view of the decision of the State Government to introduce prohibition in the State of Haryana with effect from 171996 the running of the Distillery Unit became impossible and the manufacture of potable liquors had to stop.
The society decided to close down the said unit partially and terminate the services of some of the employees who were rendered surplus.
In compliance with the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act, the society gave notices to the employees under section 25 of the said Act to terminate their services.
The petitioner also received one such notice dated 2261996.
On receipt of this notice, the petitioner represented to the society that persons junior to him had been retained while his services were being terminated.
It was pointed out that the principle of `last come first go' was not adhered to and that the provisions of Industrial Disputes Act were being violated.
The society did not respond favourably to the representation filed by the petitioner and in pursuance to the notice served earlier his services were terminated on 2981996.
It is against this order that the present petition has been filed under Article 226 of the Constitution challenging the same on the ground that it is in contravention of the principles of `last come first go' and that the provisions of Industrial Disputes Act have been violated.
It is contended on behalf of the petitioner that he is senior to respondents 2 to 4 and yet his services are being terminated whereas those of the respondents have been retained.
He has produced a copy of the seniority list prepared in the year 1992 wherein he is shown junior to respondents 2 and 3 and it is alleged that the seniority list has not been correctly prepared.
3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the society, it is not disputed that the services of respondents 2 to 4 have not been terminated.
It is averred that respondents 2 and 3 are senior to the petitioner as per the seniority list which has been attached by the petitioner himself and that respondent 4 is an employees of the Sugar Mills with whom the petitioner has no concern.
4.
Having heard counsel for the parties and after going through their pleadings, I am satisfied that the seniority list has not been properly prepared by the society and that the petitioner is senior to at least respondent 3.
As already noticed above, the petitioner joined the Distillery Unit on 111975 and was working continuously thereafter.
Respondent 3, according to the society, joined as a Clerk in the Sugar Mill on 471972 and was later transferred to the Distillery Unit in the year 1976.
He too like the petitioner should be deemed to have been given a fresh appointment in that unit with effect from 1976.
If that be so, then the petitioner who joined that unit on 111975 would obviously be senior to this respondent on the basis of continuous length of service which is the basis of the seniority list.
What is surprising is that in the case of respondent 3 his seniority had been reckoned with effect from 471972 when he joined the Sugar Mill as a Clerk whereas in the case of the petitioner his seniority is reckoned from the date when he was transferred to the Distillery Unit.
The society cannot have different yardsticks for different employees.
It must, therefore, be held that the petitioner is senior to respondent 3.
Respondent 2, in my opinion, has been rightly shown as senior to the petitioner.
He joined the Sugar Mill on 7121964 and was transferred to the Distillery Unit on 1671970 though he was regularly adjusted in this unit with effect from 1101992.
Since he has continuously worked in the Distillery Unit with effect from 1671970 i.e. much prior to the petitioner he has to rank senior to him.
5.
When the petitioner is senior to respondent 3 as held above, the principle of `last come first go' has obviously been violated because services of the petitioner have been terminated whereas respondent 3 has been retained.
In this view of the matter, the impugned order dated 2981996 terminating the services of the petitioner cannot be sustained.
6.
Before concluding it may be mentioned that the learned counsel for the society sought to raise a plea that it is not amenable to the writ jurisdiction of this court as the society is not a `State' within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution The respondent cannot be allowed to raise this plea for the first time at the time of arguments because no such objection has been taken in the written statement nor any factual basis laid therein.
The petitioner too is being taken by surprise at this stage.
If such an objection had been raised in the written statement the petitioner could have controverted the same and furnished particulars in the rejoinder to show that the State Government has pervasive control over the society so as to being it within the ambit of Article 12 of the Constitution  7.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed and the impugned order quashed.
The society is directed to take the petitioner back in service within one week from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
No costs.
Petition allowed.