Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner who is working as an Assistant Superintendent, Central Jail, prays for the issue of a writ of Mandamus directing the State of Punjab to consider his claim for "appointment to the Punjab Civil Service (Judicial Branch) as a Backward Class candidate for the examination held in April 1991".
The respondents contest this claim and point out that the petitioner's candidature was duly considered as a `General' candidate and that he cannot have his claim reconsidered on the basis of certificates etc. produced by him long after the examination was over.
2.
Learned counsel for the parties have been heard.
3.
The admitted facts are that posts in the Punjab Civil Service (Judicial Branch) were advertised on September 8, 1990.
Three of the posts were reserved for the members of Backward Classes.
The candidates had to submit their applications by October 8, 1990.
The petitioner who was already employed submitted his application.
He did not claim to be a member of the Backward Classes.
The petitioner had appeared in the written examination held from April 1, 1991 to April 4, 1991.
It was on July 10, 1991 that the petitioner submitted a representation claiming that he was entitled to be treated as a member of the Backward Classes.
Along with the application he had produced a certificate dated April 30, 1991 in which it was observed that he belongs to the `Kamboj' caste which is recognised as a Backward Class.
It was further certified that the income of his family from all sources did not exceed Rs. 50,000/- per annum.
The result of the examination was declared on July 25, 1991.
The petitioner having not been considered as a member of the Backward Classes, approached this Court through the present writ petition in August, 1991.
4.
The short question that arises is - Can the petitioner claim a right to be considered as a member of the Backward Classes on the basis of a certificate procured by him long after the competitive examination ?
5.
It is the admitted position that the candidate had to fulfil the requisite qualifications on October 8, 1990.
This was the last date for the submission of applications.
On this date the instructions on which the petitioner has based his claim had not even been issued.
In fact, the instructions had been issued vide letter dated November 27, 1990.
It further appears that these were circulated by the Office of the Inspector General of Prisons in December 1990.
It is true that in the instructions it had been inter-alia provided that "in cases where a candidate is required to be an income tax payer for appointment through direct recruitment to superior posts, the income (taxable) of his family should not exceed Rs. 50,000/- per annum."
According to the plain language of the provision it would be applicable only to the posts for which a candidate is required to be an income tax assessee.
Such was not the position in the present case.
Still further, it is true that the instructions had been made effective from July 26, 1990.
However, the petitioner's case was not covered by the provision as there was no requirement that the candidate should be an income tax assessee for appointment to the Punjab Civil Service (Judicial Branch).
6.
Mr. Dogra has submitted that the petitioner had been subsequently treated as a member of the Backward Classes for recruitment to PCS (Executive Branch) and for certain other Class-I posts.
He submits that the petitioner had been permitted to compete as a member of the Backward Classes.
Learned counsel also very fairly concedes that the petitioner had failed to qualify.
In view of this factual position, it cannot be said that the petitioner's interest has been prejudicially affected insofar as recruitment in the year 1991 is concerned.
Still further, the very fact that at a subsequent stage the petitioner was considered as a member of the Backward Classes does not mean that he had a right to be so considered even in the year 1990 because the instructions had been issued subsequent to the last date for submission of the applications.
In view of the above it is held :-  1.
The instructions issued by the Government vide letter dated November 27, 1990 shall apply only to the posts for which the last date for submission of applications is after the issue of the instructions.
2.
The petitioner having been considered as a member of the Backward Class in the subsequent selection, it cannot be said that the petitioner's interest has been prejudicially affected in any manner for recruitment to the post in the year 1991.
Thus there is no equity which may call for any interference or the issue of a direction to the respondents to consider the petitioner's claim with effect from 1991.
It would only unsettle the settled position.
No other point has been raised.
In view of the above, the writ petition is dismissed.
However there will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.