HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner after completion of his Schooling joined the five year LLB course in the respondent-University.
The course in question is divided into two parts, the first two years being called the pre-Law years and the balance 3 years as the LL.B.
Course.
The petitioner appeared in the annual examination of the first year for the academic year 1994-95 and on the declaration of the result was shown as having secured compartment in English.
He reappeared for the said paper in the main examination held in 1996 and in May 1997 but he was declared as having obtained a compartment (wrongly mentioned as failed in the petition).
The petitioner applied for the re- evaluation of the result for the examination held in May 1997 and in the meanwhile cleared all the other papers in the 2nd year of the Pre-Law Course.
In the meanwhile the result of the re-evaluation sought by the petitioner with respect to the English paper examination taken by him in May 1997 was declared on 5111997 and he was declared as having passed.
The petitioner accordingly made an application on 12111997 for admission to the higher class as he had cleared all lower courses but the same was declined.
Aggrieved thereby this petition has been filed seeking a direction ordering the respondent-University to give him admission to the LL.B.
IV year course.
2.
Notice of motion as issued in this case and a reply has been filed on behalf of the respondents.
It has been admitted by them that the petitioner had been declared as having passed in the English paper on re-evaluation and that he had applied for admission in the LL.B.
Course on 12111997 but admission had been denied to him by the respondent-University on the ground that he had applied late as the last date for amission to the course with late fees was 3171997; the more so that it would not be possible for him to fulfil the requirement of attendance.
It has also been pleaded that the Bar Council of India which was the Apex Body in matters pertaining to the law course had vide letter dated 26.7.1997 Annexure R-1 directed the University that no admission should be made after the cut off date for admission was over and that the University should strictly adhere to the norms for attendance prescribed by it.
It has accordingly been pleaded that the respondent- university had accepted this guideline and was following it in all cases.
3.
Shri Dhull, the learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that the refusal of the respondent-University to grant admission to the petitioner for the course in question was contrary to Ordinance 6 framed by the University on the subject and as such the petitioner was entitled to admission on having been declared passed in the re-evaluation.
Shri Gupta, the learned counsel appearing for the University has, however, relied upon the written statement and has argued the matter on that basis.
4.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that the petitioner deserves to be granted admission.
Rule 6 is reproduced as under:-  "If as a result of re-evaluation a candidate passed the examination or is placed in compartment he/she shall, if otherwise eligible be allowed to join the next higher class within 10 days of the date of the letter communicating the result of the re-evaluation to him/her provided seats are available.
However, admission already made would not be disturbed because of the revision of result of re-evaluation.
His/her attendance shall be counted from the date of admission.
In such cases the No. of lectures delivered shall also be counted from the date of such admission.
No extra chance will be allowed to a candidate for clearing compartment/re-appear in lieu of any chance which he/she might have missed before declaration of the result of re-evaluation."
A bare reading of the Rule indicates that if a student is declared having passed the examination on re-evaluation he would be entitled to join the next class if he makes an application within 10 days of the declaration and further that in such a case his attendance shall be counted from such admission.
Admittedly the result of the petitioner was declared on 5111997 and he made the application for admission to the higher class on 12111997.
To my mind, therefore, the petitioner was fully eligible to seek re-admission to the Course in question.
The submission of the University that the petitioner would not be able to complete the lectures as he would be joining the course mid stream is also without merit as the rule itself provides that attendance of such a student was to be tabulated from the date of admission.
5.
Shri Gupta, the learned course appearing for the University has, however, argued that the University was in duty bound to follow the Directive Annexure R1/1 issued by the Bar Council of India and as this circular provided that no admission was to be made after the cut off date fixed for admission and as the norms with regard to the attendance of lectures fixed by the Bar Council of India were to be followed, the petition could not succeed.
To my mind this argument lacks merit.
It cannot be denied that the directives issued by the Bar Council of India pertaining to the legal profession must be honoured and given full respect but such a Directive cannot displace the University Statutes as the same have statutory force.
The resolution of the Bar Council Annexure R1/1 must thus give way to the Ordinance.
As already mentioned above Rule 6 of the Ordinance gives a right to a student to seek admission provided certain conditions are fulfilled under that Rule.
Admittedly, the petitioner has complied with the Rules in question.
6.
By orders dated 10.2.1998 it had been directed by this Court that the petitioner be given admission in the course forthwith.
It is the conceded position that the petitioner has been granted admission thereunder.
This petition is, accordingly, allowed and a direction is issued to the respondents to regularise the provisional admission granted to the petitioner.
There will be no orders as to costs.
A copy of this order be given dasti to the counsel for the parties.
Petition allowed.