SS Sudhalkar, J - The petitioner is serving in CRPF and is at present working as Second-in-Command.
He joined his service in the CRPF as Deputy Superintendent of Police (CRPF) and was promoted as Deputy Commandant and thereafter as Second-in-Command.
Departmental promotions for filling up 45 vacancies of Commandant (NSG) were to be made from the Second-in-Command.
The petitioner's name is not included in the panel for promotion to the post of Commandant.
The petitioner contends that he is qualified for promotion and there is no reason to debar him from the same.
He further contends that he belongs to Scheduled Tribe category and, therefore, also he is entitled to promotion in the reserved quota category.
The representation of the petitioner for promotion was rejected and, therefore, the petitioner has filed this writ petition with a prayer that the order annexure P/3 whereby the junior to the petitioner has been promoted, be quashed and order annexure P/7 whereby the representation for promotion has been rejected to be also quashed and respondents No. 1, 2 and 5 be directed to promote the petitioner from the date his junior has been promoted.
2.
Notice of motion was issued.
Respondents No. 1 to 3 and 5 have filed the reply.
It is contended by respondents that bench-mark prescribed by the Government for promotion to the post of Commandant is 'Very Good'.
However, SC/ST officers (who) are senior enough in the zone of consideration for promotion so as to be within the number of vacancies for which the select list to be prepared/drawn up, would notwithstanding the prescribed bench-mark be included in the list provided they are not considered unfit for promotion.
The bench-mark for the petitioner was not 'Very Good' and therefore, the benefit of above guidelines could not be given to him as he was at serial number 46 of the list.
It is contended that there was 45 vacancies (13 existing and 32 anticipated) of Commandant.
DPC was convened on 28696 for considering and making recommendations for promotion to the post of Commandants.
It is also mentioned in the written statement that the zone of consideration for 45 vacancies is 94 and there were only 72 officers who fulfilled the eligibility criteria prescribed for the post in question.
3.
The method of grading is found in rule 6.3.1. which is as under :  "6.3.1.
Principles to be observed and preparation of panel :  The list of candidates considered by the DPC and the overall grading assigned to each candidate would form the basis for preparation of the panel for promotion by the DPC.
The following principles should be observed in the preparation of the panel :-  (i) Having regard to the levels of the posts to which promotions are to be made, the nature and importance of duties attached to the posts a bench-mark grade would be determined for each category of posts for which promotions are to be made by selection method.
For all group, 'C' group 'B' and group 'A' posts up to (and excluding) the level of Rs. 3700-5000 excepting promotions for induction to Group 'A' posts or services from lower groups, the bench-mark would be 'Good'.
All officers whose overall grading is equal to or better than the bench-mark should be included in the panel for promotion to the extent of the number of vacancies.
They will be arranged in the order of their inter-se seniority in the lower category without reference to the overall grading obtained by each of them provided that each one of them has an overall grading equal to or better than the bench-mark of 'Good'.
Wherever promotions are made for induction to Group 'A' posts or services from lower groups, the bench-mark would continue to be 'Good'.
However, officers graded as 'Outstanding' would rank en bloc senior to those who are graded as 'Very Good' and officers graded as 'Very Good' rank en bloc senior to those who are graded as 'Good' and placed in the select panel accordingly upto the number of vacancies, officers with same grading maintaining their inter se seniority in the feeder post.
(ii) In respect of all posts which are in the level of Rs. 3700-5000 and above, the bench-mark grade should be 'Very Good'.
However, officer who are graded as 'Outstanding' would rank en bloc senior to those who are graded as 'Very Good' and placed in the select panel accordingly upto the number of vacancies, officers with same grading maintaining their inter se seniority in the feeder post.
4.
Regarding provision for SC/ST officers, the petitioner relies on sub-rule (iv)(a) of Rule 3, which is as under :-  '(iv) Provision for SC/ST Officers :  (a) For posts/service within Group 'A' carrying ultimate salary of Rs. 7500/- or less SC/ST officers coming within the zone of consideration so as to be within the number of vacancies for which the select list to be drawn up, will be included in the select list notwithstanding the prescription of bench-mark provided they are not considered 'UNFIT'."
(emphasis supplied) 5.
The petitioner has also challenged the bench-mark given to him by stating that he believes that his service record is of 'Very Good' or 'Excellent' category and on the basis of his performance he is quite sure that his ACRs might have been recorded either 'Very Good' or 'Excellent' by his immediate superior officers.
6.
We are not disturbing the findings of the DPC in this case; meaning thereby that the petitioner, who belongs to Scheduled Tribe category, would be treated at Sr. No. 46 in the select list for promotion to the post of 2nd Commandant.
Further, he has been found fit by the DPC and his Bench-mark is 'Good'.
We are, as observed above, not disturbing the findings or the conclusions of the DPC in this case.
The point then involved in this case is as to whether if from amongst the first 45 candidates in the select list, any one of them is found not to be fit for promotion on any ground by the DPC, whether 46th person, who happens to be a SC/ST candidate and his Bench-mark is 'Good' is to be promoted as a Commandant or the next man in the seniority list, who might be belonging to the general category and having bench-mark as 'Very Good'.
7.
Considering the above facts, it is to be seen whether the petitioner could have been considered for promotion.
Amongst the candidates, the petitioner is at serial number 46 in the list of candidates considered.
There were some candidates who were not considered because of various reasons and it is not necessary to have discussion on their cases.
Out of the 72 candidates considered, as stated earlier, the petitioner is at serial number 46 in the list.
Private respondent No. 4 is at serial No. 47.
It will be proper to reproduce the first 47 candidates along with bench-mark out of the list of 72 candidates shown to us.
It is as under :  S.No., Name of the candidate Bench-mark  1., Shri CBS Rathore, 'Very Good'  2., Shri VS Yadav, Unfit  3.
Shri CJM Albert, Good  4, Shri AK Sharma, Very Good  5., Shri Ravinder Tomar, Unfit  6., Shri Nath Ram, Deferred  7., Shri Ashok Kumar, Very Good  8., Shri SP Srivastava, Good  9., Shri Ram Anuj, Good  10., Shri JS Sandhu, Sealed Cover  11., Shri GC Milli (ST), Good  12., Shri Umesh Chandra (SC), Good  13., Shri DK Mahapatra, Good  14., Shri Sushil Kumar, Deferred  15., Shri SAM Kazmi, Very Good  16., Shri Joginder Singh, Very Good  17., Shri AM Mohd., Very Good  18., Shri Anil Duggal, Very Good  19., Shri KM Iyer, Very Good  20., Shri RS Cheema, Very Good  21., Shri V Laxmi Narayanan, Very Good  22., Shri Ramesh Chander (S/C), Very Good  23., Shri Amar Singh, Very Good  24., Shri Reginald Weeley, Very Good  25., Shri Sunil Shori, Very Good  26., Shri AK Behra, Very Good  27., Shri PK Biswas, Very Good  28., Shri Kulbir Singh, Very Good  29., Shri K Arkesh, Very Good  30., Shri AK Tyagi, Very Good  31., Shri SL Sethi, Very Good  32., Shri S Kamalingam, Very Good  33., Shri Vikas Saran, Very Good  34., Shri MK Sinha, Very Good  35., Shri RN Mishra, Very Good  36., Shri SPS Basara, Deferred  37., Shri Porender Pratap, Very Good  38., Shri JS Thoidingjam, Very Good  39., Shri Gurinderjit Singh, Very Good  40., Shri SN Rudrappa, Sealed Cover  41, Shri Jasbir Singh Gill, Very Good  42., Shri Ajit Kulshreshtha, Very Good  43., Shri SP Singh, Unfit  44., Shri YK Mathur, Very Good  45., Shri Umed Singh (SC), Very Good  46., Shri Taj Mohd (ST), Petitioner, Good  47., Shri MM Khan, Respondent No. 4, Very Good  8.
If we see the bench-mark s, the candidates at serial Nos. 2, 3 and 43 are found to be unfit while the cases of candidates at serial No. 6, 14, 36 and 3 deferred.
The cases of candidates at serial No. 10 and 40 are kept under sealed cover and, therefore, the bench-marks are not given.
9.
The argument of learned counsel for the petitioner is that if 45 vacancies were to be filled up, though the name of the petitioner is at serial No. 46 in the list, even leaving other categories when three persons above him in the list who were found to be unfit, he comes in the zone of vacancies.
The argument from side of official respondents is that the post to which the promotion is to be made requires persons of excellent category and therefore, the candidates getting bench-marks 'Very Good' are preferred to those getting bench-mark 'Good'.
10.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and taking into consideration the regulations of the department quoted above, we are of the view that there is no merit in this writ petition.
The true input of the regulations of the respondent-department is that a person or persons with a bench-mark "very good" would en bloc replace those persons with bench-mark "Good" and similarly persons with bench-mark "Very Good" or "Good".
However, there is one exception for SC/ST.
If they are within the number of the vacancies having even bench-mark "Good" and are found fit they would not be replaced by any other person though having bench-mark "Very Good" or "Outstanding".
To clarify what has been stated above, all SC/ST candidates upto serial No. 45 (i.e. number of vacancies) even having bench-mark "Good" would be promoted as Commandant.
For example Mr. GC Milli belonging to ST and Mr. Ramesh Chander belonging to SC who were within the first 45 and the bench-mark was "Good" have been rightly held entitled to promotion as Commandant.
However, any person whose bench-mark is just "Good" within first 45 vacancies and belonging to general category would be replaced by person with bench-mark "Very Good" or "Outstanding" who may be from serial No. 46 onward.
The petitioner is at serial No. 46 in the list with bench-mark only "Good" whereas respondent No. 4 MM Khan and persons below him who have bench-mark "Very Good" or "Outstanding" would replace any person who has been found unfit or having bench-mark only "Good".
From the record we find that persons from No. 46 upto 63 whosever had been given bench-mark "Very Good" have replaced those persons among the first 45 who were either declared unfit or those general category candidates who had been given bench-mark only "Good".
Consequently we find nothing wrong in the action of the respondent in not selecting the petitioner for the post of Commandant.
11.
Learned counsel for the petitioner also argued that his ACR has not been correctly recorded and had been wrongly downgraded and consequently bench-mark was not correct.
The petitioner may, if so advised, make necessary representation in that regard as that is not within the scope of this court to go into that matter.
12.
Subject to the observations made above, we find no merit in this writ petition which is hereby dismissed.
Petition dismissed.