NK Sodhi, J - Petitioners alongwith many others were appointed in 1984-85 on different posts on temporary basis by the Punjab State Leather Development Corporation (for short the corporation) which is a company wholly owned by the Government and registered under the Companies Act.
Later they were made regular and given a regular pay scale.
Due to heavy losses suffered by the corporation, the Government decided to wind up the same and it is in the process of being wound up.
133 employees including the petitioners were declared surplus.
The corporation framed a policy known as Golden Hand Shake policy whereunder the surplus staff was offered lump sum amount of money at the time of their retrenchment which was more than what was otherwise due to them under law.
Some of the employees including the petitioners did not accept the Golden Hand Shake Policy and their names were sent to the State Government for absorption in its different departments.
When some of the employees were not absorbed they filed the present petition under Article 226 of the Constitution for a mandamus to the State Government to absorb them as per its policy as contained in its circular letter dated 2041992 whereby it had been decided to give employment in the State Services Class-III and Class IV posts on priority basis amongst others to those employees who were declared surplus on account of the closure of the Public Sector Undertakings of the State Government.
22 employees of the corporation filed this petition and during its pendency 16 of them were absorbed by the State Government in its different departments.
The petition was then amended and since whereabouts of two other employees were not known amended petition has been filed by the remaining four petitioners.
The prayer made by them is that the State Government be directed to absorb them like others.
It was also contended on their behalf that persons who were junior to them in the service of the corporation had been absorbed whereas they have been left out and that the action of the State Government is, therefore, discriminatory.
2.
In the written statement filed by the Corporation, it is averred that the circular letter dated 241992 is not applicable to the petitioners as their service conditions are governed by the terms laid down by the Board of Directors of the corporation.
It was also pleaded that this circular letter was subsequently amended in March, 1995 whereby absorption of the surplus staff was restricted only to the regular Government employees declared surplus on account of abolition of their posts/departments including reduction of posts.
It is denied that the petitioners are entitled to be absorbed in Government service.
3.
The writ petition was initially dismissed in limine and the petitioners went in appeal before the Apex Court.
The order of dismissal was set aside and the case remanded for a decision on merits.
This is how the matter has been placed before me for disposal.
4.
I have heard counsel for the parties and, in my opinion, the petition deserves to succeed.
It is not in dispute that out of the twenty-two petitioners who initially filed the petition sixteen have since been absorbed by the State Government in different departments some of whom were junior to the petitioners in the service of the corporation.
This is clear from the chart prepared by the petitioners which is Annexure P-12 with the petition the correctness of which has not been challenged.
The petitioners were declared surplus in the year 1992 and the policy of the State Government as contained in letter dated 2041992 was operative at that time.
As per this policy the State Government had decided to offer employment on priority basis to those employees who had been declared surplus on account of the closure of a Public Sector Undertaking.
No doubt the policy was amended in March, 1995 but at the time of the retrenchment of the petitioners the unamended policy was in force which was applicable to the petitioners.
The corporation is admittedly a State Undertaking and when other employees like the petitioners have been absorbed, there is no reason why the petitioners should have been left out.
5.
Consequently, the writ petition is allowed and the State Government directed to give employment to the petitioners on priority basis on any Class III/IV post depending upon their experience and qualifications and keeping in view the nature of the posts held by them in the corporation.
The needful shall be done within three months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
There is no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.