TS Doabia, J - Counsels heard.
Petition admitted.
With the consent of learned counsel for the parties, this petition is taken up for final disposal.
The petitioner challenges the proposed action of the State Government in inducting respondent No. 5 in the service constituted under J&K Administrative Officers (Gazetted Service) Recruitment Rules of 1996 (hereinafter referred to as the Rules of 1996).
2.
The brief facts which are relevant for the purposes of this petition are being noticed, as under :-  On 3031993, one officer by the name of Shri SS Jamwal was to superannuate.
An office order was passed.
This order bears No. 868-70/8A/CCF/J.
This is dated 30th March, 1993.
In this order, there is a recital to the effect that the respondent No. 5 who is working as PA-cum-Senior Scale Stenographer shall take over the charge from Shri SS Jamwal.
As a matter of fact, the direction given was to Shri SS Jamwal.
He was directed to hand over the charge to respondent No. 5.
It was further mentioned in the order that the arrangement be made without prejudice to outcome of Court cases pending against Shri SS Jamwal.
It was further mentioned that the final decision would rest with the Government.
There is an endorsement made in the order.
This endorsement is at S.No.
2.
This endorsement is to the effect that "he (respondent No. 5) will hold the charge of Administrative Officer in addition to his charge temporarily without getting any benefit".
3.
The further fact is that respondent No. 5 on account of his having performed the duties of the Administrative Officer was given charge allowance in terms of Regulation 87-A of the J&K Civil Service Regulations, as applicable to the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
On the basis of the aforementioned factors, the respondent No. 5 was sought to be inducted in the service under the Rules of 1996 referred to above.
It is this induction which had led to the filing of this writ petition.
The precise challenge which has been made is as under:-  (i) That the respondent No. 5 was merely given a temporary charge.
This was necessiated as the previous incumbent was retiring on 3131993.
This order as per the petitioner cannot be interpreted to mean that the respondent No. 5 was appointed as Administrative Officer.
(ii) That only that person can be inducted in the service, who has been Administrative Officer in the office of Chief Conservator of Forests.
(iii) A person who is holding the current duties charge cannot be said to be holding the office of Administrative Officer for the purposes of Schedule-II appended to the Rules of 1996.
(iv) There was a clear stipulation that the petitioner would not be entitled to "any benefit".
The fact which is being highlighted by the respondents is that so far as the petitioner is concerned, he became eligible only on 1731997.
By this order, the petitioner was given deemed promotion to the post of Section Officer.
This deemed promotion was w.e.f.
30.4.1992.
Thus, it is argued that as the petitioner became eligible only in the month of March, 1997, therefore, his case is not at par with respondent No. 5.
In the nutshell, the arguments raised by the respondents are as under :-  (A) That respondent No. 5 was holding the current duty charge as Administrative Officer, and in this capacity, he got automatically inducted into the Service, which was created under the Rules of 1996.
(B) That respondent No. 5 became eligible in the year 1993 in his capacity as PA-cum-Senior Scale Stenographer.
He could be given current duties charge; (C) The petitioner was not eligible when current duties charge was given to respondent No. 5.
(D) A plea of delay and laches has also been raised on behalf of the respondent No. 5.
I am of the opinion that the stand taken by the respondents cannot be sustained.
4.
The respondent No. 5 was merely asked to take charge from the then Administrative Officer.
A peculiar situation arose.
This situation as noticed above is visualised in the order dated 3131993.
This was a Gazetted holiday.
With a view to meet this situation, directions were given to Shri SS Jamwal to hand over the charge to respondent No. 5.
This handing over of the charge would not mean the respondent No. 5 came to be appointed as Administrative Officer; or he was given charge of the duties of Administrative Officer.
As a matter of fact in the above order, it was clearly mentioned that holding of the charge is "without getting any benefit".
Even otherwise current duties and actual conferring the status are different concepts.
This concept negatives the case of the respondent No. 5.
5.
In this regard it is pertinent to mention here that the order which was passed by the then Chief Conservator of Forests does make a mention of the fact that respondent No. 5 would hold the charge of the Administrative Officer temporarily in addition to his charge.
These lines came to be incorporated in the endorsement.
That the induction in the service under Schedule-II can only be from the category of those officers who have been described as Section Officers or Head of the Departments in the pay scale of Rs. 2000-3200.
It is in the above premises, the argument raised is that respondent No. 5 was not eligible and, therefore, he cannot be inducted in the service referred to above.
6.
With a view to counter this argument, the learned counsel appearing for respondent No. 5 and also for the State has placed reliance on SRO 326.
According to the respondents, if this SRO is taken into consideration, that (then) not only Section Officers, but Senior Scale Stenographers/PAs in the pay scale of Rs. 1500-2500 (old) would be eligible.
In case of Section Officers the experience prescribed is five years and in the case of Sr.
Scale Stenographers-cum-PAs the experience prescribed is ten years.
It is submitted that at the relevant point of time in 1993, when respondent No. 5 was allowed, to hold the charge of Administrative Officer, the SRO 326 was in operation, and therefore, respondent No. 5 was eligible for the office of Administrative Officer.
This argument cannot be accepted.
When the main order is looked into, then it becomes clear that it came into existence with a view to fulfil a short term arrangement.
By this, respondent No. 5 was directed to take the charge.
This would not amount to a situation, which may be treated as having conferred any extra benefit on respondent No. 5.
The stand taken by the State as well as respondent No. 5, therefore, cannot be accepted.
7.
It be seen that petitioner was equally eligible under SRO 326.
A section officer with five years experience was fully qualified.
As a matter of fact, an order has been passed, though belatedly, in favour of the petitioner.
He has been given promotion to the post of Section Officer w.e.f.
30.4.1992.
The petitioner was, therefore, eligible even at the time when order Annexure `B' referred to above came to be passed.
If this be the situation, then both petitioner and respondent No. 5 can be treated to be eligible for the post of Administrative Officer.
8.
Under the rules of 1996, respondent No. 5 is to have experience of 10 years, and in the case of petitioner he was supposed to have past experience of five years only.
9.
Thus, looking from any point of view, the stand taken by the State as also be respondent No. 5 cannot be accepted.
The petitioner who was fully eligible in terms of SRO 326 and who is even now eligible under the Rules of 1996 should have been considered.
This has not been done.
To sum up :-  (i) Respondent No. 5 has (been) asked to take charge from the incumbent who superannuated.
(ii) He was not to get any extra benefit.
(iii) Current duties charge is not the same thing as conferring actual status.
(iv) Petitioner has become eligible as per later order passed by which retrospective benefit was conferred on him.
(v) Claims of petitioner and respondent No. 5 are required to be looked into afresh as per Rules, 1996.
10.
Accordingly, the respondents are directed to consider the case of the petitioner.
The current duties charge which was held by respondent No. 5 would not amount his automatic induction in the Service created under the Rules, 1996 referred to above.
11.
The respondent authorities would make an exercise with a view to comply with the direction contained in this order within a period of three months.
The period of three months would begin from the date a copy of this order along with a copy of the writ petition and annexures thereof are made available by the petitioner to the respondents.
In case for any practical reasons, it is not possible to pass an appropriate order within the above said period, the respondent-authorities would be at liberty to seek extension of time.
In that eventuality, they shall have to explain each and every day's delay.
The petition is disposed of accordingly.