Jawahar Lal Gupta.
J (Oral) - The short question that arises for consideration in this Letters Patent Appeal is - Is the respondent, Prem Raj Verma, entitled to the benefit of military service for the purpose of determination of his seniority as a Group Instructor in the State of Haryana ?
The learned single Judge having decided in favour of the respondent, the State of Haryana has filed this Letters Patent Appeal.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The respondent had served in the Indian Army from April 15, 1953 to December 31, 1974.
After his discharge from the Army he was recruited as a Clerk on February 28, 1977 in the Department of Technical Education.
On March 31, 1981 he was selected and appointed as a Group Instructor in the same Department.
On joining this post he represented for the grant of the benefit of military service rendered by him during the period when the proclamation of emergency was in force.
His claim having been rejected, he approached this court through a petition under Article 226 of the Constitution and prayed that the benefit for the period from October 26, 1962 to January 10, 1968 be granted to him.
The learned single Judge has accepted this claim.
3.
Mr. Bishnoi, learned counsel for the appellant has submitted that the decision of the learned single Judge is not tenable.
No one has appeared on behalf of the respondent in spite of service.
In fact, the respondent has sent a letter in which he has stated that he is not "interested in any judgment regarding this case."
4.
The short question is - Can the respondent get the benefit as claimed by him ?
5.
Military service was initially defined in Rule '2' of the Punjab Goverment National Emergency (Concession) Rules, 1965 as under :-  "Definition - For the purposes of these rules, the expression 'military service' means enrolled or commissioned service in any of the three wings of the Indian Armed Forces (including service as a Warrant officer rendered by a person during the period of operation of the proclamation of Emergency made by the President under Article 352 of the Constitution on the 26th October, 1962, or such other service as may thereafter be declared as military service for the purposes of these rules.
Any period of military training followed by military service shall also be reckoned as military service."
A perusal of the above definition indicates that the "enrolled or commissioned service......rendered by a person during the period of proclamation of Emergency made by the President under Article 352 of the Constitution......" falls within the definition of 'military service'.
Consequently, even a person who had joined the Indian Army prior to the proclamation of Emergency was entitled to claim that he had rendered enrolled service in the Indian Army during the period of Emergency and was, thus, entitled to the benefits admissible under the rules.
However, the State of Haryana had amended this rule with retrospective effect from November 1, 1996 to inter alia provide that the expression 'military service' means "the service rendered by a person who had been enrolled or commissioned during the period of operation of the proclamation of Emergency made by the President...... ".
It is, thus apparent that the rule-making authority had taken a conscious decision to exclude the persons who had been enrolled or commissioned prior to or after the expiry of the proclamation of Emergency from the category of persons to whom benefit under the rules was to be given.
Thus while the employees in the State of Punjab were entitled the benefit of military service rendered by them even if they had chosen to join Army as a career, a similar benefit was not admissible to the employees in the State of Haryana on account of the amendment in the definition.
6.
What is the position in the present case ?
The respondent had joined that Indian Army on April 15, 1953.
This was much prior to the issue of the proclamation of Emergency.
He had continued to serve there till December 31, 1974.
It was after his discharge from the Army that he had joined as a Clerk in the year 1977.
He had, thus, chosen Army service as a career.
He had completed his tenure in the Army.
The State of Haryana has not accorded the benefit of military service in the matter of seniority etc. to persons who had joined Army prior to the proclamation of Emergency or after the expiry thereof.
Since the respondent had not been enrolled in the Indian Army during the proclamation of emergency, the benefits are not admissible to him.
7.
It appears that by the impugned orders the benefit was denied to the respondent on the ground that it is not admissible on second appointment.
This ground may be wrong yet under the provisions of the Rules the benefit of military service is only admissible to persons "who had been enrolled or commissioned during the period of proclamation of Emergency".
The respondent was not one of those persons.
Thus, he was not entitled to the benefits as claimed by him.
In view of the above we are unable to sustain the view taken by the learned single Judge.
Resultantly, this appeal is allowed and the writ petition is dismissed.
However, there will be no order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.