RS Mongia, J (Oral) - Petitioner, who is working as Senior Medical Officer in PCMS Class-II (service No. 1463) stakes his claim for being considered for promotion as a Senior Lecturer (Medicine) in accordance with Punjab Medical Education State Service (Class-II) Rules, 1979.
As per the Rules, 75 per cent posts of Senior Lecturer are to be filled by promotion on the basis of seniority-cum-merit and 25 per cent by other methods.
On 1171997, applications were invited by the Director, Research and Medical Education, Punjab (for short the `DRME') for filling the posts of Senior Lecturer/Lecturer by promotion.
It was mentioned in that letter that applications of those persons who are desirous of being considered for promotion should be routed through proper channel and one advance copy be sent to the office of the DRME.
The last date of the receipt of applications was 291997.
The petitioner applied for the post of Senior Lecturer (Medicine) on 2971997 through proper channel and also sent an application directly in advance to the DRME by registered post which admittedly was received on 1181997.
The application which was routed through proper channel, as per the written statement, did not reach the DRME.
Since, according to the respondents, the application through proper channel did not reach the DRME, the petitioner's case could not be considered for promotion as Senior Lecturer.
2.
It has been averred in the petition that the Medical Superintendent, ESI Hospital had forwarded the application of the petitioner which was routed through proper channel to Director, ESI on 2281997 and was also endorsed to the DRME.
We have been shown the letter addressed by the Medical Superintendent to Director, ESI.
On top, it is mentioned registered and it has been endorsed on the same day ie 2281997 to DRME.
3.
Respondents No. 4 to 6 who are junior to the petitioner, were promoted as Senior Lecturers (Medicine) vide order dated 15.4.1998 (Annexure P-3).
On enquiry by the petitioner, he learnt that since the application sent through proper channel had not been received in the office of DRME, his name was not considered.
He made representation on 151998 (Annexure P-4).
4.
From the facts as narrated above, it is quite obvious that for no fault of the petitioner, his case was not considered by the authorities for promotion as Senior Lecturer (Medicine).
Whatever was to be done by the petitioner to get his name considered for promotion was fully complied with inasmuch as an application was routed well within time through proper channel as also an application was sent directly in advance to the DRME.
If for some reasons, the Medical Superintendent did not forward the same to the DRME or wrongly sent it to Director, ESI, the petitioner cannot suffer.
Moreover, we find that when an application was forwarded by Medical Superintendent to Director, ESI, a copy was also forwarded to the DRME on 2281997.
If for some reasons, the DRME did not receive the application within the stipulated period, the petitioner cannot be made to suffer.
Under these circumstances, we are of the view that the DRME could have acted on the application which was directly sent in advance to him and admittedly received well within time.
Otherwise also, the main purpose for getting the application routed through proper channel is to verify regarding the facts about the service career of a particular individual like whether any departmental enquiry is pending against him or not.
Be that as it may, as observed above, the petitioner cannot be made to suffer on facts and circumstances of this case.
5.
For the foregoing reasons, we allow this writ petition and direct the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner for promotion in accordance with law with effect from the date the cases of applicants, for whom the last date for receipt of applications was fixed as 291997, were considered.
Let these directions be carried out within a period of two months.
Needless to mention, if the petitioner is promoted with effect from the date the juniors to him were promoted, he would be entitled to all consequential benefits, including the arrears of pay.
A copy of this order, attested by Special Secretary of this Court, be given to Mr. Ahluwalia.
Petition allowed.