KJ Sengupta, J - By this writ petition the writ petitioner has challenged the order of superannuation passed by the respondent No. 1 contending the same is illegal as it is premature and not on the basis of the correct date of birth.
The petitioner was working as SK Khalasi in the employment of respondent No. 1 at Tilaiya Hydel Power Station, Tilaiya Dam, Hazaribagh.
On 20th June, 1960 the petitioner joined the services without proving his exact age.
It appears at the time of his joining, the medical officer noted down the statement (age ?)
of the petitioner as on 20th June, 1960 as 23 years according to the version of this petitioner, but according to the assumption of the doctor he was 26 years.
Thereafter the respondent No. 1 had issued a circular on 29th January, 1985 stipulating the guidelines for verification of the age for illiterate and semi-illiterate employee and also for correction of age if there is any mistake in recording of age in Service Book of the concerned employee.
Accordingly the petitioner made an application for rectification of his age on 18th November, 1984 enclosing a transfer certificate issued by a school recording his date of birth as 20th June, 1936.
His representation was followed by a series of reminders uptil 5th February, 1991.
It appears that the concerned authority of the respondent No. 1, however, did not reconsider the date of birth as applied for by the petitioner.
The petitioner even after refusal went on making representation after representation.
Ultimately it appears that the matter was sought to be resolved by referring this matter to the Assistant Labour Commissioner, Government of Bihar.
The respondent No. 1 duly explained to the said Assistant Labour Commissioner on 16th October, 1992 as to their inability to reconsider and correct the date of birth of the petitioner.
Meanwhile, the petitioner was forced to superannuate on attaining his age for retirement.
2.
In the affidavit-in-opposition it appears that the writ petitioner himself has submitted various documents, namely, a medical certificate issued on 16th September, 1969 at the time of making the petitioner permanent in the post of khalasi.
In his own application dated 30th October, 1969 the petitioner has made reference to the said medical certificate wherein it is recorded on 16th September, 1969, that on that date his age was 35 years and he has accepted this age without any objection and reservation.
In his application he has categorically stated that the age on the basis of medical officer's certificate may be accepted as he was not in a position to produce any proof of age.
It is significant to mention he has signed the said application in English language.
Thereafter again on 2nd December, 1970, the writ petitioner has made an application wherein he has recorded his date of birth as January, 1934.
In another application of the writ petitioner dated 20th March, 1973 for offering himself as a candidate for the post of technician Grade-III he has categorically mentioned in the date of birth as Ist January 1934.
Similar is the situation in his another application on 4th June, 1973 for offering himself as a candidate for the post of Line Patrolman, wherein he has mentioned his date of birth Ist January, 1934.
Again another document dated 23rd August, 1971 in a letter addressed by the Director of Personnel to the Assistant Engineer, Tilaiya Hydel Station, DVC, Tilaiya, copy whereof has been given to the writ petitioner, it appears that his date of birth is recorded as 16th September, 1934.
The writ petitioner has not made any objection to all these things in the affidavit-in-reply.
He has not dealt with as to non- receipt, correctness and validity of the contents of the aforesaid writings.
The writ petitioner conspicuously has not stated of this material fact in the writ petition.
3.
Miss Ghosh, appearing with Mr. Sudip Ghosh in support of this writ petition submits that there is no consistency as to date of birth of the writ petitioner.
She submits that there is no material whatsoever on the basis of which the respondent No.
I could come to a definite decision that his date of birth was 16th September, 1934.
The opinion of the medical officer and/or examination of the medical officer cannot give a definite and concrete proof as to age of a particular person.
It appears that the date of birth has been determined by the respondent on the basis of the assumption of a medical officer not on the basis of any unimpeachable document.
Therefore, this order of superannuation on the basis of presumptive value of medical certificate is wholly illegal and arbitrary.
In support of her submissions she relies on a decision reported in 1997 W.B.L.R.
Calcutta 32 Part-I.
She submits referring to that judgment the subject matter on fact in this case is similar to that of the reported decision.
In that case the order of superannuation was struck down.
4.
Miss Ghosh draws my attention to a certificate issued by school authority wherefrom it appears he read upto primary level.
In that certificate his date of birth has been given as 20th June, 1936.
This date of birth should be taken into consideration.
The authority concerned, however, did not take note of this school certificate rather without assigning any reason the respondent No. 1 has brushed aside the evidentiary value of the school certificate.
With regard to the statements made in the various documents and applications of the writ petitioner, it is submitted by Miss Ghosh that his client was semi-illiterate.
He cannot read nor understands contents of those applications.
Therefore these documents cannot be looked into and the same are sham documents.
5.
Mr. KK Baral appearing for the respondents submits that the writ petitioner has consistently made a statement as to his date of birth and on the basis of which the authority concerned has acted upon and prepared the service record.
The school certificate which has been produced is seriously doubted as to its genuineness as in his own application he mentioned that he had no proof as to his age.
No explanation is forthcoming as to how this document proving his date of birth could be prepared and could be produced at a later stage.
Moreover, the dispute with regard to the age was sought to be referred to the Assistant Labour Commissioner, Bihar and the respondent No. 1 has given explanation and/or reply to the clarifications of the Labour Commissioner, but no such dispute was referred by the said Labour Commissioner to the Industrial Tribunal.
Therefore, there is no merit on this writ petition nor the writ petitioner can raise such dispute after travelling all those scores as stated above.
6.
I have heard the respective submissions of the learned lawyers.
I am unable to accept submissions rather believe the story that the writ petitioner was semi-illiterate and he did not know how to read English, except putting his signature in English.
I do not find any averment in the writ petition to that effect.
Curiously enough the petitioner's own application declaring his date of birth January 1934 has not been stated in the writ petition nor it is has been sufficiently explained in the affidavit-in-reply.
There are documents galore annexed to the affidavit-in-opposition wherefrom it appears that the writ petitioner's consistent case is that his date of birth is the year 1934 not as it is recorded in the school certificate.
Nothing has been explained as to why at the subsequent stage the school certificate was sought to be relied on while on previous occasion it was specifically stated that he had no document to prove his age.
Therefore, I am not prepared to believe the story of the writ petitioner's ignorance which has been spun out at the fag end of his carrier.
7.
It appears that this dispute relates to essentially industrial dispute which was sought to be raised under the provisions of the Industrial Dispute Act, but the same was not referred to by the authority concerned for the reasons best known to the Government of Bihar.
8.
The School Certificate as it has been relied on by Miss Ghosh has no evidentiary value as to the proof of correctness of the date of birth.
The certificate issued by the School authority which is an extract from the School Register as to the age of particular student, may be relevant and admissible under Section 35 of the Evidence Act.
Relevancy and admissibility of an evidence is one thing and evidentiary value as to the proof of a particular fact in statute is another thing.
The School Register recording date of (birth of a) particular student qua a certificate issued therefrom by the school authority simpliciter has no evidentiary value at all.
This principle is supported from the decision reported in AIR 1941 Cal 41 and followed by the Supreme Court decision reported in 1988(3) Judgment Today at page 389.
It will appear from the aforesaid both the decisions that this principle has been settled.
Therefore, the only document which is sought to be relied upon by Miss Ghosh's client cannot be a sacrosanct document to prove the date of birth of the petitioner even by way of approximation.
The judgment relied on by Miss Ghosh is factually distinguishable in this case.
The facts stated in that judgment show that the petitioner therein never made any representation and/or made any declaration repeatedly as to his own date of birth.
In that case the authority concerned has relied on the basis of report of the medical examination.
In this case the authority concerned has relied on each and every aspect inclusive of the declaration and statement of the writ petitioner.
On the facts and circumstances, I hold that the decision of the respondent No. 1 asking the petitioner to retire is absolutely valid and lawful and there is no reason to interfere with the same.
It appears that several opportunities were given to the writ petitioner for rectification of the record as to his age in the service record.
He applied too and his prayer was rejected.
9.
Therefore, I do not find and merit in this writ petition and the same is dismissed without any order as to costs.
All interim orders, if any, stands vacated.
Petition dismissed.