TS Doabia, J - The appointment of respondent No. 3 as Principal, Physical Education College Naseem Bagh Ganderbal Srinagar, is being sought to be nullified.
A writ of quo warran to is sought.
The circumstances under which this petition has come to be filed in this court be noticed.
2.
Petitioner submits that he possessed degree in M.P.Ed.
He further submits that he has undergone diploma course from National Institute of Sports at Patiala.
He was initially appointed as Physical Training Instructor (Non- Gazetted) on 15th of December 1964.
He was appointed in Govt.
Degree College Kathua.
He submits that he has organised several National and International competitions in India and abroad.
He is said to have visited as many as fifteen countries in connection with sport events.
At the time of filing of writ petition, petitioner was holding the post of Instructor Physical Education (Selection Grade).
Petitioner submits that he is senior to respondent No. 3.
Respondent No. 3 came to be appointed against non-gazetted post on 19th of June 1969.
He was later on, as per the petitioner, appointed against gazetted cadre on 1st of November, 1971.
It is the case of the petitioner that he and respondent No. 3 are borne on common seniority list.
He submits that even though respondent No. 3 was junior to the petitioner, he has been given promotion to the post of Principal, Physical Education referred to above.
3.
Objections preferred by the State.
4.
It is submitted that the petitioner was appointed against gazetted post on 24th of May 1966.
It is also submitted that the petitioner was senior to the respondent No. 3 at that point of time.
It is also admitted that the petitioner as also the respondent No. 3 were working as Physical Instructor in the Higher Education Department and at that point of time, petitioner was senior to the respondent No. 3.
It is further stated that the respondent No. 3 was selected and appointed as lecturer in Physical Education Department Ganderbal Srinagar.
It is on the happening of this event that respondent No. 3 was delinked from the seniority list, where earlier petitioner and respondent No. 3 used to figure.
The precise stand taken by the respondent- State in para 4 of the preliminary objections is as under:-  "The respondent No. 3 applied to the J&K Public Service Commission for his appointment as lecturer in College of Physical Education Ganderbal on the basis of direct recruitment.
Accordingly the respondent No. 3 was selected and appointed as Lecturer in Physical Education Department Ganderbal Srinagar.
On his appointment as lecturer in Physical Education, the respondent No. 3 severed his connections with the higher education department and his name was delinked from the seniority list of Physical Training Instructors of the J&K State Degree Colleges.
Accordingly his seniority was fixed in College of Physical Education in the cadre of lecturers and thereafter the respondent No. 3 was promoted as Principal of the said College of Physical Education on the recommendation of the Public Service Commission being senior-most lecturer of the College.
It is submitted that the physical education college is under the administrative control of School Education Department through Director Youth Service and Sports.
The Government of Jammu and Kashmir Finance Department issued SRO 257 dated 30th of November 1994 by virtue of which an amendment was made in the Jammu and Kashmir Degree Colleges (UGC) pay rules 1991 and Government College of Physical Education was included in rule 4 by virtue of which the said college was brought under the purview of UGC grades.
Accordingly the respondent No. 3 was placed in the grade of 4500-7300 as he was holding the post of Principal, of the College on the date of issue of said SRO 257 dated 30.11.1994.
The allegations made by the petitioner against the respondents are not based upon the true facts of the case and are denied.
Under the Jammu and Kashmir Degree College (UGC pay) Rules 1991 the petitioner is not entitled to the grade of 4500-7300, therefore, the writ petition filed by the petitioner has no force and is liable to be rejected."
5.
Thus the stand taken is that so far as lecturers and physical training instructors are concerned they are governed by the Jammu and Kashmir Education Gazetted Recruitment Rule 1979.
Pay scale of college teachers and instructors are different.
This is sought to be elaborated by giving certain facts and figures.
These are being noticed again :  College Teachers  Post UGC Pay Scale 1.
Lecturer 2200-4000 2.
Lecturer (Sr.
Scale) 3000-5000 3.
Lecturer (Selection Scale) 3700-5700 4.
Reader 3700-5700 5.
Principal 4500-7300 Instructors in Physical Education  Post UGC Pay Scale 1.
Instructor in Physical Education 2200-4000 2.
Instructor in Physical Education Senior Scale 3000-5000 3.
Instructor in Physical Education Selection Scale 3700-5700 6.
From the above factual submissions it becomes apparent that respondent No. 3 stole a march over the petitioner when he came to be inducted into services, constituted under Jammu and Kashmir Direct Gazetted Recruitment Rules 1979.
This service is now governed by Jammu and Kashmir College Teachers Recruitment Rule 1995.
Respondent No. 3 came to be appointed against the above post when he was directly recruited.
If this be the position the grievance of the petitioner that he was senior has no significance.
The petitioner and respondent No. 3 became members of different service.
The point of view put across by the petitioner is found to be without any basis.
This petition is thus found to be without merit and is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.