HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was recruited as a Sapper in August, 1971, and thereafter promoted as a Havildar in 1992.
While on his annual leave in the year 1992, he contracted an eye ailment.
He reported sick to the Regimental Medical Officer of the Unit and was also treated at the Base Hospital Delhi and thereafter referred to the All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, for opinion and advice.
He was also operated upon in the Base Hospital and was subsequently discharged and put under medical category CEE (Permanent) for eye sight, on 761993, for a period of two years.
He was, however, boarded out on account of his low medical category without the grant of any disability pension, vide order Annexure P-1 dated 22nd December, 1994.
The petitioner thereafter preferred an appeal before the Government of India against the denial of disability pension and that too was rejected vide Annexure P-2, dated 29th March, 1996, on the ground that the medical reports and the opinion of the medical authorities had indicated that the disease that the petitioner had contracted was on account of a natural process and was not attributable to or aggravated by Military Service.
The orders Annexures P-1 and P-2 whereby the petitioner's claim has been declined have been impugned in the present writ petition.
The petitioner, in addition, also claims that he was entitled to the payment of disability cover envisaged under paragraph 2(f) of the Army Order 27/81 on the ground that he had been invalidated out of service with 40 per cent or more disability.
The respondents have denied both these claims and reliance has been placed on paragraph 173 of the Pension Regulations for the Army, Part-I, of 1961 for this purpose and it has been pleaded that the petitioner's disease was not attributable to or aggravated by Military Service and, as such, the claim had been rightly rejected.
The averments of the petitioner with regard to the Insurance Cover have also been denied and it has been pleaded that nothing was due to the petitioner on that account as well.
2.
Mr. RS Randhawa, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner, has raised two arguments before me.
He has first urged that paragraph 173 ibid when read along with Appendix II, and paragraphs 7(a), (b) and (c) of the Pension Regulations, it was apparent that as no note had been recorded at the time when the petitioner was enrolled in August, 1971, that he was suffering from any disease, the inference was that the said disease was attributable to Military Service.
He has also urged that though in paragraph 3 of the writ petition he had specifically mentioned that the disease had been aggravated by Military Service, no specific denial had been made by the respondents in their written statement.
3.
Mr. Tribhuwan Dahiya, the learned counsel appearing for the respondent- Union of India, has, however, placed on record an opinion of the Medical Adviser (Pension), dated July 1 1994, in which it had been opined on a review of the appeal that "ID was a constitutional disorder of inflammatory nature and that it could not be said to have been aggravated by service factors".
4.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties on this score, I am of the opinion that the petitioner's claim to the payment of disability pension has not been correctly appreciated.
It will be noted that paragraph 7(b) of Appendix-II, ibid, takes into account two situations; firstly that the disease which had led to an individual's discharge or death would ordinarily be deemed to have arisen in service if no note of it was made at the time of the individual's acceptance for military service and secondly, an exception is made that if medical opinion holds that the disease could not have been detected on medical examination prior to acceptance for service, the disease will not be deemed to have arisen during service.
Admittedly, in the petitioner's case no note has been made at the time when he had been enrolled into military service that he was suffering from the disease in question and from the written statement filed as also the record produced, no medical opinion is forthcoming to show that the disease could not have been detected on medical examination prior to acceptance for service.
The petitioner had also claimed in paragraph 2 of the writ petition (a fact which has not been specifically denied in the written statement) that the disease had been aggravated by an unsuccessful operation at the Base Hospital, New Delhi.
5.
This petition is accordingly disposed of with a direction that the claim for disability pension will be considered afresh by the Government of India after taking an independent opinion with regard to the disability suffered by the petitioner from a Medical Board within a period of six months from the date that a certified copy of this order is supplied to them.
The petitioner's claim to disability cover is, however, left open till after the decision on the claim to disability pension and should the petitioner feel aggrieved on this score later on, he will be at liberty to approach this Court once again.
Order accordingly.