HS Bedi, J - The petitioner, Om Parkash, was recruited in the Border Security Force on 13111978.
While posted in the BSF Headquarters, he was boarded out from service on medical grounds with effect from 31.8.1994 on the report that he had developed epilepsy and was, therefore, unfit for service.
The petitioner was accordingly given pension that was due on account of his length of service in terms of rule 38 of the Central Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1972, but his claim to the grant of extraordinary pension under rule 9 of the Central Civil Services (Extraordinary Pension) Rules, 1974 (hereinafter referred to as the Rules) has been denied.
It is against this order that the present writ partition has been filed.
The petitioner's claim is that he had contracted epilepsy during service and as his medical condition had got aggravated on account of the exigencies of service, he was entitled to the extraordinary pension as per the rules.
2.
Notice of motion was issued in this case and a reply has been filed on behalf of the respondents.
The stand taken is that the petitioner's disease had not been contracted or aggravated during military service and as such, the extraordinary pension was not payable to him.
It has been pleaded that the petitioner had, in fact, been suffering from Grandmal Epilepsy since December, 1983 and he had been put in low medical category `CEE(T)' with effect from 12.1.1984 and he was boarded out 10 years later after a thorough examination by the Medical Board as his condition had not improved.
The petitioner's contention that he had contracted epilepsy due to head injury that he had suffered during service has also been denied and it has been pointed out that he, in fact, was performing static duties only as he was a wireless operator.
3.
Mr. Rahul Rathore, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner, has referred to rules 3, 3(A) of the Rules and the guidelines under rule 3(A) to contend that as no disease had been noted at the time of the petitioner's enrolment in service, a presumption was to be drawn that the disease had occurred during service and in that eventuality, the extraordinary pension due under the rules was payable.
As against this, Mr. Rathee, the learned counsel for the Union of India has pointed out that under rule 3(A) as also under guideline 5, mentioned above, only a person who was suffering from a disease mentioned in Schedule 1-A of the Rules was entitled to extra-ordinary pension and as the petitioner did not suffer from any such disease, his claim to extra-ordinary pension was not justified.
4.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, I am of the opinion that this petition deserves to succeed.
Rule 3-A and guideline 5 are reproduced as under:-  "3A.
(1) (a) Disablement shall be accepted as due to Government service provided that it is certified that it is due to wound, injury or disease which - (i) is attributable to Government service, or (ii) existed before or arose during Government service and has been and remains aggravated thereby.
(b) Death shall be accepted as due to Government service provided it is certified that it was due to or hastened by -  (i) a wound, injury or disease which was attributable to Government service, or  (ii) the aggravation by Government service of a wound, injury or disease which existed before or arose during Government service.
(2) There shall be a causal connection between -  (a) disablement and Government service; and (b) death and Goverment service,  for attributability or aggravation to be conceded.
Guidelines in this regard are given in the Appendix which shall be treated as part and parcel of these rules."
Guideline 5  "5.
In respect of diseases, the following rules will be observed :-  (a) Cases, in which it is established that conditions of Government service did not determine or contribute to the onset of the disease but influenced the subsequent course of the disease, will fall for acceptance on the basis of aggravation.
(b) A disease which has led to an individual's discharge or death will ordinarily be deemed to have arisen in service if no note of it was made at the time of the individual acceptance for Government service.
However, if medical opinion holds, for reasons to be stated, that the disease could not have been detected on medical examination prior to acceptance for service, the disease will not be deemed to have arisen during service.
(c) If a disease is accepted as having arisen in service, it must also be established that the conditions of Government service determined or contributed to the onset of the disease and that the conditions were due to the circumstances on duty in Government Service.
(d) In considering whether a particular disease is due to Government service, it is necessary to relate the established facts in the aetiology of the disease and of its normal development, to the effect that conditions of service e.g. exposure, stress, climate etc., may have had on its manifestation.
Regard must also be had to the time factor (Also see Schedule 1-A)."
5.
It will be evident from a reading of the aforesaid rule/guideline that a claimant has to be suffering from a disease mentioned in Schedule 1-A.
Rule 3-A visualises two situations: (i) that the injury is attributable to Government service or existed and arose during Government service, and (ii) had been and remained aggravated thereby.
The question for determination is as to whether either of these two conditions are satisfied in the present case.
In this connection, I have examined the entire record which has been produced before me in Court by Mr. Rathee, learned counsel for the Union of India.
The confidential proceedings of the Medical Board reveal that the petitioner was suffering from Grand Mal Epilepsy and was unfit for further service.
In column 2, it finds clear mention that the disability had been contracted while in service though it could not be directly attributable to service conditions.
In column 6, however, it has been categorically stated that although the disease was not directly attributable to service, it had been aggravated by the stress and strain of service conditions.
While dealing with rule 14 of the Pension Regulation for the Army, 1961 (earlier rule 7), which is couched in exactly the same terms as guideline 5, it has been held in Mohan lal v. Union of India and others, 1995(5) SLR 183 : 1995(4) SCT 754 (P&H) and Union of India v. Shyam Lal Malhotra, 1995(6) SLR 405, that if a disease had not been noted at the time of the claimant's initial entry into service, the presumption which was, however, rebuttable was that the disease has been contracted during service.
The case of the petitioner is on a better footing as the Medical Board clearly opined that the petitioner's disease had been aggravated by the stress and strain of service conditions.
6.
Mr. Rathee, the learned counsel for the Union of India has, however, argued that even assuming that the disease that the petitioner had contracted i.e. Grand Mal Epilepsy, had been aggravated by military service or contracted during military service, the petitioner could only succeed in case the disease found mention in Schedule 1-A of the Rules.
In this connection, Mr. Rathore has pointed out that Schedule 1-A was not exhaustive of the diseases that could be contracted during service or be aggravated thereby but the petitioner's case nevertheless fell in category D, i.e., "diseases affected by training, marching, prolonged standing, etc." and entry No. 5 refers to Post Traumatic Epilepsy and other mental changes resulting from head injuries."
The use of the conjunction before the word "other " makes the list only illustrative and, to my mind, clearly visualises that there were other diseases which could be included though they did not find specific mention.
As stated above, the report of the Medical Board clearly reveals that the petitioner's condition had been aggravated by the stress and strain of service conditions.
I am, therefore, of the opinion that the petitioner would be entitled to extraordinary pension.
7.
The petitioner has also claimed that certain other amounts such as half pay allowance, the payment from the Benevolent Fund, the TA for the luggage had also not been paid to the petitioner so far.
The respondents in their reply have admitted that these amounts were due and it has been pointed out in the written statement that the TA had already been paid whereas the other two claims of the petitioner would be satisfied shortly.
Mr. Rathore has, however, urged that despite the claim of the respondents, the TA, for the luggage had not been paid.
As the claim has not been denied, it is apparent that the payments sought are due to the petitioner.
A direction is accordingly issued that the extraordinary pension, the Half Pay Allowance, the amounts due from the Benevolent Fund and the Travelling Allowance, if not already paid, shall be paid to the petitioner within a period of two months from the date that a certified copy of this judgment is supplied to the respondents.
8.
This petition is allowed in the above terms.
There will be no order to costs.
Petition allowed.