Sat Pal, J. - In this writ petition, the petitioner has prayed for a direction to the respondents for quashing Annexure P-15 and P-16 which are the orders of promotion of respondents No. 5 and 6 in the cadre of Ziledar.
The petitioner has also sought further relief that the respondents be directed to promote the petitioner over and above respondents No. 5 and 6.
2.
Mr. Joshi, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner submits that the point raised in this writ petition is covered by a Division Bench judgment of this Court dated 15.12.97 rendered in CWP No. 16861 of 1996 Hari Krishan ARC V State of Haryana and others.
3.
I have heard the learned counsel of the parties and have perused the records and also the Division Bench judgment in the case of Hari Krishan (supra).
In the case of Hari Krishan (supra) the Division Bench has quashed the order of promotion of Bhan Singh and Ram Dhan who are respondents No. 5 and 6 in the present writ petition.
In view of this, the relief sought in this writ petition for quashing order of promotion of said Bhan Singh and Ram Dhan has been rendered infructuous.
4.
In the case of Hari Krishan (supra) it was further held that the petitioner in that case was senior to the above-mentioned two persons and as such the official respondents were directed to consider the case of the petitioner for promotion with effect from the date when any of his juniors was promoted.
5.
It is not disputed that the petitioner in this case also was senior to the respondents No. 5 and 6 and the promotion of the respondents No. 5 and 6 as stated hereinabove has already been quashed.
In view of this, this writ petition is disposed of with a direction to the official respondents to consider the case of the petitioner for promotion to the post of Ziledar with effect from the date when any of his juniors was promoted, if the petitioner is otherwise found suitable for promotion to the Post of Ziledar.
Let these directions be carried out within a period of three months.
With this direction the writ petition stands disposed of.
The parties are left to bear their own costs.