THB Chalapathi, J (Oral) - By this judgment, three writ petitions - CWP No. 9317 of 1995, CWP 5319 of 1994 and CWP No. 13115 of 1995 - are proposed to be disposed of together as the facts are similar in all the cases.
2.
For the sake of facts, CWP 9317 of 1995 (Smt. Raj Kaur Yadav) may be adverted to.
3.
The petitioners, in these cases, were selected and appointed as lecturers in the year 1992 in the subjects of Commerce, History, Geography, Pol.
Science and Home Sciences by the Public Girls College, Rewari (Haryana).
On their appointment, the petitioners joined as lecturers in the college some time in November/December 1992.
Though they are working as lecturers and though the management is taking their services as lecturers in the various subjects mentioned above they have not been paid the salary right from the inception till today.
That necessitated the petitioners to approach this court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India for a direction to the respondents to pay their salary.
It is the further case of the petitioners that the college is an aided college and 90% of the salary payable to the lecturers ought to be granted as grant-in-aid by the Government to the management.
The management has not been paying salary to the petitioners on the ground that they have not received the grant-in-aid.
It is also averred that the Director, Higher Education Haryana is the authority to sanction the posts and he has taken a decision to accord the sanction to these posts but he submitted his proposal to the Govt. for according the sanction which, according to the petitioners, is not necessary.
4.
It is the case of the Government that the courses in the subjects of Commerce, History, Geography, Pol.
Science and Home Sciences have been introduced by the college and the posts have not been sanctioned and, therefore, the Govt. need not give the grant-in-aid to the management as against the unsanctioned posts and since the posts on which the petitioners are working remained unsanctioned, the management is not entitled to the grant-in-aid.
While it is the contention of the management that the college which is an aided college cannot charge any tuition fee from the girl students studying in Govt. and affiliated colleges up to the Graduation level, the college can only be run by the grant-in-aid.
It is further averred that the college can run only on the grant-in-aid and it will not be possible for the management to pay the salary to the staff without grant-in-aid.
5.
Admittedly, the management recruited the petitioners as lecturers in various subjects mentioned above in the year 1992 and the petitioners joined the services of the college in November/December, 1992.
The petitioners were selected by a selection committee which consisted of the representatives of the Vice Chancellor, Maharishi Dayanand University (hereinafter referred to as MD University) and the representative of the Director Higher Education and the subject expert apart from the President of the management and the Principal of the College concerned.
Thus, it is clear that the selection has been made on the basis of interview and in accordance with the procedure.
Therefore, no fault can be found with the selection of the petitioners as lecturers in the college.
The management after selecting and appointing the petitioners as lecturers in the college approached the Govt. in the year 1993 for sanctioning the posts against which they were recruited vide Annexure P9 dated 9101993.
It is clearly mentioned in the reply filed by the Director, Higher Education, that on the letter of management dated 9101993 (Annexure P9) for sanctioning the posts mentioned therein, a proposal was sent to the Govt. for the sanction of posts for this college.
But according to the scheme of the grant-in-aid it appears that it is the Director, Higher Education alone who is entitled to sanction the posts in the affiliated colleges.
It is clear from Memo No. 22/2/85-Edu1(2) dated 141986 from the Commissioner & Secretary to the Govt. Haryana, Education Department, addressed to the Director Higher Education that the grant will be payable against the posts which have been sanctioned by the Director, Higher Education.
In that letter which is filed along with the reply of the writ petition as Annexure R-1, it is stated that no grant will be payable against the posts which have not been sanctioned by the Director.
It means that the sanction has to be accorded only by the Director, Higher Education in which case there is no necessity for the Director, Higher Education to refer the matter to the Government for its sanction.
The recommendation itself can be taken as an approval or sanction of the posts which have been created by the management.
The Director, Higher Education, also deputed his nominee to participate in the interview for the selection of the lecturers in which the petitioners have been selected.
Thus, it is clear that the Director, Higher Education, is very well aware of the fact that the management was recruiting the lecturers in the subjects of commerce, history, geography, pol.
science and home sciences.
Thus, it can be deemed that the sanction has been duly accorded to the creation of posts.
Further, from the averments in the reply, it is clear that the Director, Higher Education, has concluded that necessary sanction of these posts of lecturers has to be accorded.
In these circumstances, it is not open to the Government to deny the release of grant-in-aid to the management.
The petitioners have been working in the college since 1992 and have not been paid anything towards their salary for the last six years.
It is quite unjust on the part of the management as well as the govt. to deny the salary to the lecturers who have been duly selected and appointed in accordance with the rules.
It is not the case of the Government that the petitioners have been selected by any back door entry.
There is also no denial of the fact that the posts have been created in accordance with the norms fixed by the MDU to which this college in question has been affiliated.
No objection has been taken either by the University or the Government when the new courses in the subjects referred to above have been introduced in the college.
Neither the Director, Higher Education, nor the University can say that the new courses have been introduced without their knowledge since the selection has been made in the presence of the nominees of the Director, Higher Education, and also the University in the selection committee.
In these circumstances, I am of the opinion that the petitioners are entitled to the salary with all allowances admissible in accordance with the rules.
Accordingly I direct the management to pay the salary to the petitioners with all admissible allowances within a period of four months from today.
The Government is directed to release the grant-in-aid to this college in respect of the salary payable to the petitioners within four months.
Petition allowed.