THB Chalapathi, J - The petitioner was appointed as a Lecturer at Hindu College, Amritsar on 1671963 and he worked in that College upto 971964.
Thereafter he left the said college and joined DAV College as Lecturer in Physics on 1071964.
One BL Seth who was lecturer in Physics was appointed in DAV College on 1821964 while Shri KK Gupta was appointed in DAV College as Lecturer in Physics on 16101963.
In the seniority list maintained by the DAV College, Sarvshri BL Seth and KK Gupta were shown as senior to the petitioner.
2.
In this writ petition, the petitioner is seeking the relief of issuance of a writ of certiorari to quash the seniority list circulated by the 3rd respondent on 2711988 and also issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the release of selection grade to the petitioner as according to the petitioner, if his seniority is fixed over and above Shri BL Seth and KK Gupta, he will be among the first 20 persons on the basis of the correct seniority.
Though in the main writ petition, the petitioner has not impleaded BL Seth and KK Gupta, they got themselves impleaded as respondents No. 4 and 5 in this writ petition.
The DAV College, Amritsar, which is respondent No. 2 filed a written statement saying that Sarvshri BL Seth and KK Gupta joined the DAV College much prior to the petitioner's joining the same and therefore, they are rightly treated as seniors to the petitioner.
It is further averred that the petitioner was confirmed as Lecturer only on 1071965 whereas BL Seth and KK Gupta were confirmed as Lecturers on 1821965 and 6.10.1964 respectively.
Further according to the respondents, the petitioner cannot take advantage of his one year service rendered by him in Hindu College, Amritsar.
The appointment in the DAV College, Amritsar is a fresh appointment and therefore his seniority was rightly fixed according to the date of his joining in the DAV College and therefore the petitioner is not entitled to any of the reliefs prayed for in the writ petition.
Similar contentions have been raised by private respondents 4 and 5.
3.
The only point that is to be considered in this writ petition is whether the petitioner can take advantage of the service rendered by him in Hindu College, Amritsar prior to joining the DAV College, Amritsar.
It is no doubt true that both the Colleges are aided Colleges.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner placed much reliance on the decision of this Court in CWP No. 17354 of 1994.
There the claim of the petitioners therein was for the grant of benefit of past service rendered by them in the various colleges in the State of Punjab and for the grant of senior/selection grade with all consequential benefits.
That decision does not deal with the question of fixing the seniority of lecturers inter se working in the colleges.
The question whether a person who joined later in point of time after resigning the service in other college can claim a march over and above the persons who are already working in that College, has not come up for consideration in that case.
The inter se seniority of the Lecturers working in the College was not in issue in the decision relied upon.
Same is the case with the decision in CWP No. 8030 of 1976.
Therefore, I am not able to place any reliance on the aforesaid decisions.
I am of the opinion that the case is fully governed by the rules governing the service conditions of the lecturers appointed in DAV College.
Under the rules, governing the conditions of service, the seniority in a scale will be determined by length of service from the date of confirmation in the College.
The petitioner was admittedly appointed in the year 1964 and he was confirmed on 1071965 whereas Sarvshri BL Seth and KK Gupta were confirmed on 1821965 and 16.10.1964 respectively.
Further under the rules governing the appointment in DAV College, "a Teacher transferred from one College to another at his own request will take seniority from the date he joins the College to which he has been transferred.
However, seniority of a Teacher transferred from one College to another at the instance of the DAV College Managing Committee will be protected."
5.
There is no dispute of the fact that the 2nd respondent is running several Colleges and even a Teacher working in one College has been transferred on his own request to another College, he has to take the seniority from the date he joins the College to which he has been transferred.
When that is the case of the Teachers working under same Management in different Colleges that a newly appointed person, who resigned the job in the earlier College and joins in another institution, cannot claim seniority over and above the persons already working in the College.
It is quite unjust to disturb their seniority because of a new entrant who joined the College afresh after serving some other College and left his service for some reason or the other.
Suppose a person, who has worked in another College having aware of some contemplated disciplinary proceedings against him, resigns in that College and joins in other College, can it be said to be just to give him the benefit of length of service which he rendered in that College ?
Likewise a person who was getting a lower scale of pay in one College resigns his job for better prospects and joins some other College, can it be said to be just to disturb the seniority of the person, who is already working in the other College.
As it is said, a rolling stone will gather no moss.
So is the case of the petitioner.
Further as is evident from Annexure R-2/2, the petitioner was appointed as a Lecturer in Physics on a salary of Rs. 210/- plus D.A.
on probation for a period of one year only, whereas the lecturers who are already working in DAV College are getting an initial pay of more than Rs. 210/-.
The fact that the petitioner has been granted an initial pay of Rs. 230/- by Annexure R-2/3 does not make him senior to the persons already working in the College.
For the foregoing reasons, I am of the view that the petitioner cannot get any benefit of his previous service rendered by him in Hindu College, Amritsar.
The result is, the writ petition fails and is, accordingly, dismissed.
No order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.