HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner, a student of BA IIIrd year, appeared in the BA I (Compartment) Examination in English under Roll No. 102253 conducted by the respondent-University in April, 1997.
Dimple Slonia, another girl student taking the same examination under Roll No. 102254 was seated just behind her in the Examination Hall.
According to the petitioner, no incident of any kind had taken place on 3rd April, 1997 involving her and the Invegitation Staff, though some such incident had happened involving Dimple Slonia, and a report to that effect was also made to the Centre Superintendent respondent No. 4 by Smt. Pritbha Singla-respondent No. 3, the Supervisor of the Examination.
A copy of that report has been appended as Annexure R-1/1 with the written statement filed by the respondent University.
The petitioner's case further is that when the result of BA I (Compartment) examination was declared in June 1997, she found that her result was not forthcoming as proceedings for an unfair means case had been initiated against her.
On making enquiry, the petitioner obtained information that the UMC pertained to her misbehaviour with Pritbha Singla-respondent No. 3 the Supervisor of the Examination on 341997 as a report Annexure R-1/2 dated 541997 had been conveyed to the University by the said respondent substituting her name in place of Dimple Slonia as being the guilty one.
The petitioner appeared before the Unfair Means Committee (hereinafter called the Committee) on 2271997 to ascertain the details with regard to the allegations that had been levelled and she was informed about the report that had been made against her.
The petitioner, however, brought to the notice of the Committee that no incident involving her and the Supervisor had in fact taken place and the incident that had happened pertained to Dimple Slonia taking the examination under Roll No. 102254.
The case of the petitioner is that though an assurance was held out by the Committee that an independent enquiry would be held into the matter, yet no such course was adopted and vide letter dated 3091997.
Annexure R-1/3 the Committee found the petitioner guilty of misconduct at the time of the examination and decided to cancel the entire examination in which she had appeared in April, 1997 and also debarring her from appearing in any University Examination for a period of one year ie up to and including the Examination of April, 1998.
It is this action of the respondent-University that has been challenged in the present proceedings.
2.
Notice of mention was issued in the case and a reply has been filed on behalf of the University-respondent Nos. 1 and 2 which has been adopted by respondent No. 3 and 4.
The stand taken by the respondents is that the incident involving the petitioner had taken place on 3rd April, 1997 but a report had erroneously been made against Dimple Slonia vide Annexure R-1/1 dated 3rd April, 1997 and after the Supervisor-respondent No. 3 found that a mistake had been committed, she had submitted a supplementary report Annexure R-1/2 dated 541997 pointing out that the petitioner and not Dimple Slonia was the guilty one.
The respondents have, accordingly, pleaded that the petitioner was liable to be punished under sub-clause (e) of Clause 4 of the Ordinance for punishment for the use of Unfair Means and as such, the order passed against the petitioner was fully justified.
3.
Mr. RK Arora, the learned counsel for the petitioner has urged that respondent No. 3 in her report Annexure R-1/1 had clearly reported that Dimple Slonia had been guilty of misconduct/misbehaviour but in the report Annexure R-1/2 by naming the petitioner, a complete somersault had been made and for the first time, it had been suggested that in addition to the misbehaviour, an attempt to cheat had also been made by the petitioner.
He has then referred to Annexure-R-1/4, a written statement given by respondent No. 3 to the committee on 2691997 wherein the allegations of misbehaviour and also an attempt to cheat had also been levelled.
Mr. Arora's case, therefore, is that for reasons not known, respondent No. 3 had shown an undue interest in absolving Dimple Slonia and had sought to substitute the petitioner instead.
4.
The learned counsel for the respondents have, however, controverted Mr. Arora's arguments pointing out that no allegations of mala fide had been made against any one of the supervisory staff and that the mistake that respondent No. 3 had committed, had been rectified by her and as such no fault could be found with the action taken by her.
5.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the record with their assistance.
6.
It will be seen that action has been taken against the petitioner under sub-clause (e) of Clause 4 of the Ordinance mentioned above which is reproduced below :-  "Refusing to obey the Centre Superintendent or any other member of the Supervisory staff, inspecting staff or creating disturbance of any kind during the examination hall or threatening or assaulting any officer connected with the examination, any time during, before or after the examination".
7.
This clause clearly postulates that punishment is to be inflicted on account of misbehaviour in the examination hall at any time, during, before or after the examination and does not pertain to a case of cheating whatsoever.
In the allegations that had been levelled by the supervisor respondent No. 3, a clear attempt has been made to implicate the petitioner in a case of cheating or an attempt to cheat as well.
To my mind, this part of the story has not been accepted even by the UMC as no charge was framed on those allegations and as such, the stand of respondent No. 3 to that extent is belied by the University itself.
It is also apparent from the documents that have come on record that a serious dispute with regard to the identity of the student involved has been raised.
It is the case of respondent No. 3 that she had taken away Dimple Slonia's paper at the time of the alleged misconduct and the same had been sent to the University in a separate sealed cover.
To my mind, as this act was contemporaneous with the alleged misbehaviour of the student concerned, there could be no occasion for her to have made a mistake as to the identity of the delinquent student.
The respondent's counsel have argued that respondent No. 3 in her letter Annexure R-1/2 dated 541997 had clearly stated that a mistake had been committed by her in reporting on Dimple Slonia and as this communication had also been promptly sent, this version should be accepted.
To my mind, this argument of the learned counsel, in fact, goes against them for the reasons that if respondent No. 3 had noticed the mistake on 341997, there was no need for her to wait for two days ie uptil 541997 to despatch the letter Annexure R-1/2 absolving Dimple Slonia and implicating the petitioner.
It is now well settled that proceedings before an Unfair Means Committee have to be taken to be quasi-criminal in character and though the onus does not rest as heavily on the University as it does on the prosecution in a criminal trial, yet in case of doubt, the benefit must nonetheless accrue to the student.
8.
Mr. Arora has further urged that Ordinance 13 of the University visualised that in case a candidate had denied the allegations that had been levelled against him/her, the committee was bound to hold an enquiry and to fix a date, time and place for the purpose and to give a seven days clear notice to the candidate by registered post so as to enable him to prepare and project his case.
it has been pointed out that no such notice was ever issued and this averment has been made in paragraph 11 of the petition.
In their reply to the aforesaid paragraph, the respondents have made a bare denial, but a reference has been made to the submissions made in paras 3 and 4 of the preliminary submissions in which it has been pleaded that the provisions of the Ordinance had been complied with.
The record has also been produced before me today in Court to argue that the petitioner had, in fact, appeared before the Committee on 2271997.
9.
It is conceded by Mr. Gupta, the learned counsel appearing for the University that no registered notice had been issued to the petitioner as provided by Ordinance 13.
In the replication filed by the petitioner, the allegations made in para 11 of the writ petition have been reiterated and it has been pointed out that the petitioner had appeared on 2271997 not in response to any notice issued by the University but on her own volition so as to check up as to why her result had been withheld.
10.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the opinion that the petitioner's case has merit on this score as well.
It stands conceded that no notice had been given to the petitioner as provided by Ordinance 13.
Her appearance before the Committee on 2271997 was, therefore, not in response to any notice, but only to find out as to why her result had not been declared.
Obviously, at this stage, the petitioner had no knowledge of the proceeding that had been initiated and as such, she could not adequately answer the charge that had been made against her.
It is also admitted that no enquiry had been initiated against the petitioner and that even respondent No. 3 had been called before the Committee in the petitioner's absence and a supplementary statement Annexure R1/4 dated 2691997 had been taken from her.
It is, therefore, obvious that the petitioner had not been given a chance to defend herself, and for this additional reason as well, the action taken against her cannot be justified.
11.
For the reasons recorded above, this petition succeeds, the order Annexure R1/3 is quashed and a direction is issued that the petitioner's result be declared forthwith.
Petition allowed.