VK Bali, J (Oral) - All India SC/ST LIC Employees Welfare Association (Regd.)
through present petition filed by it under Article 226 of the Constitution of India seeks issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari so as to quash the selection of respondents No. 5 to 34 for the post of Higher Grade Assistant (Administration) in Jalandhar Division (Annexure P-6) as also writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to give quota as per the roster point as well as the instructions issued by the respondent- department and thereby to give nine vacancies to the reserved categories which fall to the category of scheduled castes and scheduled tribes.
2.
Brief facts of the case reveal that department issued a model roster showing the points to be reserved for SC/ST and OBC in 100 point roster wherein recruitment is made on local or regional basis.
It is the case of the petitioners that the petitioner-association falls within the State of Punjab and different roster points are provided for different States and on 5111979 respondent-department issued a circular letter wherein it was mentioned that now the roster/register of reservation was to be maintained.
The petitioner- association prepared list of posts of Higher Grade Assistants (Administration) to substantiate that certain reserved posts were being given to the general category.
On 16.9.1992 respondent-department issued yet another letter clarifying the vacancies meant for reserved categories.
Respondent No. 4 announced the vacancies to be filled by way of promotion of Higher Grade Assistants (Administration) on 2691997 and then issued notification mentioning therein promotion to the cadre of Higher Grade Assistants (Administration) and other posts.
Inasmuch as even on petitioner's request number of members of petitioner-association were being not promoted, representation was addressed to respondent No. 4 on 4.10.1997.
Despite that respondents declared result on 17101997 whereby petitioner-association was not given due share.
This constrained petitioner-association to make yet another representation dated 18101997 but when the same also brought no tangible results the present writ petition was filed.
3.
Pursuant to notice issued by this Court respondents 2 to 4 entered defence and filed written statement.
In paragraph 3 of the Preliminary Objections, it has been averred that in exercise of powers vested under Regulation 5 of the L.I.C.
of India (Promotion) Regulations 1976, the Corporation issued instructions on September 13, 1976 providing for reservations for SC/ST employees in promotions to be made in various cadres in Class III and Class IV posts in the Corporation.
In accordance with Clause 1(a) of these instructions, there has to be reservation of 15% and 7-1/2% for SC and ST candidates respectively of the posts to be filled by promotion during any promotion year.
Clause 4(a) provides that to give effect to the reservation, there shall be maintained a 40-point roster in respect of each cadre and a model roster of 40 points to be followed.
Clause 5(b) provides that reservation for SC/ST shall for all purposes, be treated as separately and only exception to this rule is permissible when the unfilled reserved vacancies for one community have been carried forward to three promotion years and still remain unfilled and in that case such vacancies can be filled by employees belonging to other categories i.e. SC or ST as the case may be if the employees belonging to other categories are eligible and available.
A copy of Instructions dated 13.9.1976 has been annexed as Annexure R-1.
While giving the position of vacancies it has further been pleaded that in the present case, 36 vacancies for promotion to the posts of HGAs were notified by the competent authority and as per 40-point roster maintained, there were 5 vacancies reserved for SC and 3 vacancies for ST besides one ST vacancy of 1994-95 which had been carried forward, but one carried forward vacancy of ST was converted into SC as it remained unfilled even in third promotion year thereby increasing number of SC vacancies to 6.
Six SC candidates were selected for promotion.
3 ST vacancies which remained unfilled have been carried forward to next promotion year.
It is further the case of the respondents that 100-point roster referred to by the petitioner in the writ petition is applicable for direct recruitment and not for promotions for which there is separate reservations and roster provided in the Corporation.
The petitioner has wrongly included ST vacancies in SC vacancies.
As per instructions, reservations for SC and ST for all purposes have to be treated separately and ST vacancies can be converted into SC vacancies only if these remained unfilled for three promotion years.
Thus, promotion to reserved posts have been made in accordance with rules.
It has also been averred that there is no irregularity or illegality regarding reservation for SC/ST candidates or there is any loss of vacancies to SC/ST to the extent of 32 since 1984.
Every year, carried forward vacancies pertaining to ST are converted into SC in third promotion year.
If the number of candidates available for SC/ST are more than the reservation and they are found suitable for promotion on the basis of merit, number of promotions to reserved candidates are more than number of reservations.
During 1991-94 there were 7 posts available for SC candidates and it was increased to 9 by interchange of two ST vacancies in the third year but number of promotions from SC category was 11 reducing number of promotions from general category by two.
Therefore, all the carried forward vacancies of ST upto 1994-95 have been converted to SC and have been filled from SC candidates.
During promotion year 1997-98 also, one carried forward vacancy of ST for 1994-95 was converted into SC thereby increasing number of SC vacancies from 5 to 6.
4.
We have heard the learned counsel representing the parties.
There appears to be basic fallacy in the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners.
For reserved vacancies as per the averments made out in the petition, there is a roster of 100 points whereas it is the positive stand of the respondents that in so far as initial appointment is concerned, the roster is of 100 points but in so far as promotions are concerned, it is 40 points roster.
If the reserved category vacancies are worked out according to 40- point roster, we are convinced from the reading of the written statement that there is no backlog of reserved category vacancies.
In fact, one post in excess is there for reserved category.
Dismissed.