Dalveer Bhandari, J - The petitioner has preferred this writ petition with the prayer that the appointment of respondent No. 4 Shri S.K.
Ghosh as Chairman and Managing Director of BHALCO, w.e.f.
14.2.1997 be quashed.
2.
The petitioner has also prayed that respondent No. 4 be directed not to disturb the functioning of the petitioner as Director (Personnel) and not to take away any administrative functions which she was holding as Director (Personnel).
An advance copy of the writ petition was given to the respondents and in pursuance to that, Dr. AM Singhvi, learned Additional Solicitor General appeared for the respondents.
He pointed out that the petitioner had earlier preferred a writ petition bearing No. 716/97 with the prayers :- (i) that the respondents be directed to consider the case of the petitioner for appointment as Chairman-cum-Managing Director, (ii) and direct the respondents to hold fresh interviews for the selection for the post of Chairman-cum-Managing Director of BHALCO.
3.
Dr. Shinghvi pointed out that the earlier petition was heard at length, and the petitioner was represented by Shri Mukul Rohtagi, Senior Advocate and Mr. Ramesh Babu, Advocate and after arguing the petition for quite some time, Mr. Rohtagi, learned counsel who appeared for the petitioner withdrew the writ petition and the writ petition was dismissed as withdrawn.
4.
Dr. Singhvi submitted that the present writ petition in substance is seeking the same relief.
He also pointed out that the earlier petition was argued at length and when the court was about to dismiss the petition in limine, at that stage, the learned counsel for the petitioner prayed that the petitioner be permitted to withdraw the petition.
In these circumstances, now the petitioner cannot be permitted to reagitate the same issues in this petition.
He also submitted that this petition is a total abuse of the process of law.
5.
I do not find any substance in the prayers of this writ petition.
However, in view of my judgment dated 771997 in writ petition No. 554 of 1997, nothing really survives in this petition.
This writ petition is accordingly rejected.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.