Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioners are working as Chowkidars in the Public Works Department, Building and Roads Branch, Haryana.
They made a claim for the regularisation of their services.
Having failed to get the requisite relief, they have approached this Court with a prayer for the issue of a writ of Mandamus directing the respondents to do the needful.
2.
The respondents have filed a written statement.
It has been averred that the petitioners are not eligible for the regularisation of their services.
Is it so ?
3.
According to the instructions issued by the State Government vide letters dated March 7, 1996 and March 18, 1996, an employee is entitled to the regularisation of the service provided he fulfils the following three conditions :-  1.
He should have completed three years or more of continuous service on January 31, 1996.
2.
He should have worked for 240 days in each year.
3.
The break in service should not be more than 30 days in any year and he should be in service on January 31, 1996.
4.
In the present case, each one of the petitioners has been in continuous service since January 1, 1993.
They have also completed 240 days of service in each of the years.
In fact, they have worked for much longer periods.
They were in service even in the month of January 1996.
In fact, each one of them had worked for 26 days in the month of January 1996.
However, their claim for regularisation is being contested on the ground that they had not actually worked on January 31, 1996.
5.
The short question that arises for consideration is: Have the respondents acted fairly in taking the view that the petitioners are not entitled to the regularisation of their services ?
6.
It is, undoubtedly, correct that the employer has the right to lay down the conditions which a candidate must fulfil before the becomes entitled to be treated as a regular employee.
However, the conditions cannot be arbitrary and unfair.
The prescribed conditions must have a reasonable nexus with the object of choosing suitable persons for regularisation.
The conditions regarding the minimum period of service or the number of days for which he must serve in each year and even regarding the break are certainly reasonable and valid.
However, the view as taken by the respondents that the employee should be present in office on January 31, 1996 failing which his services shall not be regularised does not appear to be correct.
Firstly, the requirement of the instructions is that the employee should be in service on January 31, 1996 and not that he should be physically present in office on that date.
In the present case, it is the admitted position that each of the petitioners was in the employment of the respondents in January 1996.
The only objection against them as mentioned in the written statement is that they were not present in the office on January 31, 1996.
This is not the requirement of the instructions as issued by the State Government.
Secondly, it is the admitted position that the petitioners had not only worked for 26 days in the month of January 1996 but are continuing in service till now.
Thus, the mere fact that they were not present in the office on January 31, 1996 does not indicate that they had ceased to be in service.
In fact, it is clearly admitted on behalf of the respondents that the relationship of employer and employee had continued even after January 1996.
Thirdly, there is nothing so sacrosanct about the presence of an employee in the office on a particular date.
The requirement of the instructions is that he should have served for three years or more and for the required number of days in each year.
The break should not be more than 30 days.
When the instructions are read cumulatively, it cannot be said that there is any object or rational principle which may warrant that the employee should be present in office on January 31, 1996.
7.
In view of the above, we are of the view that the action of the respondents in treating the petitioners as ineligible for regularisation on the ground that they were not present in the office on January 31, 1996 is contrary to the instructions and cannot be sustained.
The respondents are directed to consider the claim of the petitioners in accordance with the instructions within two months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
It should not be rejected on the ground that they were not present in the office on January 31, 1996.
A copy of the order passed by the respondents shall be conveyed to the petitioners.
In the circumstances, no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.