Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - Is the action of the Respondent-Punjab State Electricity Board in excluding Assistant Linemen and Sub Station Attendants from appointment to the posts of Junior Engineer-Grade-II (Electrical) violative of Article 16 of the Constitution ?
This is the short question that arises for consideration in these six Letters Patent Appeals.
The learned Single Judge having answered this question in the negative, the writ petitioners have filed these appeals.
A few facts as referred to by the counsel for the appellants in LPA No. 331 of 1996 may be briefly noticed.
2.
On May 2, 1994, the Punjab State Electricity Board invited applications for the posts of Junior Engineers-Grade-II (Electrical).
Persons who possessed the prescribed qualifications and had worked for atleast five years or more as Lineman, were eligible.
Certain other categories of employees were also entitled to compete.
On June 14, 1994, the Board issued another advertisement.
The qualifications were marginally modified.
The appellants who were working as Assistant Linemen or Sub Station Attendants, filed writ petitions with the grievance that the action of the Board in excluding them from consideration was illegal and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
They pray that the respondents be directed to consider them for appointment.
3.
The Board contested the claim and contended that only such categories of employees as had no avenue of promotion, were being considered for appointment to the posts of Junior Engineers-Grade II.
The Assistant Linemen were eligible for promotion to the posts of Linemen.
The Sub Station Attendants had an avenue of promotion to the posts of Sub Station Operators.
Thus, they had been rightly excluded from the zone of consideration for appointment to the pasts of Junior Engineers-Grade II.
The learned Single Judge having negatived the challenge, the appellants have filed these appeals.
4.
Mr. Viney Mittal, counsel for the appellants has contended that there is no rational basis for excluding the cadre of Assistant Linemen while persons who are working as mere Meter Readers have been made eligible for appointment to the posts of Junior Engineers.
Learned counsel has contended that the action is violative of Article 16 of the Constitution.
The claim made on behalf of the appellants has been controverted by the counsel for the respondents.
5.
Admittedly, the Assistant Linemen are eligible for promotion to the posts of Linemen.
Initially, even Meter Readers were eligible for promotion to the posts of Meter Inspectors.
It has also not been disputed that the posts of Meter Inspectors and Junior Engineers were inter-changeable.
In the year 1987, the Board had taken a decision to fill up the posts of Junior Engineers from amongst the Linemen.
This decision was challenged.
It was upheld by a Division Bench of this Court in Mohinder Pal Singh v. The Punjab State Electricity Board, 1994(2) SLR 438 : 1994(4) SCT 138.
Thereafter the Board decided not to fill up the posts of Meter Inspectors.
As a result, Meter Readers were left with no avenue of promotion.
It was in this situation that the Board took a conscious decision to make the Meter Readers eligible for competing for direct recruitment to the posts of Junior Engineers-Grade II.
It is undoubtedly correct that the appellants possess the academic qualifications for appointment to the posts of Junior Engineers.
However, those amongst the appellants who are working as Assistant Lineman have an avenue of promotion to the posts of Lineman.
Others who are working as Sub Station Attendants are entitled to be considered for promotion to the posts of Sub Station Operators.
Thereafter, they have further avenues of promotion.
It is in this situation that the Board had confined the recruitment to the posts of Junior Engineers to the category of Linemen which is certainly higher than those of the Assistant Linemen and Meter Readers who have no avenue of promotion.
Similar was the position in respect of Junior Draftsmen.
6.
There is another aspect of the matter.
In pursuance of the advertisement which had been issued in June 1994, about 100 persons were selected and appointed.
They have been holding these posts.
They are not parties in these cases.
At this stage, any interference with the advertisement would entail the consequence of affecting the rights of persons who are not parties in these cases.
Still further, persons who have been duly selected and appointed would be adversely affected for no fault of theirs.
7.
Since the appellants had definite avenues of promotion and the Board had limited the direct recruitment to such members of the service as formed distinct classes and did not have further avenues of promotion, its action was neither arbitrary nor violative of Article 16 of the Constitution.
The view taken by the learned Single Judge is correct and, thus, calls for no interference.
8.
It has been pointed out on behalf of the appellants that the prescription of period of five years' experience has no rational relationship with the requirement of the post.
On a perusal of the advertisement, we find that the qualification of a Diploma in Engineering with minimum experience of five years on the post of Lineman is one of the essential qualifications.
This qualification is not violative of any rule.
It does not violate any executive order.
The qualification is not unreasonable.
Thus, it cannot be said that the Board has erred in laying down an experience of five years as an essential condition of eligibility.
9.
It also deserves mention that prior to June 1997, there were no statutory rules regulating the recruitment to the posts of Junior Engineers, Grade-II.
However, it has been stated on behalf of the Board that these rules were duly promulgated and have come into force w.e.f.
July 7, 1997.
The uncertainty which prevailed on account of issue of different executive orders from time to time is no longer in existence.
Persons are now considered for promotion or appointment in accordance with the statutory rules.
10.
No other point has been raised.
11.
Taking the totality of circumstances into consideration, we find no merit in any of these appeals.
These are, consequently, dismissed.
However, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.