HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioners Mohd.
Sharif joined the respondent- Institute in August, 1993 in the Certificate Course for Servicing and Maintenance of Medical Instrumentation and completed the same in 1995.
He was, thereafter, promoted to the Diploma Course in Instrumentation and Process Control and has since completed this course as well.
The Institute issued a brochure for admissions to the Certificate, diploma and degree programmes, for the year 1997.
It was provided therein that there would be vertical mobility of 50% of the students from the Certificate to the diploma and thereafter, from the diploma to degree course on the conditions laid down.
The Institute also issued a circular dated 471997 Annexure P-1 to the petition in which it was pointed out that the students who were seeking promotion by vertical mobility from the certificate to the diploma course from the 1995 batch could avail the examination chance for Trimester-I but if the students of Diploma- 1995 (Direct) had cleared the first supplementary examination of the diploma course 1995 in the third chance, they would not be eligible to appear now.
It is the petitioners's case that respondent 4 Raman Deep Kaur and respondent 5 Vishnu Goel had cleared the aforesaid trimester in the third chance, with the result that they were not eligible for promotion to the degree course.
2.
Notice of motion was issued in this case and all the respondents have been served.
Mr. Waraich has put in appearance on behalf of respondents 1 to 3, Mr. GS Chadha, Advocate on behalf of respondent 4 and Vishnu Goyal respondent 5 remains unrepresented.
Two separate replies have also been filed one by respondent Nos. 1 to 3 and the other by respondent No. 4.
It has been pleaded by the respondents that Raman Deep Kaur who had cleared the first trimester of the degree course in the second chance whereas it has been conceded by respondent Nos. 1 to 3 and their counsel that Vishnu Goyal (Respondent No. 5) had cleared diploma course in the third chance and was, therefore, not eligible.
3.
Mr. Dinesh Kumar, the learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that the admission by vertical entry given to respondents No. 4 and 5 was contrary to the condition laid down in Annexure P-1 and if their admission was quashed the petitioners who fell at serial No. 14 in merit must get admission.
4.
It is also conceded by learned counsel for the parties that Vishnu Goel has already studied in the course for a trimester and has even taken the examination and is now awaiting the result.
It is also admitted that the two private respondents had not taken admission by the concealment or misrepresentation of facts and if at all some fault could be found with the admission of respondent No. 5 it lay with the respondent institute and not with the student concerned.
In a Full Bench decision of this Court in Swaranjit Singh and another v. State of Punjab and others, 1998(1) Judicial Reports (Labour and Services) 27 : 1997(4) SCT 511(P&H)(FB) it has been held that where admission had been granted on account of the fault committed by the admitting authority and the student had also appeared in the first trimester examination in the meanwhile it was not fair to cancel the admission at that stage.
The observations of the Full Bench fully apply to the facts of the present case.
I am, therefore, of the opinion that even though Vishnu Goel respondent No. 5 could not have got admission in view of Annexure P-1 yet his admission should not be quashed at this belated stage.
This petition is disposed of accordingly with the direction that the next candidate in order of merit on the waiting list be granted admission in the course in question but also direct that the admission of respondent Nos. 4, 6 and 5 will not be disturbed.