Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - Bhajan Singh and Satish Kumar were promoted as Assistants on July 25, 1974 and April 28, 1975 respectively.
On October 18, 1985, the Director, Food & Supplies, issued an order by which their dates of appointment were changed to July 23, 1985 and April 8, 1983 respectively.
To challenge this order, both the officials filed appeals to the State Government which were rejected.
Aggrieved by the action of the department, they approached this Court through separate petitions under Article 226 of the Constitution.
These writ petitions having been accepted and the orders passed by the department having been set aside, the State of Punjab has filed these two appeals.
A few facts as relevant for the decision of the case may be briefly noticed from the record in LPA No. 725 of 1992 (State of Punjab & Ors. v. Bhajan Singh & Ors.).
2.
The respondent was recruited as a Stenotypist on August 21, 1967.
The appointment was made on purely ad hoc basis.
However, within less than a year, he was selected by the Subordinate Services Selection Board for regular appointment as a clerk.
On July 18, 1968, his name was forwarded by the Board to the department for appointment.
Irrespective of that, he was allowed to continue working on the post of a Stenotypist and his services were regularised on December 9, 1968.
After a year, he was promoted to the post of Junior Scale Stenographer vide order dated December 17, 1969.
He was further promoted to the post of Junior Auditor on May 8, 1972.
He was then promoted as an Officiating Assistant vide order dated July 25, 1974.
While he was actually working as an Assistant, the department issued an order dated August 16, 1976 by which the respondent was confirmed as a Stenotypist with effect from April 7, 1971.
3.
Certain persons viz. respondent Nos. 2 to 8 in this appeal had been directly recruited as Junior Auditors.
They represented and complained that they had been wrongly overlooked for promotion to the posts of Assistants.
These representations were accepted by the orders dated October 18, 1985.
Accordingly, the date of appointment of the respondent as an Assistant was changed from July 25, 1974 to July 23, 1985.
This is the complete sequence of events.
4.
Mrs. Charu Tuli, learned counsel for the appellant State of Punjab has contended that the respondent was ineligible for promotion as an Assistant on July 25, 1974.
Thus, the action of the appellant in altering the date of promotion was legal and valid.
She has referred to the provision contained in Rule 9 to support the submission.
A similar plea has also been raised by Mr. Gopal Mahajan who has appeared on behalf of respondent Nos. 2 to 8.
The claim made by these counsel has been controverted by Mr. PS Patwalia, who has appeared for respondent Bhajan Singh.
5.
Admittedly, the parties are governed by the provisions of the rules called `The Punjab Food and Supplies Department (State Service, Class III) Rules, 1968'.
Rule 9 lays down the method of appointment.
Clause (G) governs the recruitment to the posts of Assistants.
It provides as under :-  "9) Method of appointment - Appointments to posts in the Service shall be made in the following manner :-  x x x x x x  (G) In the case of Assistants :-  (i) 33 per cent by direct recruitment; or  (ii) by promotion; from amongst Clerks and Junior Auditors at Headquarters having at least 5 years service jointly or separately as such or from amongst Stenographers and Stenotypists at Headquarters who have at least 5 years service as such; provided that in the case of Stenographers with scale of pay identical to Assistants, the minimum period of service as such shall be at least one year; or  (iii) by transfer or deputation of an official already in the service of the Government of India or of State Government holding an appointment equivalent to the post held by the Departmental official eligible for appointment by promotion."
A perusal of the above provision would show that 33% posts of Assistants have to be filled up by direct recruitment.
The remaining posts can be filled up by promotion and transfer.
It is further clear that the appointment by promotion can be made from amongst the clerks, the Junior Auditors at Headquarters, the Stenographers and Stenotypists.
The rule further postulates that the candidate should have an experience of five years so as to be eligible for promotion to the post of the Assistant.
6.
The short question that arises for consideration is - Was the respondent eligible for promotion to the post of Assistant on July 25, 1974 when he was actually promoted as such ?
7.
It has been contended on behalf of the appellant that the respondent was actually working as a Junior Auditor since May 8, 1972.
He had not completed the five years service `as such'.
Thus, he was not eligible.
8.
This contention is misconceived.
Admittedly, the respondent had been appointed as a Stenotypist on August 21, 1967.
He had worked as such till December 17, 1969 when he was promoted as a Junior Scale Stenographer.
He was still further promoted as a Junior Auditor in the year 1972.
By the year 1974 when he was promoted to the post of Officiating Assistant, he had factually worked as a Stenotypist for more than four years.
It is not disputed that under the rules, Stenotypists are eligible for promotion provided they have worked as such for a period of five years.
Thus, the mere fact that the respondent had been found suitable for promotion as a Junior Auditor could not have rendered him ineligible for consideration for promotion as an Assistant especially when he had retained his lien as a Stenotypist and shall, thus, be deemed to have worked for the requisite period.
Still further, it has been found by the learned single Judge, the respondent had lien on the post of Stenotypist.
The lien having been retained, his promotion as a Junior Auditor could not have resulted in denying him the right to be considered for promotion to the post of Assistant.
9.
It is true, as has been sought to be contended on behalf of the appellant that the respondent had been promoted as a Junior Auditor on May 8, 1972.
However, the factual position is that he had been working as a Stenotypist since 1967.
Merely because he was considered as suitable for promotion as a Junior Auditor could not result in taking away his lien from the substantive post.
This is all the more so in view of the fact that vide order dated August 16, 1976, he was actually confirmed as a Stenotypist with retrospective effect from April 7, 1971.
10.
In view of the above, it is clear that the respondent Bhajan Singh was holding a post from which he could be promoted to the post of Assistant.
He had the requisite experience as prescribed under the rules.
He had a lien on the post of Stenotypist.
That being so, the view taken by the learned single Judge in holding that he was eligible on the date of his promotion, cannot be assailed.
11.
In case of Satish Kumar (respondent in LPA No. 726 of 1992), it has been contended by the learned counsel that he had been promoted as a Junior Auditor on March 14, 1969.
His promotion to the post of Assistant was illegal as persons senior to him had not been considered.
12.
It is not disputed that Satish Kumar was senior to Bhajan Singh as a Stenotypist.
In fact, he had joined as a clerk on January 25, 1966 and was promoted as a Stenotypist on November 19, 1968 on regular basis.
Therefore, he was undoubtedly promoted as a Junior Auditor on March 14, 1969.
Still further, he was promoted as an Assistant on April 28, 1975.
13.
A perusal of the sequence of events shows that Satish Kumar had completed more than five years' experience as Junior Auditor so as to be eligible for promotion to the post of Assistant.
Thus, he fulfilled the requisite qualification for promotion to the post in question.
Still further, it is the admitted position that he was a regular Stenotypist since November 19, 1968.
He was senior to Bhajan Singh.
His name was continuing on the seniority list of Stenotypists in spite of his promotion to the post of Junior Auditor.
It is not the case of the appellant that Satish Kumar had acquired a lien on any post or that he had been confirmed as a Junior Auditor so as to have lost all connections with the post of Stenotypist.
Thus, viewed from any angle, he was senior to Bhajan Singh as well as eligible for the post of Assistant in April 1975 when he was actually promoted.
14.
Another fact which has been noticed by the learned Single Judge is that the promotions made in the year 1974-75 were upset after an inordinately long delay of more than 10 years.
The learned Judge has considered this action to be unfair.
In the circumstances, we find that the view taken by the learned single Judge is correct.
It is undoubtedly true that a mistake can be corrected at any time.
However, the aggrieved persons should act with reasonable care and vigilance.
If they sleep over the matter for a long time, the equity is changed.
In the present case, no remedy was sought by the private respondents for a long time.
The Government had woken up after an inordinately long delay of 10 years.
It is not surprising that the learned Judge did not accept the plea raised on behalf of the State Government.
No other point has been raised.
In view of the above, we found no ground to interfere with the view taken by the learned single Judge.
There is no merit in these appeals.
Both are, consequently, dismissed.
In view of the decision on merits, CM No. 408 of 1988 has not been pressed.
It is, accordingly, disposed of.
However, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Appeals dismissed.