Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The dispute in these two appeals is regarding inter se seniority of persons working as constables in the Telecommunication Operators Cadre in the State of Haryana.
The writ petitions filed by the appellants having been dismissed, they have filed these two Letters Patent Appeals.
Counsel for the parties have referred to the facts as appearing on the record of L.P.A. No. 147 of 1994.
These may be briefly noticed.
2.
On February 20, 1984, the Director General of Police, Haryana, notified that "the Telecommunication Operators (Cadre) shall henceforth consist of the teleprinter operators, wireless operators and cryptography operators".
Therefore, on August 2, 1988, the Superintendent of Police, Wireless Section, Haryana issued a circular informing the various authorities that "constables who are already working/trained on Wireless duty are to be absorbed in wireless section permanently.
For this purpose an aptitude test will be conducted on 11th and 12th of this month."
The officers were requested to forward "applications of all such willing constables who are matriculates..." Various persons applied.
The aptitude test was conducted on August 12, 1988.
Thereafter, the appointments were made vide orders dated August 19, 1988, September 7, 1988 and October 24, 1988.
It is the claim of the appellants that after the appointments, the inter se seniority was determined on the basis of the date of absorption in the Telecommunication Operators Cadre.
Even the promotions were made accordingly.
This process continued till June 25, 1991 when certain persons who were allegedly junior to the appellants were promoted.
The appellants filed Civil Writ Petition No. 1027 of 1991.
This was disposed of at the stage of preliminary hearing vide order dated July 16, 1991.
The petitioners therein were directed to make a representation to the competent authority viz the SP who was to decide it by passing a speaking order within three months.
The appellants made the representation.
It was rejected vide order dated November 19, 1991.
A copy of the order is at Annexure P6.
Aggrieved by the order of rejection, the appellants approached this Court through C.W.P.
No. 3678 of 1992.
Similarly, 32 persons who are appellants in L.P.A. No. 25 of 1994 had filed C.W.P.
No. 10253 of 1991.
This petition was directed against the order dated June 25, 1991 by which the department had made promotion of various constables to the posts of Head Constables.
Both the writ petitions having been dismissed by the learned Single Judge, the writ petitioners have filed the two Letters Patent Appeals.
3.
On behalf of the appellants, it has been contended by Mr. PS Patwalia that the Telecommunication Operators Cadre is a totally new cadre.
It is independent of the general police.
The seniority of the persons working in this cadre has to be determined on the basis of the date of joining.
Learned counsel emphasised that on absorption in the Telecommunication cadre, each one of the incumbents was given a new constabulary number and there was a complete snapping of ties with the past service.
That being so, the seniority had to be determined only on the basis of the date of absorption in the new cadre.
Mr. Patwalia also referred to the report, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P4, according to which the posts of the Telecommunication cadre had to be filled up by direct recruitment.
On the basis thereof, it was contended that everyone having been directly recruited, the years of service put in by different persons in the parent cadre were of no consequence.
4.
In L.P.A. No. 25 of 1994, it was additionally argued that the department had drawn up a new seniority list, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P.1 with CWP No. 10253 of 1991.
By adopting a different yardstick, the list was presumed to have been changed.
Such a course of action could not have been adopted without the grant of an opportunity to the persons whose seniority was likely to be adversely affected.
It was also contended that the Inspector General of Police had no jurisdiction to lay down the criteria that promotion from the rank of constable to that of Head Constable be made "on purely seniority-cum-merit" basis as stipulated in the letter dated June 12, 1991, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure R-1 with the written statement.
The claim made on behalf of the appellants was controverted by the counsel for the respondents.
5.
It is undoubtedly correct that vide order dated February 20, 1984, it had been provided that the cadre of Telecommunication Operators shall consist of Teleprinter Operators, Wireless Operators and Cryptography Operators.
It may even be assumed that a new cadre had been constituted in the police department.
It may also be assumed that the appointments to this cadre could be made from the open market through an advertisement and/or from persons who were already working within the department.
It is also established on the record that a circular was sent by Superintendent of Police, Wireless Section to the various DIGs, Inspector Generals, Superintendents of Police etc. by which they were asked to forward applications of persons who were working or trained on Wireless duty for permanent absorption in the Wireless Section.
Having conducted an aptitude test and appointed persons to the cadre, the authorities were faced with the situation as to how the inter se seniority of the incumbents should be determined.
One view could be that the inter se seniority should be based on the date of absorption in the new cadre.
This was the initial view which had been expressed by the Superintendent of Police while issuing the circular dated August 2, 1988.
It may have been followed for some duration of time.
However, ultimately the authorities took the view that the past years of service could not be wiped out.
Resultantly, it was decided to determine the inter se seniority of the incumbents on the basis of their total length of service.
Persons who had put in longer service were treated as senior to others with lesser service.
Did the respondents violate the law in doing so ?
6.
Admittedly, no separate rules have been framed for the Telecommunication cadre.
It is also not disputed that in the Punjab Police, the seniority is determined by the provisions of Rule 122 which inter alia provides that "seniority.... will be reckoned in the first instance from the date of first appointment...
Seniority shall, however, be finally settled by dates of confirmation..." On this basis, the seniority of the various incumbents had been initially determined.
On their transfer/absorption in the Telecommunication cadre, the same seniority has been preserved.
In other words, the seniority in the Telecommunication cadre has been determined on the basis of the date of initial appointment in the Police Department.
The criterion adopted by the respondents is just and fair.
It is equitable.
It gives credit for longer service to the members of the Force.
It is uniformally applicable to all.
It excludes all discretion.
It avoids all arbitrariness.
It obviates any chance of favouritism.
It is not unfair.
Consequently, it calls for no interference.
7.
It was contended that the seniority had been determined and fixed by the respondents.
In LPA No. 25 of 1994, great stress was laid on a document which has been produced as Annexure P.1.
It was conceded by the counsel that this seniority list of constables was never circulated.
It was never notified.
It was not finalised.
If the department prepares a list which is not issued, the employees cannot claim that their seniority has been determined or that any right on that basis has accrued to them.
In fact, it is the admitted position that the list was never issued by any authority and as such, it cannot be said that the said seniority had been up-set or that the appellants had a right to be heard before the seniority was changed.
The grievance made on that account is wholly untenable.
8.
It was also contended on behalf of the appellants by Mr. HS Gill that the Inspector General of Police could not have issued the directions as contained in the letter dated June 12, 1991, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure R.1 with the written statement.
9.
A perusal of this document shows that the Superintendent of Police had written to the Inspector General of Police pointing out that three alternative methods could be followed for promotion to the post of Head Constable.
One of the alternative methods was approved by the Inspector General of Police.
Admittedly, the Superintendent of Police is the appointing authority.
There is no rule or law which debarred him from seeking guidance or approval from a senior officer.
Equally, there is no provision which debarred the senior officer from providing the necessary guidance.
One of the suggestions made by the Superintendent of Police having been approved, a uniform yard-stick for promotion of constables to the rank of Head Constables was laid down and followed.
In the process, no rule was violated.
No law was infringed.
Nobody's right was affected.
In fact, it was only provided that the promotion should be made on purely seniority-cum-merit basis and persons who have adverse reports or who have been reported upon adversely for integrity or against whom departmental enquiries were pending, should not be promoted.
There was no illegality in this decision.
10.
Mr. Gill referred to the decision of their Lordships of the Full Bench in Sardul Singh v. Inspector General of Police, Punjab and others, 1970 SLR 505.
This was a case where the provisions of the rules for deputing constables etc. for the promotion courses was being considered.
It has no relevance to the controversy in the present case.
No other point has been raised.
In view of the above, we find no merit in either of the two appeals.
Consequently, both are dismissed.
In the circumstance, there will be no order as to costs.
Appeals dismissed.