TS Doabia, J - The petitioner is seeking appointment on compassionate grounds.
He has placed reliance on Jammu and Kashmir Employees (Death in Harness) Dependent appointment Rules, 1989.
The petitioner submits:  (i) That his father died on 20091989.
(ii) That he was minor at the time of death of his father.
(iii) That he attained majority and eligibility after passing matriculation in the year 1993.
(iv) That after attaining the majority and eligibility, the requisite application was made to the State Government in terms of the rules referred to above.
2.
It is the case of the petitioner that even though he was eligible under the rules of 1989, the requisite order of appointment on compassionate grounds has not been issued.
He submits that as a matter of fact no order accepting or rejecting the claim of the petitioner has been passed.
3.
This petition was taken for motion hearing on 13th February, 1997.
An interim order was passed.
This reads as under:-  "Notice as above.
Reply within the same time.
Respondents are directed to consider the case of the petitioner for appointment on compassionate ground since his father died in harness.
Order so passed be filed along with the reply."
Thus there was a direction in the aforementioned order to the effect that order of appointment on compassionate grounds should be made part of objections.
No such order has been placed on the file.
The respondents have filed objection.
The stand taken is that under Rules of 1989, the petitioner could not be appointed because the requisite income qualification was found wanting.
It is submitted that the benefit could not be granted as the income of the family was more than Rs. 2000/-.
Reliance has been placed on Rule 8.
This rule is of the Rules referred to above.
4.
Further stand taken by the State is that new rules have come into force.
These rules provide for grant of appointment on compassionate ground, if application for seeking appointment is made within six months of the demise of the Government Servant.
5.
I am of the opinion that when the petitioner made an application in terms of rules of 1989 then eligibility should have been determined under the aforementioned rules.
On account of inaction on the part of the respondents the petitioner cannot be deprived of the benefit which became available to him.
His case has to be considered under the Rules of 1989.
Such cases should be disposed of with utmost despatch.
In a case from Gujarat even though the requisite sanction was granted, the appointment order was not issued for three years.
it was held that there should not be delay in these matters.
A direction was given to make the appointment in the case of Nisar Ahmed v. State of Gujarat, 1997(1) SCT 812.
Reliance was placed on the decision of the Supreme Court of India reported as Smt. Sushma Gosain v. Union of India, AIR 1989 SC 1976 wherein it was observed:  "We consider that it must be stated unequivocally that in all claims for appointment on compassionate grounds, there should not be any delay in appointment.
The purpose of providing appointment on compassionate ground is to mitigate the hardship due to death of the bread-earner in the family.
Such appointment should, therefore, be provided immediately to redeem the family in distress.
It is improper to keep such cases pending for years.
If there is no suitable post for appointment, supernumerary post should be created."
6.
The petitioner has also suffered on account of delay.
The petitioner has placed on record a certificate that his family income was less than Rs. 2000/-.
The requisite certificate was signed by the Asstt.
Commissioner Kathua.
This is Annexure P-2.
If above factor is taken into consideration then the stand taken in the objections that family income of the petitioner was more than Rs. 2000/- is not correct.
As such, the petitioner would prima facie be eligible under the rules of 1989 and he was prima facie entitled to appointment on compassionate grounds.
7.
This petition which was admitted and with the consent of the parties taken up for final disposal is allowed.
The respondent would accordingly consider the case of the petitioner in terms of rules 1989 and pass orders in this regard.
Petition allowed.