NK Sodhi, J (Oral) - This order will dispose of two contempt petitions 1233 of 1997 and 4 of 1998 in which common questions of law and fact arise.
2.
By an order dated 2711997 a bunch of writ petitions including the one filed by the petitioners herein were allowed and the Director, Primary Education, Haryana was directed to issue instructions to the competent authorities to appoint the selected candidates against the vacant posts of JBT teachers which remained unfilled due to non-joining of those who were appointed earlier.
A further direction was issued that while appointing the teachers the order of merit prepared by the Service Selection Board shall be followed.
This exercise was required to be completed within three weeks from the date of the order.
3.
There were in all 165 vacancies belonging to the general category which remained vacant on account of the non-joining of those who were appointed earlier.
It is common case of the parties that these posts have since been filled up from the merit list prepared by the Board.
There were 84 posts reserved for the Ex-Servicemen which remained vacant on account of non-availability of candidates belonging to this category.
These posts have not been filled up so far.
The grievance of the petitioners is that these post have been diverted to the general category and thereafter candidates like the petitioners have not been given appointments to fill up the vacant posts.
4.
In the written statement filed by the Director, Primary Education, Haryana it is stated that he has not received any directions/instructions from the Government regarding dereservation of the vacant posts reserved for Ex- servicemen.
5.
I have heard counsel for the parties and am of the view that there is no merit in these contempt petitions.
84 vacancies meant for the Ex-Servicemen candidates can be filled up only by the candidates belonging to that category.
Since the candidates belonging to this category are not available the posts are lying vacant.
It appears that the Chief Minister desired that these posts be dereserved and given to the general category candidates in the interest of the schools and students.
But no final decision has been taken by the State Government deresevring the aforesaid vacancies.
In this view of the matter, it cannot be said that the respondents have violated the court order dated 2711997.
6.
In the result, the contempt petitions fail and the same are hereby dismissed.
Petitions dismissed.