Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - Can an employer grant different scales of pay to persons working as Managers on the basis of the qualifications ?
The learned Single Judge has accepted the claim of the respondents and held that the action of the Haryana State Cooperative Supply and Marketing Federation Limited (hereinafter referred to as the Federation) in placing them in the pay scale of Rs. 700-1,250 while the other Managers had been placed in the pay scale of Rs. 800-1,600 is violative of Article 16 of the Constitution.
The Federation has filed this appeal.
2.
A few facts as relevant for decision of this case may be briefly noticed.
3.
The respondent-writ petitioners were working in the Federation.
In the year 1979, a notice was circulated.
Persons who were graduates and had 5 years experience were invited to apply for appointment to the posts of Managers (Rice Mills).
The respondents 1 to 5 had submitted their applications and were selected.
They were appointed as Managers (Rice Mills).
In the year 1982, some more posts of Managers had become available.
The Officer on Special Duty (Administration) put up a note that most of the existing Managers did not possess requisite qualifications for rice milling.
Therefore, persons with qualifications and experience in Agriculture Processing Industry may be appointed as Managers.
The qualifications of Degree in Agricultural/Electrical/Mechanical Engineering with experience in Agricultural Processing (preferably in Rice Processing) or Diploma in Electrical/Mechanical Engineering with three years experience of working in the rice mills were prescribed.
The posts were advertised and a pay scale of Rs. 800-1,600 notified.
Later on, this pay scale was revised to Rs. 800-1,600.
The persons who were selected through a competitive process of selection were appointed and placed in the scale of Rs. 800-1,600.
The respondents 1 to 5 claimed that the action of the Federation in keeping them in the scale of Rs. 700- 1,250 while certain other Managers had been granted the scale of Rs. 800-1,600 suffered from the vice of discrimination.
The learned Single Judge having accepted the claim, the Federation, has filed this appeal.
The operation of the judgement having been stayed by the Motion Bench, the judgment has not been implemented so far.
4.
It has been contended on behalf of the appellants by Mr. CB Goel that there was no discrimination and that the view taken by the learned Single Judge is untenable.
On behalf of the respondent - writ petitioners, it has been contended by Mr. Raman Mahajan that persons possessing higher qualifications like those who had been selected and appointed in the year 1979 cannot be kept in a scale of pay lower than that granted to persons who were merely Diploma Holders.
5.
It is true as found by the learned Single Judge that there is only one cadre of Managers (Rice Mills).
It is also not seriously disputed that persons are occasionally transferred from one place to another.
However, the fact remains that the Federation had granted a higher scale of pay to persons who possessed technical qualifications and had experience of agricultural processing and/or rice milling.
They were, thus, considered to be more suitable for managing the rice mills.
6.
It cannot be disputed that classification can be made on the basis of educational qualifications.
In the present case, the differential treatment has been accorded to the officers on the basis of qualifications which have a reasonable nexus with the requirements of the post.
The Federation had taken a conscious decision to recruit persons possessing technical qualifications to man the posts of Managers after it had discovered that mere graduates were sometimes unable to manage the rice mills properly.
In view of the decision of their Lordships of the Supreme court in The State of Jammu & Kashmir v. Triloki Nath Khosa and others, A.I.R. 1974 S.C. 1 and State of UP and others v. JP Chaurasia and others, A.I.R. 1989 S.C. 19, the contention that the action suffers from the vice of discrimination cannot be sustained.
It is permissible to classify employees on the basis of qualifications.
This is precisely what has been done in the present case.
7.
Mr. Mahajan contended that the respondents are better qualified than those who are merely Diploma Holders.
The contention has been controverted by the learned counsel for the appellants.
8.
There is no definite averment or evidence to suggest that any particular person is only a diploma holder.
However, even if it is assumed that some of the persons working in the scale of Rs. 800-1,600 have merely passed a Diploma examination, the action of the Federation in granting them a higher scale of pay cannot be said to be discriminatory.
The qualifications which are relevant for a post can form a valid basis for the grant of higher scale of pay.
To illustrate, a person possessing a post-graduate degree in arts may not be eligible for the post of an electrician while a mere diploma holder may be.
It will not be possible for the persons having a post-graduate degree to perform the duties of an electrician.
Therefore, the action of the management in recruiting a diploma holder as an electrician and declaring him as eligible shall not be discriminatory.
Similarly, if the employer had chosen to fix technical qualification as a criterion for granting higher salary, the action cannot be said to be violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the constitution.
9.
Mr. Raman Mahajan then contended that there was no report against the work and conduct of the respondents.
10.
It may be so.
No action has been initiated against the respondents.
They have not been punished.
The employer had only sanctioned different pay scales on the basis of qualifications.
This was not illegal.
11.
The view taken by the learned Single Judge cannot, thus, be sustained.
No other point has been raised.
In view of the above.
We find no merit in the claim made by the respondents.
Resultantly, the appeal is accepted.
The judgement of the learned Single Judge is set aside and the writ petition is dismissed.
However, in the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.