Sat Pal, J - The order which is alleged to have not been complied with is dated 12th December, 1996 passed by a Division Bench of this court in CWP No. 11391 of 1996 and other connected matters.
The relevant portion from this judgment is reproduced hereinbelow :  "We dispose of this petition with the direction to the respective Senior Superintendents of Police to consider the claims of the petitioners for absorption as Constables with effect from the dates persons junior to them were appointed.
In case, the petitioners are found suitable orders of their appointment be issued.
Consequential reliefs regarding fixation of pay and seniority shall follow.
Keeping in view the large number of SPOs/Auxiliary Constables involved in these cases, we will not order payment of arrears of salary to avoid unnecessary burden on the State Government at this stage."
Since the above mentioned order was not complied with by the respondents, the present petition was filed by the writ petitioner.
Notice to show cause was issued to the respondent.
Reply on behalf of the respondent has been filed.
In para 2 of the reply, it has been stated that the writ petitioner has been selected by the Board of Punjab Police held to recruit ACs/SPOs to be absorbed in the Punjab Police as Constables.
It is further submitted that the petitioner has qualified the test and has been selected and has been ordered to join in the PAP at Patiala along with certain other SPOs.
Copy of the order dated 24th September, 1997 has been annexed as Annexure R-1 with the petition.
The direction given by the Division Bench to the respondents was that the case of the petitioner should be considered for absorption as Constable w.e.f.
the date his juniors were appointed.
2.
Since the petitioner has now been appointed as constable, I do not deem it necessary to proceed further in the matter.
However, in case the petitioner is aggrieved with regard to his seniority in the cadre of Constables, he shall be at liberty to approach the appropriate authority.
3.
At this stage, the learned counsel for the petitioner submits that since this petition was pending, the petitioner had not joined his duty so far.
In view of the facts and circumstances of the case, it is directed that the respondents shall permit the petitioner to join duty at PAP Patiala if he reports for duty within a week.
Copy of the order be given Dasti.