HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner passed the Bachelor of Architecture Examination in the year 1972 and was appointed a Planning Assistant in the Department of Town & Country Planning, Haryana, Chandigarh on ad hoc basis in the pay scale of Rs. 450-700 vide letter of appointment dated 3041973 Annexure P.1 to the petition.
It is the admitted position that the petitioner continued to work as such till 20th December, 1978.
The Haryana Public Service Commission advertised certain posts of Assistant Town Planners in the department and the petitioner being eligible for the said post, applied for the same through proper channels.
She was selected for the post in the pay scale of Rs. 400-1100/- and was relieved from her post as Planning Assistant vide order dated 20121978 Annexure P-2, to the petition and immediately took over on the new post.
It appears that as a result of her appointment, her salary was reduced and she, accordingly, submitted a representation to the department praying that the last pay drawn by her in the post of Planning Assistant should be protected.
These representations were rejected by the respondents vide orders Annexure P-4 and Annexure P-4/A dated 19.3.1981 and 14.9.1981 respectively.
It is against these orders that the present petition has been filed.
2.
Notice of motion was issued in this case and reply has been filed by the respondents Haryana State and the basic stand taken is that as the petitioner had joined service as an Assistant Town Planner as a fresh entrant, the benefit of her pay in the new post could not be given to her and that she was accordingly entitled to receive pay in the scale of Rs. 400-1100/- only.
3.
Mr. Balram K Gupta, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has argued that the action of the respondents in denying the benefit to the petitioner was against the express provisions of Rule 44.
(c) of the Punjab Civil Service Rules Vol.I, Part-I (hereinafter called `the Rules').
4.
As against this, Mr. Rathee, the learned Deputy Advocate General, Haryana, has reiterated the basic stand taken in the written statement and has argued that as the petitioner had been given appointment afresh, the said rule was not applicable to her case.
5.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the record.
Rule 44(c) is reproduced below :-  "44.
(c)(i).
Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules, where a Government servant holding a post in a temporary or officiating capacity is promoted or appointed in a substantive, temporary or officiating capacity to another post carrying duties and responsibilities of greater importance than those attached to the post held by him, his initial pay in the time scale of the higher post shall be fixed at the stage next above his pay drawn by him in the lower post provided it is certified by the Head of the Department in which the Government servant was holding the lower post that he would have continued to officiate in the lower post but for his promotion/appointment to the higher post."
6.
A mere reading of the rule provided for four different situations for its applicability (i) that the Government servant claiming the benefit should be holding a lower post in a temporary or officiating capacity (ii) the promotion or appointment to the higher post may be in a substantive, temporary or officiating capacity (iii) that the duties and responsibilities of greater importance should attach to the higher post and (iv) that a certificate should be obtained from the Head of the Department holding out that had the Government servant not accepted the higher appointment, he would have continued to officiate in the lower post.
To my mind, the case of the petitioner clearly falls within the ambit of the Rule.
It is the admitted case that the petitioner was holding the post of a Planning Assistant in a purely ad hoc capacity and her services were in fact, notionally regularised vide order dated 6111980 Annexure P-8 to the petition.
It is equally true that the petitioner was appointed to the higher post of Assistant Town Planner and it can also not be denied that this post had higher responsibilities of greater importance than those attached to the post of Planning Assistant.
7.
Mr. Gupta, the learned counsel for the petitioner had also relied upon State of Punjab and Anr. v. Balwant Rai, 1991(1) R.S.J.
496 : 1991(2) SCT 256, which dealt with an almost similar situation and this Court observed that the Administration was expected to act fairly while dealing with its employees.
This judgment went on to say that the certificate issued by the Head of the Department and visualised by Rule 44.
(c) was not a mandatory requirement and could be done away with in certain situations.
I am of the opinion that the observation in the aforecited case applies clearly to the facts of the present case.
To my mind, the conditions for the applicability of Rule 44(c) are clearly satisfied in the present case.
8.
Mr. Rathee, the learned D.A.G., Haryana has argued that the said rule could be applied only in the case of promotion to a higher post and as the petitioner had been given a fresh appointment from a Class-III to a Class-I post, the benefit of the earlier service for the purpose of pay fixation could not be given to her.
9.
This argument is devoid of merit.
Rule 44(c) clearly envisages that a Government employee seeking its benefits may come to the higher post from a lower post either by promotion or by a fresh appointment.
10.
This petition is, accordingly, allowed.
Resultantly, the respondents are directed to refix the pay of the petitioner in the light of the observations made above within a period of six months from the day that a certified copy of this judgment is made available to them and pay her all the arrears on the amounts due with interest @ 12% pa from the date of the same fell due till the date of payment.
Costs of the petition are also determined at Rs. 500/-.
Petition allowed.