Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - Should the enquiry proceedings initiated against the petitioners in these three cases after the lapse of more than 20 years be allowed to continue ?
This is the short question that arises for consideration in these three writ petitions.
Counsel for the parties have referred to the facts as appearing in CWP No. 12564 of 1997.
These may be briefly noticed.
2.
The petitioner is working as a Junionr Engineer in the Public Works Department, Irrigation Branch.
During the year 1971-72, he was posted in the Drainage and Mechanical Sub Division No. 3, Amritsar.
In June 1995, he was served with a memorandum dated May 29, 1995.
He was informed that enquiry proceedings have been initiated against him under Rule 8 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment & Appeal) Rules, 1970.
It was alleged that the petitioner had made purchases "in dribblets rather than in one lot...
The make and trade mark of some of the items of the material purchased has not been mentioned in the local purchase papers...You did not purchase the stock in accordance with the reserve stock limit approved by the Competent Authority...." On this basis, it was alleged that a loss of Rs. 41,34279 had been caused by making excess expenditure.
The petitioner alleges that these purchases had been made during the period from March 1971 to march 1972.
There is no justification for the respondents to have initiated the proceedings after the lapse of an inordinately long delay of more than 20 years.
Consequently, the petitioner prays that the enquiry proceedings as also the charge-sheet be quashed.
3.
This petition was listed for hearing on December 1, 1997.
No written statement had been filed.
No one had appeared.
By an ex parte order, the writ petition was allowed.
Subsequently, an application was filed with a prayer that the order be recalled.
Even the written statement was placed on record.
Notice of that application was given.
By an order of date, we have recalled the order passed by the Bench on December 1, 1997.
We have perused the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents to explain the delay.
It has been averred that one Jaswant Singh had filed a complaint to the Director, State Vigilance Bureau, Punjab.
An enquiry was registered on the basis of the said complaint.
A report was forwarded to the Secretary, Vigilance Department vide letter dated August 22, 1989.
The time was spent in correspondence.
The Chief Engineer was finally requested to prepare the charge-sheet vide memorandum dated June 11, 1993.
After making effort, the Chief Engineer was able to find out the relevant records.
On the availability of the record, the competent authority decided to issue the charge-sheet.
These charge-sheets were served on the officials vide memorandum dated May 29 1995.
It has been further averred that the charges being of serious nature, this court should not interfere with the action taken by the respondents.
4.
Learned counsel for the parties have been heard.
Admittedly, the petitioners in all the three cases are working as Junior Engineers.
It is also not disputed that the purchases are made with the approval of higher authorities and not by the Junior Engineer themselves.
Still further, it is the admitted position that in all the three cases, the purchases had been made during the period from 1971 to 1975.
It is also the admitted position that the complaint had been received in this behalf by the Vigilance Department.
There is studied silence about the date of the receipt of the complaint.
It is the respondents' own case that the regular enquiry was registered in the year 1980.
In spite of that, the respondents have taken 15 long years to conduct a preliminary enquiry and to decide as to whether or not proceedings should be initiated against the petitioners.
It is a clear case of an inefficient handling of a complaint.
5.
Inspite of this long delay, we may have been reluctant to interfere.
However, it has been pointed out on behalf of the petitioners that by his letter dated June 17, 1997, the Chief Engineer informed the Principal Secretary to the Government that the case "relates to 1972-73, 25 years back and that due to non-availability of the entire record at the belated stage it will be desirable to take a lenient view against the concerned employees giving them benefit of doubt".
It is, thus, clear that even the record is not available.
This fact is also borne out from the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents in which it has been averred that "the matter remained under correspondence for collecting the documentary evidence involved in the enquiry from the field offices."
In this situation, it appears that the petitioners' complaint that the enquiry proceedings would be an exercise in futility on account of the lapse of time and the non-availability of record is not without basis.
Since the records are not available, even the departmental authorities shall not be able to prove the charges levelled against the petitioners.
Resultantly, though reluctantly, we direct that the enquiry proceedings shall not be continued against the petitioners.
The writ petitions are, accordingly, disposed of.
No costs.