RL Anand, J - The petitioner was appointed as a lecturer in Commerce at the Guru Harkrishan Sahib Khalsa College, Panjokhra Sahib vide Order dated January 6, 1997.
The appointment was on purely ad hoc basis as the post had already been advertised by the institution.
A selection was conducted.
The petitioner was considered.
He was placed at No. 2 in order of merit.
The selection proceedings were approved by the Kurukshetra University.
A copy of the letter issued by the University on January 1, 1997 by which the selection of Rajender Pal and Nitin Dev (present petitioner) was approved is at Annexure R.2 with the written statement filed on behalf of respondent No. 3, Mr. Rajender Pal did not join.
In spite of that the petitioner has not been appointed.
He prays that a writ of mandamus be issued directing the respondent College to appoint him.
2.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the institution.
It has been inter alia admitted that the petitioner's selection along with that of Rajender Pal has been duly approved by the University.
It has been further stated that the Principal of the college "has already approached the University for sanction to appoint the petitioner as lecturer since Shri Rajender Pal has not joined.
But the University has not given any favourable reply."
3.
A copy of the communication sent by the college to the University on February 4, 1997 has been produced as Annexure R.3.
In this letter it has been stated that offer of appointment had been sent to Rejender Pal by Registered Post but he has not joined.
Consequently, the college sought permission to appoint the second person on the panel.
Mr. Guliani, learned counsel for respondents No. 3 and 4 states that the reply was received from the University vide letter dated 1221997.
A copy of this letter on which the date has not been mentioned has been produced as Annexure R.4 with the written statement.
By this letter the University had asked for a copy of the appointment letter which had been sent to Mr. Rajender Pal along with "a copy of the letter vide which he has refused to accept the offer of appointment".
In response to this letter the college had sent a communication dated February 17, 1997 informing the University that Mr. Rajender Pal had not sent "any refusal or comments".
Thereafter, nothing has been heard from the University.
4.
In this petition the University has been impleaded as one of the respondents.
No reply has been filed.
No one has put in appearance on behalf of this respondent in spite of service.
It was in view of this position that the orders for ex parte proceedings were passed by the Bench against the respondent University on October 3, 1997.
5.
The learned counsel for the parties have been heard.
6.
In view of the abovenoted factual position, the short question that arises for consideration is - Has the Institute acted legally in not appointing the petitioner as a lecturer in Commerce ?
7.
Admittedly, the petitioner has been selected by a duly constituted selection committee.
The proceedings of the selection committee have been approved by the University.
Offer for appointment was made to the candidate at No. 1.
It has been stated on behalf of respondent No. 3 that he has not joined till today nor has he sent any reply.
It was in view of this position that the college had sent a communication dated February 4, 1997 to the University to seek permission regarding the appointment of the petitioner.
The University had sent a reply vide letter dated February 12, 1997 and asked the college to send a copy of the letter of refusal.
The third respondent had informed the University that no reply had been received from the candidate.
In response to this letter the University has not cared to send any reply.
Even when the petitioner approached this Court, the University has not chosen to contest the case.
Resultantly, it will be safe to assume that the University does not have any valid basis to contest the case.
In this situation the college can justifiably presume that the University has granted approval regarding the appointment of the petitioner.
8.
Even otherwise, the institution is not expected to wait endlessly for a candidate to join.
It is true that a person who is found better in merit has a prior right to be offered the post.
The college has done the needful by making an offer to Shri Rajender Pal.
For reasons best known to him he has chosen not to join.
Since he has neither sent any reply to the college nor has he joined, it can be safely assumed that he is not interested in joining the college as a lecturer in Commerce.
That being so the institution is not obliged to keep the post vacant and to make the students to suffer endlessly.
Still further it is the admitted position that a temporary arrangement was made to tide over the situation.
In spite of that the selected candidate Mr. Rajender Pal had not protested or offered to join.
In view of the above factual position the answer to the question has to be in favour of the petitioner.
The writ petition is accordingly allowed.
Respondent No. 3 is directed to consider the petitioner's claim and offer the appointment to him.
Needful be done within two months from today.
In the circumstances, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.