Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner prays that the appointments of respondents 5 to 32 as Safai Sewaks be quashed.
It is alleged that the posts were filed up without the issue of any advertisement or notice to the public.
The petitioner also alleges that even a requisition was not sent to the employment exchange.
As a result, eligible candidates were deprived of the chance to apply and be considered.
The action was thus violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
2.
The respondents contest the writ petition.
It has been pointed out that the Municipal employees had gone on strike in December, 1996.
The State Government was confronted with a grave situation.
To meet the emergent situation, the officers had to go from place to place to collect volunteers for joining the service and working as Safai Sewaks.
The respondents had offered their services by "endangering their life at the hands of the striking employees....." In view of the peculiar situation, the respondents submit that there was no violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
3.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
It is undoubtedly correct that the posts of Safai Sewaks had not been advertised.
It is also possible that the names were not requisitioned from the employment exchange.
However, the respondents had to choose between epidemic or advertisement.
They chose to avoid the former.
The action was actuated by consideration of public interest.
It is not even remotely shown that any of the municipal councillors or the respondents had any personal interest in the individuals who had been appointed.
Since the appointments have been made to meet an emergent situation, the persons who offered their services by endangering their personal safety formed a class by themselves.
The impugned action calls for no interference.
4.
Mr. Malik submits that there are no posts against which respondents 5 to 32 can now be accommodated.
5.
It is true that the 28 persons had been appointed against the posts held by the persons who had gone on strike.
Later on, in view of the compromise, the original incumbents of the posts were reinstated.
In this situation, if the State Government has shown a concession to respondents 5 to 32 who had stood by it in the hour of need, it cannot be said to have acted illegally.
Creation of posts is a matter between the employer and the employees themselves.
It does not give any cause of action to the petitioner.
6.
Mr. Malik has referred to the decisions reported as The Excise Superintendent Malkapatnam, Krishna District, Andhra Pradesh v. KBN Visweshwara Rao and others, 1997(1) RSJ 255; Harjot Kamal Singh v. State of Punjab, 1997(1) RSJ 95 : 1996(4) SCT 33 and Himachal Road Transport Corporation v. Ms. Parveen Kumari, JT 1996(5) SC 319 : 1996(3) SCT 409.
There is no quarrel with the proposition laid down in these cases.
7.
We may add that the petitioner has not remotely shown that he had approached the respondents for being considered for appointment.
The position may have been different if it had been shown to us that the petitioner had offered his services but was arbitrarily left out of consideration.
The peculiar situation which had arisen on account of strike demanded an immediate action.
In this situation, we do not think that there was violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
In view of the peculiar facts of the present case we find no ground to interfere under Article 226 of the Constitution.
Resultantly, the writ petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.