Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner, a direct Assistant Sub Inspector of Police, is aggrieved by the order of his discharge from the Force.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as an Assistant Sub Inspector in January 30, 1990.
He was conveyed adverse remarks for the period from April 1, 1991 to December, 3, 1991, the year 1992-93 and for the period from April 1, 1993 to September 30, 1993.
His representations in respect of the adverse remarks were rejected with the exception that one of the remarks in the report for the year 1992-93 was ordered to be expunged.
The petitioner had been appointed on probation.
Vide order dated November 3, 1993, the period of probation was extended.
Ultimately, on October 13, 1994, the petitioner was ordered to be discharged under rule 128 of the Punjab Police Rules, Volume II.
He filed a review petition which was rejected by the Director General of Police vide order dated January 24, 1995.
He still persisted and submitted a review petition to the Government.
That was rejected vide order dated May 26, 1997.
Hence this petition.
3.
The solitary contention raised by Mr. PS Patwalia, counsel for the petitioner is that Rule 128 prescribes the maximum period of probation.
Since the petitioner had completed that before the passing of the impugned order, he shall be deemed to have been confirmed and that his discharge from service cannot be sustained.
Counsel has further submitted that even the extended period of probation had expired on August 31, 1994 and, thus, he shall be deemed to have been confirmed w.e.f.
September 1, 1994.
Is it so ?
4.
Rule 128 inter alia provides that "Inspectors..... and Assistant Sub Inspectors who are directly appointed will be considered to be on probation for three years and are liable to be discharged at any time during or on the expiry of the period of their probation if they......" The rule prescribes a period of probation.
It, however, does not create a legal fiction that on the expiry of the prescribed period, the incumbent of a post of Inspector or Assistant Sub Inspector shall be deemed to have been confirmed.
The rule does not say that the period of probation shall not exceed the prescribed limit of three years.
The provisions is akin to that which fell for consideration of their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Sukhwant Singh v. State of Punjab, AIR 1962 SC 1711.
5.
Mr. Patwalia submits that the rule prescribes the maximum period during which an employee remains on probation.
It does not provide for extension.
Thus, the petitioner shall be deemed to have been confirmed on the expiry of the period of three years viz. on January 29, 1993.
6.
The contention is misconceived.
The rule does not say that the period of probation shall not exceed three years as was the position in State of Punjab v. Dharam Singh, 1968 SLR 247.
The provision herein is very clear.
It does not lay down a maximum period.
Consequently, there is no question of automatic confirmation.
Still further, the plea raised by the learned counsel is clearly negatived by the sequence of events.
Admittedly, the petitioner's performance was adversely commented upon in the report for the year 1991.
It was observed that he is a "habitual absentee".
He had been warned by the Superintendent of Police vide letter dated June 10, 1991.
Thereafter, in the report for the year 1992-93, it was pointed out that the petitioner's moral character was poor.
He did not take interest in his work.
His reliability was `doubtful' and that he was a habitual absentee.
Undoubtedly, the last part of the report regarding the petitioner being a habitual absentee was expunged.
However, his performance was adversely commented upon.
Thereafter, the petitioner had again been conveyed adverse remarks for the period from April 1, 1993 to September 30, 1993.
In this report, the petitioner's integrity was described as `doubtful'.
His moral character was not found to be good.
It was further observed that he did not take interest in modern methods of investigation.
His professional ability was not good and he was unreliable.
It was observed that the petitioner is "a dishonest and unreliable officer who needs close monitoring".
The petitioner had represented against the various remarks.
The representations were rejected.
In the background of this factual position, it is not surprising that the petitioner's period of probation was extended vide order dated November 3, 1993.
Thereafter, at the expiry of the extended period of probation, the authority appears to have considered the matter and formed an opinion that the petitioner is not suitable for continuing as a member of the disciplined force.
The order is in complete conformity with the rules.
In view of the facts as have been found by the authority, it could be clearly inferred that the petitioner was not suitable for continuance in service.
The innocuous order of discharge passed by the authority calls for no interference.
7.
A vague suggestion has been made on behalf of the petitioner that the remarks as well as the impugned order were actuated by extraneous considerations.
8.
The contention is wholly misconceived.
The remarks recorded by the various authorities as well as the order of discharge have been upheld not only by the Director General of Police but also by the Government as the petitioner's representation for review of the order of his discharge from service was rejected not only by the Director General of Police but even by the Government.
No other point has been raised.
In view of the above, there is no merit in this writ petition.
It is, consequently, dismissed in limine.
Petition dismissed.