Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was appointed as a Draftsman (Civil) vide order dated November 28, 1995.
A copy of this Order has been produced as Annexure P-3 with the writ petition.
This appointment was made "on work-charge basis for a period not exceeding six months on a specific contract or till regular selection is made whichever is earlier."
On April 16, 1996, the posts were advertised.
The eligible candidates along with the petitioner were called for interview.
The petitioner had appeared in the interview held on February 7, 1997.
On February 10, 1997, the result of the selection was finalised and declared.
The selected candidates were appointed by order dated February 14, 1997.
Vide a separate order of February 12, 1997, the petitioner was relieved of his duties.
The petitioner alleges that he had been duly selected by a regularly constituted Selection Committee prior to his appointment and that the action of the respondents in terminating his services is wholly illegal.
2.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioner has been controverted by the learned counsel for the respondents.
3.
On November 26, 1997, Mr. Suresh Monga, learned counsel for the petitioner, had stated before the Bench that the petitioner had been duly selected in response to the advertisement for appointment to the post of Draftsman.
In view of the categorical statement made by the learned counsel as also the fact that in paragraph 6 of the writ petition it had been stated by the petitioner that he was "selected by a duly constituted Selection Committee," we had directed that learned counsel for respondent No. 1 viz the Kurukshetra University to produce the original record.
4.
Mr. BL Gupta, learned counsel for respondent No. 1, has produced the file before us.
A perusal of the file shows that four posts of Draftsmen (C) along with the various other posts had been advertised by the Kurukshetra University on April 24, 1995.
The Selection Committee was duly constituted.
It had met on May 4, 1995.
After interviewing the various candidates, including the petitioner, four persons were selected.
The petitioner was not one of them.
Yet, vide order dated November 28, 1995, the petitioner was appointed on work charge basis.
Thus, the averment of the petitioner that he had been duly selected has no factual basis.
The averment made in the petition was false.
5.
Admittedly, the petitioner had been appointed on work charge basis in spite of the fact that he had not been selected.
This appointment was for a period not exceeding six months and subject to the specific condition that it will last "till regular selection is made--------."
The posts had been advertised in April, 1996.
The selection was made in February, 1997.
The petitioner was not selected.
Thus, he was asked to vacate the post to make room for one of the selected candidates.
The action was in strict conformity with the letter of appointment.
There was no illegality or arbitrariness which may call for interference under Article 226 of the Constitution.
6.
Learned counsel for the petitioner contends that the petitioner had been appointed on work charge basis.
Thus, he had a right to continue till the work was completed.
7.
The contention is wholly frivolous and baseless.
The letter of appointment categorically says that the appointment is for a period of six months or till a regular selection is made.
Regular selection having been made, the petitioner was liable to vacate the post.
He was rightly asked to leave the job.
The order was perfectly just and legal.
8.
Lastly, learned counsel for the petitioner has placed reliance on the decision of the Supreme Court in State of Maharashtra v. Purshotam and others, 1996(3) SCT 754.
The controversy in that case was wholly different and the decision of their Lordships does not help the petitioner in any way.
No other point has been raised.
In view of the above, there is no merit in the writ petition.
It is accordingly dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.