Sat Pal, J. - In this case, the petitioner had filed a writ petition seeking relief that he should be appointed as Naib Tehsildar in the category of Ex- servicemen in terms of the Haryana Government letter dated 6th March, 1972.
The case of the writ petitioner was that his father was killed during the Indo-Pak war in the year 1971 and he being the dependent of the service personnel killed, was entitled to be appointed in that category.
This writ petition was allowed by a Division Bench of this Court vide judgment dated 5th December, 1996.
The operative part of the judgment as reproduced herein below:  "We, therefore, allow the writ petition and direct the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner for appointment as Naib Tehsildar strictly in accordance with the reservation policy framed by the government for Ex- Servicemen and their dependents.
We also direct the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner according to order of priority indicated in the circular letter dated 631972.
If it is found that the petitioner is entitled to be appointed under category No. (ii), then he should be given appointment as Naib Tehsildar.
This exercise shall be completed within two months of the submission of a certified copy of this order.
In case it becomes necessary to terminate service of one of the appointees in order to make room for the petitioner, then service of such appointee shall be terminated after giving notice and opportunity of hearing to him."
The petitioner filed the present COCP No. 722 of 1997 on the ground that the judgment dated 5.12.1996 has not been complied with by the respondents.
Notice to show cause of this petition was issued to the respondents.
Separate replies on behalf of respondents 1 and 2 have been filed.
Along with the reply filed by respondent No. 2, proceedings of the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana, who had examined the case of the petitioner, have been annexed.
The proceedings further show that the petitioner was called by the Services Selection Board and he appeared before the Board.
The proceedings further show that the petitioner himself had admitted before the Board that soon after the death of his father, he was adopted by the uncle of his father in the presence of close relations and his adoptive father is still alive.
The petitioner has also admitted that he had applied to the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana, for the post of Clerk in the year 1986 and on being selected for the job of Clerk, he was given appointment in 1991.
He also admitted that he was selected on the recommendations of the Services Selection Board against the quota reserved for Ex-servicemen category.
The respondent No. 2 has also annexed the copy of the letter dated 3rd October, 1997 (Annexure R2/4) which shows that the petitioner was duly informed that in terms of the judgment dated 5th December, 1996, his case has been examined by the Services Selection Board and after consideration, his name was rejected as the Board had found him not entitled to the aforesaid priority category for reservation for Ex-servicemen.
The proceedings of the Subordinate Services Selection Board clearly show that the petitioner having been adopted by the uncle of his father soon after the death of his father, ceased to be the dependent of his deceased father and further he has already availed himself of the benefit of Ex-serviceman category when he was appointed as Clerk in the year 1981.
2.
In view of these facts, I am of the view that the judgment dated 5th December, 1996 has been complied with.
In case the petitioner is having any grievance against the order of rejection passed by the respondents, he may file a fresh petition, if so advised.
Accordingly this petition is dismissed.