PS Mishra, CJ.
- Heard.
2.
The charge which is allegedly proved reads as follows :  ``For having unauthorisedly absent for duties from 28.12.1992 onwards in continuation to reporting of private sick from 1812,1992 to 29.12.1992 resulted into effect in regular services causing inconvenience to the travelling public besides loss of revenues to the Corporation which costitutes misconduct in terms of Regulation 28 (xxxii) of APSRTC Conduct Regulations.''
Defence of the petitioner-appellant has been that he was treated by a private doctor for a period from 18.12.1992 to 29.12.1992 and submitted his fitness certificate on 521993 and requested to permit him to join duty.
The charge is said to have been proved.
The Disciplinary Authority has punished the petitioner-appellant by the order of removal from service.
The Appellate Authority has, however, said as follows :  ``As the charge is proved beyond any reasonable doubt, penalty of removal from service is imposed on him.
However, looking at his length of service put in by the driver in the Corporation, a lenient view is taken.
Party is reinstated into service to the following conditions :  (i) The party, Sri Shaik Qursheed, E. 61461 Driver of SRD depot is reinstated into service as a fresh driver.
(ii) He will not get any benefits of previous service, gratuity and leave benefits.
(iii) He has to undergo medical check-up in A.1 category.
His appointment is subject to medical fitness.''
Learned single Judge has, however, dismissed the writ petition and has held that once the charge is found to have been proved and removal from service is not held to be unjustifiable, reinstatement which is to be treated as a fresh appointment is only extended by way of sympathy.
3.
Learned Counsel for the appellant has urged before us that the petitioner-appellant was charged for about one month's unauthorised absence, in respect of which he has shown sufficient evidence.
In any way, for one month's unauthorised absence when punishment was imposed, 18 years of regular and faultless service is rendered ineffective.
Learned Counsel has urged harshness of the punishment would have promoted at least of examination of the materials on the basis of which the appellate authority would have decided what would be appropriate quantum of punishment.
Learned Counsel for the respondents has, however, tried to persuade us to hold that when for unauthorised absence, removal from service is imposed as punishment and a lenient view is taken by the appellate authority by way of sympathy to the appellant, this court should not interfere.
We have considered all aspects of the matter.
Lenient view is different from a decision whether the punishment which is imposed is grossly disproportionate to the alleged misconduct.
Appellate Authority has not adverted to this aspect of the matter and has not decided whether, on the facts of the case, one month's absence demanded removal from service and if not, removal from service by wiping out of eighteen years of regular service even for terminal benefits, non-payment of back-wages with continuity of service for all other purposes, would be justified or not, thus would be a question which the appellate authority must consider.
In view of the above, we are inclined to interfere with the impugned judgment to the limited extent only that matter shall be remitted to the appellate authority to consider afresh whether the present punishment of reinstatement which would be treated as a fresh appointment and which would give no benefit of either of the continuity of service or of terminal benefits of retirement to the appellant herein is justified.
4.
The writ petition and the appeal are accordingly ordered.
Order accordingly.