NK Kapoor, J - Appellant-petitioner, who retired as a Language Teacher sought direction to the respondents to grant him running grade as a Language Teacher for the period 1791951 to 15.5.1955 as well as the pensionary benefits to which he had become entitled.
2.
The claim of the petitioner was resisted by the State but the learned Single Judge relying upon a Division Bench judgment accepted the claim of the petitioner with regard to the release of running grade for the period 1791951 to 15.5.1955.
However, the learned Single Judge did not clearly mention in the order as to the pensionary benefits and the period for which he was entitled to claim.
Hence, the present appeal.
3.
The primary grievance of the appellant is that whereas the learned Single Judge ordered for release of the running grade to the appellant but has allowed the arrears of pay on this account from the date of filing of the petition.
Secondly the appellant's prayer for grant of pensionary benefits too has been declined (as the order is silent).
Learned counsel for the appellant, thus, argued that as the learned Single Judge had permitted the appellant the running grade for the period 1791951 to 15.5.1955, this period is also to be counted for the grant of pensionary benefits and other retiral benefits.
Thus, the order deserves to be modified.
4.
Counsel for the respondents on the other hand argued that petitioner's qualifying service for the purpose of pension is to be counted from the date he started contributing towards the provident fund under the Local Body or from the date of confirmation under the State Government.
Since in the present case the petitioner was confirmed with effect from 1651955 the consequential benefits for the period thereafter be given to him and not from 1791951.
5.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties as well as perused the order of the learned Single Judge.
As noticed above, the learned Single Judge has permitted the release of running grade for the period 1791951 to 15.5.1955.
Once running grade is released to the petitioner, the same is also to be taken into consideration to grant him the pensionary benefits.
We, thus, find merit in the plea of the appellant and direct the respondents to re-fix the pension of the petitioner on the basis of period of service from 1791951 as qualifying service and grant him the pensionary benefits, arrears of pension and other benefits as permissible be calculated and paid within a period of four months from the passing of this order.
However, since petitioner approached this Court long after his retirement on 3131979, the claim for arrears on account of enhancement of pension is confined to thirty eight months from the date of filing of the writ petition i.e. on 2531987.
In case the arrears are not paid to the petitioner within a period of four months, such arrears shall carry interest at the rate of 12% per annum till the same are paid.
No order as to costs.