KK Srivastava, J - This is an appeal against the judgment dated 20121990 of a learned Single Judge of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 176 of 1985 (Mukhtiar Singh v. The Additional Registrar, (Marketing) Cooperative Societies, Haryana, Chandigarh 17 and another, 1991(2) S.C.T.
262).
The appellant/Mukhtiar Singh was appointed as a Secretary of the Kurukshetra Central Co-operative Bank Ltd, Kurukshetra (in short to be referred as "the Bank") in the year 1975.
A regular enquiry was held into the charges of embezzlement of a sum of Rs.38,291/-, misappropriation of funds and negligence of duties against the appellant, who was placed under suspension vide endorsement No. Estt.
2/EA- 1/1979-24 dated 2621983.
A charge-sheet was served on him under Rule 27 of the Haryana State Central Cooperative Bank's Staff Service (Common Cadre) Rules, 1976 (hereinafter to be referred as "the Rules") vide memo No. Estt.
2/IA-1/ 5510 dated 1981993.
The appellant filed his reply to the charge- sheet, which was not found to be satisfactory.
Shri Atma Ram, Internal Additor of the Bank was appointed as Enquiry Officer to hold the enquiry into the said charges vide office endorsement No. Estt.
2/EA-1/9392-94 dated 3101983.
The enquiry officer found embezzlement of the sum of Rs5211/-.
He found misappropriation of Rs.4,000/-, Rs. 290/-, Rs. 560/- and Rs. 3,720/-, shown as embezzlement at serial numbers 2, 4, 5 and 6 of the charge sheet.
The charge of misappropriation of a sum of Rs. 23,500/- for the purchase of 200 bags of fertilizer was also found proved.
The charge relating to the Secretary keeping the cash in hand beyond the fixed limits, as mentioned in charge No. B.1, was also found fully proved.
The other charges regarding the appellant doing unauthorised business with the Society money with mala fide intention and of negligence of duties were also found fully established.
The report was considered by the Managing Director of the Bank, who was of the view that the charges proved against the appellants amounted to gross misconduct under Rule 271 (a) (b) (i) (k) (p) and (g) of the rules., A show cause notice alongwith th copy of the enquiry report, proposing to impose a penalty of dismissal from services under rule 28(a) of the rules, was served upon the appellant vide memo.
No. Estt-2/EA-1/83- 84/23676 dated 7.3.1984 and he was asked to appear before the Board of Administrators on 12.5.1984 at 1100AM for personal hearing, regarding which memo, No. Estt.
2/HA-1/21763 dated 751984 was acknowledged by the appellant on 751984.
The appellant appeared before the Board of Administrators on 12.5.1984 and after personal hearing, the cases was postponed and again taken up in the meeting held on 2771984 when the Board of Administrators resolved as under :-  "The case is considered thoroughly in the light of charge- sheet, enquiry report, show cause notice, served upon him.
He appeared before the Board of Administrators and the BOA unanimously decided to dismiss Shri Mukhtiar Singh, Secretary from the services of the Bank with immediate effect.
He is liable to the embezzlement and irregularities found during the tenure in the societies where he had worked."
This resolution was passed against item No. 14 of the agenda, which reads as under :-  14.
To consider the case of Shri Mukhtiar Singh, Secretary (under suspension) the Balai C/s in the light of the Charge Sheet memo No. Estt.
-II/EAI/5510 dated 19883 and enquiry report thereon."
The Managing Director communicated the order of dismissal of the appellant from the services of the bank under Rule 27.3(vi) and rule 35 of the rules vide order dated 2771984 (Annexure P.1).
2.
The appellant filed an appeal under rule 231 of the Rules against the order dated 2771984 passed by respondents No. 1 (Board of Administrators to the Additional Registrar (Marketing) Co-operative Societies, Haryana, Chandigarh) in the writ petition.
After hearing the appellant and the representative of the bank, the appellate authority dismissed the appeal on 12121984 (vide order Annexure P2).
Consequently the appellant filed Civil Writ Petition No. 176 of 1985, praying for quashing of the impugned orders Annexures P1 and P2.
The sole ground taken in the writ petition was that the order of dismissal was not passed by a competent authority.
The writ petition came up for hearing before GR Majuthia, J (as then he was) on 20121990.
The learned Single Judge upheld the contention of the petitioner that the order of dismissal of the services of the petitioner passed by the Managing Director was not passed by the competent authority.
Consequently the impugned order of dismissal of the petitioner/appellant from services of the bank was quashed and he was directed to be taken back in service with all consequential benefits.
The bank (respondent in the writ petition) held aggrieved against the judgment of the learned Single Judge and filed this appeal.
We have heard learned counsel for the appellant and learned counsel for the respondents.
We have also perused the judgment under appeal.
3.
Shri CB Gorl, learned counsel for the appellant contended that the services of Mukhtiar Singh/respondent No. 2 were dismissed vide order passed by the Board of Administrators of the bank and not by the managing Director.
In order to substantiate his argument, the learned counsel for the appellant placed on record copy of the resolution No. 14, passed by the Board of Administrators of the appellant-bank in its meeting held on 2771984 under the chairmanship of Shri Suderhsan Mohan, Managing Director of the bank, a person of which clearly shows that the decision was taken by the Board of Administrators of the bank.
Undisputedly, the punishing authority is the Board of Administrators.
A careful perusal of the impugned order Annexure P1 will go to show that the Managing Director had categorically mentioned that the Board of Administrators in its meeting held on 2771984 passed the resolution.
The resolution passed by the Board of Administrators was quoted within inverted commas.
The relevant portion of impugned order Annexure P1, containing the said resolution, reads as under :-  "The case was again put up before the Board of Administrators in its meeting held on 27.7.84 for the constitution and decision.
The Board of Administrators resolved that "The case is considered thoroughly in the light of charge-sheet, enquiry report, show cause notice, served upon him.
He appeared before the Board of Administrators and the B.O.A.
unanimously decided to dismiss Shri Mukhtiar Singh, Secretary from the Services of the bank with immediate effect.
He is liable to the embezzlement and irregularities could during the tenure in the societies where he had worked."
The learned Single Judge while considering the impugned order Annexure P1, held as under:-  The Board of Directors of respondent No. 2 is the competent authority to order the petitioners dismissal from service.
In the present case, the Board of Directors, at no point of time, had the opportunity to apply its mind to come to the conclusion on the basis of report of the Inquiry Committee that the facts warranted the imposition of penalty of dismissal from service.
The Administrative Committee appears to have endorsed the recommendations of the Managing Director suggesting that penalty of dismissal from service be imposed.
The Administrative Committee cannot attain the character of the Board of Directors.
The rule enjoins that the appointing authority has to impose the punishment of dismissal from service.
NO other authority was competent to do so.
In the instant case, the impugned order was passed by the Managing Director of respondent No. 1, who was not competent to do so.
Even if the Managing Director has got the order approved by the Administrative Committee, it will not be the order passed by the competent authority since the competent authority under the rules is the Board of Directors.
The plea taken by the respondents that the Managing Director only recommended that the penalty of dismissal from service is imposed on the petitioner but in fact, the decision was taken by the Administrative Committee appears to be incorrect.
The order of dismissal does not indicate that the proposal of the Managing Director regarding imposition of penalty of dismissal from service was accepted by the Administrative Committee.
The order is under the signatures of the Managing Director."
4.
Shri Arun Jain, learned counsel for respondent No.2/Mukhtiar Singh, drew out attention to Rule 29 of the rules, which shows the authorities specified in column 3 as the competent authorities to impose the penalties specified in column 2.
In order to appreciate the stand of learned counsel for respondent No. 2, the provisions of Rule 29 may be noticed, which read as under :-  "29.
Existing Provision The authorities specified in column 3 below shall in respect of all employees be competent to impose penalties specified in column 2.
S. No.
Nature of Penalty Competent Authority Appellate authority 1.
Censure Manager Board 2.
With-holding of increment or efficiency bar Manager Board  3.
Reduction in the rank, removal, dismissals, termination of a regular employee Appointing Authority Registrar 4.
Other penalties Manager Board 29(a) The authorities specified in column 3 below shall be competent to impose penalties specified in column 2 in respect of the employees working Primary Cooperative Credit and Service Societies :-  S. No.
Nature of Penalty Competent authority Appellate Authority 1 2,3.
4 1.
Censure/warning Managing Committee Managing Director of CB 2.
With-holding of increment or officiency bar.
-do- Board of Directors of C.Bs.
3.
Reduction in the rank removal dismissal 29(b) (New clause added vide RCS letter dated 14.12.83) The authorities specified in column 3 below shall be competent to impose penalties specified in column 2 in respect of the employees working in the Central Cooperative Banks :-  Sr. No.
Nature of Penalty Competent authority Appellate authority 1.
2.
3.
4.
1.
Censure/Warning Managing Director Board of directors 2.
With-holdingh of increment of efficiency bar -do- -do- 3.
Reduction in the rank removal dismissal, termination of a regular employee.
Appointing Authority 4.
Other penalties Managing Director.
Board of Directors."
5.
There is no dispute regarding the competent authority to impose the penalty of reduction in rank, removal, dismissal, termination of a regular employee.
As noticed earlier, the Board of Directors of the bank is admittedly the competent authority to impose the punishment of petitioner's dismissal from service.
The whole question is whether in the instant case, the order of dismissal has been passed by the Managing Director or by the Board of Directors.
A careful perusal of the impugned order Annexure P1 will go to show that the matter regarding consideration of the enquiry report was mentioned in item No. 14 of the agenda of the meeting held on 2771984 of the Board of Administrators and the Board duly considered the matter and took a decision to dismiss Mukhtiar Singh from services of the bank with immediate effect.
The decision of the Board has been quoted above.
6.
It was next argued by learned counsel for respondent No. 2/Mukhtiar Singh that no personal hearing was given to him as required by Rule 28(b), as amended by letter dated 541982.
This rule provides, inter-alia, that in case any charge is held to be proved, the employee shall be advised in writing of the nature of punishment proposed to be inflicted on him/her and he/she shall be given a hearing.
We do not find any merit in this submission also, for the simple reason that the decision of the Board of Administrators clearly shows that a personal hearing was allowed to Mukhtiar Singh/respondent and thereafter the Board of Administrators had unanimously taken the said decision.
As such, there is no violation of Rule 28(b) of the Rules.
Even the impugned order Annexure P1 shows that personal hearing was given to Mukhtiar Singh/respondent.
7.
In view of the foregoing discussion, we are of the considered view that this appeal has merit and deserves to be allowed.
The learned Single Judge was in error in holding that the order of dismissal of services of respondent No. 2/Mukhtiar Singh was passed by the Managing Director of the bank and not by the competent authority, i.e. the Board of Administrators of the Bank.
Accordingly, the appeal is allowed, the judgment of the learned Single Judge is set-aside and the writ petition being devoid of any substance is dismissed.
No order as to costs.