Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was working as a Clerk/Cashier in the State Bank of Patiala.
On June 17, 1994 the Manager of the Branch submitted a complaint to the Regional Manager alleging inter alia that the petitioner had disobeyed his orders and even slapped him.
Vide order dated June 20, 1994 the petitioner was placed under suspension.
He was served with a charge-sheet dated June 29, 1994.
A departmental enquiry was held.
Three charges were found to have been proved.
Thereafter a show cause notice dated January 27, 1997 was served on the petitioner.
He submitted his reply on February 24, 1997.
After consideration of the matter, the Disciplinary Authority ordered the petitioner to be compulsorily retired from service.
An incomplete copy of the order dated April 7, 1997 passed by the Disciplinary Authority has been produced as Annexure P8 with the Writ Petition.
The petitioner had the remedy of appeal against this order.
He did not avail of it.
Instead, he has chosen to file the present petition.
2.
We have heard Mr. SK Sharma, learned counsel for the petitioner.
The learned counsel challenges the order on the following grounds :  (i) In the Show Cause Notice the penalty of stoppage of six annual grade increments was proposed.
However, by the impugned order the petitioner has been compulsorily retired from service.
Since the punishment is in excess of the penalty proposed in the Show Cause Notice, the order cannot be sustained; (ii) The charge-sheet was vague.
The list of witnesses was not supplied and, therefore, the impugned order cannot be sustained; (iii) Copy of the preliminary report was also not supplied; and (iv) The Enquiry Officer had found that charge (b) was not established.
Yet, in the Show Cause Notice it was wrongly observed that the said charge had been proved.
On the above grounds, the learned counsel contended that the impugned order of penalty cannot be sustained.
3.
A perusal of the charge-sheet shows that the following allegations had been made against the petitioner :  ``(a) That you refused to obey the lawful orders of the Branch Manager for completion of current account long book dated 861994.
(b) That you refused to receive the letter dated 17.6.1994 calling for your explanation which was sent to you through Smt. Sushila, part-time worker of the branch.
(c) That you tore the said letter dated 17.6.1994 in pieces in the cabin of the Branch Manager.
(d) That you misbehaved, manhandled and slapped the Branch Manager on the face in his cabin on 17.6.1994.''
4.
The petitioner submitted his reply to the charge-sheet.
He never complained that the charges were vague or that the list of witnesses had not been supplied to him.
He never made a prayer for the supply of these documents.
Thereafter an enquiry was held.
A copy of the Enquiry Report is Annexure P5 with the Writ Petition.
The Enquiry Officer after detailed examination of the evidence held that ``charges (a), (c) and (d) of the charge-sheet dated 2961994 (sic) in the E.P.A.
are proved against him.
However the charge (b) could not be proved against him.''
Thereafter the Show Cause Notice dated January 27, 1997 was served.
It was based on the findings recorded by the Enquiry Officer regarding the three charges which have been proved against the petitioner.
The proposed penalty was contained in the last paragraph.
The petitioner was not called upon to show cause as to why his six annual grade increments be not stopped.
On the contrary, he was asked to show cause as to why the penalty of dismissal in terms of clause 19.6(a) of ______ may not be imposed upon'' him.
The petitioner had submitted his reply.
Thereafter order of compulsory retirement was passed.
An incomplete copy of the order has been produced as Annexure P8 with the Writ Petition.
However even though it has been averred in the petition that a copy of the order has been produced yet only an incomplete document has been placed on the file.
It is in the background of this factual position that the contentions raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner have to be considered.
5.
Re.
(i)  As noticed above, the penalty proposed by the Disciplinary Authority was of dismissal and not stoppage of six annual grade increments.
The contention raised by the learned counsel is based on a misreading of the Show Cause Notice.
It had undoubtedly been observed that in the year 1989 the petitioner had been held responsible for gross misconduct and his six annual grade increments had been stopped.
However, the penalty proposed for the misconduct which was the subject-matter of the proceedings was dismissal and not the stoppage of six annual grade increments.
The contention being apparently contrary to the Notice, cannot be sustained.
Still further, a reply to the Show Cause Notice was submitted by the petitioner.
He was aware of the actual penalty which had been proposed.
Even he had not contended that the penalty was only of stoppage of increments and not of dismissal.
Consequently the first contention is wholly lacking in merit and is rejected.
6.
Re.
(ii)  It was contended that the charge-sheet is vague.
Thus the impugned order of penalty cannot be sustained.
Learned counsel also referred to the decision of their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Transport Commissioner, Madras-5 v. A Radha Krishna Moorthy, 1995(3) RSJ 85 to contend that no penalty can be imposed on the basis of vague charges.
While there is no quarrel with the proposition as enunciated in the aforesaid decision, the factual premises on which the contention is sought to be raised is wholly lacking.
The charges as levelled against the petitioner have been noticed above.
These are not a vague.
They are clearly specific.
All the necessary details have been disclosed in the charges.
Still further, neither at the stage of submission of reply to the charge-sheet nor during the enquiry proceedings did the petitioner raise any objection regarding the charges.
In fact he categorically admitted that he clearly understood the charges.
Still further, even in his reply to the Show Cause Notice the petitioner had not complained that the charges against him were vague.
The contention now sought to be raised is wholly misconceived and cannot be accepted.
Learned counsel also tried to contend that the list of witnesses had not been supplied to him.
No such contention has been raised either in reply to the charge-sheet or in the Writ Petition.
The point which has not been raised cannot be allowed to be raised at this stage.
Still further, even if it is assumed that the list of witnesses was not supplied along with the charge-sheet, no prejudice can be said to have been caused to him in the circumstances of the present case.
A perusal of the Enquiry Report indicates that the list of documents and witnesses etc. was duly supplied to the petitioner during the course of enquiry.
The witnesses were cross-examined by the petitioner.
No prejudice whatsoever is shown to have been caused to the petitioner during the proceedings.
In fact such a complaint was not made either in reply to the Show Cause Notice or even in the Writ Petition.
Consequently even the second contention raised by the learned counsel is rejected.
7.
Re.
(iii)  Learned counsel submitted that the copy of the Enquiry Report submitted by the Authority after the preliminary enquiry was not supplied to the petitioner.
It is the admitted position that the preliminary enquiry had been conducted immediately after the receipt of the complaint and before the issue of the charge-sheet.
The purpose was only to decide as to whether or not it was necessary to hold a regular enquiry.
Since the charge-sheet was served after the preliminary enquiry and the petitioner was given full opportunity during the course of the regular enquiry, it cannot be said that any prejudice was caused to him by the non-supply of the copy of the preliminary enquiry report.
Still further, no such grievance appears to have been made by the petitioner in his reply to the Show Clause Notice given by the Authority.
Nothing has been produced to show that even during the enquiry proceedings the petitioner had asked for a copy of the report.
In this situation, it cannot be said that the impugned order is vitiated on this ground.
8.
Re.
(iv)  Lastly, it was contended that in spite of the fact that charge (b) was not proved against the petitioner, the Show Cause Notice was issued on the assumption that the said charge was proved.
Even this contention is wholly misconceived and against facts.
Charge (b) was as follows :  ``That you refused to receive the letter dated 17.6.1994 calling for your explanation which was sent to you through Smt. Sushila, part-time worker of the branch.''
In the Show Cause Notice the three charges other than the above, have been mentioned.
The contention raised by the learned counsel is apparently contrary to the facts.
No other point has been raised.
In view of the above, since the answer to all the four questions raised by the petitioner is against him, there is no merit in this Writ Petition.
It is consequently dismissed in limine.
Petition dismissed.