Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioners are working as teachers in the S.D.
Kanya Maha Vidyalya, Rampura Phul, District Bhatinda.
They had joined service during the period from April 2, 1956 to September 1, 1967.
2.
On October 18, 1979, the State Government notified the Punjab Civil Services Revised Scales of Pay Rules, 1979.
These rules were made effective from January 1, 1978.
The petitioners were granted their next increment on December 1, 1978.
They allege that the teachers who had joined service after them on January 16, 1969, and were thus junior have, in fact, been granted the next increment with effect from January 16, 1978.
As a result, the juniors are drawing a higher rate of pay than the seniors.
Replying on the provisions of Section 7 of the Privately, Managed Recognised Schools, Employees (Security of Service) Act, 1979, the petitioners claim that their ``scale of pay and dearness allowance.....shall not be less than those of the employees of the State Government holding corresponding posts.....'' They further point out that in case where the scales of pay in the private schools are less than those of the employees of the State Government holding correspondent posts, the Director is under a duty to ``direct the managing committee to bring the same at par.........'' The representations submitted by them having yielded no fruitful results, they have approached this Court with the prayer that the respondents be directed to give them the first increment in the revised scale with effect from January 2, 1978, and that the order by which their pay was fixed on the hypothesis that the next increment was to be released in December, 1978, be set aside.
3.
The respondents contest the petitioner's claim on the ground that the proviso (ii) of rule 7(1) of the Punjab Civil Services Revised Scales of Pay Rules, 1979, does not apply to the employees of the privately managed aided schools according to the order issued by the State Government vide letter dated January 21, 1981.
It has been further stated that the error which had crept into the circular at Annexure R1 was rectified by the issue of a corrigendum dated February 2, 1981.
On these premises, the respondents maintain that the relief claimed by the petitioners is not admissible to them.
4.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
5.
Section 7 of the Punjab Privately Managed Recognised Schools Employees (Security of Service) Rules, 1979, is in the following terms :-  ``7.
Salaries of Employees:- Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 3, the scales of pay and dearness allowance of the employees shall not be less than those of the employees of the State Government holding corresponding posts in the schools run by the State Government :  Provided that where the scales of pay and dearness allowance of the employees are less than those of the employees of the State Government holding corresponding posts in the schools run by the State Government the Director shall direct the concerning managing committee to bring the same at par with those of such employees of the State Government.''
This provision is symbolic of the legislative intent.
It is meant to guarantee equality in the matter of scales of pay and allowances to the employees of the private schools vis-a-vis those working in the Government schools.
Legislature has also laid down that in cases where the scales of pay are lower, the managing committee shall be directed to bring them at par with those of the employees of the State Government.
This legislative mandate in the very nature of things is not only directed towards the private managements but it is also equally applicable to the State Government itself.
Resultantly, it is not only necessary that there should be parity of scale of pay but even the allowances etc. or the method of fixation of pay cannot and should not be different.
If the grant of a higher pay to a junior entitles a senior person to the grant of an extra increment in a Government school, there is no reason to treat an employee working in a private school in a different way.
6.
The circular issued by the Government regarding the application of the Punjab Civil Services Revised Scale of Pay Rules, 1979, has to be read in such a way that it does not militate against the legislative intent, as evidenced by the provisions of section 7 of the 1979 Act.
Still further, there appears to be no reasonable basis for suggesting that only the provisions of rule 7(1)(ii) shall not apply to the teachers working in private schools.
The circular, a copy of which is at Annexure R1 with the written statement, apparently implies that the provisions of 1979 Rules shall apply to the teachers in private schools except rule 7(1)(ii).
No basis whatsoever has been indicated in the circular which may justify this differential treatment.
7.
There is another aspect of the matter.
If the stand of the respondents is accepted, it would lead to inequitable results.
It is the admitted position that Smt. Bir Bala and Smt. Sarla Devi had joined service in January, 1969.
As against this, the petitioner had joined service prior to that date.
On January 16, 1978, these two teachers were given an increment while the petitioners were given a similar benefit on December 1, 1978.
Resultantly, from January 16 to November, 1978, the petitioners, at least some of them, were drawing lower salary than their juniors.
Such a course of action militates against the basic concept of fairness which governs the functioning of the State Government.
8.
In view of the above, the writ petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to refix the petitioners' pay by giving them the benefit of an increment as claimed by them.
The needful shall be done within three months from the date of the receipt of a certified copy of this order.
The arrears that may become due to the petitioners shall be paid to them within one month of decision.
In case the payment is not made in accordance with the above directions, the petitioners shall be entitled to the arrears with interest at the rate of 12 per cent from the date of accrual till the date of actual payment.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.