We have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length and perused the paper-book.
2.
The grievance of the petitioner is that inspite of being senior to respondent Nos. 7 to 16, he has not been promoted to Junior Management Grade Scale-I (JMGS-I).
The promotion from the post of Clerk to JMGS-I is to be made on the basis of selection criteria laid down in the Regional Rural Banks (Appointment and Promotion of Officers and other Employees) Rules, 1998, which has been adopted by respondent No. 4-Bank on 4.10.1999.
The promotion policy lays down that promotion shall be made on the basis of seniority-cum-merit.
The selection process for promotees is given in Clause (J), as under :-  "(J) Selection Process for Promotees : The selection shall be on the basis of performance in the written test, interviews and five years performance Appraisal Reports, as per the division of marks given below :- (A) Written Test  : 70 Marks (B) Interview  : 20 Marks (C) Performance Appraisal Report  : 10 Marks Total Marks  : 100 Marks (A) Written Test (70 Marks) : The Candidates shall be required to appear for written test comprising test in English and test in Banking Law, practice and procedures including working procedures in the Regional Rural Bank concerned.
70 Marks allotted to written test shall be further divided as under :- English  35 Marks Banking Law Practice and Procedures  35 Marks Total Marks  70 Marks A list of only those candidates who secure a minimum of 40% marks each in the English, Banking Law, Practice and Procedures shall be prepared.
The Bank, thereafter shall prepare in the list of selected candidates in the order of seniority to the extent of hundred per cent of the vacancies for promotion for the purpose of calling for interview."
It is not disputed between the parties that the petitioner has successfully cleared the written test.
The petitioner has also received 10 Marks on the basis of Appraisal Report.
However, the petitioner has only got 8 marks out of 20 in the Interview.
Thus, the petitioner had secured only 54 Marks.
In order to be eligible for promotion, the candidate must secure at least 55 marks in the aggregate.
The petitioner not having secured the requisite minimum marks, has not been promoted.
3.
Mr. Gupta, learned counsel for the petitioner, has vehemently argued that the petitioner could not have been ignored from promotion as the criteria for promotion is seniority-cum-merit.
The respondents, therefore, could not have fixed a bench mark.
In support of the submission, the learned counsel has relied on judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of BV Sivaiah and others etc. v. K Addanki Babu and others, 1998(4) SCT 46 (SC) : AIR 1998 Supreme Court 2565.
4.
Mr. Bajwa, learned counsel appearing for respondent Nos. 1 to 6 argues that the petitioner had only right to be considered for promotion.
He has been duly considered.
Therefore, no relief can be granted to the petitioner.
He has participated in the selection process and cannot now be permitted to challenge the same.
Learned counsel thereafter made a reference to the additional affidavit filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 to 6 on 1482006 and submitted that the Board of Directors of the respondents-Bank had introduced a bench mark in the meeting held on 182002.
The competent authority, according to Mr. Bajwa, had decided to fix 55 marks as a minimum bench mark for promotion from the post of Clerk to the post of JMGS-I for General Category and 50% marks for the SC/ST candidates.
The interview of the candidates who had qualified the written test, was held on 26122002.
According to the learned counsel, the judgment relied on by the counsel for the petitioner in the case of BV Sivaiah and others (supra), instead of supporting the claim of the petitioner, rather supports the case of the respondents.
Mr. Gupta also points out that against the non-promotion, the petitioner had filed a statutory appeal which has been dismissed by the respondents, without passing a speaking order.
In reply to this, Mr. Bajwa submits that the competent authority had considered the appeal filed by the petitioner in the light of the promotion policy and dismissed the same.
He also submits that the writ petition deserves to be dismissed as no legal right of the petitioner has been infringed.
5.
We have considered the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties.
Undoubtedly, the promotion policy lays down that promotion shall be made on the basis of seniority-cum-merit.
The promotion cases of all the candidates have been considered by a Committee consisting of the Chairman of the concerned Regional Rural Bank; a Director nominated by the sponsor Bank and a Director nominated by the Nationalised Bank.
The aforesaid Committee had laid down the selection process in which a candidate was required to appear in the written test and interview.
Marks were also allotted for the Performance Appraisal Report.
The further condition was attached to the written test that out of the 70 marks, a candidate must secure a minimum 40 marks each in English, Banking Law Practice and Procedure.
The Bank thereafter shall prepare the list of selected candidates in order of seniority.
No minimum qualifying marks were prescribed for the interview.
However, the Board of Directors had introduced the minimum bench mark which provided that in order to be eligible for being promoted, a candidate must secure a total of 55 marks in the aggregate.
As pointed out in the written statement as well as by Mr. Bajwa, at the time of hearing of the case, the petitioner had obtained only 54 marks in the aggregate.
Last candidate selected had secured 62 marks.
In such circumstances, we are of the considered opinion that no injustice has been done to the petitioner.
Mr. Gupta has placed strong reliance on the observations made by the Supreme Court in the case of BV Sivaiah and others (supra) in paragraph 17 wherein it has been observed as under :-  "17.
On behalf of the promoted officers, it was urged that for the purpose of promotion on the basis of seniority-cum-merit, seniority means the length of service and that among officers who were appointed on the same date and have the same length of service seniority can have no bearing and promotion has to be made on a comparative assessment of merits of such Officer.
We are unable to agree.
While applying the principle of seniority- cum-merit for the purpose of promotion what is required to be considered is inter se seniority of the employees who are eligible for consideration.
Such seniority is normally determined on the basis of length of service, but as between employees appointed on the same date and having the same length of service, it is generally determined on the basis of placement in the select list for appointment.
Such determination of seniority confers certain rights and principle of seniority-cum-merit gives effect to the such rights flowing from seniority.
It cannot, therefore, be said that in the matter of promotion on the basis of seniority-cum-merit seniority has no role where the employees eligible for promotion were appointed on the same date and have the same length of service."
6.
In our opinion, these observations cannot be of any assistance to the petitioner.
7.
In fact the submission made by Mr. Gupta has been answered by the Supreme Court in paragraph 18 of the judgment which is as follows :-  "18.
We thus arrive at the conclusion that the criterion of "seniority-cum- merit" in the matter of promotion postulates that given the minimum necessary merit requisite for efficiency of administration the senior, even though less meritorious, shall have priority and a comparative assessment of merit is not required to be made.
For assessing the minimum necessary merit, the competent authority can lay down the minimum standard that is required and also prescribe the mode of assessment of merit of the employee who is eligible for consideration for promotion.
Such assessment can be made by assigning marks on the basis of appraisal of performance on the basis of service record and interview prescribing the minimum marks which would entitle a person to be promoted on the basis of seniority-cum-merit."
8.
A perusal of the aforesaid observations clearly shows that the Supreme Court has held that the competent authority can lay down the minimum standard that is required and also prescribe the mode of assessment of merit of the employee who is eligible for consideration for promotion.
It is categorically held that the assessment can be made on the basis of assigning marks on the basis of appraisal of performance, on the basis of service record and interview and prescribing the minimum marks which entitle a person to be promoted on the basis of seniority-cum-merit.
Further in paragraphs 36 and 37 of the judgment, the Supreme Court considered a similar provision contained in the promotion policy of the concerned Bank and held as follows :-  "36.
Chindwara-Seoni Kshetriya Gramin Bank : By order dated April 8, 1993, promotions were made to the post of Area/Senior Manager in the Chhindwara- Seoni Kshetriya Gramin Bank on the basis of the recommendations made by a Selection Committee.
The said recommendations were made on the basis of marks awarded after interview and assessment of the performance of the candidates eligible for promotion.
The said promotions were challenged before the Madhya Pradesh High Court by filing a Writ Petition (MP No. 1931 of 1993) which has been allowed by the learned single Judge by his judgment dated February 7, 1997 in view of the earlier judgment dated July 24, 1996 passed in MP No. 943 of 1993.
The said judgment was based on the judgment of the Division Bench of the High Court in LPA No. 151 of 1996.
Civil Appeal arising out of Special Leave Petition (C) No. 7321 of 1997 has been filed by one of the promoted officers against the said judgment of the learned single Judge of the High Court.
37.
During the course of hearing of the appeal the learned counsel for the respondent-Bank has placed before us the relevant documents relating to the impugned selection and promotion.
On a perusal of the said documents, we find that 50 marks out of the total of 100 marks were prescribed as the minimum qualifying marks for interview and only those who had obtained the qualifying marks in interview were selected for promotion on the basis of seniority.
It was, therefore, a case where a minimum standard was prescribed for assessing the merit of the candidates and those who fulfilled the said minimum standard were selected for promotion on the basis of seniority.
In the circumstances, it cannot be said that the selection has not been made in accordance with the principle of "seniority-cum-merit".
We are, therefore, unable to uphold the impugned judgment of the High Court.
The appeal has to be allowed and the impugned judgment of the High Court has to be set aside and the promotion of the appellant on the post of Area/Senior Manager under order dated April 8, 1993 has to be affirmed."
These observations make it abundantly clear that the action of the respondents cannot be said to be either arbitrary, unreasonable or against the promotion policy.
In view of the above, we find no merit in the writ petition and the same is hereby dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.