NK Sodhi, J - Petitioner joined as a Lecturer in Vaish College, Rohtak on 1.8.1969.
While he was working there he was selected as Lecturer in GMN College, Ambala (for short the college) where he joined on 18101973 and is continuing to work there.
The Haryana Government considered the proposal of introducing the Merit Promotion Scheme of UGC for the Lecturers of private affiliated colleges in the State and decided to grant selection grade of Rs. 1200-1840 to the Lecturers on the terms and conditions mentioned in the letter dated 1551987 from the Commissioner and Secretary to Government Haryana, Education Department to the Director of Higher Education.
The number of selection grade posts in private college were 20% of the permanent posts in the college and the selection grade was to be granted on the basis of seniority and service record.
In partial modification of the earlier letter dated 1551987 the State Government sanctioned the grant of selection grade to the Lecturers working in private colleges who had 20 years regular service as, Lecturer in a college on 1121985.
It appears that the Merit Promotion Scheme was further modified and the selection grade was granted to Lecturers after 16 years of regular service on 1121985.
All other conditions and the mode of grant of selection grade remained the same as indicated in the letter dated 1551987.
2.
Petitioner claimed that he was entitled to the selection grade as he had the requisite years of service to his credit after counting the service rendered by him in Vaish College, Rohtak.
The Screening Committee set up by the college recommended the case of the petitioner for the grant of selection grade and the Managing Committee of the College concurred with that recommendation.
However, when the matter went to the State Government the selection grade was not sanctioned to the petitioner only on the ground that he did not have 16 years of regular service as a Lecturer in the college on 1121985.
The service rendered by him in Viash College, Rohtak was not counted.
It was then that he filed the present petition under Article 226 of the Constitution for a direction to the respondents to count his service rendered in Vaish College towards the period of 16 years so as to entitle him to claim the selection grade.
3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondents 1 and 2, it is pleaded that the petitioner did not fulfil the condition of 16 years regular service in the college on 1121985 and therefore, he is not entitled to the selection grade.
4.
The sole question that arises for consideration in this petition is whether the service rendered by the petitioner in Vaish College, Rohtak is to be counted towards the period of 16 years, If it is counted, he had 16 years of service as on 1121985 and would be entitled to the grant of selection grade but not otherwise.
This question came up before GS Singhvi, J in Dr. Romilla Jain v. The State of Haryana and another, in civil writ petition 11125 of 1993 : 1995(3) SCT 53 (P&H), and the same was answered in favour of the petitioner.
In that case the petitioner had resigned from DN College on 30111988 and joined Geeta Vidya Mandir Girls College, Sonepat on 1121988 and there being no physical break in her service the learned Judge directed the respondents therein to consider her case for the grant of selection grade after counting the service rendered by her in the DN College.
Applying the ratio of that case to the case in hand, it must be held that the past service rendered by the petitioner in Vaish College, Rohtak is to be taken into account for counting 16 years of regular service in the college.
If this is done, the petitioner had the requisite years of service to his credit on 1121985.
He is, therefore, entitled to the grant of selection grade as claimed by him.
5.
Before concluding, it may be mentioned that the learned counsel for respondents 5 and 6 expressed an apprehension that the petitioner was junior to the respondents and that he should not be given seniority over them merely because his claim for the grant of selection grade is being allowed by the Court.
The apprehension of the learned counsel is without any basis.
The question of interse seniority between the petitioner and respondent 5 and 6 was not raised by Mr. Patwalia during the course of arguments and nor has the same been decided.
6.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed and the respondents are directed to count the previous service of the petitioner rendered in Vaish College, Rohtak and grant him the selection grade as claimed by him.
No costs.
Petition allowed.