Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioners in these four writ petitions complain that the Punjab State Electricity Board has wrongly ignored their claims for appointment to the posts of Auxiliary Plant Attendants.
The respondents contest this claim.
Counsel for the petitioners have referred to the factual position in Civil Writ Petition No. 2161 of 1994.
It may be briefly noticed.
2.
The Board issued circulars on October 28, 1991 and on November 20, 1991 inviting applications for appointments to the posts of Auxiliary Plant Attendants at the Thermal Plants in Ropar and Bathinda.
However, no selection was made.
On July 29, 1992, a fresh circular was issued by which applications were invited for 30 posts of Auxiliary Plant Attendants.
Persons working on regular, work-charged and daily wages who fulfilled the prescribed qualifications were eligible to apply.
It was inter alia provided that the candidate should have "at least 3 years experience as Plant Attendant on Condensor, Boiler Feed Pump and other Auxiliaries of Thermal Plant of minimum 15 MW capacity or above."
The petitioners who are working as Sub Station Attendants applied for these posts.
3.
On September 24, 1992, a Committee constituted to consider the claim of the Sub Station Attendants for the posts of Auxiliary Plant Attendants, submitted its report.
It was of the view that "since the seniority of Sub Station Attendants (including those working at Thermal Plants) is being maintained at Board's level for their promotion as Sub Station Operators and their basic duty on the plants is to operate switch gears, which is similar to the duties of Sub Station Attendants in the Distribution, they should not be considered for the posts of Auxiliary Plant Attendants."
The petitioners were not treated as eligible for appointment to the posts of Auxiliary Plant Attendants.
The Selection Committee after examination of the matter prepared a list.
A notice dated December 14, 1992 was issued.
It was inter alia observed that the Selection Committee had checked the documents of the candidates and drawn "a tentative seniority list."
The list could be inspected in the office of the Superintending Engineer and in case, any of the eligible candidates "have any objections in respect of the list they can make individual representations..... in writing .... upto 18121992 - 11 am" The petitioners claim that they represented.
However, the objections were decided only on October 7, 1993 when one of the petitioners was informed that the Sub Station Attendants were entitled to be considered to the posts of Sub Station Operators and as such, he is not eligible for the post of Auxiliary Plant Attendant.
This was done only after the petitioners had filed CWP No. 1350 of 1993.
The petitioners claim that the report dated September 24, 1992 submitted by the Sub Committee, the list prepared by the Selection Committee and the order rejecting their representation, copies of which have been produced on record as Annexures P.3 to P.5, are illegal and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
They pray that these orders be quashed and that the respondents be directed by the issue of a writ in the nature of mandamus to consider their claim for the posts of Auxiliary Plant Attendants in the direct recruitment quota.
They also pray that the Board should be restrained from appointing respondent Nos. 5 to 39 to the posts in question.
4.
The solitary petitioner in CWP No. 3913 of 1995 has only impugned the recommendation dated September 24, 1992 made by the Sub Committee, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P 2 and the letter dated July 7, 1993 sent by an officer of the Board to the Director, Personnel in respect of Balbir Chand, Sub Station Operator.
The petitioner claims that these orders on the basis of which he has been denied selection and appointment to the post of Auxiliary Plant Attendant be quashed and that the respondents be directed to consider his claim.
5.
In Civil Writ Petition No. 11707 of 1994, the petitioners claim that the recommendations of the Committee contained in the letter dated September 24, 1992 by which the petitioners' names were not included in the list prepared by the Selection Committee be quashed.
6.
Civil Writ Petition No. 10746 of 1993 has been filed by persons who are working as Junior Plant Attendants.
They pray for the issue of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to consider and appoint them as Auxiliary Plant Attendants.
7.
Separate written statements have been filed by the official respondents in all the four cases.
Since the selected candidates have been impleaded as respondent Nos. 5 to 39 in only CWP No. 2161 of 1994, the reply filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 to 4 in this petition may be briefly noticed.
The respondents have stated by way of preliminary objections that CWP Nos. 708 and 1350 of 1993 had been filed in this court raising issues similar to those arising in these cases.
The former case was dismissed vide judgment dated Feburary 15, 1994 by one of us (Jawahar Lal Gupta, J).
The other case was dismissed as withdrawn.
The qualifications etc. for the post could be laid down only by the experts.
The matter had been considered by the Sub Committee.
It had made its recommendations.
The duties of the Sub Station Attendants are limited to the Switch gears or Control Room.
The other categories coming within the purview of Plant Attendants like Junior Plant Attendants, Electricians Grade I, Chargemen, Assistant Foremen and Plant Operators etc. are required to do all kinds of operations and maintenance of the plant.
The Committee had rightly found that the duties of the Sub Station Attendants related to the distribution of power while those of the Plant Attendants were to generate power.
The Sub Station Attendants are eligible for promotion to the posts of Sub Station Operators while the Plant Attendants are considered for promotion to the posts of Auxiliary Plant Attendants.
In this manner, there is a valid basis for classification and there is no violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
It has been further pointed out that even though initially, a few persons as mentioned by the petitioners had been selected for the posts of Auxiliary Plant Attendants from amongst the Sub Station Attendants but later on in view of the experience, the matter was referred to the Sub Committee.
The action was taken in pursuance of the recommendations of the Committee.
Since the petitioners do not possess the requisite experience they have not been appointed as Auxiliary Plant Attendants.
Broadly on these premises, the respondents maintain that there is no merit in this petition which should be dismissed.
8.
Mr. Amar Vivek, counsel for the petitioners contended that the selection made by the respondents was wholly arbitrary and invalid.
No selection committee had ever met.
Only a seniority list, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P4 was drawn.
The petitioners were never heard before their claims were rejected.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioners was controverted by Mr. NK Gupta who appeared for the respondents.
He submitted that the employer had the right to lay down the qualifications and to choose the source of recruitment.
9.
The short question that arises for consideration is :- Have the respondents acted illegally or arbitrarily in taking the view that the Sub Station Attendants are not eligible for appointment to the posts of Auxiliary Plant Attendants ?
10.
It is true that initially, the Board was considering the claims of Sub Station Attendants for promotion to the posts of Auxiliary Plant Attendants.
The petitioners have mentioned the names of four persons who had been appointed as Auxiliary Plant Attendants from amongst the Sub Station Attendants.
It was, however, in the light of the experience that the matter was referred to the Sub Committee.
On consideration, it was found that the Sub Station Attendants were not experienced to work as Auxiliary Plant Attendants.
It was, thus, considered proper that the Sub Station Attendants may continue to be promoted to the posts of Sub Station Operators while only those who were dealing with the generation of power be considered for appointment as Auxiliary Plant Attendants.
The classification based on the difference in nature of duties and the consequential experience gained by the two categories of employees is rational and has a reasonable nexus with the object of choosing suitable persons to man the posts.
It is not arbitrary or unfair.
It cannot be said that the Board had acted either illegally or unfairly in accepting the view taken by the Sub Committee.
In doing so, it did not violate any statutory rule or even any executive instructions.
The action was not arbitrary or unfair.
11.
Mr. Aggarwal submitted that no selection committee had been constituted.
No interviews were held.
Only a seniority list was prepared.
Thus, the action of the respondents was arbitrary and unfair.
12.
This does not appear to be the correct position.
The contention is belied by the pleadings of the parties.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents in CWP No. 10746 of 1993, it has been pointed out that the Board had "in its own wisdom restricted the vacancies of direct quota to the employees of the Board....." The persons who possessed the prescribed qualifications and experience had applied.
The Selection Committee had considered the qualifications and experience.
The "names of the persons found eligible are arranged in order of seniority in select list and the appointments to such vacancies are made from amongst the persons borne on said select list in order of the names so arranged subject to the other service conditions."
This is perfectly just and fair.
It eliminates all chances of manipulation.
In other words, eligible candidates have been put on the select list in order of their seniority and the appointments have been made in that order.
In fact nothing has been produced on record to show that it was not so or that any eligible candidate had been excluded from consideration.
In this process, the selection committee was virtually left with no discretion except to verify the eligibility of the candidates.
Another aspect which deserves mention is that the Committee not only prepared the list but even invited objections against it.
This gave the eligible candidates an opportunity to show that their names had not been mentioned in the order of their seniority.
The procedure followed by the Committee was absolutely just and fair.
In fact, nothing could be more fair.
13.
Mr. Aggarwal submitted that the respondents had erred in selecting persons without giving the petitioners an opportunity of being heard.
This contention is wholly misconceived.
The persons who were working as Sub Station Attendants were not eligible.
Yet, they claim that they should have been heard.
What for ?
Learned counsel was unable to explain.
Even we are not able to find any justification for the contention raised by the learned counsel.
It was wholly misconceived and is rejected.
In view of the above, the question as posed above is answered against the petitioners.
It is held that the action of the respondents in excluding the Sub Station Attendants from consideration for promotion to the posts of Auxiliary Plant Attendants was neither arbitrary nor unfair.
The selection is legal and valid.
It infringes no law.
Consequently, it calls for no interference.
14.
In CWP No. 3913 of 1995, as already noticed, the petitioner has impugned the recommendations made by the Sub Committee on September 24, 1992 and the letter dated July 7, 1993 which is a copy of the letter in respect of Balbir Chand.
No arguments were addressed by the learned counsel in support of the grounds raised in the petition.
As already observed, the recommendations made by the Committee were based on consideration of the relevant material.
The classification was rational and had a reasonable nexus with the object of choosing suitable persons for appointment to the higher posts.
No ground for interference is made out.
The above view shall also apply to CWP No. 11707 of 1994.
However, it deserves to be mentioned in addition to what has been said above that the petitioners (Angrej Singh etc.) had also filed CWP No. 708 of 1993.
It was dismissed.
They had then filed LPA No. 854 of 1994.
Vide order dated August 26, 1994, the writ petition was dismissed as withdrawn.
No right to file any other petition was reserved.
It was not even mentioned that the petitioners have filed CWP No. 11707 of 1994.
Consequently, it was rightly conceded by the learned counsel that the second petition would be barred in law.
15.
In CWP No. 10746 of 1993, the petitioners are working as Junior Plant Attendants.
It has not been alleged that their claims for promotion were not considered.
Still further, no challenge even to the actual selection made by the respondents has been made.
The selected candidates are not even parties.
In this situation, no ground whatsoever for interference is made out.
If fact, it is clear from the pleadings that the claims of eligible persons were duly considered.
It was not even suggested that the claims of the petitioners were not considered.
Resultantly, no ground for interference is made out.
No other point was raised.
In view of the above, there is no merit in any of these petitions.
These are, consequently, dismissed.
However, we make no order as to costs.
Petitons dismissed.