Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioners are the members of the Municipal Council, Mansa.
They pray that the appointments of respondents Nos. 5 to 23 to the posts of Clerks, Firemen, Drivers, Peons, Instructors etc. as made by the Council may be quashed.
The primary ground on which the appointments are challenged is that the members of the Selection Committee had selected their relations.
The merit was ignored.
No specific criterion was followed.
The interview was clearly a farce.
Candidates who were either not eligible or suitable were selected and appointed.
Seeing the illegalities, the petitioners represented.
The first representation was submitted on May 7, 1994 followed by subsequent representations dated May 14, 1994 and July 22,1994.
Mr Mandeep Singh, Joint Director, Local Bodies, Punjab, was appointed as the Enquiry Officer.
He conducted the enquiry in a totally illegal and arbitrary manner as the representationists were not associated with the proceedings.
In fact, ``one Veeran Wanti d/o Shri Joginder Singh r/o Mandi Kalan, District Bathinda was appointed as Lady Instructor.''
She is ``the first cousin of Shri Mandeep Singh, Inquiry Officer.
Therefore, he also did not care to take any action in the enquiry as he was adequately compensated on the appointment of his cousin.''
The petitioners have given details in respect of the irregularities committee by the respondents during the process of selection and appointment.
In particular, details regarding the relationships and other irregularities in the process of slection and appointment have been given in para 16 of the petition.
In the background of these facts, the petitioners pray that the appointments be quashed and the Respondent-Council be directed to make fresh selection in accordance with law.
2.
Separate written statements have been filed on behalf of the respondents.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the Council, through its Executive Officer, it has been mentioned that the petitioners who are the Municipal Coucillors have no locus standi to challenge the appointments of respondents Nos. 5 to 23.
The appointments had been made on the recommendations of the sub Selection Committee.
The recommendations were approved by the Council.
The petitioners are, thus, ``a party to the said resolution.....'' It has also been averred that the appointments have been challenged after a gap of three years.
On the ground of delay alone, the writ petition should be dismissed.
It has been admitted that ``Charanjit Singh is a son of the Municipal Councillor Shri Sukhdev Singh, but before his appointment order was issued prior sanction was got from the Director, Local Government.''
The candidates who were eligible and have been recommended by the Committee were appointed.
It has also been stated that the posts were duly advertised.
Requisition was also sent to the Employment Exchange as well as the Welfare Office.
The candidates who appeared for the interviews were duly considered.
Only the selected candidates were appointed in order of merit.
On these premises, it has been prayed that the writ petition be dismissed.
3.
A separate written statement has also been filed by respondent No. 4, Mr. Narotam Singh, the then President of the Municipal Council.
Besides repeating objections which have been raised on behalf of the Municipal Council, he was alleged that ``the petitioners have filed the instant petition for extraneous considerations.''
Petitioners Nos. 1 and 2 have ``connived.''
With regard to Petitioner No. 3, it has been pointed out that she was a candidate for the post of Clerk.
She was not found suitable for the appointment.
The petition has been filed as a ``matter of frustration.''
It has been pointed out that the posts were advertised on July 24, 1993.
The interviews for the posts were held on August 5, 1993.
The appointments were made in strict order of merit after recommendations had been duly approved by the Council.
Various allegations made by the petitioners have been controverted.
4.
A joint written statement has also been filed on behalf of the selected candidates.
The pleas raised are almost akin to those raised by the Council and its President (Respondents Nos. 3 and 4).
5.
Mr. Mandeep Singh, the Joint Director has been impleaded as respondent No. 24.
He has filed a separate written statement.
He admits that complaints had been received regarding irregularities in the appointments made by the President and some members in the year 1993.
He had conducted an enquiry on April 25, 1994 in the office of the Municipal Council, Mansa.
He had submitted his report to the Government on April 29, 1994.
According to the report submitted by him, the ``President and some members of the Municipal Council were held responsible for making appointments in violation of principles of law.''
This report was accepted by the Government.
A show cause notice dated May 16, 1994 was issued by the Government to the President for removal from his office on the ground of misusing of powers in making various appointments in the office of Municipal Council.
A similar show cause notice was issued to Shri Sukhdev Singh who was a member of the Council.
In view of these facts, the respondent alleges that he has been unnecessarily accused by the petitioners.
It has been further pointed out that on receipt of reply to the show cause notice, the Government had ``issued a warning to the President and the said member to be careful in future but directed the President to dispense with the Services of those employees who were illegally appointed.''
The other averments with regard to the irregularities in the enquiry have been controverted.
The respondent admits that Smt. Veeran Wanti is related to him.
He has, however, pointed out that he had submitted the report against the President on April 29, 1994 whereas Smt. Veeran Wanti was appointed by the Municipal Council on July 4, 1995.
On this basis, he submits that the appointment had nothing to do with the enquiry report.
6.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
The short question that arises for consideration is were the appointments made by the Respondent-Council on the basis of merit. ?
7.
It has been categorically alleged that most of the selected candidates are related to the members of the Selection Committee or they were otherwise close to them.
The pleadings of the parties and the facts on record support this allegation.
Still further, a perusal of the report submitted by Mr. Mandeep Singh shows a clear finding that ``the relations of the President and certain other Municipal Councillors were selected by disregarding the merit......'' Still further, it appears that a show cause notice had been given to the President and another member of the Council.
After consideration of the reply, the Secretary.
Department of Local Government suggested that ``services of all appointees appointed in an irregular manner may be dispensed with and President and the concerned member of MC Mansa may be warned to be careful and meticulously follow Government policy in future.''
This proposal made by the Secretary on August 5, 1994 was approved by the Minister on August 8, 1994.
One wonders how the respondents still managed to continue in service.
Counsel for the State Government was not able to explain as to how the Council managed to ignore the orders passed by the Government.
Be that as it may, the fact remains that respondent No. 24 had found that the selections were not properly made.
Still further, the Government had accepted the report.
It had ordered the appointments to be set aside.
Yet, the respondents had continued to hold the respective posts.
This was grossly unfair.
8.
It was contended on behalf of the respondents that the petition is belated.
On this ground alone, it was prayed that the writ petition be dismissed.
9.
In the facts circumstances of this case, the contention cannot be accepted.
Firstly, the petitioners had represented against the impugned appointments.
Secondly, on their complaint, an enquiry had been ordered.
The enquiry officer had recorded findings to uphold the allegations made in the complaints.
As already noticed, this report was accepted by the Government.
Even an order for setting aside the appointments had been passed.
It is only when the appointments of respondents Nos. 5 to 23 were not rescinded in spite of the findings of the Enquiry Officer and the orders of the Government that the petitioners had filed the present writ petition.
10.
It also deserves mention that the petitioners are primarily pleading a public cause.
They are not trying to enforce a personal right.
At least petitioners Nos. 1 and 2 are not vindicating any personal grievance.
They are pleading for purity in appointments to the posts in the Municipal Council.
Since the Government was inquiring into the matter, they could have legitimately waited for the result of their efforts.
It is only when they were faced with frustration at the doors of the Government that they had approached this Court as a last resort.
In the circumstances of this case, the petition cannot be dismissed on the ground of delay.
11.
On behalf of the respondents, it was pleaded that the appointments of relations were made with the approval of the Deputy Director.
Consequently, these were not liable to be interfered with.
12.
Even this contention cannot be sustained.
Admittedly, some of the selected candidates were related to the members of the Selection Committee.
Some of them were otherwise close.
One of the respondents was working as a gunman with a Councillor, There was, thus, a conflict between interest and duty.
There was a degree of bias.
To what extent were the members influenced in their consideration of the claims of the candidates ?
There is no way to measure the extent.
However, like a drop of poison would ruin a cup of pure milk, the bias in the case would taint the selections with illegality.
No other point was raised.
In view of the above, the appointments of respondent Nos. 5 to 23 are vitiated by bias of the members of the Selection Committee.
These are, consequently, set aside.
The respondent-Council is directed to make fresh selection after advertising the posts.
Respondent Nos. 5 to 23 who are holding different posts at present shall be entitled to compete in this selection.
If they fulfil the qualifications, they will not be rejected only on the ground of age etc.
In the circumstances, there will be no order as to costs.