GC Garg, J - Primary challenge in this writ petition under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India is to the order dated 28.6.1988, Annexure P19 whereby the petitioner was dismissed from service.
2.
In the year 1983, the petitioner was working as Chief Cashier, an officer of Junior Management Grade, in the Branch Office of the respondent- Bank at Budhakhera.
As per the case set out in the writ petition, the petitioner proceeded on leave on the ground of sickness w.e.f.
18111983 to 2121983.
However, respondent No. 5 who at the relevant time was the Manager in the said bank after making visit to the residence of the petitioner found that the petitioner was not ill.
The petitioner, however, after availing leave reported for duties on 3121983 in the Bank along with medical certificate issued by the Civil Hospital, Jind, but he was not allowed to join his duties and was rather directed by respondent No. 5, by letter dated 3121983 to get himself examined from the Chief Medical Officer, Jind (in short `CMO') as in the opinion of the Manager, the prescription slip issued by the Civil Hospital was not acceptable to him as it was not supported by Medical Certificate of the Senior Medical Officer, Jind.
Thus by the said letter dated 3121983, Annexure P2, the petitioner was advised that after getting himself examined from the CMO Jind, he should also get a fitness certificate from the said medical authority and till he does not do so, he will not be allowed to join his duties.
The petitioner thereafter wrote to the Divisional Officer of the respondent-Bank, vide his letter dated 3121983, Annexure P4 intimating that respondent No. 5 did not permit him to join his duties when he submitted his joining report on 3121983.
Since not action was taken by respondent-4, the petitioner made a representation, copy Annexure P.5 to the General Manager-respondent No. 2 bringing the above facts to his notice and further praying that he may be deemed to be on active duty from 3121983 till he is allowed to join his duties, and sick leave applied for by him for the period 18111983 to 2121983 may be granted.
Respondent No. 5 again by his letter dated 951984, Annexure P.6 wrote to the petitioner that since he had not complied with the requirement of producing the medical certificates as directed earlier and had been absenting from duty, he should explain the reasons for his unauthorised leave w.e.f.
3121983, within 10 days from the receipt of the letter failing which disciplinary action would be taken against him in terms of the Regulations of the Bank.
Reply dated 1851984, Annexure P.7 submitted by the petitioner to the aforesaid letter was not found to be satisfactory and he again by letter dated 3051984, Annexure P.8, was given another 10 days' time to explain reasons for his absence and was also directed to report for duties.
The petitioner, however, did not join his duties.
He was thereafter served with a charge- sheet dated 25.6.1984, Annexure P.9 by the Disciplinary Authority whereby it was proposed to hold an enquiry against him under Regulation 6 of United Commercial Bank Officer Employees' (Discipline and Appeal) Regulations, 1976 (for short `1976 Regulations').
The petitioner was also required to submit a written statement of his defence within a period of ten days of the receipt thereof.
Petitioner accordingly submitted his reply dated 671984, Annexure P10 to the charge-sheet.
Thereafter an Inquiry Officer was appointed and on the basis of enquiry report submitted by him, the disciplinary authority by order dated 2721985, Annexure P.11 removed the petitioner from the service of the bank with immediate effect.
The petitioner filed appeal against the order of removal and the appellate authority by taking a lenient view converted the punishment of removal of the petitioner from service into withholding of his three next annual increments with cumulative effect, by his order dated 1261985, Annexure P.12.
The petitioner thereafter sought permission to file review petition against the appellate order, but the same was declined by letter dated 1681985, Annexure P13.
The petitioner was consequently, by registered letter dated 1891985, Annexure P14, directed to report for duty to the Manager of Sector 17-B Branch of the bank at Chandigarh.
Petitioner, however, did not report for duty and thus was served a notice dated 181986, Annexure P.15, under the provisions of Regulation 20(1) of United Commercial Bank (Officers') Service Regulations, 1979 (in short `1979 Regulations') whereby it was clearly stated that despite several notices sent to him directing him to resume duties, he had not turned up to report for duty, it was clear that he was not interested to serve the bank and thus on the expiry of a period of three months from the said notice, he would stand terminated from the service of the bank.
The matter, however, did not rest here and the petitioner made a final appeal dated 25.9.1986, Annexure P.16 to the Chairman and Managing Director of the bank.
The petitioner was again served with a charge-sheet dated 2461987, Annexure P17.
The Inquiry Officer accordingly submitted his report dated 1321988, Annexure P.18 holding the petitioner guilty of all the charges levelled against him.
The disciplinary authority thus on the basis of the inquiry report, by order dated 28.6.1988, Annexure P19 dismissed the petitioner from service.
Thereafter the request made by the petitioner for re-consideration of his case was declined by the bank authorities by letters dated 14.10.1988, Annexure P20 and 18.1.1989, Annexure P21.
It is in this situation, the petitioner has filed the present writ petition challenging the order of dismissal from service.
3.
In the joint written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, broadly, the facts set out in the writ petition were not disputed.
However, all that was said to explain the matter was that the petitioner did not comply with various directions viz. to get himself examined from the CMO and producing a fitness certificate from him and nor did he join his duties despite being asked repeatedly and, therefore, he remained absent from duty unauthorisedly.
It was further stated that the petitioner was served with a charge-sheet and asked to attend the inquiry and submit his statement of defence, but the petitioner did not opt to appear before the Inquiry Officer and as a matter of fact, he himself chose to boycott the inquiry in writing.
As regards the second inquiry as well, it was stated that the Inquiry Officer afforded ample opportunities to the petitioner to appear and defend himself but he without any legal or just cause wilfully failed to appear before the Inquiry Officer.
The Inquiry Office submitted his report on the basis of evidence/documents produced during the inquiry proceedings and on a consideration thereof, the disciplinary authority validly passed the order of dismissal of the petitioner from service.
Allegations of mala fide and personal grudge levelled in the writ petition against respondent No. 5 were specifically denied.
As regards the punishment, it was stated that the conduct of the petitioner in having remained absent from duty unauthorisedly and intentionally and wilfully not complying with the instructions/letters issued by the authorities, his dismissal from service was quite justified.
4.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
The petitioner has challenged his dismissal order, primarily on the grounds that the Manager of the Bank, respondent No. 5 was not justified in asking him to get medically examined from the CMO, Jind.
Respondent No. 5 had no authority to stop the petitioner from joining the duty on 3121983 and that it was respondent No. 5 who had not allowed him to join the duties.
Another ground of challenge is that the petitioner has been punished twice on the same charge, therefore, the impugned order of dismissal from service was illegal and without jurisdiction.
In other words, the whole grievance of the petitioner, if summarised more briefly, is that there was no evidence or material before the Inquiry Officer or the punishing authority to pass the order of dismissal and that a proper procedure as enshrined in the relevant Rules and Regulations of the bank was not followed and further that while passing the dismissal order, rules of natural justice were not adhered to.
5.
On a consideration of the entire matter and after going through the relevant Regulations of the respondent-bank, I am of the opinion that none of the submissions made on behalf of the petitioner has any merit.
Adverting to the facts, it may again be noticed that the petitioner has challenged two orders, Annexures P2 and P19.
By order/letter dated 3121983, Annexure P2 the petitioner had been advised to get himself medically examined from the CMO Jind and also intimated that till he produces a fitness certificate from the aforesaid medical authority, he would not be allowed to join his duties.
On a reading of the letter, Annexure P2, I find that the direction of the competent authority for producing the aforesaid documents was well within its competence and power as conferred by 1976 Regulations.
The provision of the said Regulations relevant in this behalf deserves to be noticed here :-  ``13(1) No officer employee shall absent himself from his duty or be late in attending office or leave the station without having first obtained the permission of the competent authority; Provided that in the case of unavoidable circumstances where availing of prior permission is not possible or is difficult, such permission may be obtained later subject to the satisfaction of the competent authority that such a permission could not been obtained.
(2) No officer employee shall ordinarily absent himself in case of sickness or accident without submitting a proper medical certificate : Provided that in the case of temporary indisposition or sickness of a casual nature, the production of a medical certificate may, at the absolute discretion of the competent authority, be dispensed with.''
6.
It is, thus, clear from the above provisions of the Regulations that no officer employee of the respondent-bank can ordinarily absent himself in case of sickness without submitting a proper medical certificate.
In other words, an officer of the said bank is required to produce a proper medical certificate in the eventuality of his being on leave on the ground of sickness, notwithstanding the fact that such requirement may in some cases be dispensed with at the absolute discretion of the competent authority.
But the matter herein is not of sickness of a casual nature.
It is abundantly clear from the facts available on the record, particularly from petitioner's own representation dated 3121983, Annexure P4 that he fell ill on 10101983 and availed leave for twenty days i.e. upto 30.10.1983.
The petitioner in less than two weeks again fell ill on 12111983 and as per his own averments, availed sick leave from 18111983 to 2121983.
Further it is petitioner's own view that the subsequent illness was owing to relapse of earlier fever.
In the situation, it cannot be said that the petitioner fell ill all of a sudden or that the sickness was of a causal nature and thus the competent authority was expected to dispense with the requirement of proper medical certificate.
Requirement of producing such a certificate in the facts of this case was rather, otherwise also felt necessary because on personal verification by the Manager of the bank at the residence of the petitioner, the latter was not found present or taking rest.
Thus, I see no reasonable ground to quash the letter, Annexure P2 whereby the petitioner was asked to produce medical certificate from the competent medical authority and this was so done in view of the provisions of the Regulations.
7.
As far as the challenge to the order dated 28.6.1988, Annexure P19 is concerned whereby the petitioner was dismissed from service by the disciplinary authority on the basis of report dated 1321988 of the Inquiry Officer, it may be noticed that the petitioner was served a charge-sheet dated 2461987 on three counts, namely, (i) remaining continuously and unauthorisedly absent from duties; (ii) wilfully violating and not complying with lawful and reasonable orders of the Divisional Manager, Chandigarh asking him to report for duties at Sector 17-B, Chandigarh Branch; and (iii) not adjusting the loans availed by him from the bank and which were over-due from him.
After going through the entire record, I do not find any irregularity, much less a material irregularity, in the matter of following the proper procedure relating to conducting the inquiry and passing the impugned order of dismissal.
The relevant provisions in this behalf as contained in the 1976 Regulations deserve to be noticed here :  ``6.
Procedure for imposing major penalties : (1) No order imposing any of the major penalties specified in clauses (e), (f), (g) and (h) of regulation 4 shall be made except after an inquiry is held in accordance with this regulation.
(2) Whenever the Disciplinary Authority is of the opinion that there are grounds for inquiring into the truth of any imputation of misconduct or misbehaviour against an officer employee, it may itself enquire into, appoint any other public servant (hereinafter referred to as the inquiring authority) to inquire into the truth thereof.
Explanation - xxx xxx xxx xxx (3) Where it is proposed to hold an inquiry, the Disciplinary Authority shall frame definite and distinct charges on the basis of the allegations against the officer employee and the articles of charge, together with a statement of the allegations, on which they are based, shall be communicated in writing to the officer employee, who shall be required to submit within such time as may be specified by the Disciplinary Authority (not exceeding 15 days), or within such extended time as may be granted by the said Authority, a written statement of his defence.
(4) On receipt of the written statement of the officer employee, or if no such statement is received within the time specified, an enquiry may be held by the Disciplinary Authority itself, or if it considers so to do appoint under sub-regulation (2) an Inquiring Authority for the purpose : xxx xxx xxx (5) The Disciplinary Authority shall, where it is not the inquiring authority, forward to the inquiring authority; (i) a copy of the articles of charges and statements of imputations of misconduct or misbehaviour; (ii) a copy of the written statement of defence, if any, submitted by the officer employee; (iii) a list of documents by which and list of witnesses by whom the articles of charge are proposed to be substantiated;  (iv) a copy of statements of the witnesses, if any; (v) evidence proving the delivery of articles of charge under sub-regulation (3); (vi) a copy of the order appointing the `Presenting Officer' in terms of sub-regulation (6).
(8) (a) The inquiring authority shall by notice in writing specify the day on which the officer employee shall appear in person before the inquiring authority.
(b) On the date fixed by the inquiring authority, the officer employee shall appear before the inquiring authority at the time, place and date specified in the notice.
(c) and (d) xxx xxx xxx'' A plain reading of provisions of the above regulations clearly brings out that no order imposing any of the major penalties specified in clauses (e) to (h) i.e. including the dismissal from service, shall be made after an inquiry is held in accordance with regulation 6 of the 1976 Regulations.
It is further clear from the above provisions that whenever the Disciplinary Authority comes to a conclusion that there are certain grounds for inquiring into the truth of any imputation of misconduct or misbehaviour against an officer employee of the respondent-bank, it may appoint any other public servant to inquire into the truth thereof.
In the eventuality aforesaid, the said Authority shall frame definite and distinct charges on the basis of the allegations against the officer and the articles of charge, together with a statement of the allegations, on which they are based, shall be communicated in writing to the officer who shall be required to submit a written statement of his defence within the time permitted by such Authority.
The Inquiring Authority shall thereafter by a notice in writing intimate to the officer the date, place and time calling upon him to appear in person before it.
This is exactly what had been done by the Disciplinary Authority and the Inquiring Authority in the present case.
No finger can thus be raised by the petitioner in regard to the procedure required to be followed by the concerned authorities in the matter of conducting a departmental inquiry.
But, as noticed already, undisputedly the petitioner was duly served with a notice issued by the Inquiring Authority in terms of provisions of sub-regulation (8-(a) and (b)) of regulation 6, and in spite of this, he did not appear before him.
Not only this, the Inquiry Officer issued many reminders and afforded ample opportunity to the petitioner to appear before him and defend but he without any legal or just cause, wilfully and deliberately chose to boycott the inquiry.
Faced with the above situation, the Inquiry Officer proceeded to hold the inquiry ex parte which is permissible being so done in terms of sub-regulation (19) of regulation 6 ibid.
8.
Procedure for taking action and making an order of imposing penalty on the basis thereof has been laid down in sub-regulation (7) of regulation 6, which provided that on receipt of the inquiry report, if the Disciplinary Authority having regard to the findings on all or any of the articles of charge, is of the opinion that any of the penalties specified in regulation 4 should be imposed on the officer employee, it shall notwithstanding anything contained in regulation 8 make an order imposing such penalty.
A still glance at the relevant provisions of the Regulations, goes to show that the concerned authorities did not commit any irregularity as far as the question of following the proper procedure is concerned.
Nothing seems to have been done in this behalf that was not permissible to be done within the ambit of the said provisions.
No specific illegality or instance has been quoted by the petitioner which may attract the attention of the Court or otherwise require to exert its eyes in the matter of observance of the procedure.
Thus in the circumstances aforesaid all that can in nut-shell be concluded is that after considering the inquiry report and the facts before it, the Disciplinary Authority rightly and validly passed the impugned order, Annexure P19.
9.
While coming to the last limb of the submissions of the petitioner that the authorities did not follow the principle of natural justice, firstly, in the matter of holding the inquiry and secondly, while making order of imposing penality.
It is worth noticing here that the petitioner has made an endeavour to level the impugned orders as patently illegal, actuated with mala fide and without jurisdiction.
In this regard, all that could possibly be stated by the petitioner is that he was not allowed to join his duties by respondent No. 5 when he approached him in this behalf.
He further had the audacity to state that he was not allowed to join his duties by respondent No. 5 as the latter wanted to harass him.
But there is no material on the record from which it can be concluded that respondent No. 5 was in anyway prejudiced against the petitioner.
It is otherwise not possible to conclude so in the absence of any specific allegation of mala fide against respondent No. 5 though the latter has been impleaded as a party in his individual capacity as well.
It is further very difficult to accept the version of the petitioner that respondent No. 5 did not permit him to join his duties.
Supposing he did so at a particular time or on other few occasions, there were many other courses open to the petitioner to submit his joining report.
He could send his joining report by registered post or even approach the higher authorities and also report for duty before them.
However, on the other hand, it has abundantly come on the record that from time to time, the authorities sent several letters to the petitioner requesting him to join his duties, but he did not pay any heed to it.
Even after the acceptance of petitioner's appeal, he by letter dated 1891985, Annexure P14 was in clear terms requested to resume his duties and report for duty in Sector-17 Branch of the Bank, but still he did not respond to the request.
Not only at this juncture, even the notice issued by the Inquiry Officer was duly served upon him but he deliberately kept himself away from those proceedings.
If the petitioner had been really interested to prove the bona fide of his innocence, it was the best occasion for him to do so by associating him in the inquiry.
But the petitioner apparently had his own reservations that ultimately proved to be fatal to his career.
The entire process in the matter of taking disciplinary action against the petitioner and imposing penalty upon him apparently seems to have been conducted quite decently and within the four corners of the concerned Regulations.
No instance has been brought to my notice that might enable me to form an opinion that there is any encroachment in the matter of following the principles of natural justice, may it even be in the matter of imposing penalty as well.
In the circumstances as noticed above, I find no reason to conclude that the impugned order Annexure P19 is illegal and without jurisdiction and that while passing that order, principles of natural justice were not kept in mind.
10.
For the reasons stated above, the writ petition fails and is consequently dismissed, but with no orders as to costs.