Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner is working as an Executive Engineer with the Haryana State Electricity Board.
He has filed this petition with a two fold grievance.
Firstly, the petitioner complains that he has been arbitrarily suspended by an order dated September 9, 1996.
A copy of this order has been produced as Annexure P-4 with the writ petitioner.
The petitioner further complains that the Board has arbitrarily declined to accept his request for voluntary retirement as contained in his letter dated January 10, 1997, a copy of which is at Annexure P-6 with this writ petition.
2.
On behalf of the respondent, it has been pointed out that a charge sheet dated June 16, 1997, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure R-I with the written statement, has already been issued to the petitioner.
He had been placed under suspension in contemplation of the disciplinary proceedings.
Consequently, it has been pointed out that the Board does not wish to allow the petitioner to retire pending the departmental inquiry against him.
It has been further stayed, during the course of hearing, that another charge sheet dated July 22, 1997, has also been issued to the petitioner.
3.
We have seen the charge sheets, Some of the allegations against the petitioner are serious.
In this situation, it is not surprising that the petitioner was placed under suspension.
Equally, the action in refusing to accept his request for premature retirement was also not arbitrary.
Resultantly, the petitioner's prayer for quashing the order of suspension and for the issue of a mandamus directing the respondents to accept his prayer for voluntary retirement cannot be accepted.
4.
Mr. Patwalia submits that the petitioner has remained under suspension since September, 1996.
A period of more than nine months has already elapsed.
Under the rules, the petitioner is entitled to the payment of subsistence allowance at an enhanced rate.
Mr. Aggarwal, learned counsel for the respondent Board, on instructions from Mr. Arun Kumar, Secretary of the Board who is present in Court, states that in case the petitioner represents, the Board shall consider his claim for the grant of subsistence allowance at the enhanced rate in accordance with the rules.
Learned counsel further submits that it is true that there has been a delay in the issue of charge sheets.
He submits that the petitioner's claim shall be considered in the light of the factual position.
It has also been stated on behalf of the respondent that in case the petitioner submits his reply to the charge sheet within the prescribed time, the inquiry proceedings shall be held as expeditiously as possible.
No ground to grant the prayers as made in the petition is made out.
Consequently, the petition is disposed of with a direction to the respondent Board to consider the claim regarding enhancement of the subsistence allowance.
No costs.