P Venkatarama Reddi, J - The petitioner who is working as Mechanic Grade-1 in the Regional Workshops, APSRTC, Karimnagar, has filed this writ petition seeking a direction to the respondent to promote him to the post of Leading Hand from the date on which his junior by name, Sri Ahmed Zareef was promoted.
It is the case of the petitioner that he was promoted to the post of Mechanic Grade-II in the year 1977, while he was working in the Kamareddy Depot.
He came on transfer to the Karimnagar Workshop on 30.7.1981 and he was promoted as Mechanic Grade-I on 2341984.
Sri Ahmed Zareef was appointed as Mechanic Grade-II on 15121978.
Thus, by the time the petitioner came on transfer to Karimnagar Regional Workshop in the year 1981, Sri Ahmed Zareef was working as Mechanic Grade-II.
In the final seniority list of Mechanics- Grade-II published on 2351983, Sri Ahmed Zareef was assigned the first position in the seniority list and the petitioner was given the 11th position.
The petitioner states that he made a representation protesting against the assignment of higher ranking to Sri Ahmed Zareef but copy of the said representation has not been filed.
It is also not stated by the petitioner as to whether he filed objections when the provisional seniority list was published.
Be that as it may, the seniority list published in the year 1983 has not been challenged by the petitioner nor we can permit him to challenge the same, at this distance of time.
That apart, Sri Ahmed Zareef was promoted as Leading Hand on 1121983.
Even than, he did not question his promotion.
On 1271987, the provisional seniority list of Leading Hands in the Regional Workshop, Karimnagar was published.
There also, Sri Ahmed Zareef was assigned the Ist position.
The petitioner wants to say that he should not have been treated as junior to Sri Ahmed Zareef in the cadre of Mechanic Grade-II by virtue of his earlier promotion to that post, while he was working in Kamareddy Depot.
Apart from the laches pointed out above the petitioner has not impleaded Sri Ahmed Zareef as a party and therefore, we do not think that we can entertain the grievance of the petitioner, at this belated stage after Sri Zareef earned two promotion.
We are, therefore, unable to grant any relief in this writ petition.
The writ petition is dismissed.
No cost.
Petition dismissed.