Sat Pal J (Oral) - The petitioner in this case while working as Superintendent of Police in the State of Haryana sought voluntary retirement from the said post and was retired on Ist January, 1987.
Thereafter, after the lapse of more than 10 months, he was appointed Member, Haryana Public Service Commission on 12th November, 1987 and held this post upto 15th September, 1990 and he was appointed as Chairman, Haryana Public Service Commission on 16th September, 1990 and held this post upto 23rd April, 1991.
2.
Having held the post of Member, Haryana Public Service Commission from 12th November, 1987 to 15th September, 1990 and the post of Chairman Haryana Public Service Commission from 16th September 1990 to 23rd April, 1991, the petitioner claimed pension under Regulation 9(A)(I) of the Haryana Public Service Commission (Conditions of Service) Regulations, 1972 (hereinafter referred to as the Regulations).
The claim of the petitioner was, however, rejected on the ground that the case of the petitioner was not covered under Regulation 9(A)(I) of the Regulations but on the contrary it was covered by Regulation 9(I) of the Regulations.
3.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties.
The relevant portion of Regulation 9(A)(I) is reproduced as follows :  "9(A)(I).
Subject to the provisions of these regulations, every Member, who at the date of appointment as such, was not in the service of the Central or a State Government, shall, on his ceasing to hold office be paid a pension for his life, at the rate of three hundred rupees in the case of Chairman and two hundred and fifty rupees in the case of any other Member, per mensem for each completed year of service as Chairman or the Member, as the case may be, subject to a maximum of one thousand and eight hundred rupees and one thousand and five hundred rupees per mensem respectively.
No dearness allowance shall be admissible on pension.
Provided that no such pension shall be payable to the Chairman or the Member :-  (i) unless he has completed one year's service as such; or xx xx xx xx" 4.
A mere reading of this Regulations shows that this Regulation is applicable to a Member/Chairman of the Haryana Public Service Commission who on the date of appointment was not in the service of Central or State Government.
It is not disputed that on 12th November, 1987, the date on which the petitioner was appointed as Member, Haryana Public Service Commission, was not in the Central or State Government.
5.
Mr. Sharma, learned Deputy Advocate General appearing on behalf of the State, however, submits that since the petitioner was appointed as Member Haryana Public Service Commission as an official nominee since he had held a post in the service of the State for more than 10 years, he was not entitled to claim pension under Regulation 9(A)(I).
I, however, do not find any merit in the contention raised by the learned Deputy Advocate General.
Regulation 9(A)(I) does not stipulate any such condition that a person who had earlier held a post in the service of the State Government would not be entitled to claim pension under this Regulation.
The only condition stipulated in Regulation 9(A)(I) is that on the date when he was appointed Member/Chairman of the Haryana Public Service Commission, he was not holding any post in the State or in the Central Government and secondly, had put in minimum one year's service as Member/Chairman.
Since, the petitioner fulfils both the conditions stipulated in Regulation 9(A)(I), he is entitled to pension under this Regulation.
6.
For the reasons recorded herein above, the petition is allowed and the order dated 10th December, 1991 (Annexure P-2) is set aside, and it is held that the petitioner shall be entitled to the pension under Regulation 9(A)(I) w.e.f.
the date it became due to the petitioner.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to interest at the rate of 12% per annum from the date the pension became due.
The view I have taken finds full support from a judgment of this Court in Air Marshal Shivdev Singh (Retd.)
v. State of Punjab, 1990(6) SLR 708 : 1991(2) SCT 290.
The respondents are further directed to grant relief to the petitioner in terms of this judgment within three months.
The parties are, however, left to bear their own costs.