Sat Pal, J. (Oral) - In this writ petition, the petitioners have prayed for quashing the orders dated 18th December, 1991 (Annexure P-2), 13th January, 1992 (Annexure P3) and 3rd March, 1992 (Annexure P-4) by which the respondents Nos. 2 to 16 (in short, the private respondents) were promoted as Assistant Engineers on ad hoc basis against vacancies of the direct recruitment quota in the scale of Rs. 2000-200/4000 in the public interest with immediate effect.
2.
Briefly stated, the facts of the case are that the petitioners as well as the private respondents have been appointed as Junior Engineers in pursuance of the advertisement dated August 13, 1988, (Annexure P-1).
Annexure P-1 clearly states that after successful completion of training all the selected persons shall be absorbed in the regular service of the HSEB as Junior Engineers and they can either be posted in any Thermal/Generation Project within the jurisdiction of HSEB including BBMB/BCH or outside Haryana State or in the field cadre at the discretion of the Board.
The admitted facts of the petitioners are that all the petitioners were higher in the merit list than all the private respondents in the select list, prepared for appointment as Junior Engineers.
It is also not disputed that all the writ petitioners were posted in the Generation projects and all the private respondents were posted in the field cadre (General Cadre) by the Board.
3.
The promotion of the Junior Engineers to the next cadre (Assistant Engineers) is governed by the Punjab State Electricity Board Service of Engineers (Electrical) Recruitment Regulations, 1965 (hereinafter referred to as the Regulations).
As per Regulation 9(1), 65% posts of the Assistant Engineers are filled up by direct recruitment and 35% by promotion from amongst the persons holding posts of Junior Engineers both in the Generation Cadre as well as in the General Cadre.
Out of the said 35% quota, 22% of the posts are filled up by seniority from amongst the persons who are having experience of 5 years in the cadre of Junior Engineer and the remaining 12-% are filled up from amongst the persons who possess the degree of A.M.I.E./BE and are having experience of 2 years.
4.
In terms of the said Regulation, eligibility for consideration for promotion from A.M.I.E./BE against 12% quota shall be determined from the date of qualifying the said examination.
It is also an admitted fact that all the writ petitioners had qualified the examination of AMIE/BE prior to the date when the private respondents had qualified the said examination.
In view of this, all the writ petitioners were entitled to be considered for the post of Assistant Engineers against 12% quota prior in time than the private respondents.
5.
It may be relevant to point out here that the Regulations do not provide any discrimination for promotion to the post of Assistant Engineer from amongst the Junior Engineers belonging to the General Cadre or Generation Cadre.
In this connection, reference may also be made to the orders dated 1101996 (Annexure A-1), 30996 (Annexure A-2) and 17th September, 1996 (Annexure A-3) which have been filed along with CM No. 6353 of 1997.
The aforesaid orders clearly show that the Junior Engineers working in the Generation cadre could be transferred to General cadre and vice versa .
Similarly, the orders dated 27th January, 1993 (Annexure P-7), 30th August, 1991 (Annexure P-8) and 9th December, 1992 (Annexure P-9) show that the Assistant Engineers working in the Generation cadre could be transferred to the General Cadre and vice-versa .
6.
Mr. Rajiv Atma Ram, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioners, after referring to the orders, Annexures P-2, P-3 and P-4 submits that from these orders, it is clear that promotions of Assistant Engineers were made from the persons working in the General cadre and these promotions were made against posts (65% quota) meant for direct recruitment.
He submits that since the petitioners were posted in the Generation cadre under the orders of the Board and not according to their own choice and further since the Junior Engineers working in the Generation Cadre could be transferred to the General cadre and vice versa, the petitioners were also entitled to be considered for promotion to the posts of Assistant Engineers at the time when the promotions were made vide Annexures P-2, P-3 and P-4.
He further submits that admittedly, since all the petitioners had qualified the examination of A.M.I.E./BE on the date much prior to the date when the private respondents had qualified the examination, the petitioners were entitled to be considered for promotion even prior to the consideration of the private respondents for promotion to the post of Assistant Engineers.
He, therefore, contended that the impugned orders Annexure P-2, P-3 and P-4 were liable to be set aside and the respondent No. 1 should be directed to consider the case of the petitioners for the post of Assistant Engineers from the date when the private respondents were considered for promotion vide orders, Annexures P-2, P-3 and P-4.
In support of his submissions, the learned counsel placed reliance on the following judgments of this Court :  (1) Kishan Chand v. Haryana State Electricity Board at Chandigarh, 1984(2) SLR 799;  (2) Harbans Lal v. State of Punjab, 1995(6) SLR 150.  and a judgment of Division Bench in C.W.P.
No. 13674 of 1996 decided on 14th March, 1997 (Ahush Bakhat Rai v. State of Punjab).
7.
It will also be relevant to note here that during the pendency of the writ petition, the respondent-Board issued order dated 7th April, 1994, copy of which has been filed as Annexure-B along with CM No. 5713 of 1994, by which Sarvshri Kashmir Singh and Rajiv Kumar Mishra who were respondents Nos. 16 and 13 respectively in this writ petition, have been regularised from the date on which their quota post became available as per the provisions of the Regulations.
Annexure-B also shows that respondents Nos. 16 and 13 have been regularised from the date when they were appointed as Assistant Engineers on ad hoc basis vide Annexures P-2, P-3 and P-4.
8.
Separate written statements on behalf of respondent No. 1 and some of the private respondents have been filed.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondent No. 1, it has been stated that since the vacancies of Assistant Engineers were available in the field cadre (general cadre) at the relevant time and as such only persons who were working at that time in the General cadre were entitled to be promoted to the post of Assistant Engineer.
This submission has been reiterated by Mr. Setia, learned counsel appearing on behalf of respondent No. 1.
9.
In the written statement filed on behalf of some of the private respondents, it has been stated that the private respondents have been promoted on ad hoc basis as stop gap arrangement against the quota posts meant for direct recruits with the condition that as and when the direct recruits will be available, they will be reverted and the ad hoc promotion will not confer any right on them regarding seniority and promotion as Assistant Engineer.
None has, however, appeared on behalf of the private respondents today.
10.
I have given my thoughtful consideration to the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties and have perused the record.
From the advertisement, Annexure P-1, it is clear that the candidates selected pursuant to said advertisement could either be posted in Thermal/General projects or in the field cadre (General cadre) at the discretion of the Board.
Admittedly, all the writ petitioners were higher in the merit list in comparison to all the private respondents and all the writ petitioners were posted in Generation cadre not because they had opted for posting in that cadre but only because of the orders passed by the respondent-Board.
As stated herein above, the Junior Engineers working in Generation cadre can be transferred to the General cadre and vice versa .
From the facts on record, it is also clear that the promotions made to the posts of Assistant Engineers vide impugned order, Annexures P-2, P-3 and P-4 were made against the posts meant for direct recruits and for those posts, the private respondents have got no preferential right to be considered qua the writ petitioners.
As a matter of fact, the writ petitioners had qualified the examination of AMIE/BE prior in time than all the private respondents and in terms of Regulation 9, they were entitled to be considered and promoted to the post of Assistant Engineer prior in time than the private respondents.
There is no stipulation in the statutory rules that in case vacancies arise in the General cadre, then only persons working in the General cadre could be promoted as Assistant Engineer.
On the contrary, the cadre of Assistant Engineers is only one cadre and as such persons working in the Generation cadre could not be discriminated qua the persons working in the General Cadre while making promotions to the posts of Assistant Engineers.
11.
In view of these facts, I do not find any merit in the contention raised by Mr. Setia, learned counsel appearing on behalf of respondent No. 1.
Similarly, there is no merit in the submission made in the written statement filed on behalf of some of the private respondents.
In fact, Annexure-B filed with CM No. 5713 of 1994, clearly shows that two of the private respondents who were promoted on ad hoc basis vide orders, Annexures P-2, P-3 and P-4 have been regularised against the same post of Assistant Engineers from the date when they were appointed on ad hoc basis.
During the course of arguments, Mr. Rajiv Atma Ram, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioners, submitted that even other respondents have also been regularised by respondent No. 1 from the date when they were promoted as Assistant Engineers vide impugned orders.
12.
In view of the above discussion, I am of the opinion that Annexures P-2 to P-4 have to be set aside.
Accordingly, the writ petition is allowed and the orders dated 18th December, 1991 (Annexure P-2) 13th January, 1992 (Annexure P-3) and 3rd March, 1992 (Annexure P-4) are hereby set aside and the respondent No. 1 is directed to consider the case of the petitioners for promotion to the posts of Assistant Engineers in the same manner as was done in the case of respondents Kashmir Singh and Rajiv Kumar Mishra vide order dated 7th April, 1994 copy of which has been filed as Annexure-B with CM No. 5713 of 1994.
Needless to add, that consequential benefits have to be given to the petitioners after they are considered and promoted.
The view I have taken finds full support from two DB judgments in the case of Kishan Chand (supra) and Ahush Bakhat Rai (supra).
The parties are, however, left to bear their own costs.