Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner, a constable in the Haryana Police, was dismissed from service vide order dated November 12, 1992 passed by the Superintendent of Police.
He filed an appeal which was dismissed by the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Gurgaon Range vide order dated February 26, 1993.
His revision petition having been rejected by the Director General of Police, he has filed the present writ petition.
The petitioner alleges that the respondents have not taken into consideration his good record of service and that the order of dismissal is violative of the provisions of Rule 162 of the Punjab Police Rules, Volume II.
The petitioner, consequently, prays that the orders dated November 12, 1992, February 26, 1993 and June 25, 1996, copies of which have been produced as Annexures P14, P16 and P19 respectively, be quashed.
He further prays that the respondents be directed to reinstate him with all consequential benefits.
2.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents by the Superintendent of Police, Faridabad.
It has been inter alia pointed out that the petitioner had been awarded punishments for absence from duty for different intervals of time on different occasions.
In particular, it has been pointed out that he had remained absent from September 4, 1990 to December 18, 1990 for 104 days.
Thereafter, he had absented himself from April 24, 1991 to July 30, 1991.
On these occasions, the petitioner was awarded minor penalties.
He did not improve.
He again absented himself from October 9, 1991 to March 16, 1992 for a period of 159 days.
On this occasion, it was directed that a regular departmental enquiry be held against him.
He was charge-sheeted and an enquiry was held.
Thereafter, the impugned orders were passed.
It has been stated that the punishing authority had "taken into consideration the entire record of the petitioner ... before awarding the punishment of dismissal."
It has also been pointed out that punishments of drill, censure, warning, stoppage of five increments with permanent effect and leave without pay for 97 days had been awarded to the petitioner for absence from duty.
It is only when the petitioner had not shown any improvement that the impugned orders of dismissal were passed.
3.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that he had joined the Police Force in the year 1976 and had earned consistently good reports since then.
It is only on account of illness during the year 1991 that the petitioner was unable to attend to his duties.
This did not warrant the extreme penalty of dismissal.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioner was controverted by the learned counsel for the respondents.
4.
A perusal of the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents clearly shows that the petitioner had been awarded punishment at least on five occasions for having remained absent from duty at different intervals of time.
On one of the occasions, a penalty of stoppage of five future increments with permanent effect was imposed.
In view of this factual position, the claim made on behalf of the petitioner that he has a good record of service appears to be wholly unfounded.
Equally untenable is the plea that the petitioner had been unable to attend to his duties on account of illness.
In the written statement, it has been specifically stated that the petitioner "did not submit the alleged medical certificate during the course of enquiry and did not produce any evidence in support of..... his claim of illness."
Still further, it has been pointed out that after the receipt of the enquiry report, a show cause notice was given to the petitioner.
It was duly served on him on October 9, 1992, through a special messenger.
He did not file any reply.
A reminder was issued vide letter dated November 5, 1992.
Even then, he did not appear or file any reply.
In this situation, the submission by the counsel for the respondents that the story of illness was a lame excuse, appears to be well- founded.
In view of this factual position, the conclusion of the punishing authority that the petitioner is guilty of grave misconduct and did not deserve any lenience, cannot be said to be unfair.
The appellate and the revisional authorities rightly confirmed the order.
It meets with the requirements of Rule 162.
5.
There is another aspect of the matter.
The petitioner was a member of a disciplined force.
A man in uniform is the symbol of State's authority.
He has to be an example of rectitude and good behaviour.
The petitioner by his repeated acts of absence from duty did not conform to the standard of discipline expected of a member of the Police Force.
In view of the rule enunciated by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in State of UP and others v. Ashok Kumar Singh and anothers, 1996(I) SCC 302 : 1996(2) S.C.T.
139, absence of a constable on several occasions is a grave misconduct.
In such a case, the punishment awarded by the disciplinary authority which has been confirmed by the higher authorities calls for no interference under Article 226 of the Constitution.
No other point was raised.
Resultantly, there is no merit in this writ petition.
It is, consequently, dismissed.
However, in view of the facts that the petitioner has already been dismissed from service, there will be no order as to costs.