T.N.C.
Rangarajan, J - This petition is directed against the proceedings of the Regional Manager, Nellore, dated 3111986 confirming the punishment of withholding of annual increment for a period of one year which shall have an effect on future increments.
This punishment relates an incident which took place on 1471985 when the petitioner was functioning as a Conductor in Bus No. AAZ-4701 on the route of Kanigiri to Hyderabad.
It appears that on the way at Markapuram 54 passengers got into the bus and the petitioner stopped the bus at the outskirts of the village and was issuing the tickets.
At that time TTIs inspected the bus and charged the petitioner for not issuing the tickets for four passengers.
The petitioner protested by stating that he was yet to complete the issue of tickets, and hence, the charge was untenable.
This was supported by the passengers as well as the DSP, who happened to pass that way and hence the inspecting staff went away.
But later, a charge sheet was issued on 3171985 framing the following charges :  "Charge No. 1 : "For having failed to issue tickets and collect the requisite fare from four passengers who had boarded the bus at Markapur and bound for Hyderabad which constitutes misconduct under Regulation 28(iv)(a) of APSRTC Employees' (Conduct) Regulations, 1963".
"Charge No. 2 : "For having instigated the passengers not to give anything in writing stating that your job will be lost which constitutes misconduct under Regulation No. 28 (xxxii) of APSRTC Employees' (Conduct) Regulations, 1963".
"Charge No. 3 : "For having refused to give statement at the time of check which constitutes misconduct under Regulation No. 28 (viii) of APSRTC Employees' (Conduct) Regulations, 1963".
"Charge No. 4 : "For having abused the TTIs with unparliamentary language which constitutes misconduct under Regulation 28(iv) of APSRTC Employees' (Conduct) Regulations, 1963".
The petitioner, thereupon, give an explanation on 181985 enclosing statements given by 3 passengers on 1471985 and 1571985.
The Depot Manager, however, passed an order on 7.9.1985 stating that on a consideration of the entire evidence available on record he had come to the conclusion that the charges levelled against the petitioner stands proved beyond doubt for which deferring the annual increment falling due for a period of one year which will have an effect on future increments is a fit and proper punishment.
The petitioner appealed but the appeal was dismissed on 6101985 stating that the time given for issuing the tickets was sufficient and hence if the time had been utilised properly there would not have been a chance for the incident.
On a review, 3rd respondent passed the impugned order stating that the Statistical Return revealed that the check took place between stage No. 3 and 5 indicating that the petitioner had failed to issue tickets to four passengers by violating the Rule of `Issue and Start' and lenient view had already been taken.
2.
The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that there was no application of mind on the part of the respondents to the evidence on record particularly with reference to the statements given by the passengers, and hence, the finding that the petitioner was guilty of misconduct was untenable.
Secondly, it was submitted that the punishment of stoppage of increment with an effect on future increments was a major penalty as held by the Supreme Court in the case of Kulwant Singh Gill v. State of Punjab, 1991(2) SCT 30 (SC) : 1990(6) SLR 73 which requires a regular enquiry, and therefore, absence of such enquiry vitiated the entire proceedings.
3.
The learned counsel for the respondents supported the orders of the authorities concerned and submitted that the very fact that four ticketless passengers were found in the bus when the inspection took place indicated that the misconduct was proved and since the petitioner did not have a clean record, the punishment was proper.
It was also submitted that the stoppage of increment did not amount to a major punishment, and hence, the impugned order should be upheld.
4.
I have perused the statements of the passengers which were given on the day of the inspection as well as the next day.
One of them is a Municipal Commissioner and the other is a Lecturer in Mathematics while the third is a graduate.
All of them state that the checking staff behaved badly not realising that the bus was crowded and overloaded and it was moving slowly at the insistence of the passengers while the petitioner-conductor was trying to complete the issue of the tickets.
It appears that technically there was a fault when the bus had started to move before the issue of the tickets was completed and this technical fault is reflected in the Statistical Return.
The authorities concerned have concluded that the petitioner is guilty of misconduct on the basis of that fact alone and they have completely ignored the statement of the passengers given contemporaneously.
The other significant factor is that the charge-sheet was given on 3171985 whereas the incident happened on 1471985 which indicates that the proceedings were initiated in a routine manner on the basis of the Statistical Return.
The authorities concerned have completely ignored the circumstances in which the incident took place namely : overcrowded bus, inadequate time to issue tickets, insistence of the passengers for keeping the bus moving and the effort of the Conductor to complete the issue of the tickets inspite of such constraints.
In this background, the finding of all the authorities concerned that the petitioner committed the misconduct could only be called as an irrational finding within the meaning of `Wednesbury unreasonableness.'
"The modern statement of the principle is found in a passage in the speech of Lord Diplock in Council of Civil Service Unions v. Minister for the Civil Services, 1985(1) AC 374 : "By "irrationality" I mean what can now be succinctly referred to as "Wednesbury unreasonableness" [Associated Provincial Picture Houses v. Wednesbury Corporation, 1948(1) KB 223 (233)].
It applies to a decision which is so outrageous in its defiance of logic or of accepted moral standards that no sensible person who had applied his mind to the question to be decided could have arrived at".
Applying this principle, I am of the opinion that the decision of the authorities in finding the petitioner guilty of the first misconduct is clearly irrational on the face of the evidence on record.
Moreover, there is no evidence at all for the other three charges.
I have, therefore, no hesitation in quashing the impugned orders.
5.
Accordingly, the writ petition is allowed.
No costs.
Petition allowed.