THB Chalapathi, J - The petitioner is seeking issuance of a writ of Certiorari to quash the orders of the Controller of Examinations of Panjab University dated 8111996 (Annexure P.3), dated 11121996 (Annexure P7) and dated 16/17121996 (Annexure P.9).
2.
The petitioner was granted admission to the Master of Engineering Course in Chemical Engineering Department in the year 1994 as a part-time student.
She took the examinations held by the University in December, 1994, May, 1995, December, 1995 and in January, 1996.
She passed 8 subjects out of 10 subjects in that course.
She appeared in the examination held in May, 1996 in which she passed in both the papers in the subject of "Chemical Reaction Engg.-I" but was able to pass in the written paper but failed in the Sessional (Internal Assessment) paper in the subject entitled "Process Dynamics and Control".
By the impugned order dated 8111996 she was required to appear in both the papers i.e. written as well as sessional paper in the subject of "Process Dynamics and Control" on the ground that it was a combined paper though she was declared qualified in one paper.
The petitioner made a representation on 22.111996 (vide Annexure P5).
By the letter dated 11121996 (vide Annexure P7) the Controller of Examinations informed the petitioner that her request for exemption to appear in the paper which she had already cleared cannot be acceded to as the candidate is required to clear the entire subject and since she had not cleared the Internal Assessment of the subject she has to appear in both the papers.
The same stand was reiterated in Annexure P.9 by the Controller of Examinations.
Therefore, the petitioner approached this Court to quash the letters of the Controller of Examinations referred to above and for a direction to the University to allow her to re- appear in the Sessional paper in the subject "Process Dynamics and Control" by exempting her for re-appearing in the written paper in the said subject.
3.
In the written statement on behalf of the respondents, it is inter alia averred that since the petitioner failed in the Sessional paper she has to take both the papers in that subject though she passed in the written examination and that Sessional paper cannot be treated as a separate paper.
It is further averred in the written statement that in case a candidate has passed the Sessional paper, then he is allowed to retain his marks of the Sessional paper and has to re-appear only in the written examination but in case a candidate has failed in the Sessional paper but passed in the written examination then the said candidate has to re-appear in both the papers.
The University placed reliance on regulation 82 of the Panjab University Calendar Vol. II.
4.
The undisputed facts are : the petitioner appeared in the examination in Master of Engineering in Chemical Engineering that took place in May, 1996.
The examination consists of two subjects namely Chemical Reaction Engg.-I and Process Dynamics and Control.
Each subject has two papers, one is written and another is Sessional.
In the subject Chemical Reaction Engg.-I the petitioner secured more than the pass marks.
Thus she cleared that subject but in Process Dynamics and Control the petitioner secured 40 marks in the written which is the minimum required pass marks but secured only 35 marks in Sessional whereas for that paper the minimum pass marks is 50.
Thus the petitioner secured the required minimum pass marks in the written paper but failed to secure the minimum pass marks in the Sessional paper.
She was asked by the Controller of Examinations to appear both in written as well as Sessional papers in the subject "Process Dynamics and Control".
According to her, since she secured the pass marks in the written paper she is not required to re-appear in the written paper and she is to be allowed to re-appear only in Sessional paper.
Therefore, we have to see whether both written and sessional papers in the subject "Process Dynamics and Control" are to be treated as a combined paper for the purpose of declaring the petitioner to clear that particular subject or whether both the papers are to be treated separate and the petitioner can be exempted from appearing in the written paper in which she already secured the minimum pass marks and be allowed to re-appear in sessional paper only as she failed to secure the minimum pass marks in that paper.
In the written statement filed by the University, it is categorically mentioned in paragraph 6 of the same as follows :-  "That in reply to para 6 it is submitted that the respondents are not treating the Sessional Part as a separate part.
However, in case a candidate has passed the sessional paper then he is allowed to retain his marks of the sessional paper and has to only re-appear in the written examination but in case a candidate has failed in the sessional paper but has passed in the written examination such candidate has to take the paper of both the parts.
The reason for this aspect is that the sessional paper is the internal paper of the College/Department and, therefore, the candidate is not required to re-take the same."
Thus, it is clear if a candidate has passed the Sessional paper and failed in the written paper he is not required to take re-examination in both the papers but he is allowed to re-appear only in the written paper whereas a candidate who passed in the written paper but failed in Sessional paper he is required to take the re-examination in both the papers.
We do not see any justification for giving differential treatment among the persons who secured the minimum pass marks in the written examination and was not able to secure the minimum pass marks in Sessional examination.
If both the papers are to be treated as one composite part, then every candidate who has failed in one of the papers has to re-appear in both the papers but the stand taken by the University as extracted above does not appear that both the papers are treated as one integral part in the subject concerned.
The University is making a differentiation between written paper and Sessional paper.
We do not think such a differentiation is warranted by regulation 82 of the Panjab University Calendar Volume II which reads as follows :-  "Subject to Regulation 11 a candidate who has failed in any paper may be allowed to reappear in any subsequent examination to pass the examination in that subject, on payment of admission fee of Rs. 25 per paper in each semester examination, subject to a maximum of Rs. 60 prescribed for the examination concerned and admission fee for reappear would be in addition to the admission fee charged for other semesters' examination, if any, in which he was appearing provided that such a candidate shall not be placed in the category of `Pass with distinction'."
A reading of the Rule clearly shows that each paper in each semester examination is considered as a separate one.
Admission fee of Rs. 25/- per paper is being charged when a candidate who has failed in any paper for re- appearance in that paper.
Rule 81 of the Panjab University Calender Volume II prescribes the minimum number of marks required to pass the examination.
According to it, a person to pass the examination shall get 40% in each theory paper and 50% in the sessional part of each paper.
There is nothing in the regulation which shows that a person who failed to secure the minimum number of marks required in sessional paper shall reappear or be treated to have failed in theory paper also though the candidate secured the minimum number of marks in the theory paper.
A reading of regulation 81 and 82 of Panjab University Calendar Volume II, 1995 clearly shows that the intention of the University authorities is to take each paper as separate and distinct and if a candidate fails in one paper, need not re-appear in the other paper.
The candidate has to appear only in the paper in which he failed to secure the minimum number of marks.
Since the petitioner secured 40% of marks in the theory paper as required under regulation 81 it is not necessary for her to re-appear in the said paper i.e. theory paper (written paper) but she has to take the examination only in the Sessional part in the subject "Process Dynamics and Control".
5.
In view of what is stated above, we allow the writ petition and direct the University to declare the result of the petitioner in the theory paper and allow her to appear only in the Sessional paper (Internal Assessment) in the subject "Process Dynamics and Control" and the University is further directed to count her marks of written paper as secured by her in the examination held in May, 1996.
There will be no order as to costs.