Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - Is the action of the respondents of granting the special pay of Rs. 150/- to the drivers attached to the Ministers and giving Rs. 25/- only to the drivers in the Haryana Roadways violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution ?
This is the first question that arises for consideration in this writ petition.
2.
The petitioners are working as drivers in the Haryana Roadways.
They are in the pay-scale of Rs. 420-700.
They are also being given a special pay of Rs. 25 per month.
As against this, the drivers working with the Ministers who are also in the pay-scale of Rs. 420-700 were given a special pay of Rs. 150 per month vide order dated July 3, 1981.
The petitioners allege that the action of the respondents in sanctioning special pay at different rates to the drivers is violative of the principle of equal pay for equal work.
They consequently pray for the issue of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to grant them a special pay of Rs. 150 per month with effect from the date it has been given to the other categories of drivers.
3.
The respondents contest the claim of the petitioners.
Besides raising the plea of delay etc., it has been pointed out that the special pay of Rs. 150 has been granted to the drivers in the Ministers' Car Section on account of the specially arduous nature of duties performed by them.
It has been specifically pointed out that ``the drivers working in the Ministers' Car Section etc. are expected to be present at their duties for 24 hours whereas the drivers working in the Haryana Roadways are to perform duties for scheduled hours only.
Drivers working in Haryana Roadways are governed by Motor Transport Workers Act and Factories Act is also applicable to them.
They are also entitled to double over-time for the duties performed beyond eight hours and also entitled to travelling allowance.
They were also paid bonus at the rate of 15% of the their pay for the year 1983-84.
On the other hand, the drivers in the Ministers' Car Section etc. are not getting any over-time and bonus etc. A statement showing the over-time paid to the drivers of Haryana Roadways, Karnal Depot reveals that ``drivers of Karnal Depot earn at an average Rs. 282/- per month.''
4.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
The solitary contention raised by Mr. Roshan Lal Batta, learned counsel for the petitioners is that all drivers perform only one function viz., driving the vehicles.
Consequently, all are entitled to be treated equally.
The action of the respondents in granting a special pay of Rs. 150 to some of the drivers and denying a similar benefit to the petitioners is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioners has been controverted by Mr. Gurinder Singh, learned counsel for the respondents.
5.
A perusal of Rule 252 of the Punjab Civil Service Rules, Volume I, Part I shows that special pay is ``an addition, of the nature of pay, to the emoluments of a post or of a Government employee, granted in consideration of:-  (a) the specially arduous nature of the duties; or (b) a specific addition to the work or responsibility........'' 6.
A perusal of the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents clearly brings out the fact that the drivers working in the Ministers' Car Section are expected to be present on duty for 24 hours.
They are not entitled to the payment of any over-time allowance or bonus etc. As against this the drivers in Haryana Roadways have scheduled hours of work.
They are paid over-time at the rate of double the wages whenever they are called upon to do any extra work.
In fact, it has been pointed out that a driver in the depot earns an over-time of Rs. 282 per month on an average.
The averments in the written statement clearly bring out the disparity in the two categories of drivers.
The duties being performed by the drivers in the Ministers' Car Section etc. have been found by the Government to be more arduous and onerous.
Consequently, a higher rate of special pay has been sanctioned for them.
It is in conformity with the Rule.
It is neither arbitrary nor violative of the principle of equal pay for equal work.
Consequently, it calls for no interference.
7.
Mr. Batta refers to the decision of their lordships of the Supreme Court in MP Singh and others v. Union of India and others, AIR 1987 SC 485.
This was a case where it was found that identical duties were being performed by the persons belonging to the Department and those on deputation.
In this situation, it was held that the special pay had to be paid equally to both categories of persons.
This is not the position in the present case.
It is clear that the duties being performed by the drivers working in the Ministers' Car Section are more arduous.
Consequently, a higher rate of special pay has been sanctioned.
8.
No other point has been urged.
In view of the above, there is no merit in this writ petition.
It is, consequently, dismissed.
However, in the circumstances of case, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.