Ashok Bhan, J - With this order we shall dispose of the application filed by the petitioner to review the judgment in CWP No. 16740 of 1995 decided on 7101996.
2.
Petitioner was appointed as workshop Instructor in the trade of ``Painting and Sheet Metal'', vide order, Annexure P-1, which post he joined on 171965.
The next higher post for promotion is Foreman Instructor.
Petitioner was ignored for promotion as Foreman Instructor as he did not possess the requisite qualification of one year's Central Training Institute (hereinafter referred to as `C.T.I.')
Certificate in the trade of Painting or one year's practical training in a public limited company, in case, C.T.I.
facilities were not available in the trade of painting.
Petitioner kept on filing representations with a request that he be sent for the training but he was not sent for the training as there was no facility of training in Painting Course available in any institution in the country.
Petitioner had also requested that he be sent for one year's practical training in a public limited company as provided under the Technical Education Department Services Rules, 1986.
He was not sent for one year's practical training in a public limited company although certain persons, who were similarly situated, were sent to public limited companies to obtain one year's practical training.
Taking all these factors into consideration and finding merit in the contentions raised by the counsel for the petitioner, the petition was disposed of with the following directions :-  ``Accordingly, we direct the respondents to send the petitioner for one year's practical training to a public limited company within three months from the date of receipt of a certified copy of this order, for acquiring the requisite qualification, failing which respondents are directed to promote the petitioner as Foreman Instructor by relaxing the condition of possession of one year's CTI Certificate or one year's practical training from a public limited company."
3.
As the petitioner retired on 30111996, the directions given by this Court in its judgment dated 7101996 could not be carried out.
Petitioner has averred that because of the changed circumstances, he is entitled for promotion to the post of Foreman Instructor from the date persons junior to him were given promotion with all benefits of pay and service and has accordingly prayed for review of our judgment dated 7101996.
4.
From the operative part of the judgment, reproduced above, it is clear that the respondents were given three months time for deputing the petitioner for one year's practical training in a public limited company, failing which the respondents were directed to promote the petitioner as Foreman Instructor by relaxing the condition of possession of one year's CTI Certificate or one year's practical training from a public limited company.
Petitioner retired before the expiry of three months and, therefore, could not be sent for one year's practical training.
For this, fault cannot be attributed to the respondents.
Petitioner also cannot be made to suffer for no fault of his.
Employer had not sent him for training inspite of his repeated requests.
Under the circumstances, to do complete justice between the parties, we deem it appropriate to modify our judgment dated 7101996 to the extent that the petitioner be deemed to have been promoted a day prior to the date of his retirement as Foreman Instructor with all consequential benefits.
Respondents are directed to refix the pay of the petitioner on the promotional post and recompute the pensionary benefit i.e. pension, gratuity, etc. and disburse the same to the petitioner within six months.
The review application stands disposed of in the above terms.