Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner is aggrieved by the order dated April 7, 1982 by which the Government had directed the Administrator Municipal Committee, Yamunanagar to terminate his services as a Sectional Officer (Civil).
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
Certain posts of Sectional Officers were advertised by the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana.
The petitioner was one of the applicants.
He was selected and his name was recommended to the Public Works Department in the Buildings and Roads Branch.
In the year 1972, the petitioner was appointed as a Sectional Officer.
While he was working as such, he was sent on deputation to the Municipal Committee, Yamunanagar on September 9, 1974.
In November 1975, the Government decided to abolish 20 posts of Junior Engineers in the Buildings and Roads Branch of the Public Works Department.
The petitioner was one of those who were likely to be rendered surplus.
The Government tried to accommodate him.
Consequently his name was forwarded to the Irrigation Branch of the Public Works Department for adjustment.
The petitioner was given a posting order in the Irrigation Branch at Sundarnagar.
It appears that he requested the second respondent to adjust him.
Consequently, vide order dated January 22, 1976, a copy of which was produced as Annexure P-1 with the writ petition, respondent No. 2 appointed the petitioner as a Junior Engineer on purely temporary basis.
The pay which the petitioner was already drawing was protected.
It was also observed that this appointment shall be subject to the approval of the higher authorities, if so required.
His case was actually forwarded to the Government.
Vide communication dated December 13, 1976, it was pointed out by the Commissioner and Secretary to Government, Haryana in the Local Self Department that the petitioner having been appointed on the recommendation of the Subordinate Services Selection Board, it was not necessary to obtain the permission from the Board for his absorption in the Municipal Committee.
After the receipt of this communication, the Municipal Committee, Yamunanagar considered the matter in its meeting held on April 19, 1977.
The following agenda item was placed before the Committee :-  ``Application of Sh. BD Gupta, Sectional Officer, requesting therein for confirmation in service, is put up.
The Municipal Engineer (City Centre) has reported his work and conduct satisfactory.
The Secretary has reported that since the post of Sectional Officer is of a temporary measure, in the City Centre Complex, he being an experienced hand, be please adjusted against regular post of Building Inspector in the grade of Rs. 200-10-280/15-430/20-450 plus allowances.
The SSS Board is also to be informed for filling up one post instead of two posts of Building Inspector, as in this case the approval of the SSS Board is not required vide Government letter No. 12304-5(2)-76/40190 dated 13121976 since he was already selected through SSS Board.
He may also be confirmed against the above post.''
The following order was passed :-  ``Agreed as proposed.
Sh. BD Gupta, Sectional Officer will however continue to work under Municipal Engineer (City Centre) for the time being.
Later on, he will be adjusted against the post of Building Inspector as and when his services as City Centre will no longer as required.''
In view of the above, it is clear that the proposal for his confirmation was accepted.
It was further ordered that he may continue to work under the Municipal Engineer for the time being.
Later on, he had to be adjusted against the post of Building Inspector.
About five years later, the Government informed thee Administrator of Respondent No. 2 that it is unable to ``regularise the ad hoc appointment of Shri BD Gupta, Sectional Officer (Civil)'' Consequently, it was directed that his services be terminated with immediate effect.
Aggrieved by this order, the petitioner has approached this court through the present writ petition.
It is alleged that the order passed by the Government is wholly arbitrary and unfair.
Accordingly, it is prayed that the order passed by the Government, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-5 with the writ petition and the consequential order passed by respondent No. 2 vide letter dated April 15, 1982, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-6, be quashed.
3.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the State of Haryana.
It has been inter alia stated by way of a preliminary objection that the petitioner had not disclosed the fact that certain posts had been abolished in the Buildings and Roads Branch.
As a result, he was relieved of his duties on December 28, 1975 to join his new assignment in the Irrigation Branch.
Consequently, he had ceased to be in service with effect from December 28, 1975.
Respondent No. 2 had appointed the petitioner without notifying the vacancy either to the Employment Exchange or to the Subordinate Services Selection Board.
The appointment given to the petitioner was on purely temporary basis object to the approval of the higher authorities.
This appointment was illegal and violative of Rule 14.
As such, directions for the termination of his services had been rightly given.
Separate written statement on the same lines has been filed on behalf of respondent No. 2 as well.
4.
Mr. Girish Agnihotri, counsel for the petitioner has submitted that the action of respondent No. 1 in directing respondent No. 2 to terminate the services of the petitioner is wholly illegal and arbitrary.
No reason whatsoever had been assigned.
No opportunity had been given to the petitioner.
The action was, consequently, violative of the principles of natural justice and unfair.
On the other hand, Mr. Jaswant Singh, learned counsel for respondent No. 1 has submitted that the petitioner had been appointed on purely temporary basis and that too subject to the approval of the Government.
In this situation, he had no right to continue on the post.
5.
Admittedly, the petitioner had been selected by the Subordinate Services Selection Board for the post of Sectional Officer in the year 1972.
He has continued in service since then for the last 24 years.
It is also not disputed that in January 1976, the petitioner was appointed by the Respondent-Municipal Committee on temporary basis.
Even though it was said that the order is subject to the approval of the higher authorities, if so required, the Government had vide its communication dated December 13, 1976 clearly noticed the fact that the petitioner had already been recommended by the Subordinate Services Selection Board and as such, it was not necessary to take the permission of the Board again.
In this situation, it was observed that the objection raised by the audit may be dropped.
It was also observed that there is no rule which may compel the Government or the Municipal Committee to obtain the approval of the Board in such a situation.
It was in pursuance of this communication of the Government to the Municipal Committee, Respondent No. 2 that the resolution dated April 19, 1977 was passed by the second respondent.
The proposal for the petitioner's confirmation in the service was approved.
He was to be adjusted against the post of Building Inspector as and when his services in the City Centre were not required.
After five years, the Government issued the impugned instructions to the Administrator vide letter dated April 7, 1982.
It was observed that the Government is unable to approve the proposal for the regularisation of the ad hoc appointment of Mr. Gupta, the petitioner.
Nothing has been produced on record to show that he had ever been appointed on ad hoc basis.
There was no proposal for the regularisation of his ad hoc appointment.
The question of seeking the approval of the Government could not have arisen.
Consequently, there was no occasion for the Government to direct that the petitioner's services be terminated.
The order was wholly arbitrary and unfair.
In any event, even an opportunity was not given to the petitioner to put forth his view point and show that he had not been appointed on ad hoc basis.
What compelled the Government to take such an action after the lapse of five years is not clear from the record.
In any case, no reason has been disclosed even at the hearing.
Accordingly, the order cannot be sustained.
6.
Mr. Jaswant Singh, learned counsel for the respondents submits that according to Rule 14, the appointment to a post in the service has to be made on the recommendation of the Subordinate Services Selection Board or after notifying the vacancy to the Employment Exchange.
It is the Government's own case that the petitioner had been appointed after his name had been duly recommended by the Board.
It is also not disputed that when the Municipal Committee had pointed out that the audit had raised an objection, the Government had observed that the petitioner's appointment having been made on the recommendation of the Board, no approval was required for the second time and that the audit objection should be dropped.
Therefore, the Government cannot be permitted to say now after the lapse of so many years that the petitioner's appointment was in any way irregular or in violation of Rule 14.
No other point has been urged.
In view of the above, the communication dated April 7, 1982, issued by the Government vide letter at Annexure P-5 and the consequential order of termination passed by respondent No. 2 vide letter dated April 15, 1982 (Annexure P-6) cannot be sustained.
These are, accordingly, quashed.
However, in the circumstances, there will be no order as to costs.