Ashok Bhan, J - Petitioner who was working as Deputy Economic and Statistical Adviser in the Economic and Statistical Organisation, Punjab, has filed this petition for issuance of a writ of certiorari quashing the recommendations of the Departmental Promotion Committee (which held its meeting on 29111995) for filling up three posts of Joint Directors in the Economic and Statistical Organisation, Punjab, by promotion from amongst the Deputy Economic and Statistical Advisers on the ground that these posts have been filled up in contravention of Rule 7(2) of the Punjab Economic and Statistical Organisation (State Service Class-I) Rules, 1969 (hereinafter referred to as the Rules).
2.
Eligibility for the post of Joint Director filled up through promotion is Master's degree in Economics or Mathematics or Agricultural Economics or Commerce or Statistics with Statistics as one of the papers in the first four cases from a recognised university plus eight years experience in guiding and conducting research in various economic and statistical matters and Senior Research Officer of Deputy Economic and Statistical Adviser.
State of Punjab was to fill up three posts of Joint Directors by promotion.
All promotions in Class-I service in Economic and Statistical Organisation are to be made by selection on merits as envisaged in Rule 7(2) of the Rules, which reads as under :-  ``7(2) All promotions shall be made by selection on merit as enjoined in the Punjab Service (Appointment by Promotion) Rules, 1962 and no person shall be entitled to claim as of right, promotion to such posts on the basis of seniority alone.''
3.
Petitioner has averred that on 29111995 Departmental Promotion Committee (for short referred to as DPC) consisting of Secretary to Govt. of Punjab, Department of Planning, the Economic and Statistical Adviser and representatives of Welfare and Personnel departments considered the case of three senior most Deputy Economic and Statistical Advisers in Economic and Statistical Organisation, Punjab and have submitted their recommendations to the concerned Minister to the Government of Punjab for approval and subsequent promotions of respondents No. 3, 4 and 5 being the senior most in the seniority list issued on 31.8.1993, in violation of Rule 7(2) of the rules.
That the posts have been filled on the principle of seniority cum merit whereas the posts were to be filled as per the rule on the principle of merit-cum-seniority.
It has been averred by the petitioner that he has got a very good record including one outstanding report during the relevant period and falls at Serial No. 5 in the seniority list of Deputy Economic and Statistical Advisers.
For the selection of three Joint Directors at least five senior most Deputy Economic and Statistical advisers ought to have been considered as per criteria already laid down for determining merit of the candidates.
That the DPC did not consider the petitioner or even respondent No. 6 who is immediately senior to the petitioner thereby contravening the merit criteria; further averment of the petitioner is that in October 1994 the DPC determined the merit by allotting marks to various levels of over all assessment records in the annual confidential reports of the officials under considerations for promotion and the following criteria was laid down :-  ``Over all assessment Marks allotted out of 10 Outstanding 9 Very good 7 Good 5 Average 3'' It was also decided to give one additional mark for an appreciation letter issued to the Government servant.
This time this criteria has not been adopted by the DPC and, therefore, the selection made by the DPC is bad in law.
4.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondents No. 1 and 2, it is admitted that DPC's meeting was held on 29111995.
A panel of eligible Deputy Economic and Statistical Advisers was considered each time for each post for promotion to three posts of Joint Directors in Economic and Statistical Organisation, Punjab.
Apart from respondents No. 3, 4 and 5, petitioner as well as respondent No. 6 were considered by the DPC The record of respondents No. 3 and 6 and the petitioner was found to be good but as the record of the junior officials in each panel was not found to be of exceptional merit, the senior most Deputy Economic and Statistical Adviser in each block was recommended by the DPC for promotion to the post of Joint Director.
Out of three selected Deputy Economic and Statistical Advisers for promotion to the post of Joint Director, respondents No. 3 and 4 have been promoted as Joint Directors and have since joined.
It is denied that selections were made on the basis of seniority-cum-merit.
It has been denied that there has been any violation of Rule 72. of the Rules.
It is admitted that in the DPC's meeting held in October 1994, the procedure for selection was followed as indicated in the petition but the DPC which met in November 1995 was not bound to follow the criteria adopted by the DPC in its meeting held in October 1994 regarding allocation of marks out of 10 to over all assessment of the candidates; that DPC has a right to evolve its own procedure for selection of the candidates.
5.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
Under Rule 72 of the Rules promotion to Class-I service in the Department of Economic and Statistical Organisation, Punjab, is to be made by selection on merit.
Promotions are to be made on the principle of merit-cum-seniority and not on seniority-cum-merit.
If selection is to be made on the basis of seniority-cum-merit then if there is nothing adverse against the senior, he has to be selected and appointed without comparing the inter se merit of the candidates.
In merit-cum-seniority, the selection is to be made on the basis of comparative merit of the candidates and if a junior has a better merit than the senior then he has to be selected irrespective of the inter se seniority of the candidates.
If there merit of all the candidates is equal then senior can be selected and appointed.
6.
In the present case, respondents have stated that juniors like the petitioner and respondent No. 6 did not have any exceptional merit, therefore, seniors i.e. respondents No. 3 to 5 were selected and appointed as Joint Directors.
The DPC adjudged the merit of the candidates including the petitioner to be equal and selected respondents No. 3 to 5 being senior.
In the petition it has not been stated or even suggested that petitioner had either an exceptional merit or better merit than respondents No. 3 to 5 who have been selected.
7.
Selection was made on the basis of merit-cum-seniority.
For each post of Joint Director a panel for three Deputy Economic and Statistical Advisers was considered.
Petitioner's name was also put on the panel but as he was not found to be of better merit than the seniors, he was not selected.
8.
In the absence of rules to the contrary, every DPC is free to adopt its own criteria for making selection.
The last DPC which met in October, 1994 evolved its own procedure regarding allocation of marks out of 10 to over-all assessment of the candidates.
Order Annexure P-1 dated 14111995 in which a mention is made regarding the procedure adopted by the DPC which made the selections in the year 1994 was passed pursuant to the directions given by this Court while disposing of CWP 18463 of 1994 filed by Sarvshri Ram Rattan Sharma and Harbhajan Singh.
DPC which met in November 1995 was not required to follow the criteria which was adopted by the DPC which made selections in October 1994.
It is not the case of the petitioner that prior to 1994, the same procedure was adopted by the DPC for making selections as was adopted by the DPC in 1994.
It cannot be said that as a rule the subsequent Departmental Promotion Committees were required to adopt the same procedure which was adopted by the DPC in 1994.
For the reasons stated above, we do not find any defect in the process of selection either in procedure or on merits.
Dismissed with no order as to costs.