VK Bali, J (Oral) - This order shall dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 3894 and 5011 of 1996 as common questions of law and fact are involved in both the cases.
2.
Petitioners, Baru Ram in C.W.P.
No. 3894 of 1996 and Rang Bihari Lal in CWP No. 5011 of 1996, through present petitions filed by them under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, seek issuance of writ in the nature of certiorari so as to quash the joint seniority list of Naib Tehsildars, Annexure P-5, prepared by the Financial Commissioner, Revenue, Punjab, under Regulation 4 of the Punjab Tehsildars (Residuary Service Matters) Regulations, 1984 (for short `1984 Regulations') and for considering them for promotion to the post of Tehsildar from a date persons junior to them holding the post of Naib Tehsildar were promoted to the post of Tehsildar.
Relied asked for is sought to rest on the facts that need a brief mention.
3.
On October 7, 1988 petitioners were promoted as Naib Tehsildars whereas respondent No. 4 was appointed as Naib Tehsildar on December 4, 1989.
Respondents 5 to 7 were appointed as Naib Tehsildars on September 20, 1990.
Seniority list of Naib Tehsildars of Ferozepur Division as on March 31, 1995 was circulated on July 17, 1995 in which petitioners were shown senior to private respondents 4 to 7.
In 1995 joint seniority list of Naib Tehsildars in the State of Punjab was prepared for the purposes of promotion to the post of Tehsildar and the petitioners were shown far junior to the private respondent and some persons junior to the petitioners, including respondents 4 to 7 were promoted to the post of Tehsildar on September 8, 1995 and February 13, 1996.
Aggrieved of their non-consideration and non-promotion to the post of Tehsildar, petitioners have filed these petitions for the relief, as indicated above.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioners vehemently contends that the petitioners were promoted as Naib Tehsildar on October 7, 1988 whereas private respondents 4 to 7 were appointed later than them.
However, on account of no fault of the petitioners, their promotion on October 7, 1988 was shown to be on ad hoc basis for the sole reason that they were not enlisted in the register maintained by the Commissioner of the division.
It is for the precise reason that they continued to be shown to have been promoted on ad hoc basis.
However, on October 341, 1994, Shri S.C. Aggarwal, IAS, Commissioner, Ferozepur Division, clearly said that the petitioners and other Naib Tehsildars, who were working on ad hoc basis were entered in Registers `B', `C' and `D' maintained under Rule 8 of the Punjab Naib Tehsildars (Class-III) Service Rules, 1994 for their deemed enlistment.
Petitioners Baru Ram and Rang Bihari Lal were enlisted as required under the Rules in the Registers maintained under Rule 8 of the Rules aforesaid.
However, inasmuch as the petitioners were shown to have been promoted on ad hoc basis for the sole reason that they were not enlisted as required under the Rules, they were shown junior to respondents 4 to 7 in the tentative seniority list prepared by the department.
When, therefore, an occasion came to promote Naib Tehsildars to the post of Tehsildars, petitioners' case was not considered and it is respondents 4 to 7 who stole march over them.
5.
On the last date of hearing, when the matter came up before us, there was controversy as to whether it is on account of non-enlistment of the petitioners that they have been shown to have been promoted on ad hoc basis and, therefore, shown junior to respondents 4 to 7.
We called for the records.
Mr. Masih, learned AAG, Punjab, in all fairness after looking into the records, states that actual reason for which the petitioners were shown to have been promoted on ad hoc basis is what is stated by learned counsel for the petitioners, i.e. that they were not enlisted in the relevant registers.
He further states that petitioners were promoted against regular vacancies.
6.
From the array of facts, as have been reproduced above, it is, thus, clear that the petitioners were certainly senior to respondents 4 to 7 and they were ignored for promotion to the post of Tehsildar for the sole reason that they were wrongly shown junior to respondents 4 to 7 in the tentative senior list.
7.
In somewhat similar circumstances, a Division Bench of this Court in CWP No. 3489 of 1993 (Uttam Chand and another v. State of Punjab and others), decided on October 7, 1993, upheld the claim of petitioners in the said case, who too were ignored for their non-enlistment and were actually enlisted during the pendency of the petition.
8.
For the reasons recorded above, these petitions are allowed and a direction is issued to the respondents to consider the case of petitioners for promotion to the post of Tehsildar and if their service records are found such that they are entitled for promotion, they be promoted a day earlier to respondents 4 to 7 were promoted on the post of Tehsildar.
Petitioner Baru Ram has since retired.
If, ultimately he is promoted to the post of Tehsildar, he would be entitled to only consequential benefits.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petitions allowed.