NK Sodhi, J - Petitioner 1 was appointed an Octroi Clerk on daily wages by the Municipal Committee, Jandiala Guru, District Amritsar (for short the Committee) in the year 1974.
He worked as such till 30.9.1979.
From 1101979 to 3041980 he was given a regular grade of a clerk.
Similarly, petitioner 2 was employed as an Octroi clerk by the Committee from 191979 to 3041980 in a regular grade.
The Committee advertised four posts of clerks in the Daily Tribune and also sent a requisition to the Employment Exchange, Amritsar for sending the names of eligible candidates for filling up those posts.
A Selection Committee was constituted which interviewed the candidates on 1351980.
Four candidates were recommended for appointment including the petitioners.
The Committee as per its resolution dated 2151980 approved the selection of the petitioners and others and resolved to appoint them on probation for one year.
It was further resolved that before appointing the petitioners approval of the Regional Deputy Director, Local Government Department, Amritsar be obtained.
Accordingly, a letter dated 2151980 was sent to respondent 3 for according approval to the appointing of the petitioners and others.
The appointments were approved as per letter dated 2751980.
The petitioners were then given regular appointments by the Committee as per its resolution No. 91 dated 2751980.
It may be mentioned that the Committee erroneously believed that it was governed by the provisions of Punjab Civil Service Rules Volume-I Part-I (hereinafter called the Rules) and, therefore, as per its resolution No. 210 dated 271980 it decided to relax the upper age limit in the case of the petitioners under Rule 38 of the Rules.
After they had worked for about 2 years, the Deputy Director, Local Government, Amritsar issued a show cause notice dated 1231982 to the Executive Officer of the Committee stating therein that the power of relaxation had not been properly exercised in the case of petitioners and that their cases we not covered by Rule 38 of the Rules.
The Committee was required to show cause why its resolution dated 2151980 appointing the petitioners be not annulled under Section 236 of the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911 and their appointments set aside.
The Committee in its meeting held on 2931982 considered the show cause notice and resolved that to remove the petitioners from service who had been confirmed would cause great hardship to them.
It was further decided that the President of the Committee along with Vice-President and other office- bearers should meet the Minister for Local Bodies and impress upon him that services of the petitioners be not terminated.
The Executive Officer was authorised to prepare a reply on behalf of the Committee and submit the same to the State Government.
The Director, Local Government, after considering the reply of the Committee passed an order on 4.8.1982 annulling the resolutions dated 2151980 and 271980 thereby setting aside the appointments of the petitioners.
It was observed in the order that the Committee had not given any cogent reasons for relaxing the age limit in the case of the petitioners.
Thereafter the Committee filed representation to the State Government against the annulment of its resolutions but that was rejected.
As a consequence of the order passed by the Director, Local Government, the services of the petitioners were terminated and they were relieved of their duties w.e.f.
1431983.
It is against this action of the State Government that the present petition has been filed under Article 226 of the Constitution  2.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondents 1 and 2, a somewhat contradictory stand has been taken.
On the one hand it is pleaded that in terms of Rule 38 of the Rules, only the Head of a Department is competent to relax the age limit but that could be done only in exceptional cases and the discretion has to be used sparingly only on furnishing full justification while on the other hand it is also stated that the Committee never brought to the notice of the State Government that the Rules had not been extended to its employees.
It is admitted that the rules on which reliance had been placed in the impugned order had neither been adopted by the Committee nor had those been made applicable to it under its bye-laws.
Respondent 3 in his written statement has admitted that the Committee was the appointing authority of the petitioners and that it had presumed that the Rules were applicable to its employees.
I have heard counsel for the parties.
3.
There is no gainsaying the fact that the petitioners on their appointment were municipal employees and not employees of the Government and, therefore, the Rules did not apply to them.
It is also the common case of the parties that the Rules had not been adopted by the Committee either by a resolution or through its bye-laws.
This being so, the impugned order of the Director dated 4.8.1982 annulling the resolutions of the Committee on the ground that it had not given any cogent reasons for relaxing the upper age limit in the case of the petitioners in terms of Rule 38 of the Rules was misconceived and cannot be sustained.
It is also not in dispute that there is no provision in the bye-laws of the Committee providing any upper age limit for its employees.
There was thus no impediment for the Committee to appoint the petitioners.
As observed earlier, the Committee believed that the Rules were applicable to it and, therefore, it passed a resolution on 271980 relaxing the upper age limit in the case of the petitioners.
In my view, no such resolution was necessary and it was an exercise in futility which could not result in any prejudice to the petitioners.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioners brought to my notice a copy of requisition certified to be true by the Executive Officer of the Committee which had been sent to the Employment Exchange inviting the names of eligible persons for the four posts sought to be filled in the year 1980.
A perusal of this requisition shows that the age limit then prescribed was between 18 to 35 years.
Admittedly, the petitioners were in this age group at the time of their appointment in the year 1980.
In this view of the matter as well, their appointment cannot be said to be illegal.
5.
In the result, it must be held that the Director, Local Bodies was not justified in annulling the resolutions of the Committee appointing the petitioners and consequently their termination from service was illegal.
6.
The question that now arises is as to what relief the petitioners be given when more than fifteen years have elapsed since their services were terminated.
In my opinion, they are entitled to be reinstated with continuity of service and all consequential benefits.
Petitioners who are present in Court submitted through their counsel that they will not claim any back wages from the Committee.
For the reasons recorded above, the writ petition is allowed and the Committee directed to reinstate the petitioners with continuity of service and all consequential benefits but without any back wages.
Petitioners have been directed to report for duty within one month from today.
In the circumstances of the case, there is no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.