Ashok Bhan, J - Civil Writ Petitions 18751 of 1995, 5519, 5520, 5925 to 5930, 6013, 6249 to 6252, 7416, 7450 to 7455, 8116, 8278 to 8280, 11069 to 11072, 11391, 11708, 14551 and 19046 to 19048, all of 1996, are taken up together as common law point is involved in all these petitions.
2.
Facts, as stated below, are taken from Civil Writ Petition 7451 of 1996 :-  Petitioners, who were recruited as Special Police Officers (hereinafter referred to as `SPOs.
'), in the year 1992 have filed this petition for issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to appoint them as Constables from the date persons junior to them were promoted and allotted constabutary numbers with all consequential benefits.
State Government approved the enlistment of 9160 SPOs - 5000 SPOs.
for raising five Auxiliary Battalions of 100 SPOs.
each and 4160 SPOs.
for Special Police Pickets.
These Officers were to be called as Auxiliary Constables.
Standing Order No. 11039/61 dated 2671990.
Annexure P-2, was issued laying down the requirement of educational qualification, physical standards, age and medical fitness and the process of selection to the post of SPOs/Auxiliary Constables.
Selection was to be made on the basis of certain educational qualifications, physical standard and medical fitness, after holding a written test and an interview.
Clause 13 of this Standing Order provided for further avenues of promotion for the purposes of giving appointment and further induction as Constable to the persons working as SPOs/Auxiliary Constables.
Clause 13 provided as under :-  ``Further Avenues of Promotion : The Auxiliary Constable will be eligible for recruitment as Constable after one year of service provided his work and conduct is found satisfactory by the District Senior Superintendent of Police.
The District Senior Superintendent of Police will make selection out of the eligible Auxiliary Constables for appointment as Constable.
After their selection as Constable, they shall be governed by the Punjab Police Rules.''
Standing Order, Annexure P-2, was further supplemented by the instructions issued by the Director General of Police, Punjab, vide memo dated 19111991, Annexure P-3, which provided that there would be no direct recruitment of Constables.
Appointment was first to be made as SPOs.
Auxiliary Constables and the Constables were to be promoted from amongst the SPOs./Auxiliary Constables, who had worked for a minimum period of six months.
Absorption was to be made in accordance with their seniority and suitability.
3.
Petitioners have averred that they discharged their duties honestly and diligently but inspite of that the competent authority instead of considering their claims, started appointing persons junior to them as Constables.
Names of five such persons who were recruited as SPOs.
later than the petitioners and appointed as Constables have been mentioned in the petition.
In short, their grievance is that the appointment of the persons who were recruited as SPOs.
later than the petitioners ignoring their claims is discriminatory and violative of the equality clause of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
4.
In the written statement filed, the stand taken by the respondents is that the SPOs, were enlisted on daily wages, being paid at the rate of Rs. 30/- per day which was later on revised to Rs. 40/- per day and then to Rs. 50/- per day, purely on temporary basis and their services could be terminated without issuing them any notice.
It has been denied that the claims of the petitioners have been ignored.
Constabulary numbers were given to those SPOs.
who deserved according to the performance of their duty, efficiency and dedication to the service.
Recruitment as Constables was made from amongst the SPOs on the basis of efficiency and the services rendered by them.
5.
Mr. DS Brar, learned counsel for the petitioners, pointed out that the competent authority has to consider the claim of various SPOs.
for appointment as Constables in accordance with the Standing Orders, Annexure P-2 and P-3, keeping in view the principles of seniority and suitability.
Persons juniors to the petitioners have been appointed without considering the claims of the petitioners thereby violating the guarantee of equality provided under Article 16 of the Constitution of India.
As against this, Mr. SS Saron, Additional Advocate General Punjab, has argued that the appointment to the post of Constables was made on the basis of efficiency and performance of duties by the various SPOs.
6.
After hearing counsel for the parties and going through the record and the pleadings of the parties, we are of the opinion that this writ petition must succeed.
Standing Order, Annexure P-2, lays down the procedure for selection providing educational qualifications, minimum physical standards required and subject to being medically fit, after holding a written test and an interview.
Under Clause 13 of the Standing Order, Annexure P-2, an SPO becomes eligible for recruitment as Constable after one year of service provided his work and conduct was found satisfactory by the District Superintendent of Police, who is required to make selection out of the eligible SPOs for appointment as Constables in accordances with their seniority and suitability.
Standing Order, Annexure P-3, reduced the minimum period of service from one year to six months for appointment as Constables for amongst the SPOs.
A combined reading of the Standing Orders, Annexure P-2 and P-3, makes it clear that the recruitment as Constables from amongst the SPOs.
was to be made on the basis of their recruitment as SPOs.
in order of merit and keeping in view their efficiency and suitability.
Positive stand of the petitioners is that their case was not considered for appointment were considered as Constables while appointing persons junior to them.
In the written statement filed, respondents have not stated that the cases of the petitioners for appointment as Constables while appointing persons junior to them.
From the pleadings of the parties, it is clear that the cases of the petitioners were not considered for appointment as Constables while appointing persons juniors to them as Constables.
In similar circumstances, a learned Single Judge of this Court in CWP 812 of 1994 (Balwinder Kumar and other v. State of Punjab and others) decided on 691995, issued the following directions :-  ``The writ petition in disposed of with the direction that the respective District Superintendents of Police shall consider the claims of the petitioners for absorption as Constables with effect from the date/s the person/s junior to them were appointed.
In case, the petitioners are found suitable, orders of their appointment shall be issued.
The consequential reliefs relating to the fixation of pay and payment of arrears of salary, shall follow.
The needful shall be done within six months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.''
7.
We dispose of this petition with a direction to the respective senior Superintendents of Police to consider the claims of the petitioners for absorption as Constables with effect from the dates persons junior to the were appointed.
In case, the petitioners are found suitable, orders of their appointment be issued.
Consequential reliefs regarding fixation of pay and seniority shall follow.
Keeping in view the large number of SPOs./Auxiliary Constables involved in these cases, we will not order payment of arrears of salary to avoid unnecessary burden on the State Government at this stage.
Directions issued above be carried out within six months from the receipt/production of a certified copy of this order.
No costs.