RS Mongia, J (Oral) - The petitioner had joined the Indian Air Force on August 21, 1974.
While joining the Indian Air Force he had the qualification of B.Sc.
(Medical).
During the course of his service with the Air Force he acquired the qualifications of BT from Gauhati University in the year 1980 and thereafter obtained MA in English from Panjab University, Chandigarh in the year 1986.
He was to be discharged from the Indian Air Force on August 31, 1995 after completion of his tenure provided for the rank of Junior Warrant Officer.
2.
The State of Punjab had advertised 1000 posts of Lecturers in Schools in the State on December 28, 1994.
The last date for submission of applications was within one month of the date of issue of the advertisement.
Out of the aforesaid posts, 150 posts were for Lecturers in English.
As per the Government Instructions, 14% posts were reserved for Ex-servicemen.
The petitioner in response to the aforesaid advertisement applied for the post of Lecturer in English staking his claim for being considered against the posts of Ex-servicemen.
He also attached `No Objection Certificate' from the Air Force authorities.
Though the petitioner was called for interview on May 26, 1995, but factually he was not interviewed as the respondents did not consider him to be an ex-serviceman as he was to be discharged from the Indian Air Force much after the date of submission of the application and even the date of interview.
It is the case of the petitioner that as per Punjab Recruitment of Ex-servicemen Rules, 1982 (as amended up-to-date), read with the explanation to the Ex-servicemen (Re-employment in Central Civil Services and Posts) Rules, 1979, which are being followed by the State of Punjab, an employee working in the Armed Forces, who is to be discharged/retired within one year is to be treated as an ex-serviceman.
According to the learned counsel the petitioner's right to be considered as an ex-serviceman was denied.
He further submitted that even if the petitioner was not to be considered as an ex-serviceman, he should have been interviewed as he could compete against the post meant for general category.
3.
It is not necessary for me now in this case to opine whether the petitioner was to be considered as an ex-serviceman as the learned counsel for the respondents on the basis of written instructions has stated that the petitioner may now appear for interview for the post of Lecturer in English before the Departmental Selection Committee on August 22, 1996 at 900 AM, where he shall be interviewed on that date or on a later date that may be told to him on that date, against the post meant for ex-servicemen.
It may further be observed here that the petitioner's case, in any case, should have been considered against post meant for general category, even if at the earlier stage the petitioner was not to be considered as an ex-serviceman.
4.
In view of the stance taken by the learned counsel for the respondents, I dispose of this writ petition by directing the respondents to interview the petitioner, as suggested by the respondents, on August 1996 at 900 AM (if for any reason interview cannot be held on that date, then another date be intimated to the petitioner).
The petitioner may appear on the aforesaid date and time for interview before the Chairman of the Departmental Selection Committee, whose address is SCO No. 130-131, Sector 34-A, Chandigarh.
5.
If in the earlier interview, against 21 posts of Lecturers in English meant for ex-servicemen, as many suitable ex-servicemen were not selected and, therefore, appointment was made of lesser number than the posts meant for ex- servicemen, then if the petitioner is found suitable, he would be given appointment against that category.
In case 21 persons from the ex-servicemen category were selected for the posts of Lecturers in English, in that eventuality, the petitioner would be offered appointment only if he is found more meritorious than the last candidate to whom the offer of appointment was made, even in case the petitioner is found higher in merit than the last candidate selected and appointed in the general category for the post of Lecturer in English in the earlier selection, even then the petitioner would be given appointment considering him to be a general category candidate.
The appointment shall be made effective from the date the last candidate in the ex-servicemen category or the general category was given appointment (as the case may be) or w.e.f.
the date of his discharge from the Air Force i.e. August 31, 1995, whichever is later.
However, the petitioner shall not be entitled to any arrears of pay but that date shall count for all other purposes.
6.
There will be no order as to costs.
7.
A copy of this order, attested by the Special Secretary to this Court, be given to the counsel for the respondents for onward transmission to the concerned authorities.
Ordered accordingly.