VK Bali, J (Oral) - Raghbir Chand through present writ filed by him under Article 226 of the Constitution of India seeks a writ in the nature of Certiorari so as to quash order dated January 29, 1992, vide which it was held that he was not entitled to any pension under the rules.
2.
Brief facts of the case reveal that the petitioner after graduating in law started practising as an Advocate.
When he had practised for two years, he applied for the post of a prosecuting Sub Inspector and was selected as such in the year 1969.
He joined the post of Prosecuting Sub Inspector at Ambala on April 28, 1969.
Obviously, at the time when he joined service, he was medically examined and was found fit for entry into government service.
Earlier the investigating agency was in the police department but in the meanwhile by April, 1974, it was separated from police department and a separate directorate of prosecution was created with the Director of Prosecution as Head of the Department and the said Department was placed under the Administrative Control of Administration of Justice Department.
The post of Prosecuting Sub Inspector was designated as Assistant District Attorney.
It is the case of the petitioner that due to heavy pressure of work assigned to him, he remained under tension and ultimately he developed psychosis as also emotional disturbances and delusions which took the form of mental ailment known as schizophrenia.
He was medically examined by the Medical Board and which opined that he was a patient of chronic undifferentiated schizophrenia and was unfit to join duties as District Attorney.
Vide order dated April 19, 1979, he was retired on invalid pension.
Copy of the order retiring petitioner on invalid pension has been annexed with the petition as Annexure P-1.
It is the case of the petitioner that he had rendered 9 years 11 months and 22 days of service which was only less by 8 days of ten years which concededly qualifies himself for getting pension.
The order Annexure P-1 it appears was revised by order Annexure P-2 dated January 29, 1992, vide which the petitioner was informed that his qualifying service was less than ten years and therefore, he was not entitled to pension under the Rules.
It is this order referred to above which has been challenged in this writ petition.
3.
The sole but forceful contention of Mr. Gill, the learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner is that a separate rule dealing with the retirement from public service on account of mental infirmity or permanent incapacitation for a public service exists.
Rule dealing with the same is 511 of the Punjab Civil Service Volume II which reads as follows:-  ``511.
An invalid pension is awarded on his retirement from the public service, to a Government employee who by bodily or mental infirmity is permanently incapacitated for the public service, or for the particular branch of it to which he belongs.
Note :- The amount of invalid pension shall not be less than the amount of normal family pension admissible under the Family Pension Scheme 1964.''
It is further the contention of the learned counsel that if a specific rule deals with a particular situation, the general rule that an employee is entitled to pension if he has rendered ten years of service would not be attracted.
For his aforesaid contention, the learned counsel relies upon the judgment of this Court in Avtar Singh v. State of Punjab, 1989(3) SLR 623.
4.
The cause of the petitioner is sought to be opposed on the sole ground that the petitioner had not rendered ten years service which qualifies him for pension and he has actually served for 6 years 11 months and 9 days only.
The learned State Counsel relies upon Rule 6.16 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules Volume II to contend that the petitioner is not entitled to pension.
Rule 6.16 reads as follows:-  ``6.16(1) In the case of a Government employee retiring in accordance with the provisions of these rules before completing qualifying service of ten years, the amount of service gratuity shall be the appropriate amount as set out in the table below and no additional or special additional pension shall be granted to him - Completed six-monthly periods of qualifying service Scale of service gratuity 1 2 1.
1/2 months' Emoluments 2.
1 month's Emoluments 3.
1-1/2 months' Emoluments 4.
2 months' Emoluments 5.
2-1/2 months' Emoluments 6.
3 months' Emoluments 7.
3-1/2 months' Emoluments 8.
4 months' Emoluments 9.
4-3/8 months' Emoluments 10.
4-3/4 months' Emoluments 11.
5-1/8 months' Emoluments 12.
5-1/2 months' Emoluments 13.
5-7/8 months' Emoluments 14.
6-1/4 months Emoluments 15.
6-5/8 months' Emoluments 16.
7 months' Emoluments 17.
7-3/8 months' Emoluments 18.
7-3/4 months' Emoluments 19.
8-1/8 months' Emoluments.''
5.
I have heard the learned counsel representing the parties and gone through the records and I am of the view that if a particular matter is specifically dealt with in a separate rule, it is that rule which will apply and would preclude the applicability of a general rule.
If an employee was to get pension only after serving ten years, then in that case whatever might have been the circumstances of his retirement, he would have been entitled to pension.
An employee could retire after ten years of service on the ground that he had become physically unfit to serve.
There was absolutely no necessity to frame a separate rule dealing with the retirement of an employee when he was to become physically unfit to hold the post.
The judgment relied upon by Mr. Gill in Avtar Singh's case supports his contention wherein it was held that:-  ``Rule 4 of the 1975 Rules clearly provides that a person who is required to be retired under rule 3 shall be granted retiring pension.
The argument raised on behalf of the Government was that the rule applicable to pension would be the one contained in the Punjab Civil Service Rules Volume II, Chapter IV, rule 4.2(1)(b).
The Chapter starts with the heading `Reckoning of service for pension' and rule 4.2(1)(b) thereof provides for the superannuation pension payable to the Govt. employees to a service or post to which candidates of more than 25 years of age are normally recruited and the proviso (1) provides that the concession of giving pension shall not be admissible to a Government employee unless his actual qualifying service at the time he quit Government service is not less than 10 years.
According to him since petitioner had only 9 years and 10 months of service, and 10 years being qualifying service for making him entitled to pension, he has rightly been denied the pensionary benefits.
In view of the aforesaid argument of the Counsel for the State, Rule (5) of the 1975 Rules assumes importance.
Rule 5 has the overriding effect on other rules for the time being in force.
The rule of pension referred to by the learned counsel for the State was framed long before the Rules in question which specifically relate to pre-mature retirement were framed and for that reason the law framers have given overriding effect to the pre-mature retirement Rules.
Here, the employee is not quitting the post either on superannuation or at his sweet will but is being forced to leave the job and probably for that reason the rule framers provided Rule 5 giving overriding effect to these Rules and by virtue of rule 4 of the 1975 Rules the appellant is entitled to pensionary benefits, irrespective of the period during which he may have remained in service.''
6.
It appears that the respondents prior in point of time by rightly interpreting the rules held petitioner entitled to invalid pension while passing order Annexure P-1.
There was absolutely no need to pass a fresh order setting at negate (naught) the said order.
Order Annexure P-2, thus, cannot sustain.
The same is quashed.
Petitioner is held entitled to invalid pension as envisaged under Rule 511 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume II.
Let arrears as due on today be calculated within two months from today and the amount be paid to the petitioner within one month from that date.
Let pension be paid to the petitioner in future as well till such time he is entitled to it under the rules.
This petition is allowed in the manner aforesaid but there will be no order as to costs.