Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - On October 17, 1980 the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Ferozepur Range, Ferozepur, passed an order by which the petitioner's two years' service was ordered to be forfeited with permanent effect.
The petitioner filed an appeal to the Inspector General of Police.
It was rejected vide order dated June 3, 1981.
Copies of these orders have been produced as Annexures P-5 and P-7 with the writ petition.
The petitioner prays that these orders be set aside and consequential relief be granted to him.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
In August, 1975, the petitioner was posted as Station House Officer, Police Station Samana.
On May 29, 1978, he was served with a charge sheet alleging inter alia that he had detained Gurbachan Singh Sarpanch of Village Achral Khurd, Amar Singh and others at Police Station, Samana.
When he was approached by the respectables of the area he had demanded Rs. 1500/- for their release.
Ultimately, the Sarpanch had paid Rs. 900/- as illegal gratification.
3.
These charges were inquired into.
The Inquiry Officer found that the allegations against the petitioner were not proved.
The conclusions recorded by the Inquiry Officer were accepted by the punishing authority viz, the Senior Superintendent of Police.
However, when the matter came to the notice of the Deputy Inspector General of Police, he vide his order dated January 22, 1980, found that the conclusions recorded by the Inquiry Officer were not tenable.
He gave detailed reasons and directed the issue of a notice to the petitioner to show cause as to why his service of four years be not forfeited with permanent effect.
Copy of the reasons recorded by the Deputy Inspector General of Police for disagreeing with the findings recorded by the Inquiry Officer and the Senior Superintendent of Police (which is Annexure P-2 with the writ petition) was also supplied to the petitioner along with the show cause notice.
The petitioner submitted a detailed representation running into 11 pages.
On a consideration of the matter, he rejected the representation vide his order date October 17, 1980.
He found that the charge of illegally detaining the persons was fully proved against the petitioner.
However, taking a lenient view, he ordered the forfeiture of only two years' service with permanent effect.
The petitioner's appeal against the order having been rejected by the Inspector General of Police vide his order dated June 3, 1981, he has approached this court through the present petition.
The orders dated October 17, 1980 and June 3, 1981 have been impugned in this petition.
4.
The claim made by the petitioner has been controverted by the respondents in the written statement filed on their behalf.
5.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has made a two-fold submission.
First, it has been urged that the impugned orders cannot be sustained as the charge of illegally detaining anyone was never levelled against him.
Secondly, the learned counsel has submitted that the orders are vitiated as no opportunity had been given to the petitioner by the Deputy Inspector General of Police before reversing the findings recorded by the Inquiry Officer.
6.
Mr. Dhillon appearing for the respondents has controverted the claim made on behalf of the petitioner.
7.
As for the first submission, it may be mentioned that the petitioner has reproduced the charge in paragraph 1 of the writ petition.
A perusal of this charge as reproduced by the petitioner shows that it has been specifically mentioned that ``all the said persons were illegally detained at the police Station.''
It is, this, clear that the charge of illegal detention of the persons mentioned in the charge sheet had been levelled against the petitioner.
The contention that such a charge had not been made against the petitioner cannot thus be sustained.
Still further, even in the reasons recorded by the Deputy Inspector General of Police, it has been specifically observed that on August 2, 1975, the petitioner while posted as Station House Officer, Police Station, Samana had ``unlawfully detained Gurbachan Singh Sarpanch of Village Achral Khurd, his tractor driver Amar Singh......'' Even in the impugned order, a categorical finding to that effect had been recorded.
In paragraph 6, it has been found that the charge ``pertaining to the unlawful detention of the above mentioned four persons in the police station on 2875 stands fully proved.''
The petitioner has filed an appeal.
It appears that he did not even allege that the order passed by the Deputy Inspector General is vitiated as no charge of illegally detaining Gurbachan Sigh etc. had been levelled against him.
8.
In view of the above, the first contention raised by the learned counsel cannot be sustained.
It is consequently rejected.
9.
Equally lacking in merit is the second contention raised by the learned counsel that no opportunity having been given to the petitioner before reversing the finding recorded by the Inquiry Officer, the impugned orders are vitiated.
Mr. Patwalia submits that the petitioner had the right to be heard by the Deputy Inspector General of Police before he recorded his reasons for disagreeing with the findings recorded by the Inquiry Officer.
He submits that the issue of a show cause notice after the reversal of the findings was unfair and is violative of the principles of natural justice.
Even this contention cannot be accepted.
It is undoubtedly true that the Inquiry Officer had held that the charge is not proved against the petitioner.
This conclusion of the Inquiry Officer had been accepted by the Punishing Authority.
However, on review of the matter, the Deputy Inspector General of Police found that he was not able to agree with the findings recorded by the Inquiry Officer or the punishing authority.
He gave his reasons.
These reasons are enumerated in detail in the note dated January 22, 1980, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-2 with the writ petition.
After having recorded his reasons, he observed that he was ``tentatively of the opinion that 4 years approved service of SI Gurbachan Singh should be forfeited with permanent effect.
A show cause notice should accordingly be issued and he should be asked to make a representation .............'' Accordingly, the show cause notice was issued to the petitioner.
In reply the petitioner had the opportunity to not only show cause against the proposed penalty but also against the reasons recorded by the Deputy Inspector General of police for disagreeing with the findings recorded by the Inquiry officer.
The petitioner was afforded an opportunity to show cause against the reasons for which the Deputy Inspector General of Police had differed from the Inquiry Officer as also against the penalty that he wanted to impose.
No rule or precedent has been pointed out to show that the opportunity had to be granted before the Deputy Inspector General of Police expressed his disagreement with the findings recorded by the Inquiry Officer.
Even in the case of a civil servant, Article 311 of the Constitution as it originally stood only envisaged the grant of an opportunity to show cause against the penalty which included within it the opportunity to controvert the findings recorded by the Inquiry Officer.
The action in the present case is not shown to be contrary to the rules or any principles of natural justice.
Consequently, the order calls for no interference.
In view of the above, there is no merit in the petition.
It is consequently dismissed.
However in the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.