Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - (Oral) - The petitioner was recruited as a Constable on May 9, 1989.
He was transferred to Ist Commando Battalion and deputed to Assam in January, 1994.
In response to a query, he was informed that no test for admission to List B-1 which consist of persons found suitable for being sent for the Lower School Course shall be held in January, 1995.
However, subsequently, he discovered that in fact, the test had been held on January 28, 1995 and the persons who were selected had been deputed for the course.
On coming to know of this, he represented.
Having got no response from the respondents, the petitioner had approached this Court through the present writ petition with a prayer for the issue of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to create a special seat and depute him for the course ``starting from 1101995.''
2.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been stated that initially the Government had taken the decision that no test for deputing the constables for the Lower School Course shall be held in the year 1995.
Intimation in this regard was given to all Heads of Departments vide TPM dated November 26, 1994.
Later on, it was decided to hold the test on January 28, 1995.
Information was, thus, conveyed to all Heads of Departments vide teleprinter message dated December 19, 1994 and January 10, 1995.
This information had also been conveyed to the Inspector General of Police (Commando) who is incharge of the entire Commando Force.
The test was, accordingly, held.
Those persons who appeared were considered.
The selected candidates were deputed for the course.
It has been further stated that the test is held every year and the petitioner is entitled to appear in the said test.
3.
Mr. Hari Singh Mann, learned counsel for the petitioners submits that no intimation was given to the petitioner with regard to the date of the test.
On the contrary, he had been informed that no test is being held.
By the communication of wrong information, the interests of the petitioners have been jeopardised and various persons who had actually appeared in the test have stolen a march over him.
4.
On the other hand, Ms. Jaishree Thakur, learned counsel for the respondents has stated that the information with regard to the test had been actually conveyed by the Inspector General of Police (Commando) to the Commandant of the Battalion to which the petitioner had been deputed.
Thereafter, the commandant had sent a FAX message from Assam on January 24, 1995 conveying that ``eligible candidates (drivers) who are temporarily attached with this Battalion have already been relieved towards their respective units on 21195.''
On this basis, she submits that the petitioner's claim that he did not have any information, is not correct.
5.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
6.
It is true that the petitioner had been initially informed that no test is being held in January, 1995.
However, as has been stated by the respondent, it appears that subsequently, intimation was sent to the various units including the Commando Unit.
The FAX message produced by Ms. Thakur clearly indicates that intimation had been given to the Commandant of the Battalion in Assam and eligible candidates who had been temporarily attached with the Commando Battalion had been relieved on January 21, 1995.
The copy of the FAX message as produced by Ms. Thakur is taken on record as Mark `A'.
From this message, it appears that those persons who had expressed their willingness to appear in the course had been relieved so as to enable them to report to their respective units.
Furthermore, in the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been categorically averred that intimation had been given to the Inspector General of Police (Commando) regarding the test which was to be held on January 28, 1995.
Taken cumulatively, it cannot be said that the petitioner had no notice about the test.
In any event, there is a dispute on facts.
It can't be resolved in a writ petition.
Still further it is not disputed that the petitioner is eligible to appear in the test which may be held in future.
The fact which has been stated by the counsel for the respondents is that the test is held every year and the next test is to be held in January 1997.
In this situation, it would be appropriate that the petitioner may appear in the test.
In case, he is selected and qualifies the course, he may approach the authorities through a representation.
In case, he can establish that he did not have any notice of the test held in January 1995, the authorities may consider his claim for the grant of appropriate relief.
7.
The Writ petition is, accordingly, disposed of.
In the circumstances, there will be no order as to costs.