Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner is aggrieved by the order dated April 17, 1995, by which his prayer for voluntary retirement has been rejected.
He prays that this order be quashed and it be declared that he shall be deemed to have retired with effect from May 15, 1991.
The petitioner also prays for the issue of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to release the retiral benefits.
A few facts as relevant for the decision of the case may be briefly noticed.
2.
The petitioner was recruited as a Sectional Officer on April 14, 1959.
On April 23, 1972, the petitioner was promoted to the post of Sub Divisional Officer.
While he was working as such, he applied for earned leave of 55 days.
He had to go to Canada to attend his daughter's wedding.
The leave was sanctioned for the period from December 25, 1989 to February 17, 1990.
Even a certificate was issued to the effect that ``no inquiry case/police case/ disciplinary case/corruption case is pending against Shri Sumitter Singh Gill, Sub Divisional Officer.''
The petitioner went abroad in December, 1989.
He states that on account of his ill health he was forced to ask for extension of leave.
When his request was declined, he sent a notice dated February 15, 1991, requesting the respondents to allow him to voluntarity retire from service on the expiry of the required period of three months.
No reply was given to the petitioner.
On August 7, 1992, the petitioner made a request to the respondents to release his pension and other retiral benefits.
He also sent them an indemnity bond vide letter dated September 3, 1992.
The Chief Engineer forwarded his case to the Government.
Simultaneously an inquiry was also made as to whether or not he was in employment in Canada or he was getting any unemployment allowance.
The petitioner sent his reply soon after the receipt of this letter.
He informed the respondents that he was not doing any job and that he was not getting any unemployment allowance.
Thereafter, certain other correspondence ensued.
Ultimately, vide order dated April 17, 1995, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-15 with the writ petition, the Government informed the petitioner that his request for voluntary retirement and extension of leave and been rejected.
Aggrieved by this order, the petitioner has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
He, as already noticed, prays that the order April 17, 1995, be quashed and the respondents be directed to release his retiral benefits.
3.
The respondents contest the petitioner's claim.
The fact that the petitioner had been granted earned leave from December 25, 1989 to February 17, 1990, has been admitted.
It has, however, been averred that the petitioner did not return to the same post on the expiry of the said leave and remained ``wilfully absent from duty w.e.f.
18.2.1990 onward.
Therefore, he was not on duty when he applied for voluntary retirement.
Rather he was wilfully absent from duty for which his dismissal is warranted''.
On these premises, the respondents urge that the notice for premature retirement as given by the petitioner was invalid and illegal.
4.
The petitioner has filed a replication controverting the stand taken by the respondents.
The reply to the replication has been filed by the Chief Engineer, Canals.
5.
The petitioner had filed this writ petition on September 6, 1995.
Thereafter, the respondents issued a charge-sheet dated October 10, 1995.
The petitioner them filed a Civil Miscellaneous Application No. 20760 of 1996 praying that the respondents be restrained from appointing an Inquiry Officer.
then this application came up for hearing, learned counsel for the parties submitted that the main writ petition itself may be decided.
Accordingly, the main writ petition was fixed for hearing.
6.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
Mr. Surya Kant, learned counsel for the petitioner, has submitted that under the provisions of rule 3 of the Punjab Civil Services (Premature Retirement) Rules, 1975, as amended vide Notification dated November 29, 1979, a civil servant has the right to voluntarily retire by giving three months' notice and that the respondents have no jurisdiction to decline this request except in a case when the employee is under suspension.
Accordingly, the learned counsel submits that the petitioner shall be deemed to have retired on the expiry of three months from February 15, 1991, when he had served the three months' notice on the respondents.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioner has been controverted by the learned counsel for the respondents.
7.
Rule 3 inter alia provides that the appointing authority has an absolute right to retire an employee who has completed 20 years of qualifying service by giving him a notice of three months or pay in lieu thereof.
A reciprocal right has been given to the employee to seek voluntary retirement after he has completed 20 years of qualifying service.
The only power reserved by the Government for rejecting this request is contained in the proviso which can be invoked when the employee is under suspension.
It has been provided that ``no employee under suspension shall retire from service except with the specific approval of the appropriate authority.''
Otherwise, the Government employee under rule 3(2) has the right to retire after giving three months' notice in writing to the appropriate authority.
8.
In the present case, it is the admitted position that the petitioner had given three months' notice an February 15, 1991.
A copy of this notice is on record as Annexure P-7.
No action was taken for a period of almost one and a half years.
On August 7, 1992, the petitioner made a request for the release of this retiral benefits.
Still nothing was done.
It appears that the Chief Engineer prepared a letter for forwarding the matter to the Government on September 3, 1992.
A copy of this letter is on record as Annexure P-9.
However, it transpires that even this letter was not forwarded for a period of more than a year till September 20, 1993.
Thereafter, the petitioner was asked to inform if he was working in Canada or if he was drawing any unemployment allowance.
He furnished the requisite information.
The matter remained under correspondence.
However, no action was initiated against the petitioner and no information was sent to him with regard to his request for voluntary retirement till April 17, 1995, when he was informed through the impugned letter that his request had been rejected.
9.
The sequence of events clearly shows that no action had been initiated against the petitioner till April 17, 1993.
In fact, even thereafter, the action was initiated by the respondent only in October, 1995, when they had probably become aware of the writ petition filed by him.
In spite of these facts, it is the admitted position that the petitioner was never placed under suspension.
That being so, the respondents had no jurisdiction or right under any provision of the rules to decline the petitioner's request for premature retirement.
The rule authorises the Government or the appropriate authority to decline a request for premature retirement only in case a where the employee is under suspension.
In other cases, the rules have not conferred any power on the employer to decline the request for premature retirement.
In the present case, it is the admitted position that the petitioner was never placed under suspension.
Even disciplinary proceedings had not been initiated against him till Oct 95.
Thus, the respondents had no jurisdiction to decline his request for premature retirement.
10.
In view of the above, the order dated April 17, 1995, by which the petitioner's request for voluntary retirement was rejected is set aside.
It declared that the petitioner shall be deemed to have retired with effect from May 15, 1991.
He will be entitled to the payment of retiral benefits in accordance with the rules.
This shall be done by the respondents within three months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
In case of failure to pay retiral benefits within three months as aforesaid, the petitioner shall be entitled to arrears with interest at the rate of 12 per cent from the date of accrual till the date of actual payment.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.