SS Nijjar, J. (Oral) - The petitioner in this petition under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India has challenged the order dated 21st November, 1988 passed by Respondent No. 2 wherein his claim for appointment on the post of Teacher in the Respondent No. 3 institution has been rejected.
2.
It is the claim of the petitioner that he was appointed as an Asstt.
Teacher in the Respondent No. 3 institution on 10th June 1974.
This institution was given the permission to start a Junior College with effect from 22nd July, 1985.
At that time only one division each of the 11th Standard in Arts and Commerce was permitted.
Thus the workload of the said institution was not sufficient to appoint a full-time Teacher.
Therefore, only a part- time teacher was appointed for the 11th Standard.
In the Session 1986-87 permission was also granted to start one division each in Arts and Commerce for the 12th standard.
Respondent No. 4 came to be appointed as an Asstt.
Teacher in the Respondent No. 3 institution on 14th June, 1986.
He had also applied or the post of Teacher in the Junior College, in pursuance to the advertisement issued by the Respondent No. 3 on 1st June, 1986.
Respondent No. 4 was appointed on the post of teacher on 2nd July, 1986.
This appointment was only for one year since the same had not been approved by Respondent No. 2.
The post of teacher in the Junior College was again advertised on 15th May, 1987.
The last date of application was 25th May, 1987.
Respondent No. 4 again applied and came to be selected for appointment.
He was actually appointed on 1st August, 1987.
Respondent No. 4 did not have MA Second Class on 25th May, 1987.
He had, however, appeared in the examination and his result was declared on 26th July, 1987.
Thus on the date when he was appointed on 1st August, 1987 respondent No. 4 was fully qualified to be appointed on the post of Teacher.
3.
It is claimed by the petitioner that at the time when he was appointed as Asstt.
Teacher on 10th June, 1974 he was fully qualified to be appointed on the post of Teacher in the Junior College.
He possesses the requisite qualifications being MA Second Class and B.Ed.
He further states that he being a member of the Backward Class was entitled to get preferential treatment.
However, when the Respondent No. 3 was permitted to start the Junior College, it was not aided.
It is the pleaded case of the petitioner that in view of the fact that the Junior College was not aided and that the post offered was only of a part-time teacher, he did not wish to take the risk of losing the job as an Asstt.
Teacher in the Secondary School.
Consequently he did not apply in response to any of the advertisements which were issued.
However, on appointment of Respondent No. 4 he started making representations to Respondent No. 3 claiming that he should have been upgraded to the post of teacher in preference to the appointment of Respondent No. 4.
He made first such representation on 7th August, 1987 in which he had stated that he was entitled to be upgraded in terms of the Rules of the State Government.
He did not mention anything about the ineligibility or illegality in the appointment of respondent No. 4.
There was no response to the said representation.
He, therefore, sent a reminder on 7th September, 1987 to Respondent No. 2.
4.
On 25th October, 1987 the Respondent No. 3 passed a Resolution to the effect that the petitioner should be given upgradation in Junior College from the next academic year 1988-89.
This was done in view of the fact that the period of six months of the current academic year was already over.
However, no action was taken in pursuance of this Resolution also.
On 27th December, 1987 respondent No. 2 sent a letter to Respondent No. 3 regarding the staff approval for the year 1987-88.
In this letter it is mentioned that appointment of Respondent No. 4 is approved as full time teacher in the Junior College in the running scale of 600-1000 for this academic year only.
This approval was also granted subject to the condition that respondent No. 3 would appoint the petitioner as Junior College teacher from the academic year 1988-89.
However, in pursuance of this letter, no action was also taken and respondent No. 4 continued to work on the post of teacher in the Junior College.
The petitioner made other representations also complaining that no action had been taken to implement either the Resolution dated 25 October, 1987 or letter of respondent No. 2 dated 27th December, 1987.
Ultimately on 12th August, 1988, the petitioner asked for a copy of the Resolution passed by the Respondent No. 3.
He did not make any grievance against respondent No. 4 nor did he claim, that he was entitled to be upgraded on the post of teacher.
On 21st August, 1988 the petitioner again sent a representation to respondent No. 2 wherein for the first time he claimed that he should be appointed as teacher in the Junior College on the basis of seniority.
He also referred to some assurance which was given by respondent No. 2 to the Teachers' Association Meeting to the effect that the management would be informed about giving the appointment to the petitioner from the next academic year.
Various representations were also discussed in a representation by the Divisional Secondary Teachers Association on 20th September, 1988.
It was mentioned that although the petitioner is eligible and senior, his appointment to the Junior College is not being made.
Ultimately Respondent No. 2 directed an enquiry to be conducted into the various complaints made by the petitioner.
The petitioner also submitted a detailed representation to the enquiry officer on 26th October, 1988.
In this representation he reiterated what has been stated above.
5.
On 21st November, 1988 respondent No. 2 informed the petitioner that his application for upgradation cannot be considered.
In this order it is clearly stated that one enquiry has been made regarding his complaint.
During the enquiry it was found that the management had given an advertisement in the newspaper for the Marathi subject for the years 1985-86, 86-87 and 87-88 and the petitioner had not applied for the said post.
It is further stated that he had not made any complaint to the department also.
His complaint dated 7th August, 1987 after the appointment of Respondent No. 4 was also noticed.
In view of the fact that since the petitioner had not made any complaint it was deemed proper that no relief could be granted.
The petitioner has challenged this order claiming the same to be arbitrary, illegal and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
6.
Respondent No. 2 has filed an affidavit in reply wherein the same stand has been taken to the effect that from 1985 till 1988 the petitioner kept quiet.
He only raised a claim after the appointment of Respondent No. 4.
It is also stated that on enquiry it was found that the claim of the petitioner is not tenable.
The petitioner has filed a rejoinder to the affidavit in reply.
However, nothing new has been pleaded therein except the reiteration of the case pleaded in the petition.
7.
When the matter was taken up for hearing the petitioner, pointed out that he has filed two additional affidavits to bring on record certain subsequent developments.
In the first affidavit dated 11th Feb, 1996 the petitioner states that he was given promotion as a full time teacher in Junior College of Respondent No. 3 and worked in the said Junior College from June, 1991 to 15th November, 1995.
Thereafter he was rendered surplus and he was transferred to Karmaveer Baburao Patil College, Urun, Islampur, Tal.
Walwa, Dist.
Sangli.
He was in service of the said College till the filing of of the affidavit i.e. 11th February, 1996.
He makes a grievance that he is in fact entitled for his salary for the full-time teacher in Junior College from 1985 till 15th June, 1995.
Till the filing of the affidavit he had not received his salary as a full-time teacher since according to the authorities (respondent No, 2) his case is pending before this Court.
In the second affidavit filed on 13th September, 1996 he states that he was again transferred from Karmaveer Bhaurao Patil College, Islampur, Tal.
Walwa, Dist.
Sangli to Smt. Kasturbhai Walchand College, Sangli City.
He continues to work as a full-time teacher in the said College and is getting his monthly salary regularly.
He was working in the Karmaveer College from 26th February, 1996 till 3rd July, 1996.
He states in this affidavit that all that remains is his claim of salary as prayed for in the petition and fixation of pay accordingly.
8.
We have heard Mr. Langote, learned Counsel for the petitioner at length.
He has argued that petitioner being fully qualified was entitled to be appointed as teacher in the Junior College at the time when Respondent No. 4 was appointed on the said post.
He further submitted that the post of teacher in the Junior College could have been filled in only by transfer/promotion from the seniormost Assistant teachers working in the Secondary Schools.
The Respondents could not have resorted to the mode of direct appointment unless it was found that no Assistant Teacher was willing to accept the post of teacher.
In any event, the appointment of respondent No. 4 is illegal as on the last date of application as given in the advertisement, the respondent No. 4 was not eligible to be appointed on the said post.
The Respondent No. 4 at that time did not have MA Second Class which was the requisite qualification for being appointed on the post of teacher.
To fortify his submission that the post was to be filled by promotion he has placed reliance on GR No. 1379/76331 dated 28th April, 1980.
Relying on the said GR He states that the said GR clearly stipulates that in the event of filling up of a vacancy of a teacher in the Junior College, the seniormost Asstt.
Teacher in the Secondary School is to be appointed on the post of teacher.
It is only in the case or non-availability or non- willingness of a senior Asstt.
Teacher to be appointed on the post of a teacher that the institution could resort to appoint Teacher directly.
We are unable to agree with the interpretation of the GR as given by Mr. Langote.
A bare perusal of the GR shows that the subject relates to transfer of the teacher.
Furthermore, the said GR is couched in terms of guidelines.
The same cannot, by any stretch of imagination, be treated as mandatory.
The said guidelines relate to transfer of Asstt.
Teachers to the post of teacher in the Junior College.
Thus since the post had been filled by due advertisement, the question of applicability of this GR does not arise.
9.
Even otherwise we find that the conduct of the petitioner has totally disentitled him to any relief for being appointed on the post of Teacher from the date respondent No. 4 had been appointed.
It has been admitted by the petitioner himself that the post had been advertised for not less than three occasions.
He has categorically stated that each time he did not apply as first in 1985-86 only part-time teacher was to be recruited.
In 1986-87 the petitioner chose not to apply for the said post as the said wing of the institution was not receiving any grant-in-aid.
The petitioner states categorically that there was no question of the petitioner seeking upgradation to the post of teacher in Junior College during the academic year 1985-86.
He did not wish to take any risk of having to vacate the post of Asstt.
Teacher in an aided school to be appointed as teacher in an un-aided College.
This reasoning is not only mentioned in the petition but is also reiterated in the representation sent by the petitioner.
Having chosen not to make any application on the post of teacher merely because at that time the said institution was unaided the petitioner cannot now be permitted to stake his claim to the very same post, merely because respondent No. 4 has been regularly appointed on the said post.
In other words, the petitioner cannot be permitted to eat his cake and have it too.
The petitioner kept quiet during all the three years when the institution remained unaided.
He did not make any challenge to the appointment of Respondent No. 4 on the ground that he was ineligible.
It was only when the institution was made aided and Respondent No. 4 had been regularly appointed that the petitioner started making grievances.
His grievance in regard to ineligibility of respondent No. 4 is wholly devoid of any merit.
It is the admitted case that when the post was advertised, the last date for receiving the applications was given as 25th May, 1987.
It has been pleaded by the petitioner himself that respondent No. 4 had applied in response to the advertisement which was issued on 15th May, 1987.
Respondent No. 4 had already taken the MA final examination.
His result was declared on 26th July, 1987 wherein he secured the neccessary second class.
He was appointed on the post of teacher on 1st August, 1987.
Thus on the date of appointment he was fully eligible to be appointed and no grievance can be made by the petitioner on that score.
Thus we find no merit whatsoever in the claim of the petitioner for either being appointed on the post of teacher or for the grant of scale of pay of the teacher from the date respondent No. 4 was appointed.
The petitioner has not argued the point that he being a member of the SC was entitled to preferential treatment.
No finding is, therefore, required to be given on this point, as the same has not been pressed.
10.
In view of what is stated above, the writ petition in so far as the petitioner's claim for salary from 1985 until 1991 is concerned is wholly devoid of any merit and is hereby rejected.
However, we find that the petitioner was ultimately appointed on the post of teacher in June, 1991.
These facts were narrated in the two affidavits filed by the petitioner at the time of the hearing.
His claim that in spite of having been appointed in June, 1991, he was not paid the salary of teacher, only on the ground that his case is pending, deserves to be allowed.
Once he had been lawfully appointed he was entitled to get his salary as a teacher.
Thus the claim of the petitioner for payment of salary w.e.f.
June, 1991 until 15th June, 1995 is hereby allowed.
At the time of the admission of the petition, the petitioner was granted interim relief in terms of prayer clause (c) which was to the effect that pending the hearing and final disposal of the petition, Respondent No. 2 be directed not to grant approval to the appointment of respondent No. 4 as teacher in the Junior College of respondent No. 3.
Consequently respondent No. 4 has not been paid his salary although he continuously worked on the said post.
We are also informed the even respondent No. 4 has resigned from the post of teacher in the respondent No. 3 institution.
Therefore, all that is needed to be done in order to do complete justice between the parties is to vacate the interim order and direct that the respondent No. 4 be paid his salary for the period he has served as a teacher in the Respondent No. 3 College.
Consequently the writ petition is disposed of in the terms stated above.
It is hereby directed that the payments due to the petitioner for the period June, 1991 until 15th June, 1995 and the payment due to respondent No. 4 for the period he served as a teacher in Respondent No. 3 be made within a period of 3 months from today.
The writ petition is disposed of accordingly with no order as to costs.
Rule is discharged.
Ordered accordingly.