Sat Pal, J - The petitioner was appointed as Patwari in the year 1949 in the erstwhile State of Punjab and subsequently, when the State of Haryana came into existence, he opted to serve in the Haryana State.
A case of embezzlement of Rs. 2260/- was registered against the petitioner on 18th April, 1974 under Section 409, Indian Penal Code, at PS Gharaunda, and in that case, he was convicted by the Judicial Magistrate, Ist Class, Panipat, vide his judgment dated 16th November, 1974.
However, taking a lenient view, the learned Magistrate released the petitioner on probation under the Probation of Offenders Act on furnishing bail bond to be of good behaviour in the sum of Rs. 3,000/- for one year.
Vide order dated 9th June, 1975, passed by the Collector, District Jind, the petitioner was removed from service.
It may be pointed out here that the petitioner did not challenge the aforesaid order of his removal from service.
After the lapse of more than 20 years, the petitioner has filed this Writ petition for a direction to the respondents to grant compassionate pension allowance under Rule 25 of the Punjab Civil Service Rules, Volume II, as applicable to the State of Haryana (hereinafter referred to as the Rules).
2.
Notice of motion on this petition was issued to the respondents.
Written statement on behalf of respondents Nos. 1 to 6 has been filed.
In the written statement, the respondents have taken a preliminary objection that the provisions of Rule 25 of the Rules were not applicable to the present case as the conduct of the petitioner who was convicted by the Criminal Court, did not deserve special consideration as provided in the Rules.
Another preliminary objection taken by the respondent-State is that the writ petition deserves to be dismissed on account of laches as this petition has been filed after a lapse of more than 2 decades from the date when the petitioner was removed from service.
3.
Mr. Shalendra Sharma, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner contended that the petitioner was an old man of 70 years and had no other source of income and was totally dependent on his son.
He further submitted that since the petitioner was not in a position to work, the respondents should be directed to grant compassionate allowance under Rule 25 of the Rules.
The learned Deputy Advocate General, Haryana, on the order hand, submitted that under Rule 25, the Government had an absolute discretion to grant or not to grant any compassionate allowance and keeping in view the facts of the this case, the Government exercised its discretion in the right manner in not granting any compassionate allowance.
4.
Before dealing with the rival contentions of the learned counsel for the parties, it will be relevant to reproduce Rule 25 of the Rules and Note 1 under this Rule, which reads as under :  ``25 No pension may be granted to a Government employee dismissed or removed for misconduct, insolvency or inefficiency; but to Government employee so dismissed or removed, compassionate allowances may be granted when they are deserving of special consideration; Provided that the allowance granted to any Government employee shall not exceed two-thirds of the pension which would have been admissible to him if he had retired on medical certificate.
Note 1 - This rule vests Government with an absolute discretion to grant or not to grant any compassionate allowance, the only restriction being that if granted, it shall not exceed the maximum of two-thirds of the pension that would be admissible to the officer concerned on retirement on medical certificate.
It is practically impossible in view of the wide variations that naturally exist in the circumstances attending each case, to lay down categorically, precise principles that can uniformly be applied to individual cases.
Each case has, therefore, to be considered on its merits and a conclusion has to be reached on the question whether there were any such extenuating features in the case as would make the punishment awarded, though it may have been necessary in the interest of government, unduly hard on the individual.
In considering this question, it has been the practice to take into account not only actual misconduct or course of misconduct which occasioned the dismissal or removal of the officer, but also the kind of service he has rendered.
Where the course of misconduct carries with it the legitimate inference that the officer's service has been dishonest, there can seldom by any good case for a compassionate allowance.
Poverty is not an essential condition precedent to the grant of a compassionate allowance, but special regard is also occasionally paid to the fact that the officer has a wife and children dependent upon him, though this factor by itself, is not except perhaps in the most exceptional circumstances, sufficient for the grant of a compassionate allowance.''
5.
From Note 1 under Rule 25, it is evident that the Government has absolute discretion to grant or not to grant any compassionate allowance to an employee who has been dismissed or removed from service for misconduct.
Note 1 further shows that where the course of misconduct carries with it the legitimate inference that the officer's service has been dishonest, there can seldom be any good case for grant of compassionate allowance.
Admittedly in the present case, the petitioner was convicted under Section 409 IPC on the charge that he had embezzled a sum of Rs. 2260/- and on that ground he was removed from service.
From this fact, it is clear that the petitioner was not an honest employee and as such his case cannot be a good one for grant of compassionate allowance under Rule 25 of the Rules.
Further, this petition is liable to be dismissed on the ground of laches also as the present petition has been filed by the petitioner after lapse of more than 20 years from the date when he was removed from service.
6.
For the reasons recorded herein above, we do not find any substance in this petition and accordingly the same is dismissed.