Jawahar Lal, Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner and respondent No. 3 are members of Scheduled Castes.
The petitioner was appointed as a Sub Divisional Officer on April 11, 1980.
Respondent No. 3 was appointed after him.
In the tentative seniority list issued on December 1, 1987 the petitioner was placed at Sr. No. 101 while respondent No. 3 was at Sr. No. 149.
Another seniority list was issued on July 30 1993.
In this list, the petitioner was placed at Sr. 82.
As against this respondent No. 3 was shown at Sr. No. 113.
Yet, in the year 1994, when three posts of Executive Engineers became available, the respondent viz.
The Punjab Water Supply and Sewerage Board was not considering the petitioner's claim for promotion only on the ground that he possessed a degree in Mechanical Engineering and not in Civil Engineering.
The petitioner submitted representation on July 10, 1994.
It was followed by anohter representation on August 5, 1994.
Yet another representation was submitted on October 18, 1994.
When nothing fruitful ensued, the petitioner approached this Court through the present writ petition.
He prays that the appointment of respondent No. 3 to the post of Executive Engineer against the post reserved for members of Scheduled Castes be quashed and the respondents be directed to consider his claim in accordance with the rules.
2.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of respondent No. 2 only.
It has been inter alia pointed out that "the Board has made separate budgetary provisions for Civil and Mechanical divisions.
The post against which respondent No. 3 was promoted had become available in the civil side and the petitioner who is possessing the qualifications of Mechanical Engineering was not eligible to be considered for the post of Executive Engineer (Civil).
It has been further stated that the promotion of the "respondent in the present case was made keeping in view that Punjab Service of Engineers Class I Public Works Department (Public Health Branch) Rules, 1961."
It has been inter alia provided by a note that "the candidates to be appointed for civil posts shall be recruited with qualifications in Civil Enginering whereas those recruited in the Electrical Engineering unit shall possess qualifications in Electrical Engineering.
Candidates recruited for Mechanical charges will be required to possess degree in Mechanical Engineering."
Relying on this provision, the respondent submits that the petitioner was not eligible to be considered for promotion to the post of Executive Engineer which had fallen vacant in the civil division.
3.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
4.
Mr. Bhandari, learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the action of the respondents is contrary to the provisions of the rules governing the service in the Board.
Learned counsel particularly refers to the provisions of the Punjab Water Supply and Sewerage Board (Service).
Regulations, 1981 wherein it has been provided that a Sub Divisional Engineer who has been served for a minimum period of 8 years in the execution and maintenance of public health works is eligible for promotion to the post of Executive Engineer.
Since the petitioner is senior to respondent No. 3 he had a right to be considered for promotion before him.
The respondent acted illegally in ignoring him for promotion.
5.
On the other hand, Mr. Patwalia, who has appeared for respondent No. 3 has contended that the Board having made separate budgetary provisions for different divisions and having issued even separate seniority lists in the Civil and Mechanical Divisions, the petitioner was rightly overlooked for promotion.
The arguments addressed on behalf of respondent No. 3 have also been adopted by the learned counsel for the Respondent-Board.
6.
The short question that arises for consideration is was the petitioner eligible to be considered for promotion to the post of Executive Engineer ?
7.
Admittedly, the Board has framed regulations under the provisions of the Punjab Water Supply and Sewerage Board Act, 1976.
These regulastions are applicasble to the various services in the Board.
The mode of recruitment to different services has been laid down in Regulation 22.
The qualifications and the mode of appointment have been prescribed in Appendix `B'.
The provisions relating to the posts of Executive Engineer and the Sub Divisional Engineer can be usefully extracted.
These are as under.
APPENDIX `B'Class I Designation of post Pay Scale Qualifications for direct recruitment Qualifications for promotion or by deputation or transfer from PWL, Public Health Branch 1 2 3 4 xxx xxx Executive Engineer 1400-2100 First Class B.Sc (Civil) Engineering ME (Public Health) should have served as sub-civi-(sic) Engineer minimum period of 6 years Should have served as (sic) for a minimum period of 8 years in the execution and maintenance of (sic) divisional Public Health Works Class II + Sub-Divisional Enginner 940-1850 with 2 advance incremnts for post graduate B.Sc.
Engg.
(Civil/Mech) or its equivalent Decree recognised by Govt. from any university or equivalent qualification of AMIE 1) By deputation or transfer from Public Healthii) By promotion from amongst SOs/Circle head Drafts-men with 10 years experience in the ratio of 20% or 5% of the total strength respectively as fixed by the Pb.
Govt. in the Class II service rules of Public Health Deptt.
iii) By Promotion from amongst SCs, who are B.Sc.
Engineering having 2 years experience iv) By promotion from amongst Sos/Circle Head Draftsmen who qualify AMIE and have 5 years experience as Sectional Officer or Circle Head Draftsman 8.
A perusal of the above provisions shows that the post of Executive Engineer is borne on the Class I Service.
The petitioner and respondent No. 3 were initially appointed as Sub Divisional Engineer which post is included in the Class II Service.
The qualification for direct recruitment to the post of Sub Divisional Engineer is a degree in Civil or Mechanical Engineering.
Even a person possessing an equivalent qualification including that of AMIE is eligible for direct recruitment to the post.
Admittedly, both the petitioner and respondent No. 3 possess the qualification of degree in Engineering and were recruited to the post of Sub-Divisional Engineer.
Thereafter, a person can be either directly appointed to the post Executive Engineer or he can be appointed by promotion.
For direct recruitment, it is incumbent on the candidate to have qualification of degree in Civil Engineering and Post Graduate Degree of Masters in Public Health.
It is also necessary that he should have served as a Sub-Divisional Engineer for a minimum period of six years.
However, insofar as promotion is concerned, the only requirement is that the candidate "should have served as Sub-Divisional Engineer for a minimum period of 8 years in the execution and maintenance of public health works."
The regulation does not require that a candidate should have a degree either in Civil or Mechanical Engineering.
That requirement is fulfilled at the time of initial recruitment to the Class II Service.
Thereafter, it appears that the rule only requires that the person should have been engaged in the execution and maintenance of public health works for a period of 8 years as a Sub-Divisional Engineer.
That is the essential requirement.
It is not disputed that the petitioner had worked for more than 8 years in the execution and maintenance of public health works when respondent No. 3 was promoted.
It is also the admitted position that he was senior to the third respondent.
Yet, he was not considered when respondent No. 3 was promoted.
In this situation, it is clear that the action of the Board in ignoring the petitioner for promotion was violative of the p provisions contained in the statutory regulations and Article 16.
9.
Counsel for the respondents have referred to the provisions of the rules applicable in the Public Works Department (Public Health Branch) of the Government.
Learned counsel point out that in view of the note in these rules, the petitioner was eligible for being considered for promotion to the post of Executive Engineer.
10.
The contention is misconceived.
Firstly, it is clear that special rules would over-ride the general rules.
The employees in the Board are governed by the provisions of 1981 regulations as referred to above.
These regulations being clear and unambiguous, a provision contained in the rules of 1961 framed by the Govt. cannot be applied to the parties in the present case.
There is no gap or lacuna in the regulations.
Consequently, the reference to the rules of 1961 is wholly misconceived.
Still further, it is evident that at the time of the framing of the regulations, the Board was aware of the provisions of the 1961 Rules.
It had the option and the opportunity to incorporate a provision like the one contained in the note to the 1961 Rules.
It had the option and the opportunity to incorporate a provision like the one contained in the note to the 1961 rules in the regulations.
It did not do so.
The omission appears to be intentional and not an act of over-sight.
In view of the fact that no provision akin to the one contained in the note was made in the regulations, clearly shows that the authority did not want to create any separate channels of promotion for the Engineers possessing qualifications in the Mechanical or Civil disciplines.
11.
Mr. Patwalia refers to the fact that the department had issued separate seniority lists for determining the inter se seniority of Engineers in the Civil and Mechanical, disciplines.
It appears that the Managing Director of the Board had issued a letter dated May 25, 1995 by which separate seniority lists of Sub Divisional Engineers had been prepared and circulated.
These lists were apparently tentative.
These were issued during the pendency of the petition.
Learned counsel for the petitioner suggests that these lists had been issued only to stifle the petitioner's claim.
The allegation on the part of the petitioner in this behalf does not appear to be wholly unfounded.
In any case, these lists were issued after the promotion had already been made.
These could have no application to the facts of the present case.
Still further, the rules do not provide that there would be separate seniority of Sub Divisional Engineers possessing the qualification of a degree in Civil or Mechanical engineering.
Consequently, the issue of these lists cannot really affect the controversy in the present case.
12.
It was also suggested that the Board has made separate budgetary provisions for the civil mechanical disciplines.
This is an internal matter.
It cannot affect the operation of the regulations.
Under the conditions of service governing the parties, the Board could not have refused to consider the petitioner's claim for promotion merely on the ground that he was Graduate in Mechanical Engineering.
Equally, the Board could not have preferred respondent No. 3 in spite of his for being junior to the petitioner merely on the basis of his having a degree in Civil Engineering.
Since the petitioner is senior and possesses the qualifications under the regulations, the grievance made by him in the present case is well-founded.
It has, consequently, to be sustained.
13.
Resultantly, the writ petition is allowed.
The promotion and appointment of respondent No. 3 to the post of Executive Engineer is set aside.
He is directed to vacate his office forthwith.
The respondent Board shall consider the claim of the petitioner and respondent No. 3 in accordance with the regulations.
In case, the petitioner is found suitable, he shall be promoted.
In the circumstances, there will be no order as to costs.