GS Singhvi, J - This petition has been filed for issue of writ to quash Annexure P-7 and to direct the respondents to grant benefit of senior scale of 3000-4500 and selection grade (3700-5300) after 8 and 18 years of service respectively on the basis of similar benefit given to the holders of equivalent categories of posts in Irrigation Department.
2.
Petitioner joined service as Assistant Geologists in the Agricultural Department, Punjab on 24101970, 2161974 and 29101976.
Petitioners No. 1 1 and 2 were promoted as Geologists Hydrogeologists w.e.f.
111982 and 20.2.1988 respectively.
3.
Service conditions of the employees working in the Agriculture Department (Class II) posts are governed by the Punjab Agricultural Service (Class II), Rules, 1974.
The service is divided into four different cadres, namely, Engineering posts, Statistical Posts, Geological posts and Administrative posts.
Posts in the Engineering cadre includes Assistant Agricultural Engineer which is equivalent to Assistant Geologist.
The post of Assistant Geologist in Agricultural Department has also been treated as equivalent to Sub Divisional Engineer in the Irrigation Department.
Likewise the post of Geologist has been treated equivalent to the post of Executive Engineer in the Irrigation Department and the post of Joint Director (Hydrogeology) has been treated equivalent to that of Superintending Engineer in the Irrigation Department.
4.
When Third Pay Commission constituted by the Government of Punjab was considering the equivalence of various posts for the purposes of revision of pay scales, the Assistant Geologists claimed parity with Sub Divisional Engineers of Irrigation Department.
This demand of the Assistant Geologists was found to be justified by the Pay Commission which recommended grant of pay scale to the Assistant Geologists at par with Sub Divisional Engineers.
5.
Similar recommendation came to be made for Geologists/Hydrologists as would appear from para 2911 of the Report of Third Pay Commission which is reproduced below:-.
``2911: The posts of Assistants Geologist are filled to the extent of 33-1/3% by direct recruitment with M.Sc.
Geology and the remaining 66-2/3% posts by promotion from amongst the Section Officers in the line.
The Assistant Geologists have demanded parity in pay scale with Sub Divisional Engineers on the ground that the sectional Officers and the Geologists are already having parity with the Junior Engineers and the Executive Engineers respectively of the Engineering Department.
The posts of Geologists are filled to the extent of 50% by direct recruitment and 50% by promotion.
The academic qualifications prescribed for direct recruitment to this post are the same as for Assistant Geologist i.e. M.Sc (Geology).
An experience of five years is prescribed for the post of Geologist whereas for the post of Assistant Geologist an experience of one year is prescribed.
The demand of the Assistant Geologists for giving them parity with the Sub Divisional Engineers is thus justified.
Accordingly, we recommend a scale of Rs. 2100-3700 for this post.
For the post of Geologist/Hydrologist, a scale of Rs. 3000-4500 is recommended.''
6.
According to the petitioners the Government of Punjab accepted the recommendation of Third Pay Commission and granted the pay scale of Rs. 2200- 4000 to Assistant Geologists vide notification dated 23.1.1989 and thereby treated them at par with Sub Divisional Engineers.
Subsequently, the Government of Punjab granted senior scale of Rs. 3000-4500 to the Assistant Engineers/Sub Divisional Engineers on completion of 8 years regular service.
Likewise selection grade of Rs. 3700-5300 came to be prescribed for Sub Divisional Engineers/Assistant Engineers subject to their fulfilling the condition of 18 years of regular service.
Similar benefit was, however, not extended to the Assistant Geologist in Agriculture Department of the Government of Punjab.
The petitioners have pleaded that the posts in the discipline of Hydrogeology exists in the Irrigation Department, Punjab and holders of these posts have been allowed the benefits at par with those holding the posts in the engineering cadre of Irrigation Department.
The petitioners have also stated that promotion avenue for Assistant Geologists/Hyrogeologists are very meagre and they can claim consideration of promotion only against the post of Joint Director (Hydrogeology) and that paucity of avenue of promotion is a strong circumstances warranting the grant of benefit of senior scale and selection grade to the petitioners.
For claiming such relief the petitioners made representations before the Government but vide Annexure-P.7, the Government expressed its inability to accept the proposal sent by the Director of Agriculture for grant of senior scale and selection grade to the Assistant Geologists.
The petitioners have challenged the decision of the Government on the ground of arbitrariness and violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
7.
Writ petition has been resisted by the respondents who have pleaded that no specific decision was taken by the Government on the recommendations of the Pay Commission for bringing about parity between Assistant Geologists and Sub Divisional Engineers.
It has, however, been admitted that the posts of Assistant Geologists in Agriculture Department were sanctioned the same scale of pay as that of Assistant Engineers/Sub Divisional Engineers and the Geologists in Agriculture Department were granted pay scale at par with Executive Engineers in the Irrigation Department.
The respondents have pleaded their ignorance about the existence of Geological wing in the Irrigation Department but at the same time they have pleaded that functions and duties of the equally qualified officers differ from Department to Department and no identity or parity can be assumed between the officers of Geological Wings of Irrigation and Agriculture Department.
In para 9 of the reply it has been admitted that chances of promotion of the employees in the Agriculture Department are meagre as compared to the Irrigation Department.
The respondents have pleaded that claim of the petitioners for grant of senior scale and selection grade was duly considered and was rejected by the Government on the basis of work and duties of the petitioners vis-a-vis others.
The case of the respondents is that no right vests in the petitioners to be given the benefit of senior scale/selection grade.
8.
Learned counsel for the petitioners relied on the decision of this court in State of Punjab v. Dr. Gautam Mahajan and others, 1994(1) SCT 776(P&H)(DB) : 1993(8) SLR 1, and argued that once the post of Assistant Geologist and other posts in the Geology wing of Agriculture Department have been equated with the posts in the Irrigation Department, there could be no reason or justification to deny the benefit of senior scale and selection grade to the petitioners.
He further argued that in the face of admission made by the respondents about the availability of meagre chances of promotion, the petitioners ought to have been given the benefit of senior scale and selection grade at par with members of the Engineering service.
The learned Dy.
Advocate General argued that the Government has not accepted the alleged equation of posts and, therefore, the petitioners have no right to be given senior scale and selection grade.
9.
I have given thoughtful consideration to the rival contentions and, in my opinion, the petitioners are entitled to the relief prayed for.
Although the respondents have tried to show that the Government did not accept the recommendations made by the Third Pay Commission treating the post of Assistant Geologist as equivalent to Assistant Engineer/Sub Divisional Engineer but when the Government has itself granted pay scale to the petitioners and holders of other posts at par with the pay scale admissible to the Engineers, there remains little justification for the respondents to contend that the Government has not implemented the recommendations of the Third Pay Commission.
There can be no doubt that Third Pay Commission was a specialised body having full material before it on the basis of which it could determine the equivalence of posts and when the Pay Commission found justification in the plea of the Assistant Geologists to be treated at par with Assistant Engineers/Sub Divisional Engineers there remains no justification to treat them differently in the matter of grant of larger monetary benefits in the form of senior scale and selection grade.
The admission made by the Government about availability of meagre chances of promotion to the members of the cadre of Geology Branch supports the plea of the petitioners that they should be treated at par with the Engineers for the purposes of grant of senior scale and selection grade.
The case of State of Punjab v. Dr. Gautam Mahajan (supra) on which reliance has been placed by the learned counsel for the petitioners relates to a similar claim made by the persons who were employed in the Directorate of Water Resources which was a new Division of Irrigation Department.
In that case also the post of Senior Hydrogeologist and Senior Design Engineers were equated with the post of Deputy Director and the posts of Hydro-Chemist, Junior Geologist and Junior Hydrogeologists were equated with the post of Assistant Design Engineer in the same pay scale.
However, for the purposes of grant of higher grade the parity was not maintained.
The learned single Judge accepted the plea of the writ petitioners and directed the grant of benefit similar to the Assistant Design Engineers and Senior Executive Engineers.
In my opinion, the ratio of that decision is directly applicable to the case of the petitioners and, therefore, a writ of mandamus deserves to be issued in their favour for grant of senior scale and selection grade from the date of completion of 8 years and 18 years of service respectively.
10.
For the reasons stated above, the writ petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to give benefit of senior scale and selection grade to the petitioners on their completion of 8 and 18 years service respectively.
Necessary instructions should be issued by the Government within a period of there months and cases of the petitioners and other similarly situated persons should be considered for grant of senior scale and selection grade in the same manner in which the members of Engineering service of the Irrigation Department have been given these scales/grads.
The parties are left to bear their own costs.