Ashok Bhan, J - Prayer made in this petition is for quashing the order dated 1181995 Annexure P-1 declining to promote the petitioner as Naib Tehsildar and order Annexure P-11 dated 29.8.1995 declining the request of the petitioner to grant additional chance for appearing the departmental examination.
2.
Petitioner was appointed as District Revenue Accountant on 1101988.
On 2791993 Commissioner, Jalandhar Division, Jalandhar, directed all the Deputy Commissioner of Jalandhar Division to recommend the cases of suitable kanungos/D.R.As.
for promotion as Naib Tehsildar belonging to the SC/ST category.
3.
Deputy Commissioner, Jalandhar, vide letter dated 8111993, recommended the name of the petitioner for promotion as Naib Tehsildar but his case was not considered because of the delayed recommendations made by the Deputy Commissioner.
Petitioner filed CWP 11746 of 1994 which was disposed of on 7.4.1995 with a direction to the Commissioner, Jalandhar Division, Jalandhar to consider the case of the petitioner for promotion as Naib Tehsildar from the date his juniors were promoted and pass the necessary orders within one month.
4.
Commissioner, Jalandhar Division, Jalandhar, rejected the claim of the petitioner for promotion as Naib Tehsildar vide order dated 1181995, Annexure P-1 on the ground that petitioner did not fulfil the necessary condition of clearing the departmental examination.
5.
Passing of departmental examination is a pre-condition for promotion as Naib Tehsildar.
Petitioner fulfilled the requisite experience but he had not cleared the departmental examination.
Rule 7 of the Punjab Naib Tehsildar (Class-III) Rules, 1984 is reproduced below :-  ``7.
Persons eligible to appear - The persons eligible to appear for the examination shall be :- (a) Naib Tehsildars appointed by direct recruitment under sub-rule (i) of Rule 7 of the Rules, or by transfer under second proviso to Rule 7 of the Rules - within a period of 2-1/2 years from the date of their initial appointment.
(b) District Kanungos, District Revenue Accountants and Kanungos and Senior Revenue Accountans and Assistant Water-Logging appointed by the promotion from the post of Kanungo: Provided that such persons shall not be permitted more than five chances, at their convenience, to appear in the examination: Provided further that one additional chance may be given by the Commissioner for special reasons to be recorded in writing: Provided further that the Financial Commissioner may give one more additional chance, in exceptional cases.''
The above rule provides that a person cannot be permitted more than five chances to appear in the departmental examination and further that an additional chance can be given by the Commissioner for special reasons to be recorded in writing and thereafter Financial Commissioner can also give one more additional chance in exceptional cases.
There are eight departmental papers out of which petitioner had cleared seven.
Petitioner had exhausted his five chances.
He moved an application before the Commissioner, Jalandhar Division, for giving him another chance for clearing the 8th paper of departmental examination.
This application was duly recommended by the Deputy Commissioner.
Reason stated in the application Annexure P-10 was that he could not clear the examination in February 1995 because of the death of a very near relative.
The aforesaid request was declined by the Commissioner, Jalandhar Division, Jalandhar, by order Annexure P-11 which has been impugned in this writ petition.
6.
Counsel for the petitioner has contended that petitioner could not clear his 8th paper of departmental examination in February 1995 because of the death of his close relative; that under the similar circumstances, Commissioner, Jalandhar Division has granted additional chance to various candidates to clear the departmental examination; that petitioner should have been provided with an additional chance to clear the examination as was provided to the similarly situated candidates.
7.
In the written statement filed, stand taken by the respondents is that petitioner could not be promoted as Naib Tehsildar as he had not passed the departmental examination.
Further it has been stated that no case was made out for relaxation as the petitioner had failed to disclose the close relationship with the deceased because of whose death he could not clear the departmental examination.
We have heard the counsel for the parties.
8.
No meaningful challenge was raised to the order Annexure P-1.
Passing of departmental examination is a pre-condition for appointment as Naib Tehsildar.
Since petitioner had not cleared the departmental examination, he could not be considered for promotion as Naib Tehsildar.
Order Annexure P-1 is, therefore, upheld.
9.
Proviso to Rule 7 of the aforesaid rules invests the Commissioner of a Division to grant one additional chance for special reasons to be recorded in writing.
Petitioner's case was that becuase of the death of a close relation, he could not clear the departmental examination.
It is true that he has not disclosed his relationship with the deceased who had died either in the application Annexure P-10 or in this writ petition.
Counsel for the petitioner after taking instructions from the petitioner who was present in Court stated that father-in-law of the petitioner had died.
Petitioner's case should have been considered sympathetically and he should have been provided with an additional chance to clear the examination specially when under similar circumstances additional chances had been given to other candidates.
Petitioner has given instances where under similar circumstances additional chances were provided to various candidates which has not been refuted in the written statement.
Keeping in view the facts and circumstances of the case, we are of the opinion that petitioner deserves to be granted an additional chance to clear the departmental examination.
Accordingly, we accept this writ petition and direct the respondents to give the petitioner an additional chance to clear the departmental examination.
No costs.
Petition accepted.