GS Singhvi, J - The only question which requires decision in this writ petition is whether the respondent - University can decline admission to petitioner No. 1 against the seats reserved for the children/grandchildren of freedom-fighters on the ground that the certificate produced by her has not been issued by the Deputy Commissioner of the District.
2.
In order to decide the controversy it will be useful to give a factual background of the case.
Petitioner No. 1 is the daughter of petitioner No. 2 and grand daughter of Shri Ishar Singh Mardan.
She applied for admission in the Entrance Test notified by the Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar (for short, the respondent-University) for admissions to the Medical Colleges in the State of Punjab.
Along with her application form, the petitioner No. 1 submitted certificates issued by the Secretary to Government, Punjab, Department of Freedom Fighters, for claiming benefit of reservation made in favour for the wards of the Freedom Fighters.
However, the authorities of the respondent-University refused to accept her candidature for the seats reserved for the wards of the Freedom Fighters on the ground that the certificate produced by her had not been issued by the Deputy Commissioner of the District concerned.
Thinking that she may not be altogether debarred from appearing in the Entrance Test, the petitioner No. 1 submitted an application before the Co-ordinator of the P.M.T.
on 11.6.1996 and requested for change of her category from wards of Freedom Fighters (reserved category) to general category.
3.
The petitioner has pleaded that refusal of the respondent-University to accept her candidature as a ward of the Freedom Fighter is wholly arbitrary and unjustified because she had produced the certificate issued by the competent authority in terms of the government instruction dated 1491995.
According to her, the University was not justified in insisting upon the production of a certificate issued by the Deputy Commissioner because the Government of Punjab had issued instructions authorising the General Administration Department, Political Wing, to issue such certificates in favour of those who had not received pension or Tarma Patras and as her grand-father had neither received pension nor the Tamra Patra the certificate issued by the Secretary to Government, Freedom Fighters, Department of General Administration (Political-III Branch) ought to have been accepted.
4.
In the written statement filed by the respondent-University, it has been pleaded that as per the prospectus the wards of only those Freedom Fighters could claim benefit of reservation, who were receiving Freedom Fighter's pension or who were awarded Tamra Patras for political suffering and the certificate to this effect had been issued by Deputy Commissioner of the District concerned and as the petitioner No. 1 did not produce such certificate, her candidature was not liable to be considered against the category of wards of Freedom Fighters.
5.
During the course of hearing on July 26, 1996 learned counsel appearing for the respondent-University submitted that certificates Annexures P1 and P1A issued by the Government on 14111995 and 17.5.96 do not satisfy the requirements of circular dated 1491995 because these certificates do not show that the grandfather of petitioner No. 1 had suffered imprisonment for at least six months before independence.
An affidavit incorporating this objection was also filed along with C.W.
No. 16125 of 1996.
To meet this argument an additional affidavit of petitioner No. 2 was submitted on 1481996.
In this affidavit, petitioner No. 2 has stated that his father had participated in Jaito Morcha, Gurdwara Movement, which was declared as a freedom movement and he was awarded three years' rigorous imprisonment.
Petitioner No. 2 has also stated that his father was put in Multan Jail in the first instance and then in Campbelpur Jail.
He also produced a photostat copy of the order passed by the Additional District Magistrate on August 16, 1933 which contains a mention of the conviction of Shri Ishar Singh in connection with Gurdwara Movement.
A copy of the affidavit of one Shri Manmohan Singh, Freedom Fighter has also been filed to support the plea that Shri Ishar Singh had suffered imprisonment.
Similarly, a copy of the affidavit of one Shri Ajit Singh Sarhadi, Senior Advocate (ex-Member of Parliament) has also been filed and it has been pleaded that both these affidavits and the order were produced before the Government and only after verification of the records, the Government had issued certificates Annexures P1 and P1-A.
6.
After conclusion of the arguments, a copy of the certificate dated 128196 issued by the Government has been placed on the record of this case along with the affidavit of petitioner No. 2, which was filed in the court along with CA No. 16771 of 1996.
7.
Admissions to various Medical Colleges in Punjab are made every year as per the policy guidelines framed by the Government.
The Government assigns the task of holding combined Entrance Test to one of the Universities in the State.
The University concerned issues a prospectus incorporating therein the guidelines/rules framed by the Government for the purpose of admissions.
For the year 1996, the task of holding Entrance Test was entrusted to the respondent-University and in compliance of the Government instructions, the respondent-University issued prospectus giving details of the seats, the eligibility conditions etc.
In the said prospectus reservation of seats made in favour of the wards of the Freedom fighters was indicated and the candidates seeking admission against such seats were required to submit certificates issued by the Deputy Commissioners of the Districts to which Freedom Fighters belong.
The definition of `Freedom Fighters' incorporated in the prospectus shows that only those who were recipients of the Freedom Fighters' pension from the Punjab Government or who were awarded Tamra Patras, were included in the category of the Freedom Fighters for the purpose of admissions to Government Medical Colleges/Dental Colleges/Ayurvedic Colleges.
Annexure P2 is the circular issued by the Government on 1491995 regarding issuance of the certificates to those Freedom Fighters of the Punjab, who did not get pension and Tamra Patras, but, who are otherwise proved to be Freedom Fighters on the basis of the documents and proof.
This circular shows that the Government took a policy decision to issue Freedom Fighters certificates to those who had not received pension or Tamra Patras, but, who fulfil the criteria mentioned in paragraph 1.
The criteria contained in paragraph 1 requires that the person must have undergone minimum imprisonment for six months in the mainland jails before Independence.
It appears that due to communication gap between different departments of the Government, the contents of the instructions issued vide circular dated 1491995 could not be incorporated in the rules framed by the Government/the prospectus issued by the University.
However, we do not find any reason why the instructions contained in circular dated 1491995 should not be read as a part of the scheme framed by the Government for giving benefit to the wards of the Freedom Fighters.
It would result in a situation of invidious discrimination amongst the Freedom Fighters if benefit of reservation made in favour of their wards is not extended only on the ground that they did not receive pension or Tamra Patras even though they are categorised as Freedom Fighters as per policy decision of the Government.
In order to avoid an interpretation of the policy decision which may render it unconstitutional, we are of the opinion that circular dated 1491995 should be read as a part and parcel of the over-all policy framed by the Government to give benefit of the reservation to the wards of the Freedom Fighters.
8.
Annexure P1 and P1A are certificates issued by the Secretary to Government Punjab, Department of Freedom Fighters.
Of these, the first certificate does not make reference to the instructions dated 1491995, but, the second certificate contains a clear stipulation that it was being issued under the Punjab Government instructions dated 1491995.
The issue of certificate Annexure P1-A by the Secretary, Government of Punjab (Freedom Fighters), Department of General Administration, is the proof of the fact that the Government after examining the relevant documents produced by the grand- father of petitioner No. 1 came to the conclusion that he was qualified to be treated as a Freedom Fighter.
In view of these certificates, we do not find any merit in the submission of the learned counsel for the respondents that absence of incorporation of a fact that grand-father of the petitioner No. 1 had suffered imprisonment for six months should be treated as a ground to discard the certificates.
In our view, the very reference of the circular dated 1491995 is conclusive proof of application of mind by the Government to the requirement of clause (1) of the instructions and only after having satisfied himself of the genuineness of the papers produced before him by the grand-father of petitioner No. 1, the Secretary concerned must have issued the certificates.
9.
Refusal of the University to recognise the certificates produced by the petitioner for the purpose of treating her candidature against the seats reserved for the wards of Freedom Fighters is clearly illegal.
As per the Government instructions, a certificate could be issued only by the General Administration Department and not by the Deputy Commissioner of the District concerned.
It was, therefore, impossible for the petitioner No. 1 to produce a certificate issued by the Deputy Commissioner and the University has not acted fairly by insisting on the production of a certificate issued by the Deputy Commissioner.
The University, in our opinion, could not compel the petitioner to do the impossible.
10.
The argument of Shri Patwalia that the petitioner No. 1 should not now be given the benefit of reservation made in favour of the wards of Freedom Fighters because she applied for the change of category on 11.6.1996 cannot be accepted for the simple reason that the petitioner No. 1 had done so under compelling circumstances.
Her act of submitting application Annexure R1 was not voluntary and, therefore, it cannot be said that the petitioner No. 1 waived her right to be given benefit of reservation made in favour of the wards of Freedom Fighters.
11.
For the aforementioned reasons, the writ petition is allowed.
Letter Annexure P4 issued by the Co-ordinator, P.M.T.
- 96, Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, is declared illegal and quashed.
Respondents 2 and 3 are directed to consider the candidature of the petitioner against the seats reversed for the wards of the Freedom Fighters and grant her admission as per her merit amongst the wards of the Freedom Fighters.
Necessary order should be passed by the University within a period of ten days of the submission of a certified copy of this order.
Petition allowed.