RS Mongia, J (Oral) - This order will dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 4044 of 1986 and 1370 of 1987 as a common question of law and fact is involved in these cases.
2.
While terminating/retrenching the services of some employees on account of reduction of posts in the cadre, has the reservation for a particular category to be kept in view ?
Is the question that has been raised by the petitioners in the present writ petitions.
In other words, supposing the cadre strength of a particular service is of 200 posts and 20 per cent is the reservation for a particular category and all the posts are filled then the reserve category is entitled to hold 40 posts.
Supposing the cadre is reduced to 100 posts, the question is as to whether the termination/retrenchment is to be done by the process of 'last come first go' i.e. the junior-most persons are to be retrenched/terminated or 20 per cent belonging to the reserve category have to be kept out of the 100 post that remain after reduction.
3.
Briefly the facts of the case, as given in C.W.P.
No. 4044 of 1986, are that the petitioner belongs to the category of Ex-servicemen (hereinafter referred to 'ESM').
He was appointed as a Forest Guard on July 6, 1985 against a reserved vacancy meant for ESM.
Because of reduction of posts of Forest Guards, he was relieved from the service on July 25, 1986 as per his seniority.
Haryana Government had issued instructions on February 9, 1979 that while making appointment by way of direct recruitment 20% posts would be reserved for ESM, though this percentage was reduced to 17 per cent later on vide instructions, dated December 17, 1980.
The petitioner has given a break-up of the appointments to the posts of Forest Guard that were made between the period February 9, 1979 to December 16, 1980 and between December 17, 1980 to the date of termination of his services.
Paragraph 7(B) of the amended writ petition is in the following terms :-  "7(B) That on 921979 the Haryana Govt. issued instructions that while making appointment 20% seats shall be reserved for ex-servicemen and it is further necessary to mention here that between 4.2.1979 to 7.9.1979 about 119 posts were filled up by direct recruitment and out of these 119 posts the share of ex-servicemen comes to about 24 posts and only 14 ex- servicemen were appointed.
Similarly, 93 appointments were made between 18th September, 1979 to 12th December, 1980.
While in that period also the share of ex-serviceman was for 18 posts and only 7 ex-servicemen were appointed.
It is further necessary to mention here that between 17.12.1980 to uptodate about 710 appointments were made and the reservation for ex-serviceman in direct appointment after 16121980 is 17% so in view of the Govt. instructions prevailing at that time the share of ex-serviceman comes to about 122 posts while only 80 ex-serviceman were appointed.
The net result is that the share of ex-serviceman from 921979 to uptodate comes to 164 while only 101 ex-serviceman were appointed.
So the ex-serviceman has already appointed less to their prescribed quota.
Even if 100 posts are abolished only 20 ex-serviceman could be retrenched but as about 63 ex-servicemen were less to their prescribed quota so there is no question of termination of the services of the petitioner arise."
The corresponding reply to this para may be reproduced hereunder :- "7(B) That the contents of para 7(B) of amended writ petition are wrong and denied.
The appointment of the petitioner was made against the reserved vacancy of Ex-Serviceman as per instructions in force and the services of the petitioner were terminated due to reduction in cadre as per seniority list.
In case of reduction the junior-most will have to be terminated.
Hence the termination orders of the petitioner are correct and legal as per condition No. 5 of his appointment order/copy attached as R.5."
Paragraph 7 of the written statement runs thus : "That the contents of para No. 7 of the writ petition are wrong and denied.
The total strength of the cadre for the year 85-86 was 1698 but due to 10% reduction in the cadre, the strength of the cadre was reduced to 1528.
At the time of recruitment of the petitioner 1637 Forest Guards were working and in this way 109 Forest Guard were surplus at that time.
The 10% cut was imposed in the cadre for the Forest Guards before the appointment of the petitioner.
Thus in view of reduction in the strength of excess of the cadre the termination orders of the petitioner are legal.
It is admitted that the petitioner was at S. No. 969 in the seniority list of the Forest Guards as it stood on 11..86 but now the seniority of the petitioner is fixed at Sr. No. 1674 as the benefit of the Military service given to the petitioner has been cancelled."
4.
It may be noticed here that the petitioner in the other writ petition also belongs to the category of ESM and in the seniority list he was shown one step higher than the petitioner, Lajja Ram, in CWP 4044/86.
5.
It is apparent from the pleadings of the parties that the figures given by the petitioner have not been denied at all.
From the pleadings of the respondents it is evident that the case of the respondents is that the petitioner's services were terminated in accordance with his seniority number on account of reduction in the number of posts.
It has nowhere been mentioned that out of the Forest Guards those remained in service after reduction the quota of ESM was also maintained.
6.
Once the Government has taken a policy decision to reserve certain number of posts for a particular category, it would ipso facto follow that on reduction of number of posts proportionate number of vacancies for the reserve category would also be reduced and out of the remaining posts the quota for the reserve category has to be kept in view.
The retrenchment or the termination cannot just be based on seniority as at all given times it has to be seen whether the reserve categories are properly represented upto the quota fixed in the relevant instructions.
A similar view was taken by a Division Bench of this Court in CWP No. 16464 of 1989, decided on December 13, 1993 (KT Kokne and others v. State of Haryana etc.).
It was observed that "while keeping the incumbents on the posts, which remain after abolition, the reservation for the members of the Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes, etc. as per Rules 9.5(c) of the Rules, for the direct recruits and as per Rule 9.7.
(c)(i) for the promotees has be kept in view.
This was also so observed in the interim order of the Motion Bench, dated 22nd December, 1989 passed in C.W.P.
No. 16464 of 1989.
7.
From the narration of facts, it is evident that the quota of ESM was not kept in view while retaining the personnel on the posts of Forest Guards after reduction of posts.
From the figures mentioned by the petitioner, which have not been denied, it is evident that on reduction of posts, the petitioner was within his quota of the category of ESM and, therefore, his services could not have been terminated.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has stated at the bar that he does not press any other point raised in the writ petition and gives up his claim regarding the granting of military service benefit.
Now the question that arises is - As to what relief the petitioners are entitiled to at this stage ?
8.
Learned counsel for the petitioners states at the bar that during the pendency of the writ petitions, the petitioners were reappointed by the respondent-department as Forest Guards.
He further states that if the orders of termination of the services of the petitioners, dated July 25, 1986, are quashed, the end result would be that they would be entitled to continuity of service with back wages.
9.
For the reasons recorded above, I allow these writ petitions and hold that the termination of the petitioners is not sustainable.
They would be deemed to have continued in service with effect from the date of their initial appointments.
However, I am of the view that in the facts and circumstances of the case, as the petitioners have not rendered any service after their termination till their appointment, they will not be entitled to any back wages, but all other consequential benefits, like continuity of service etc. shall follow.
I make no order as to costs.