THB Chalapathi, J - This judgment will dispose of writ petition No. 520 of 1996 and writ petition No. 1099 of 1996 as identical questions of law and facts are involved in both the writ petitions.
However, for the facility of judgment, facts have been taken from CWP No. 520 of 1996.
2.
The petitioners are students of two year Diploma Course in Pharmacy in Gandhi College of Pharmacy, Karnal.
They were selected on merit for the academic Session 1994-95 for the Diploma Course in Pharmacy and they have been allocated to Gandhi College of Pharmacy, Karnal, by the State Board of Technical Education, Haryana which conducted the admission test.
Accordingly, the petitioners were admitted to Diploma Course in Pharmacy which started on 10101994.
They were allowed to sit in the Ist Year Examination of Diploma Course which commenced on 1581995 and was concluded on 1591995.
Though the results were not declared, the petitioners were allowed to attend IInd year of Diploma Course which started on 22101995.
The petitioners deposited annual charges and fees etc. for the IInd year.
Thereafter the results of the Ist Year Examination of Diploma Course of Pharmacy were declared on 28.11.1995.
As per results declared, the petitioners have failed in more than two papers of Ist Year Diploma Course and they have to re-appear in those papers of the Ist year Diploma Course in Pharmacy in supplementary examination.
The College debarred the petitioners from attending the classes of the 2nd year on the ground that they have to reappear in more than two papers.
The notice in this regard was issued by the Director, Gandhi College of Pharmacy, Karnal on 1st December, 1995 which is annexed as Annexure P-3 to the writ petition.
According to the said notice, "all the students attending D Pharm.
IInd Year who do not fulfil the eligibility conditions of promotion i.e. those who have failed in more than two papers were directed not to attend the classes."
Thereuopon the petitioners made a representation to the Principal of the College and requested him to allow them to attend the classes of IInd Year as they were attending the classes from 12.10.1995.
The Principal informed them that the State Board of Technical Education of Haryana had directed the College not to allow the students to attend the classes of IInd Year who have to re-appear in more than two papers of Ist Year.
The writ petitioners made a representation dated 13121995 vide Annexure P-4 to the Board to allow them to attend the IInd Year of Diploma Course.
The petitioners further stated that they have come to know that the Board of Technical Education framed examination rules.
The said rule "Promotion to Next Higher Class" reads as follows :-  "Promotion to next higher class -  The students of all semester classes shall be promoted to the next higher semester/class after completion of examination conducted as per rule 3(b) and their attendance for next higher class shall be counted from the date of commencement of that session schedule which is approved by the competent authority.
The promotion to higher semester/class shall be made on the following conditions :- (A) For the courses being run on semester basis : A candidate will be allowed to join 5th or 6th semester class only after he/she has passed all the subjects prescribed in the first and second semesters respectively.
(B) For the courses being run on annual basis of duration of three years and more : A candidate will be allowed to join 3rd or 4th year class only after he has passed all the subjects prescribed in the first year and IInd year respectively.
(C) In respect of diploma course in Pharmacy the promotion to IInd year shall be governed according to rules framed by Pharmacy Council of India from time to time.
(D) In respect of courses being not covered above, there shall be no bar for promotion to next higher class."
3.
According to the petitioners, the clause in the Examination Rules for promotion to the next higher class relating to Diploma Course in Pharmacy is not in accordance with law.
The relevant clause reads that in respect of diploma course in Pharmacy, the promotion to IInd Year shall be governed according to rules framed by Pharmacy Council of India from time to time.
According to them, Diploma Course in Pharmacy is governed by All India Council for Technical Education Act, 1987 and the Rules under the Pharmacy Act, 1948 have no application.
Therefore the Pharmacy Council of India has no control over the colleges which are imparting training in the Diploma Course in Pharmacy.
Therefore, according to the petitioners, the rule relating to promotion to next higher class in respect of diploma course in Pharmacy, the promotion to IInd year shall be governed as per rules framed by Pharmacy Council of India from time to time is not valid.
According to the petitioners they are entitled to continue their studies in IInd year.
They can clear their back-log of the Ist year while attending classes in the IInd Year of the Pharmacy Course.
It is also the case of the petitioners that they have been admitted to the IInd Year and they have been regularly attending the classes of IInd year with effect from 12.10.1995 and, therefore, they cannot be prevented from attending the IInd year course on the ground that they have to re-appear in more than two papers in the Ist year Examination.
It is the further case of the petitioners that the examinations of Ist Year and IInd Year of Diploma Course in Pharmacy are conducted twice a year ie August- September and December-January.
It is also the case of the petitioners that when they fail in more than two subjects they would appear during December- January examination of the Ist Year while attending the classes and clear that papers of the Ist Year in which they failed, but that will not disentitle them to attend the classes of IInd Year.
The petitioners, therefore, approached this Court to quash the order of the Director of the College, Annexure P-3, dated 1121995 and to direct the respondents to regularise their admission to the IInd Year of Diploma Course in Pharmacy and to permit them to attend the classes of the IInd Year.
4.
The Ist respondent, namely, the Board of Technical Education, Haryana, filed a written statement contending inter alia that under Section 10 of the Pharmacy Act, 1948, the rules regulating Diploma Course in Pharmacy have been framed and notified by Pharmacy Council of India on 281991 and that the Pharmacy Act was made applicable to all Pharmacy Institutions throughout India.
Under the Regulation of 1991, those candidates who have appeared for all the subjects and passed the diploma in Pharmacy Part-I (first year) examination are eligible for promotion to diploma in Pharmacy Part-II (Second year) and the failure in more than two subjects debars the students from promotion to diploma in Pharmacy Part-II (Second year) class.
The Board of Technical Education, Haryana (hereinafter called the 'Board') admitted that the petitioners were admitted in two years Diploma Course in Pharmacy during 1994-95 Session and they were allowed to join Gandhi College of Pharmacy, Karnal and that all the petitioners appeared Part-I (first year) examination during August, 1995 and the result of Ist Year Pharmacy was declared on 28.11.1995 and the petitioners failed in more than two papers of Ist Year Examination and thus they have been debarred from promotion to diploma Course in Pharmacy Part-II (Second year).
It is further stated that All India Council for Technical Education has not laid down any provision for D Pharmacy Course.
Therefore the Regulations made by Pharmacy Council of India have been incorporated in the rules of State Board of Technical Education and, therefore, no right of the petitioners has been infringed.
According to the Ist respondent, as the petitioners failed in more than two subjects, they are not eligible for promotion to IInd Year of Diploma Course in Pharmacy.
Therefore, there is no illegality in preventing the petitioners, who are students of Pharmacy Course, from attending the classes in IInd Year as they failed to fulfil the eligibility criteria for promotion to IInd Year Course having failed in more than two subjects.
5.
It is, therefore, to be seen whether the petitioners can be permitted to attend the IInd year classes though they failed in more than two subjects of the Ist year examination.
According to the learned Counsel for the petitioners, the Pharmacy Act, 1948 stood repealed by implication by All India Council of Technical Education Act, 1987 and, therefore, the rules framed by Pharmacy Council of India in regard to promotion to IInd Year classes are not applicable as they were framed after repeal of the Pharmacy Act of 1948.
Therefore, rules framed by Board of Technical Education, Haryana, that in respect of diploma course in Pharmacy, the promotion to IInd Year shall be governed according to rules framed by Pharmacy Council of India from time to time, have no application to the facts of the present case and other rules governing in regard to promotion in respect of other technical courses will apply to the students of the diploma course in Pharmacy.
According to the learned Counsel, in other technical courses, the students who failed in more than two papers, have been allowed to attend classes in the IInd Year on the condition of their clearing those papers of Ist year in which they failed.
It is also contended by the learned Counsel that the petitioners may be allowed to sit in the supplementary Examination and pass those subjects in which they have earlier failed, while attending the classes in the IInd year of Diploma Course in Pharmacy.
The contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners that Pharmacy Act, 1948 stands repealed by All India Council of Technical Education Act, 1987 cannot be accepted.
The provisions of All India Council of Technical Education Act, 1987 and Indian Pharmacy Act, 1948 will apply to the institutions which are imparting education in Pharmacy.
The decision relied upon by the learned Counsel for the petitioners in Gandhi College of Pharmacy v. All India Council of Technical Education, New Delhi and others, 1996(1) SCT 190(P&H) : AIR 1995 PH 315 does not apply to the facts of the present case.
The learned Judge while dealing with this contention has observed as follows :-  "The 1948 Act is undoubtedly an existing law which was in force in the territory of India prior to the commencement of the Constitution.
This law was thus to continue to operate till it was altered or repealed or amended by a competent Legislature.
Parliament in exercise of its powers under Entry-66 of List-1 (Union List) has enacted the 1987 Act.
As already noticed above, this Act covers same field which was earlier covered by the 1948 Act, namely, to lay, down norms and standards for studies in the field of pharmacy.
Therefore, in terms of Article 372 of the Constitution, the 1987 Act to the extent it covers the same field as covered by the existing law i.e. the 1948 Act will prevail and the provisions of the 1948.
Act to that extent stand repealed/altered.
Alteration, repeal or amendment contemplated by Article 372 of the Constitution may be express, i.e. the existing law may be expressly altered, repealed or amended by a competent Legislature.
An existing law may also be modified by necessary implication and this can be done even by a separate enactment as in the present case.
When two Acts are inconsistent or repugnant to each other, the existing law will be deemed to have been altered, repealed or amended by the later law enacted by the competent Legislature.
Even when there is no repugnancy or inconsistency between the two enactments, the later law enacted by the competent Legislature will prevail provided that law covers the same field as is covered by the existing law since it is last expression of the will of the Legislature that must prevail."
There cannot be any dispute about the proposition of law as (sic) in the above decision.
It is, therefore, to be seen whether the All India Council for Technical Education Act, 1987 (hereinafter referred to as the 1987 Act) provides for the procedure regulating the examinations and conditions of promotion of the students of Ist year to IInd year.
Section 10 of the 1987 Act provides the functions of the Council for Technical Education.
Under Section 10(i) the Council may lay down norms and standards -for courses, curricula, physical and instructional facilities, staff pattern, staff qualifications, quality instructions, assessment and examinations.
Though Section 10 of the 1987 Act authorises the Council to provide norms and standards for assessment and examination, it is admitted by the learned Counsel for the petitioners that Council for Technical Education has not prescribed any norms so far.
Section 10 is only an enabling provision.
There is nothing in the Act to suggest that the Pharmacy Council functioning under the 1987 Act is debarred from prescribing any Standards in regard to assessment and examinations.
Even the All India Council for Technical Education has not fixed any norms under Section 10(i) of the 1987 Act.
Whenever the All India Council for Technical Education prescribes the norms and standards for assessment and examinations, then those norms will govern the field and supersede the rules framed by the All India Pharmacy Council.
The provisions of the 1987 Act will apply only if there is any over-lapping in the rules framed by both the Councils.
In fact, a representative of Pharmacy Council of India is also a member of All India Council for Technical Education under Section 3 of the 1987 Act.
Therefore the 1987 Act recognises the existence of the Pharmacy Council of India and any rules made by the Pharmacy Council of India will be operative till All India Council for Technical Education frames any rule under Section 10 of the 1987 Act.
Till such time, the rules framed by All India Pharmacy Council will be in operation.
7.
The All India Council for Technical Education issued guidelines for admission to Engineering Degree and Engineering Diploma Programmes in pursuance of Section 10(6) of the 1987 Act in its notification No. F1/11/88-T-5 (AICTE)/2108 dated 15.6.1992.
The said notification was filed along with the written statement and marked as Annexure R-1.
Paragraph 92 of the said guidelines reads as follows :-  "92 : The above guidelines will not be applicable for admission to degree courses in Architecture, Pharmacy, Applied Arts, etc. for which separate admission guidelines issued by the concerned organisation exist.
Admission to these courses will continue to be governed by those guidelines."
8.
Thus, it is clear that All India Council for Technical Education has not framed guidelines or rules under Section 10 of the 1987 Act in regard to promotional policy of the students from Ist year to IInd year and the rules framed by the All India Pharmacy Council will govern the field.
The Pharmacy Council of India has framed the Regulations in the year 1991.
These regulations have been framed under Section 10 of the Pharmacy Act, 1948 and approved by the Central Government.
Regulation 16 reads as follows :-  "Regulation 16 : Eligibility for promotion to Diploma in Pharmacy (Pr.
II) : All candidates who have appeared for all the subjects and passed the Diploma in Pharmacy Part-I examination are eligible for promotion to the Diploma in Pharmacy Part-II class.
However, failure in more than two subjects shall debar him/her from promotion to the Diploma in Pharmacy Part-II class."
9.
Thus, it is clear that when a student fails in more than two subjects, he is not entitled to be promoted to the Diploma in Pharmacy Part-II class.
Admittedly, all the petitioners failed in more than two subjects of the Ist year course.
Therefore, they are not entitled to be promoted to the IInd year course.
I am, therefore, of the opinion that the petitioners are rightly denied promotion to the IInd year course.
10.
It is contended by the learned Counsel for the petitioners that even before the declaration of the result of the Ist year, the college authorities admitted them into IInd year course and they attended the classes for a period of about one month till results were declared and thereafter they were prevented from attending the classes, but the fact that the college authorities admitted the students for the IInd year class and collected fee for the IInd Year class does not stop the authorities from debarring the students, who failed in more than two subjects, from attending the classes of IInd year.
Therefore, the petitioners cannot take advantage of the action on the part of the college authorities in admitting them into the IInd year class by accepting the fees for the IInd year.
I do not, therefore, find any ground to quash the impugned order (Annexure P-3) whereby the petitioners were directed not to attend classes for D Pharma IInd year.
It is brought to my notice that in supplementary examination held in January/February 1996 all the petitioners have cleared the papers in which they failed earlier.
If that is the case, the petitioners are entitled to be admitted into the IInd year course in the next session.
The respondents are directed to admit the petitioners provided they cleared the papers in which they failed earlier and qualified themselves under the Regulations 1991 framed by the Pharmacy Council of India.
Fee already paid by the petitioners for the IInd year course shall be adjusted towards the fee for admission to IInd year Course if not already refunded.
11.
Subject to the above directions, both the writ petitions are dismissed.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.