RS Mongia, J (Oral) - The petitioner, who was working as a Deputy Manager (Export) in the pay scale of Rs. 2000-3200 with the Haryana State Small Scale Industries and Export Corporation Ltd (hereinafter referred to as 'the Corporation') was promoted as Assistant General Manager (Export) in the scale of Rs. 3000-4500 vide order dated September 7, 1990 passed by the Managing Director of the Corporation.
The order of promotion reads as under :-  "Shri RP Sharma, Deputy Manager (Exports) working in the scale of Rs. 2000-3200 is hereby promoted as Asstt.
General Manager (Export) in the scale of Rs. 3000-100-3500-125-4500, with immediate effect, subject to the condition that he will remain on probation for a period of one year.
His earlier promotion will not confer upon him any right of seniority over those who may otherwise be senior to him and whose cases for one reason or the other have not been decided."
2.
The probation period of the petitioner was initially extended for three months vide order dated September 5, 1991 and then for another one month vide order dated December 10, 1991 pending ratification by the Board of Directors of the Corporation.
It is the case of the respondent that promotion of the petitioner was required to be ratified by the Board of Directors under Clause 3.1(b) of the Service Bye-Laws of the Corporation.
3.
Vide order dated December 19, 1991, issued by the Managing Director of the Corporation (copy at Annexure P 11), the petitioner was reverted to the post of Deputy Manager (Export), for the reasons mentioned therein, which are reproduced as under :-  "Accordingly, the promotion case of Sh. RP Sharma was placed before the Board of Directos in its meeting held on 16121991.
The Board of Directors examined the case and did not ratify the promotion as he does not possess the required qualifications to be promoted to the post of Asstt.
General Manager (Export) and while promoting him cases of officers senior to him were not even considered.
In view of the decision taken by the Board of Directors in its meeting held on 16121991.
Sh. RP Sharma is hereby reverted to the post of Deputy Manager (Export) in the pay scale of Rs. 2000-60-2300-EB-75-3200-100-3500, with immediate effect."
This order led the petitioner to file the present writ petition.
Learned counsel for the petitioner raised the following points :-  (i) There were no qualifications laid down by the Board of Directors or any competent authority for filling the post of Assistant General Manager (Export) by promotion.
The case of the petitioner was duly considered for promotion on the basis of his merit/length of service/qualifications and experience.
(ii) At the time of promotion of the petitioner, there was no seniority list which might have been prepared and circulated by the Corporation which might have show that there were any senior persons than the petitioner, who could be considered for promotion to the post of Assistant General Manager (Export).
(iii) The petitioner having been put on probation he could only be reverted if his work and conduct during the period of probation was not found satisfactory and on no other ground.
(iv) No show cause notice or opportunity was afforded to the petitioner before passing the impugned order of reversion.
Point No. (i) : So far as Point No. (i) is concerned, learned counsel for the petitioner argued that the Board of Directors of the Corporation had not laid down any qualifications for filling the post of Assistant General Manager (Export) by way of promotion.
The qualifications which have been referred to by the respondent in its written statement only pertain to filling the post of Assistant General Manager (Export) by direct recruitment.
In paragraph 6 of the written statement filed on behalf of the Corporation, it has been averred that qualification for the post of Assistant General Manager (Export) were laid down by the Board of Directors, which are as under :-  "The incumbent should be B.Sc.
Mech.
Engg.
Ist Class, alongwith Diploma in International Trade preferably from LIFT of MBA with 3 to 5 years experience in International Trade.
The candidates should be between the age of 30-35 years relaxable by 5 years in exceptional cases."
4.
A bare reading of these qualifications does support the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner inasmuch as the experience asked for is in International Trade and the age should be between 30-35 years, which would clearly indicate that these qualifications were meant for direct recruitment as normally age cannot be a bar for purpose of promotion.
Consequently, I am of the view that the reasons given in the impugned order that the petitioner did not hold the requisite qualifications is not well based as there were no qualifications laid down for the purpose of filling the post of Assistant General Manager (Export) by promotion.
Point No. (ii) :  The order of promotion envisaged that the petitioner's promotion was subject to the right of any other person who might be senior to the petitioner.
Even if no seniority as such was circulated, the question that arises is - Were there any other officers who were otherwise senior to the petitioner under the Service Bye-Laws ?
Bye-Law 34 of the Corporation provides the method of determining the seniority of the employees of the Corporation.
According to Clause 34(a) "the inter se seniority of persons appointed to posts carrying the same scale of pay shall be determined by the dates of their substantive appointments to such posts on the same date, their seniority shall be determined.................."  5.
In the written statement names of seven officers, namely S/Sh.
NS Rathore, AP Chugh, KC Sood, OP Kharbas, OP Chaudhary, Siri Ram and Sundhir Verma have been mentioned who were promoted in the pay scale of Rs. 2000-3200 prior to the petitioner.
If the seniority is to be determined between the petitioner and the aforesaid seven persons under Bye-law 34 (a), they would naturally rank senior to the petitioner having joined in the pay scale of Rs. 2000-3200 prior to the petitioner.
They had certainly a right of consideration for promotion.
This reason, which is given in the impugned order that the senior persons were not considered while considering the case of the petitioner, it is well based.
It is not necessary that there should be some circulation of the seniority because for the purposes of promotion at a given time, all the officers in the pay scale of Rs. 2000- 3200 would be clubbed together and their names will be arranged in the order of the date of their appointment in the said grade and for purpose of consideration for promotion that would be deemed to be the seniority.
In the replication it is nowhere said that the dates given of promotion of the aforesaid seven officers in the grade of Rs. 2000-3200 are wrong.
Consequently, I do not find any merit in the submission of the petitioner on this point.
Point No. (iii) :  The petitioner was put on probation by the order of promotion.
However, that was also subject to the condition that the order was without prejudice to the right of the seniors.
If the cases of the seniors had not been considered, the order from its very inception would be violative of Article 16 of the Constitution of India despite the fact that the petitioner might have even completed the period of probation successfully.
If an order of promotion is violative of any rule or the Constitution, the same can be set aside despite a person having successfully completed the period of probation.
Consequently, I do not find any merit in the submission of the petitioner on this point.
Point No. (iv) :  Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the order of reversion should have been passed after issuing a show cause notice to the petitioner.
I do not find any merit in this submission.
The promotion order, itself, as reproduced above, indicates that the same was conditional.
As observed above, if the cases of the senior persons were admittedly not considered the question of issuing any show cause notice to the petitioner did not arise as the reversion was being ordered on the ground mentioned in the promotion order itself.
As I have observed that the cases of the senior persons were not considered, the respondent was justified in passing the impugned order of reversion.
6.
For the foregoing reasons, I do not find any merit in this writ petition, which is hereby dismissed.
However, the respondent-Corporation is directed that if during the pendency of the writ petition it has already not considereda the case of the petitioner alongwith his seniors for promotion to the post of Assistant General Manager (Export) or to the equivalent post with whatever nomenclature the same is now known, by considering the petitioner to be qualified for purpose of consideration for promotion, the respondent- Corporation shall now consider the case of the petitioner alongwith other senior officers for promotion within a period of three months of the receipt of a copy of this order either from Court or a certified copy thereof from the petitioner.
I make no order as to costs.