RS Mongia, J - The petitioner served in the Army from February 14, 1949 to June 30, 1973.
After his discharge from the Army, where he worked as Hawaldar, he joined Punjab Land Development and Reclamation Corporation (hereinafter referred to as 'the Corporation') as Bulldozer Operator on November 1, 1973.
It is the admitted case of both sides that the rules known as 'The Punjab Government National Emergency (Concession) Rules, 1965' (hereinafter referred to as 'the 1965 Rule') are applicable to the Corporation.
Under Rule 4 of the 1965 Rules, the military services rendered during the period of emergency i.e. from October 26, 1962 to January 10, 1968 is to be reckoned for the purpose of seniority and fixation of pay.
The aforesaid rules were adopted by the Corporation in the year 1988-89.
A representation dated January 15, 1992, Annexure P-4, has been placed on record, wherein the petitioner claimed the benefits of military service towards increments etc.
This having not been granted, the petitioner had filed the present writ petition with the aforesaid grievance.
The second grievance raised in the writ petition is that vide order dated April 22, 1991 (Annexure P.1) on the revision of the pay scale from Rs. 450-700 to Rs. 1025-1800, the petitioner's pay was fixed at Rs. 1350/- and in the remarks column it was mentioned that "Increment will not be given from 1186 onwards till the employee receives a good annual confidential report and his pay shall remain @ Rs. 1350/- pm" The grievance of the petitioner is that by this order future increments have been stopped, which is punishment and no punishment could be awarded unless a departmental enquiry was held and an order to that effect was passed in accordance with law.
2.
So far as the first grievance is concerned, the petitioner's claim for the benefit of military service was rejected on the ground that since the petitioner had not joined the armed forces during the period of emergency, he was not entitled to the benefit under the 1965 Rule.
This point stand settled now so far as the 1965 Rule relating to the State of Punjab are concerned that irrespective of the fact that a person joined the army prior to the emergency or during the emergency, he would be entitled to the benefit of military service rendered during the period of emergency.
Reference may be made to 1995(2) SLR 313.
Learned counsel for the respondents in view of this judgment was unable to substantiate his stand.
Consequently, it is held, that the petitioner was entitled to count his military service for the purpose of fixing his pay by nationality giving him deemed date of counting military service rendered by him during the period of emergency i.e. October 26, 1962 to January 10, 1968.
The petitioner would be entitled to get his pay fixed on the basis of the deemed date of appointment and the payment of arrears accordingly.
Since the petitioner filed his first representation for getting the above relief on January 15, 1992, he is entitled to the arrears so calculated w.e.f.
three years prior to the filing of the representation is w.e.f.
January 15, 1989 till his date of retirement on January 29, 1992.
3.
Coming to the second grievance, it may be observed that the stand of the respondents is that the petitioner could not cross the efficiency bar w.e.f.
January 1, 1984 and had the pay scales not been revised, he would have been given the next increments in the unrevised pay scale only after he had crossed the efficiency bar by getting good annual confidential reports.
Since by January 1, 1986 he had not got good annual confidential reports to cross the efficiency bar w.e.f.
January 1, 1985, or w.e.f.
a later date, his efficiency bar was not crossed w.e.f.
January 1, 1985 or from January 1, 1986 when the pay scales were revised.
Therefore, the remarks were specifically given in the order at Annexure P.1 while fixing the pay of the petitioner in the revise pay scale that future increments will be dependent on the petitioner's getting good annual confidential reports.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner argued that the aforesaid order laying down a condition that future increments would depend on getting good annual confidential reports amounts to stoppage of increments and the same being punitive could not be passed without affording opportunity of hearing to the petitioner and holding enquiry etc. under the Departmental Rules.
Further he submitted that at no time the petitioner was informed of the order refusing to allow him to cross the efficiency bar and that being so, the remarks in the order at Annexure P.1 are wholly uncalled for.
5.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that there is no substance in the arguments of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
Stopping of an employee at efficiency bar is not by way of punishment.
The cross of efficiency bar depends on good record of an employee.
A person who might have average reports may not be in the given circumstances allowed to cross the efficiency bar.
Further, it is not the case of the petitioner that despite there being an order of not allowing the petitioner to cross the efficiency bar w.e.f.
January 1, 1984, he was still getting the increment.
In other words, after January 1, 1984, no increment was added to the petitioner's pay and even if it is assumed for the sake of argument that the order of stopping the petitioner at the efficiency bar was not communicated to the petitioner, the petitioner is deemed to have the knowledge of the same as increments were never added to his pay after January 1, 1984.
On revision of pay scales only the pay was being fixed in the new pay scale on the basis of pay which the petitioner was getting prior to January 1, 1986.
Naturally the next increments in the revised pay scale would have been dependent on the petitioner's earning good annual confidential reports to enable him to cross the efficiency bar.
6.
For the foregoing reasons, the writ petition is partially allowed to the extent that the respondent-corporation would give the benefits of military service to the petitioner for the service rendered by him during the period of emergency i.e. from October 26, 1962 to January 10, 1968 and by giving him deemed date of appointment would fix his pay accordingly and release his arrears within a period of three months of the receipt of a copy of this order either from this Court or certified copy thereof from the petitioner.
Since the petitioner made his first representation on January 15, 1992 as per record of this case to claim the aforesaid relief, the arrears shall be confined to three years prior to January 15, 1992 ie January 15, 1989.
If the payment, as aforesaid, is not released to the petitioner within the aforesaid period, he would be entitled to 12% interest per annum thereon.
However, I make no order as to costs.