Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - This issues that arise in this case are -  (i) Can the Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh resort to direct recruitment to the post of Joint Medical Superintendent without considering the claim for promotion of a person who is working as a Deputy Medical Superintendent ?
(ii) Can the solitary post of Joined Medical Superintendent be reserved for members of Scheduled Castes ?
2.
In December 1995, the Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh issued an advertisement inviting applications for various posts including that of Joint Medical Superintendent.
This post was reserved for members of Scheduled Castes.
The petitioner who is working as a Deputy Medical Superintendent in the Institute impugns this advertisement on two grounds.
Firstly, the petitioner alleges that in accordance with the rules, the post can be filled up by direct recruitment only if no suitable person is available for appointment by promotion.
According to the petitioner, he is fully eligible for the post and was, thus, entitled to be considered for promotion before the Institute could have resorted to the method of direct recruitment.
Secondly, petitioner states that the solitary post of Joining Medical Superintendent cannot be reserved for members of Scheduled Castes.
Since the post has been illegally reserved exclusively for members of Scheduled Castes, the advertisement is vitiated.
3.
The Respondent-Institute contests the petitioner's claim.
It has been stated that the petitioner is not eligible for promotion to the post of Joint Medical Superintendent as "he does not possess the required experience of five years as regular Deputy Medical Superintendent at this Institute."
Since the "only incumbent of the single existing/sanctioned post of Dy.
Medical Superintendent" is not eligible, the Institute was entitled to fill it up by direct recruitment.
It has also been stated that the present vacancy falls at point No. 2 of the reservation roster maintained by the Institute.
The first point which was reserved for the members of Scheduled Castes was carried forward in 1987 by appointing Dr. Rajinder Kalra.
This point was to be "cleared in the subsequent three recruitment years."
Consequently, the post has been reserved for the members of the Scheduled Castes.
This, according to the respondents, is in accordance with the instructions issued by the Government of India.
4.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
5.
The first question that arises for consideration is - was the Institute entitled to resort to the method of direct recruitment in the circumstances of the present case ?
6.
According to the respondents, the petitioner was not eligible for appointment by promotion as he did not have the requisite experience of five years.
Is it so ?
7.
Admittedly, the petitioner had joined the Punjab Civil Medical Service, Class II on November 9, 1971.
In July 1981, the petitioner joined the Respondent-Institute as Medical Officer (Staff Clinic) on deputation.
While he was working in the Institute, the post of Medical Officer held by him was advertised.
The petitioner had applied for this post.
He was selected and was offered the post vide memo dated June 17, 1987.
He submitted his charge receiving report on June 29, 1987.
Ultimately, he was permanently absorbed in the service of the Institute with effect from that date.
It is also the admitted position that "the petitioner was deputed to look after the work of the job of Deputy Medical Superintendent in addition to his own duties at Nehru Hospital attached to this Institute and was allowed a special pay of Rs. 200/- per month w.e.f.
191988."
It has been further stated that "during the period from January 87 to March 92, there was no sanctioned post of Deputy Medical Superintendent at the Institute.
The post of Deputy Medical Superintendent was created in April 1992 and was filled by direct recruitment in February 1995 on regular basis."
According to the respondent, the petitioner was "selected and appointed to the post of Deputy Medical Superintendent on regular basis w.e.f.
11.2.95.
Therefore, he does not possess the required experience of five years as regular Deputy Medical Superintendent at this Institute."
It has been further mentioned that the existing regular post of Deputy Medical Superintendent was upgraded to that of Joint Medical Superintendent "with the condition that the existing post of Deputy Medical Superintendent shall stand abolished from the date of the upgraded post of Joint Medical Superintendent is filled up.
Consequent upon the upgradation of the existing post of Dy.
Medical Superintendent to that of the Joint Medical Superintendent, the then incumbent Dr. Rajinder Kalra of the post of Deputy Medical Superintendent was considered for promotion to the post of Joint Medical Superintendent.
On the recommendations of the Selection Committee, Dr. Rajinder Kalra was promoted to the said upgraded post of Joint Medical Superintendent w.e.f.
1187.
Accordingly, the said post of Joint Medical Superintendent was filled up w.e.f.
1187 and the existing post of Dy.
Medical Superintendent stood abolished from the said date i.e.
1187."
8.
These pleadings indicate that with effect from January 1, 1987, the post of Deputy Medical Superintendent had ceased to exist.
Yet, it is admitted by the Respondent that with effect from September 1, 1988, the duties of the post of Deputy Medical Superintendent had been entrusted to the petitioner.
He was also paid Rs. 200/- per month as special pay in addition to his salary as a Medical Officer (Staff Clinic).
There is undoubtedly an inconsistency in the two pleas taken by the respondent.
On one hand, it is admitted that the petitioner was given the additional charge of the post of Deputy Medical Superintendent with effect from September 1, 1988.
On the other hand, it is claimed that the posts stood abolished with effect from January 1, 1987.
These two pleas are inconsistent.
There is an apparent inharmony.
However, the fact remains that so far as the petitioner is concerned, he was discharging the duties of the post of Deputy Medical Superintendent from September 1, 1988 and continued to do so till he was appointed to the said post in February 1995 on regular basis.
9.
An extract from the rules has been produced as Annexure P.3 with the writ petition.
In case of recruitment by promotion, the post of Joint Medical Superintendent can be filled up "from amongst Deputy Medical Superintendents having five years experience".
The rule does not postulate that the incumbent should have worked on the post for five years on regular basis.
It only requires that he should have an experience as a Deputy Medical Superintendent.
In ordinary parlance, 'experience' means "an actual living through something and coming to know it first hand rather than through hearsay or report".
According to Webster 3rd New International Dictionary, 'experience' means "being engaged in a particular activity; direct observation of or participation in events, encountering, undergoing or living through things in general as take place in the course of time."
Since the petitioner has performed the duties of the post of Deputy Medical Superintendent, he has directly participated in the events.
He has encountered the pitfalls and lived through the job requirements.
He has personally acquired the necessary knowledge about the job.
He has experience of the post of Deputy Medical Superintendent.
The plea raised on behalf of the respondents that he is not eligible, cannot, thus, be sustained.
10.
It is admitted position that the petitioner's claim for promotion was not considered.
It is not disputed that the Institute can resort to the method of direct recruitment only if it comes to the conclusion that no suitable candidate for promotion is available.
In the present case, the respondent had decided to "fill up the said post of Joint Medical Superintendent by direct recruitment" only because the petitioner "does not possess the required experience of regular five years as Deputy Medical Superintendent."
This is not in consonance with the rules.
Consequently, the action can't be sustained.
11.
Accordingly, the first question is answered in the negative.
It is held that the Institute was not entitled to resort to the method of direct recruitment in the circumstances of the present case.
12.
It was then contended by Mr. Surya Kant, learned counsel for the petitioner that the solitary post of Joint Medical Superintendent could not have been reserved for the members of Scheduled Castes.
According to the learned counsel, the post is included in Group 'A'.
It is in the pay scale of Rs. 4100-5300.
As for the post falling in Group 'A' which carry an ultimate salary of Rs. 5,700/- or less per month," there is no reservation.
He refers to the instructions issued by the Government of India as quoted at Page 25 of Swami's Compilations on reservations and concessions for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes etc.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been admitted that the post of Deputy Medical Superintendent as well as that of Joint Medical Superintendent are Group 'A' posts but since the petitioner was not eligible and no Scheduled Caste candidate was available in the feeder cadre of Deputy Medical Superintendent for promotion, the vacancy has been reserved for members of Scheduled Castes.
13.
Whatever be the position under the instructions issued by the Government of India, a solitary post in a cadre cannot be reserved for members of Scheduled Castes.
If this were allowed, there would be 100% reservation which would negate the guarantee of equality of opportunity as enshrined in Article 16 of the Constitution.
The rule in this behalf has been clearly enunciated by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Dr. Chakradhar Paswan v. State of Bihar and others, AIR 1988 SC 959.
It has been held that "if there is only one post in the cadre, there can be no reservation with reference to the post either for recruitment at the initial stage or for filling up a future vacancy in respect of that post.
A reservation which would come under Article 16(4), pre-supposes the availability of least more than one post in that cadre."
14.
In this view of the matter, the plea raised on behalf of the respondent by Mr. Nehra that the first reserved point has been carried forward is wholly meaningless and lacking in merit.
Admittedly, there is only one post of Joint Medical Superintendent.
The solitary post can never be reserved.
A special provision for one cannot mean a total deprivation for the majority.
15.
Accordingly, even the second question is answered in the negative.
It is held that the Respondent-Institute could not have reserved the solitary post of Joint Medical Superintendent.
16.
Both the questions having been answered in favour of the petitioner and against the respondent, the writ petition is allowed.
The Respondent is directed to consider the petitioner's claim for promotion to the post of Joint Medical Superintendent on the basis that he fulfils the requirement of experience.
The needful shall be done within two months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
The advertisement in so far as it relates to the post of Joint Medical Superintendent is quashed.
In the circumstances of the case, we leave the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.