RS Mongia, J (Oral) - The petitioner in this writ petition claims that he was entitled to be brought on list 'F' prepared under the Punjab Police Rules (as applicable to Haryana), with effect from June 26, 1973, but in fact he was brought on the said list with effect from May 8, 1974 and them promoted as Inspector on May 30, 1974.
The supersession by his juniors for being brought on list 'F' resulted in his promotion as Inspector from a later date.
His further claim is that he was promoted as Deputy Superintendent of Police w.e.f.
April 22, 1985, whereas he should have been promoted with effect from September 22, 1981.
His prayer is that on the basis of giving him the correct dates of promotion as Inspector and DSP his case should be considered for promotion as Senior Superintendent of Police with effect from the dates his juniors were promoted.
2.
It may be observed here that the petitioner has since retired as Deputy Superintendent of Police from service on April 30, 1996 after attaining the age of superannuation ie 58 years.
It may further be observed here that the representation of the petitioner against his supersession as Deputy Superintendent of Police, which the petitioner was claiming w.e.f.
1981 was considered and rejected on February 20, 1984 by the Director General of Police (copy at Annexure P-4).
This writ petition was filed on October 14, 1993.
3.
It would be too late in the day to go into the point as to whether the petitioner was illegally ignored for being brought on list 'F' in the year 1973.
The writ petition so far as that aspect is concerned is filed after 20 years.
So far as promotion to the rank of Deputy Superintendent of Police with effect from the year 1981 is concerned, the writ petition was filed after nine years of the rejection of the representation.
So far as these prayers are concerned, the same are highly belated and are rejected on this short score alone.
4.
Faced with this situation, learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that let the petitioner's date of promotion as Deputy Superintendent of Police be taken as April 22, 1985.
He, however, submitted on the basis of the averments made in CM Application No. 4655 of 1996 that Jai Karan, who was promoted as Deputy Superintendent of Police later than the petitioner on April 25, 1985 and one Harpal Singh, who was promoted as such on August 31, 1985, were promoted as Superintendent of Police vide order dated December 22, 1993 and February 1, 1996 (copies at Annexure P8 and P9 with the CM Application).
Though these promotions were ordered to be made in their own pay scales, yet learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the above said two persons were junior to the petitioner as Deputy Superintendent of Police, but the petitioner's name was not considered while promoting them as Superintendent of Police.
To this extent I am of the view that the petitioner's case has substance.
5.
Consequently, I dispose of this writ petition by directing Respondent No. 1 to consider the case of the petitoner notionally for promotion to the rank of Superintendent of Police w.e.f.
the date when Jai Karan was promoted as such vide order dated December 22, 1993 though in his own pay scale, and if still not found suitable, then consider him w.e.f.
February 1, 1996 when Harpal Singh, DSP was promoted as Officiating Superintendent of Police, though in his own pay scale, and if found suitable for promotion, give the petitioner all consequential benefits ensuing therefrom.
These directions be carried out within a period of four months of the receipt of a copy of this order either from this Court or a certified copy thereof from the petitioner.