VS Aggarwal, J - The BRS Institute of Medical Sciences (Dental College and Hospital) is affliated to Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra.
The University conducted an entrance examination for admission to Ist Professional BDS course with respect to BRS Institute of Medical Sciences (Dental College and Hospital-respondent No. 2).
For the purpose of conducing of the said admission, a prospectus was issued by the Kurukshetra University.
According to the prospectus admission was to be based on a combined entrance test conducted for the purpose of admission.
The last date for submission of the application was 30101995.
After the test, the result was declared on 17121995.
Petitioner Gaurav Vasudeva is the son of an Ex-serviceman.
The father of respondent No. 3-Rajesh Kumar also served in the Indian Army and was discharged being medically unfit.
Both the petitioners and private respondent No. 3 had taken the test.
They applied for 2 seats reserved for children of Ex-servicemen.
The petitioner secured 550 marks in the Combined Entrance Test while the private respondent secured 361 marks.
As per Chapter II Clause 14, the candidate had to appear before the Interview Board but the interview carried no marks.
The said clause reads :-  "14.
Interview Board Apart from the Entrance Test, which the candidates will be required to take, the selected candidates will also be required to appear before an Interview Board to be appointed by the Vice-Chancellor.
Under no circumstances will any relaxation be given to candidates who are unable to appear before the Interview Board on the fixed date.
Interview will carry no marks."
2.
The number of seats, reservation of seats, its distribution and duration of the course was covered by Chapter IV of the prospectus.
The relevant extract of the same reads :-  "BDS Course B.R.S.
Institute of Medical Services (Dental College & Hospital) Kot Billa (Panchkula).
Total Number of seats 60 Distribution of seats A Free Seats (i) SC/ST 6 (20%) (ii) BC 3 (10%) (iii) Children of ESM 1 (iv) Children/Grand Children of Freedom-Fighter including INA personnel belonging to Haryana.
1 (v) Open 19 B Payment seats (i) SC/ST 6 (20%) (ii) BC 3 (10%) (iii) Children/ESM 1 (iv) NRI's 9 (for the academic year 1995-96) (v) Open 11."
The method of selection and admission is contained in Chapter V Paragraph Nos. 1 and 2 of the same is reproduced below for the sake of facility :-  "Method of Admission (1) The admission to BDS course shall be made/finalised in order of merit of the Entrance Test subject to availability of seats.
(2) In case of admissions against free seats and payment seats, the candidates higher in merit list will be considered/offered admission against the 50% FREE SEATS in order of merit and candidates of lower merit will be considered/offered admission against PAYMENT SEATS."
The petitioner as mentioned secured 550 marks while the private respondent was way behind and secured 361 marks.
The fee payable for the free seat is Rs. 10,000/- while for the payment seat the fee payable is Rs. 50,000/-.
The petitioner was offered the seat for which the payment had to be made and is reserved for the ward of Ex-servicemen.
He claims that since he had secured more marks, he should have been given the seat which is described as free seat and not to respondent No. 3.
The decision of respondent Nos. 1 and 2 giving free seat to respondent No. 3 has been questioned, pleading inter-alia that on enquiries it has been informed that since father of private respondent No. 3 was discharged on medical ground attributable to Military Service, he has been treated as Ex-serviceman disabled man and, therefore, has been given priority.
The said decision is termed to be illegal and contrary to the prospectus printed by the University.
By virtue of the present petition, petitioner seeks a direction to be issued to respondent Nos. 1 and 2 to shift him from payment seat to free seat reserved for the children of Ex-servicemen to BDS course and refund the fee to the petitioner.
3.
Notice was issued to the respondents.
Contest is only offered by private respondent No. 3.
In the reply filed by the said respondent, it has been contended that if the application submitted by the candidate is incomplete, the same is liable to be rejected as per the instructions.
The petitioner had applied qua the seats reserved for the children of Ex-servicemen.
As per the instructions certificates prescribed in Appendix E and H had to be appended.
The petitioner has not attached the certificates.
Thus, he has no right to claim the seat reserved for the children of Ex-servicemen.
It has also been alleged that seats could be given to Ex-servicemen's children of Haryana State only as per the provisions of Chapter I Clause A(ii).
The same reads :-  "A(ii).
The children/wards (if parents are not living)/dependents of the employees of Indian Defence Services/Para-Military Forces belonging to Haryana State at the time of entry into service as per their service record.
(Such candidates will submit a certificate in the proforma given in Appendix 'H' from the officer duly authorised by the Army/Navy/Air Force/concerned Para-Military Forces Headquarters, as the case may be)."
The petitioner's father is stated to be not a resident of Haryana when he joined service because he has not shown the address of Haryana State when he was enrolled in the Army.
Furthermore the respondent's case is that the instructions of Director General, Resettlement, Ministry of Defence, had been adopted by Haryana State.
The allocation of seats were to be made on priority basis for dependent children of Ex-servicemen in the following manner :-  "CATEGORY, PRIORITY (a) Killed in action 1 (b) Disabled in action and Boarded out from Army Service : 2 (c) Died while in service with death attributable to military service : 3 (d) Disabled in service and boarded out with disability attributable to military service : 4 (e) Gallantry Award and other Award winners : 5."
Relying upon the said decision which had been adopted by the State of Haryana, the claim of respondent N 3 was preferred to that of the petitioner.
4.
As mentioned above, the private respondent justified the free seat having been offered to him alleging that his father was disabled while in service and, therefore, his case had to be considered on priority basis.
Reliance was placed on the instructions issued by the Director General, Resettlement, Ministry of Defence.
However, one wonders if such priority could be given keeping in view the ground of discharge or the person having been killed in action.
It has already been noticed above from the Prospectus that reservation is only in favour of Ex-servicemen.
There is no further break up of priority being given to any such categorisation of children of Ex- servicemen in the Prospectus.
No such categorisation could have been created giving preference to respondent No. 3.
Not only the Prospectus was silent to what is being alleged by respondent No. 3, there is nothing further on the record that the alleged instructions relied by private respondent No. 3 had been adopted by the University.
Unless the same is shown to have been adopted by the University, they will not apply automatically.
It will not give a right to give preference to the ward of an Ex-servicemen on the basis of instructions which have not been adopted.
The reliance of private respondent No. 3 on these instructions is, therefore, totally unfounded and without any basis.
5.
Our attention was drawn to the decision rendered by this Court in the case of Miss Richa Batra v. Maharishi Dayanand University, Rohtak and others, 1994(2) SCT 365 (P&H) CWP 12417 of 1993, decided on 8121993.
It goes without saying that a judicial decision is a precedent with respect to the question of law decided.
It may be a good precedent if the facts are identical.
The facts in the case of Miss Richa Batra (supra) indicate that the prospectus in the said case did not say as to how the inter-se merit of the children of deceased or disabled JCOs or other ranks is to be determined.
As noted above, in the present case in hand it had been determined on the basis of the marks secured.
When the instructions in the peculiar facts of the case of the petitioner and private respondent No. 3 were clear, the ratio of the decision in the case of Miss Richa Batra (supra) will not come to the rescue of respondent No. 3.
6.
Confronted with that position, it had been urged that the petitioner had not shown that his father was a resident of Haryana when he joined the Indian Army and that being so he could not have been considered for the seat claimed by the petitioner.
Even the said plea has simply to be stated to be rejected.
The University had accepted the petitioner eligible being child of an Ex- serviceman of Haryana.
It is obviously on the basis of the documents furnished by the petitioner.
The private respondent No. 3 or any other person has not challenged the admission of the petitioner with respect to the seat meant for the dependent of the Ex-servicemen.
Consequently, we are not inclined to allow the said contention raised on behalf of the private respondent for the first time when earlier he has not cared to challenge the admission of the petitioner.
No further enquiry in this regard would be justified.
7.
It is obvious from aforesaid that the petitioner had secured more marks than respondent No. 3.
They are both children of Ex-servicemen.
The petitioner, therefore, was entitled to the free seat in the said course.
The respondent Nos. 1 and 2 were not justified in giving the same to private respondent No. 3.
8.
For these reasons, we allow the petition and direct respondent Nos. 1 and 2 to shift the petitioner from the payment seat to the free seat in the category of Ex-serviceman in the BDS course for the Session 1995-96.
As a necessary corollary respondent No. 3 may be shifted to the payment seat.
The balance amount due should be refunded to the petitioner within a period of 3 months.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.