Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - Can a person who has been rejected by the Subordinate Services Selection Board for recruitment to the post of a Clerk be given seniority above a selected candidate by the process of retrospective regularisation ?
This is the short question that arises for consideration in this writ petition.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The Subordinate Services Selection Board advertised certain posts of Clerks in the year 1981.
The petitioner along with respondents Nos. 3 and 4 competed for these posts.
While the petitioner was selected, respondents No. 3 and 4 who had been working as clerks on ad hoc basis since June/July 1979 were rejected.
On August 27, 1982, the Board recommended the petitioner's name for appointment as a clerk.
On Department 7, 1982, after a gap of more than three months, the second respondent issued an order regarding the petitioner's appointment.
He joined immediately thereafter on December 9, 1982.
The petitioner continues to hold the post of a clerk since then.
3.
On January 4, 1983, the State of Haryana issued a notification under the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution.
It was stated in this notification that the Governor of Haryana hereby excludes from the purview of the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana such Class III posts of clerks as have been held for a minimum period of two years on the 15th September, 1982 by ad hoc clerks who are to be regularised if they fulfil the following conditions :-  "(i) Only such ad hoc clerks who have compleeted two years' service on the 15th September, 1982, and were in service on 15th September, 1982, may be regularised against the posts/vacancies of clerks.
The recommendees of the Subordinate Services Selection Board should be absorbed against the remaining vacancies.
Those recommendees of the Board who cannot be absorbed, their names be returned to the Board to enroll them to recommend their names to other departments for appointment against clear vacancies; (ii) against the reserved posts/vacancies, only such ad hoc clerks be regularised who belong to the category for which the posts stand reserved; (iii) only such ad hoc clerks as have been recruited through the Employment Exchange or Directly by the appointing authority after obtaining Non-availability certificate from the Employment Exchange should be made regular; (iv) the work and conduct of the ad hoc clerks proposed to be regularised should be of an over all good category and no disciplinary proceedings is pending against them; and  (v) only those ad hoc clerks should be considered for regularisation who possessed the prescribed qualifications for the post at the time of their appointment on ad hoc basis.
(vi) The seniority of the ad hoc clerks so regularised may, vis-a-vis the clerks appointed on regular basis, be determined with effect from 15th September, 1982.
The inter se seniority of such ad hoc clerks shall be determined in accordance with the date of their joining the post on ad hoc basis.
If the date of joining the posts on ad hoc basis by such clerks was the same then an older member shall rank senior."
4.
In pursuance of the above-mentioned notification, services of respondents No. 3 and 4 were regularised vide order dated September 29, 1983 with retrospective effect from September 15, 1982.
On December 11, 1986, a tentative seniority list of clerks was issued.
In this list, the petitioner was shown junior to respondents No. 3 and 4.
He represented.
His claim was not accepted.
On the contrary, by order dated October 1, 1987, respondents No. 3 and 4 were promoted as Assistants.
Aggrieved by the action of the respondents, the petitioner has approached this court through the present writ petition with a prayer that the action of respondent No. 2 in treating respondents No. 3 and 4 as senior to him be set aside and that a direction be given to him to consider the petitioner's claim for promotion with effect from the date the persons junior to him were promoted as Assistants.
5.
The respondents controvert the petitioner's claim.
Curiously, the Additional Director has filed the written statement on behalf of all the respondents including the private parties.
The factual position has not been disputed.
It has, however, been stated that since respondents No. 3 and 4 had completed more than two years of service on September 15, 1982, their services have been retrospectively regularised vide order dated September 29, 1983.
The benefit of seniority has also been given to the said respondents with effect from the date of regularisation of their services.
On this basis, the respondents maintain that the petitioner is junior and was rightly over-looked for promotion.
A separate written statement has also been filed by respondents No. 3 and 4.
However, the pleas taken by them are similar to those taken on behalf of the Department.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
Mr. Asha Nand Sharma, learned counsel for the petitioner submits that a person who has been regularly selected cannot be treated as junior to a person who has been rejected.
The action of the Department in treating the petitioner as junior to respondents No. 3 and 4 is arbitrary and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondents have submitted that the action is in strict conformity with the provisions containe in the notification issued by the Government on January 4, 1983.
The learned counsel point out that the seniority of ad hoc clerks whose services had been regularised had to be determined on the assumption that they were working on regular basis since September 15, 1982.
Thus, the counsel maintain that the action of the respondents is legal and valid.
The two questions that arise for consideration are : (i) Does the notification dated January 4, 1983 supersede the statutory rules governing the service ?
(ii) Can a person who has been rejected for regular appointment be made senior to another who has been duly selected and appointed, by resorting to the procedure of retrospective regularisation ?
Reg : (i)  6.
On a plain reading of the notification dated January 4, 1983, it is clear that the State Government had taken a decision to exclude "such Class III posts of clerk as have been held for a minimum period of two years on the 15th of September, 1982 by ad hoc clerks".
This decision was notified on January 4, 1983.
The use of the word 'hereby' is important.
It signifies an act of prospective operation.
It denotes that the exclusion is effective from the date of the decision which is January 4, 1983.
Secondly, it also deserves notice that this notification was of general application.
It was to apply to all posts of clerks in the State in different services.
Some of these may be governed by statutory rules, Some are not.
However, there is nothing in the notification of January 4, 1983 which may give it an overriding effect on the rules which have been promulgated by the State Government for determining the conditions of service of the employees in different departments.
Surely, there could not be two methods for determination of seniority of persons working in a department viz. the one prescribed by the statutory rules and the second prescribed by the notification of January 4, 1983.
It appears that the provision regarding determination of seniority made in the notification of January 4, 1983 was to apply only in such cases where there were no statutory rules governing the particular department.
In any event, is well settled that special always overrides the general.
If there are rules governing a particular department, a general notification like the one issued on January 4, 1983 has to be read as subservient to the special rules.
7.
It is the admitted position that the condition of service governing the employees in the Panchayats Department of the State of Haryana are laid down in the rules.
'The Haryana Panchayats Department State Service, Group C, Rules, 1979'.
These rules were actually published in the Government Gazette of January 22, 1980.
Rule 7 inter alia provides that no person shall be appointed to the service unless he fulfils the qualifications as prescribed in Appendix 'B'.
Rule 9 lays down that recruitment to the service shall be made (i) by promotion; or (ii) by direct recruitment; or (iii) by transfer on deputation of an official already in the service of any State Government or the Government of India.
It may be mentioned here that in Appendix 'B', the qualification of Matric with Hindi has been prescribed as the minimum qualification for direct recruitment.
It has been further provided that a person can be appointed "by transfer from other department of Haryana Government having qualification mentioned above provided the person has been appointed in that department through the Board."
The method for determination of seniority is laid down in Rule 12.
The relevant portion of this rule can be usefully extracted.
It reads as under :-  "12.
Seniority of members of the Service.
- Seniority inter se of members of the service shall be determined by the length of continuous service on any post in the service : Provided that where there are different cadres in the Service, the seniority shall be determined separately for each cadre : Provided further that in the case of members appointed by direct recruitment, the order of merit determined by the Board, shall not be disturbed in fixing the seniority."
(emphasised) 8.
A perusal of the above provisions indicates that whenever the posts of clerks have to be filled up by direct recruitment, these should be through the Board.
Still further, the inter se seniority is determined "by the length of continuous service on any post" in the cadre.
However, in case of members appointed by direct recruitment, the order of merit determined by the Board cannot be disturbed.
Consequently, it is clear that in a case where two persons compete for the post of clerk, the one who is placed higher in order of merit shall remain senior to the one who is below him in order of merit.
9.
When the notification of January 4, 1983 is read along with these rules, it appears that the exclusion of the posts from the purview of the Board was effective from January 4, 1983.
It did not affect the seniority of the persons who had been appointed by direct recruitment and whose seniority stood determined by the operation of Rule 12.
It is only in those cases where either no statutory rules existed or no direct recruitment had been made through the Subordinate Services Selection Board that the provisions of the Notification dated January 4, 1983 regarding determination of seniority of the persons whose services had been regularised vis-a-vis others was to be applicable.
If the provisions of the notification are read down in this manner, these will not only help the meritorious candidates to remain senior to those who have been rejected but would also save the notification from a possible challenge on the ground of violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
Neither on a plain reading nor by any process of construction can the notification of January 4, 1983 supersede the pre-existing statutory rules governing the service.
No provision has been made in this notification which may even remotely suggest that it is to have an over riding effect.
In the absence of such a provision, it cannot be said that the seniority of the persons appointed by regularisation vis-a-vis those who have been directly recruited shall be determined in accordance with clause (vi) and not according to the provisions of the statutory rules.
10.
To illustrate, two persons A and B are selected by the Board in that order of merit.
A joins on September 16, 1982.
B joins on September 14, 1982.
Inspite of the fact that A has joined two days later than B, he would remain senior because he is higher in order of merit.
However, by operation of clause (vi) of the notification dated January 4, 1983, A would become junior to all the clerks whose services have been regularised w.e.f.
September 15, 1982.
There would, thus, be a direct conflict between the statutory rules and the notification of January 4, 1983.
In this situation, it cannot be said that the inter se seniority of the person has to be determined under Clause (vi) of the notification dated January 4, 1983.
In fact, the seniority shall have to be determined in accordance with the provisions of the special rules which have been enacted in respect of the conditions of service of the persons working in the Panchayat Department.
11.
Taking the totality of circumstances into consideration, it is held that the general provisions of the circular dated January 4, 1983 cannot supersede the statutory rules governing the members of the service.
The rules having been framed prior in time and the, notification dated January 4, 1983 having not been given an overriding effect by either making an express proviso or by implication, it cannot supersede statutory rules.
Reg : (ii)  12.
It is the admitted position that the petitioner and respondents No. 3 and 4 had competed for recruitment to the posts of clerks.
Inspite of the fact that the said respondents had considerable experience, the petitioner was found to be more meritorious and he was selected.
According to the provisions of Rule 12 as already noticed, the inter se seniority of the persons selected for direct recruitment has to be determined by the order of merit.
The person who is higher in order of merit has to be senior to the one who is below him.
It follows that those who are rejected or persons whose names are not included in the merit list cannot be senior to those who are selected.
Consequently, in view of the provision of the Rule 12, a rejected candidate cannot be senior to a person who has been selected by the Board and appointed in pursuance to the action.
13.
There is another aspect of the matter.
The appointments on ad hoc basis are normally made to meet the exigencies of service.
Even in the present case, respondents No. 3 and 4 were appointed "on ad hoc basis for a period of six months or till the recommendees of SSS Board arrive whichever is earlier".
On advertisement of the posts, the petitioner as well as respondent Nos. 3 and 4 had competed.
While the petitioner was selected, the respondents 3 and 4 were rejected.
Yet their services have been regularised with effect from September 15, 1982.
In this situation, the regularisation of the services of respondents No. 3 and 4 with a retrospective effect is virtually in the nature of a concession.
Such persons who get regular appointment in spite of rejection in open competitive selection, cannot be treated as senior to those who have been found to be meritorious and have been selected.
If this is permitted, the merit would become wholly irrelevant.
Surely, such cannot be the situation in public services.
Such a course of action would be violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
It would be arbitrary, unfair and unjust.
14.
Accordingly, even the second question is answered in the negative and it is held that a rejected candidate cannot be given seniority over a selected candidate by the process of regularisation.
15.
Learned counsel for the respondents relied on the decision in Ram Niwas Verma and others v. State of Haryana and others, 1995(3) SCT 139(P&H) to contend that an ad hoc employee on regularisation gets a right to determination of his seniority on the basis of the date of regular appointment.
However, on a perusal of this decision, it appears that the issue involved in Ram Niwas Verma's case was entirely different.
There is nothing to suggest that the respondents in that case had competed in the selection conducted by the Board.
The factual position being different, the respondents can derive no advantage from this decision.
Even otherwise, the act of regularisation itself may be subject to the criticism of being arbitrary if it is to adversely affect the seniority of the persons who have already been appointed on regular basis after selection through the Board.
16.
This leaves the question regarding the validity of the order of promotion of respondents No. 3 and 4 passed on September 29, 1987, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P.3 with the writ petition.
Admittedly, the claim of the petitioner was not considered on the ground that he is junior to respondents No. 3 and 4.
This, as already observed, was not correct.
17.
In view of the above, both the questions are answered in favour of the petitioner and against the respondents.
As a result, the writ petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to treat the petitioner as senior to respondents No. 3 and 4.
They will consider the petitioner's claim for promotion to the post of Assistant with effect from the date the department had promoted respondents No. 3 and 4.
In case, it is found that a vacancy is not available, the junior out of the two respondents shall stand reverted.
In the circumstances, the parties are left to bear their own costs.