GS Singhvi, J - Failure of the competent authority to discharge its duty in accordance with the provisions of law is the sole reason which has compelled the petitioners to move this Court for issue of a writ to quash the order Annexure P-2.
dated 2791995 and to direct the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 to consider their cases for promotion to the post of Head Clerk.
2.
Petitioners as well as the respondent No. 1 are employees of the Municipal Council, Hisar.
Till the date of the issue of the impugned order, all of them were working as Clerk-cum-Cashiers in the service of the Municipal Council, Hisar.
None of the petitioners has earned any adverse report or punishment during the course of service.
In the tentative seniority-list (as on 30.9.1994) of the Clerks, serving in the Municipal Council, Hisar, names of the petitioners appear at serial Nos. 6, 21, 29, 34, 37, 39, 43, 42, and 45 respectively.
Name of the respondent No. 4 appears at serial No. 47 in the same very list.
The petitioners have alleged that ignoring their seniority, the respondent No. 2 passed the impugned order dated 2791995 and promoted the respondent No. 4 as Head Clerk on ad hoc basis with a condition that if any employee is found senior to him, he (respondent No. 4) will be reverted and in this manner the respondent No. 2 has acted in violation of the service rules as well as the equality clause contained in the Constitution.
3.
Three separate written statements have been filed by the respondents.
In their written statement, the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 have stated that promotion to the post of Head Clerk is to be made on the basis of seniority- cum-merit as per Rule 10 of the Haryana Municipal Services (Integration, Recruitment and Conditions of Service) Rules, 1982, and for this purpose a joint seniority-list of all the employees working on different Clerical posts in the entire district is required to be prepared.
It is stated that the respondent No. 2 had issued letters to all the Municipal Councils/Committees to send particulars of all the employees in order to facilitate the preparation of the seniority-list.
The respondents have also pleaded that regular promotion will be made according to the district-wise seniority and with a view to make stop-gap arrangement, the respondent No. 4, who has earned very good/outstanding reports, has been promoted.
In its reply, the respondent No. 3 has also pleaded that the post of Head Clerk is at district level and all the Clerks are entitled to be considered for promotion.
Respondent No. 3 has pleaded that on an application submitted by the respondent No. 4 for promotion to the post of Head Clerk, the Municipal Committee transmitted the service record and Annual Confidential Reports of the respondent No. 4 to the Deputy Commissioner, Hisar, who passed the impugned order.
Respondent No. 3 has further stated that many persons senior to the petitioners are available in the cadre of clerks and they are also entitled to be promoted on the higher post.
In a separate reply, respondent No. 4 has raised an additional plea that in the past also ad hoc promotion had been accorded to the post of Head Clerk and after considering his merit, the respondent No. 2 was fully justified in issuing the order (Annexure P-3).
4.
From the averments made in the reply of respondent Nos. 1 and 2, it is clear that promotion to the post of Head Clerk is required to be made on the basis of seniority-cum-merit, which necessarily implies due consideration to the candidature of senior persons before a junior can be accorded promotion and a senior can be superseded only when he is found unfit.
Better record of a junior person cannot entitle him to claim promotion over and above a senior person, who may also possess fairly good record of service.
Consideration of comparative claim for selection of the most meritorious person from amongst those who fall within the zone of consideration can be made only when the criteria is merit or merit-cum-seniority.
Therefore, unless it can be shown that the petitioners were not entitled to be considered for promotion on the basis of their seniority, the order Annexure P-3 cannot be held as arbitrary and unconstitutional.
5.
Parties are not in dispute that the petitioners are senior to the respondent No. 4 and there is no allegation that any of the petitioners has got adverse remarks in the confidential reports or he has been punished by the competent authority.
This gives rise to a presumption that the service record of the petitioners is not blameworthy.
In view of this, we do not find any logic or justification for the action of the respondent No. 2 to promote the respondent No. 4 as Head Clerk.
Even though the promotion of respondent No. 4 has been described as ad hoc but by such promotion, the respondent No. 4 has not only started enjoying higher status, he is receiving higher salary as compared to the petitioners.
We, therefore, hold that the respondent No. 2 has acted in violation of the constitutional right of fair consideration guaranteed to the petitioners under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
6.
Two reasons, which have been assigned by the respondent Nos. 1 to 3 for passing the impugned order, are that - (i) overall district-wise seniority- list of Clerks of different categories has not been prepared; and (ii) respondent No. 4 possesses very good record of service as compared to the petitioners.
Both these reasons, in our opinion, are wholly irrelevant and cannot be made basis for supporting a patently illegal order.
Duty to get the district-level seniority-list prepared is of respondent No. 2 and it is not open to the respondent Nos. 1 to 3 to contend that right of the petitioners to be considered for promotion can be overlooked merely because the respondent No. 2 has himself failed to act in accordance with Rules.
Moreover, when it is not in dispute that the respondent No. 4 is junior to the petitioners even within the Municipal Council, Hisar, it is not permissible for the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 to plead that the respondent No. 4 has been promoted because district-wise seniority-list has not been prepared.
Likewise, the argument that the respondent No. 4 possesses very good record of service as compared to the petitioners is per se fallacious.
When the respondent No. 2 has not at all examined the cases of others before the issue of order Annexure P-3, it is not possible to accept the submission of the learned counsel for respondent Nos. 1 to 3 that respondent No. 4 has been promoted being meritorious.
That apart, we are firmly of the opinion that when promotion is required to be made on the basis of seniority-cum-merit, the respondent No. 2 is duty-bound to give due weightage to the seniority and ignore the senior person in the matter of promotion only if the senior is found unfit/unsuitable.
That is not even the case of the respondents and, therefore, the order dated 2791995 cannot be sustained on any count.
7.
Before concluding, we cannot restrain ourselves from expressing our regret that even after coming into force of the Rules as early as in the year 1982, the respondent No. 2 has not prepared district-wise seniority-lists of Clerks for the purpose of making promotion to the higher posts.
Perhaps this may also be the position of other districts of the State and litigation on similar lines will continue to pour in the Courts.
In order to prevent filing of such cases, we deem it proper to issue a general direction to respondent No. 1 to instruct the deputy Commissioners of various districts to finalise the seniority-list of different cadres and then to undertake the exercise of making regular promotions.
(sic) shall be taken within six months from today.
A copy of this order be made available to respondent Nos. 1 to 3 on payment of the requisite charge.