Asok Kumar Ganguly, J - Heard the learned Counsel for the parties.
This writ petition has been filed by the State of West Bengal challenging an order dated 23rd August, 2005 passed by the West Bengal Administrative Tribunal in OA 1074 of 2005.
By the said order the learned Tribunal has been pleased to stay the final order of dismissal passed by the petitioner against the respondent in connection with a departmental proceeding.
2.
The relevant facts of the case are that the aforesaid OA was filed by the respondent, Sambhu Nath Guha, challenging the departmental proceeding initiated against him.
It was filed by Sambhu Nath at a stage when second Show-Cause Notice was issued to him.
The Tribunal entertained the original petition at a second show-cause stage.
Grievance was made by Sambhu Nath before the Tribunal to the effect that respondent/Authorities are trying to over reach the Tribunal by trying to pass the final order in a hot haste.
As such, a prayer was made to stay the operation of the final order which was passed in a great hurry.
Before the Tribunal it was stated by the respondents who are petitioners before us, that the final order has been passed on 18082005 and as Sambhu Nath refused to accept the same on 18082005 and 19.08.2005 they were compelled to serve it in the hospital where Sambhu Nath was admitted for having treatment.
3.
Recording these facts the Tribunal held that since an attempt is made to overreach the order of the Tribunal and since the respondent/Authorities have acted with indecent haste, an order of injunction should be passed and the Tribunal was pleased to issue the injunction order.
4.
In this proceeding we are not making any pronouncement on the merits of the disciplinary proceedings which was challenged before the Tribunal.
But looking at the final order the operation of which has been stayed by the Tribunal, it appears that the second Show-Cause Notice dated 05.08.2005 was served upon Sambhu Nath on 11th August, 2005.
Admittedly Sambhu Nath was given seven days time to show-cause why he will not be dismissed from service.
But Sambhu Nath did not reply.
As such, the order of dismissal was passed on 18082005 by one Rajesh Singh Superintendent of Police, Government Railway Police, Howrah.
The facts remain that after receipt of the second Show Cause Notice, Sambhu Nath prayed for fourteen days time to submit his reply to the Show Cause Notice by a letter dated 17.08.2005.
The stand of the petitioner is that such prayer of Sambhu Nath was rejected, but, however, Sambhu Nath submits that no such rejection was communicated to him.
5.
Be that as it may, it is clear that Sambhu Nath was not given seven days time.
Admittedly Show Cause Notice was served on Sambhu Nath on l1th August, 2005 and order of dismissal was passed on 18th August, 2005.
Only six days elapsed within 12th of August, 2005 and 17th of August, 2005 and the order of dismissal was passed on 18th of August, 2005.
Therefore, clear seven days time from 12th August, 2005 was not granted to Sambhu Nath.
6.
When a person is asked to give reply to a Show Cause Notice which contains a threat of his dismissal from service the person, who has to give his reply has a substantial stake as the matter involves the question of his livelihood.
In such a situation seven days means clear seven days time and in counting that period of seven days the date of service of Notice must be excluded.
Here that has not been done.
Therefore, the order of dismissal cannot be sustained only on the ground of inadequate notice and accordingly the order of dismissal is quashed here and now.
7.
Now, in this case a question arises whether the Tribunal can entertain a challenge to a departmental proceedings at the stage of a second show cause notice.
The Tribunal having been created under the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 (hereinafter called the said Act) is functioning as a Court of First Instance in connection with service dispute of employees like Sambhu Nath and others.
It may be true that in view of the Constitution Bench judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of L Chandra Kumar (AIR 1997 SC 1125) the functioning of such Tribunals is held to be supplementary to the jurisdiction of High Court under Article 226.
But the jurisdiction of such a Tribunal cannot be equated with the jurisdiction of the High Court under Article 226 and it has not been so done by the Hon'ble Apex Court in Chandra Kumar.
Therefore, such Tribunals have to function within the statutory parameters under which they have been created.
8.
In the case of the instant Tribunal, section 20 of the said Act makes it clear that such Tribunal shall not ordinarily accept an application unless it is satisfied that the applicant had availed of all the remedies available to him under relevant service rules as to redressal of his grievances.
This is clear from section 20, sub-section (1) of the said Act.
In the instant case the Tribunal has not recorded any reason or given any indication why it is entertaining the challenge to a departmental proceeding at a second show cause stage ignoring the requirement of section 20 of the Act.
It goes without saying that when a departmental proceeding is pending at a second show-cause stage it has not attained finality in as much as no punishment has been imposed.
Therefore, the matter is at an inchoate stage and the requirement of exhaustion of statutory remedy which is mentioned in sub-section 1 of section 20 of the Act cannot be satisfied in such a case.
But in this case the Tribunal entertained the original petition which challenged the second show cause notice ignoring this specific statutory bar.
9.
This Court says that the Tribunal can never entertain a challenge to a departmental proceeding unless it has reached finality or unless the statutory remedies are exhausted.
The language of the section is clear, that ordinarily it cannot.
Therefore, when the Tribunal is entertaining a challenge before the proceeding has reached finality the Tribunal must record why it is doing so since the law prescribes otherwise.
If there are extraordinary situations which shock the conscience of the Tribunal and which show that the proceeding has been initiated either without jurisdiction or the departmental proceeding is going on, on the basis of charges, which even after admission, do not make out any case of misconduct against an employee or if there is any situation which demonstrates that the proceeding is conducted with gross violation of the principles of natural justice or the proceeding is vitiated by patent perversity, then the Tribunal can entertain it in view of the language in section 20, sub-section (1) which says ordinarily a tribunal shall not entertain such an application.
The circumstances mentioned above, take the case out of an ordinary situation.
Of course those circumstances, pointed out above, are not exhaustive but they are merely illustrative in nature.
Where any of those circumstances or a circumstance which is similar to the above exists the Tribunal must apply its judicial mind to those circumstances and record its reasons dealing with those circumstances and record its reasons dealing with those circumstances before entertaining a challenge to a departmental proceeding at the second show cause stage.
Normally a departmental proceeding, if challenged at a second show cause stage, is not entertainable even by the High Court in exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 226 unless some special circumstances exist.
10.
Reference in this connection may be made to the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Chanan Singh v. Registrar, Co-operative Societies, Punjab & Ors., (1976)3 SCC 361.
In Chanan Singh, the Supreme Court held that High Court acted erroneously in exercise of its power under Article 226 when it interfered with a departmental proceeding, which had not reached finality Disapproving of such steps taken by the High Court the Hon'ble Supreme Court speaking through Justice Krishna Iyer held as follows :  "No punitive action has yet been taken.
It is difficult to state, apart from speculation, what the outcome of the proceedings will be.
In case the appellant is punished, it is certainly open to him either to file an appeal as provided in the relevant rules or to take other action that he may be advised to resort to.
It is not for us, at the moment, to consider whether a writ petition will he or whether an industrial dispute should be raised. "
Those words of caution are applicable with much greater force in the case of the Tribunal since it has to function conforming to the discipline of section 20, sub-section (1) which is set out below.
"S. 20(1) A Tribunal shall not ordinarily admit an application unless it is satisfied that the applicant had availed of all the remedies available to him under the relevant service rules as to redressal of grievances. "
Here in the order dated 23082005, the learned Tribunal has not either referred to section 20 of the said Act, nor has it discussed the principles of section 20.
11.
For the reasons aforesaid this Court cannot approve the order passed by the Tribunal and the order of the Tribunal dated 23rd August, 2005 is set aside.
This writ petition is allowed.
12.
For the reason which we have indicated above, the final order, dated 180805 which has been disclosed in this proceeding, is set aside.
As a result of setting aside of the final order Sambhu Nath be reinstated in service provided he has not been or is not placed under suspension.
Since the show-cause notice has been served on him and sufficient time has lapsed he must give his reply to the said show cause notice within a period of two weeks from the date of his reinstatement or from the date he is placed under suspension as the case may be.
Thereafter the authorities concerned may pass a final order in accordance with law within a period of one month from the date of receiving the reply from Shambhu Math.
13.
If the final order goes against Sambhu Nath he is at liberty to challenge the same in a proper forum and in accordance with law.
This Court makes it clear that it has not made any pronouncement on the legality or otherwise of the charge sheet, the enquiry officer's findings and the second show cause notice issued against Sambhu Nath.
All points are kept open.
Since this court holds that the Tribunal, in the facts of the case, acted erroneously by entertaining the OA filed by Sambhu Nath, being OA 1074 of 2005, the OA stands dismissed.
14.
There will be no order as to costs.
Urgent xerox certified copy of this Judgment if applied for, may be given to the parties as early as possible after completing all the formalities.
Tapan Kumar Dutt, J - I agree.
Order accordingly.