Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - Are the non-teaching employees of the Kurukshetra University entitled to claim parity of pay with the employees of the Panjab University ?
This is the short question that has been raised in this writ petition.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The 29 petitioners are members of the technical staff.
They are working in various departments of the Science Faculty of the Kurukshetra University.
According to the petitioners, the Finance Committee in the meeting held on March 20, 1971 had decided that "there should be a uniform principle in regard to the revision of grades and that the University should ordinarily follow the Haryana Government in the matter of adoption/revision of grades for all the administrative/ministerial posts.
If no equivalent post exists in the Haryana Government then the grade of the Panjab University should be normally adopted."
This proposal of the Finance Committee was approved by the Executive Council of the University on March 24, 1971.
Consequently, when the Panjab University revised the grades of the technical staff.
w.e.f.
April 1, 1976, the Kurukshetra University not only revised the scales but even designated the posts on the pattern of the Panjab University.
This action was approved by the Executive Council vide its resolution dated July 29, 1978 and the revised pay scales were granted to the petitioners w.e.f.
April 1, 1978.
However, in the year 1979, the Kurukshetra University did not follow the decision of the Panjab University regarding the revision of pay scales of the technical staff.
Vide letter dated October 29, 1983, the Respondent- University made a recommendation with regard to the persons holding the posts of Technical Assistants Grade II.
The State Government having taken no action, the University constituted an expert committee under the chairmanhip of Professor HL Bhatnagar, Dean, Faculty of Science.
The Committee made its recommendations.
Thereafter, another committee under the Chairmanship of Professor NNath submitted its recommendation vide letter dated May 26, 1988, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P.5 with the writ petition.
The matter was then referred to the Finance Committee.
Vide its resolution dated February 1, 1991, the Finance Committee recommended the case of the technical staff.
The petitioners allege that this resolution was conveyed to the Government vide letter dated February 2, 1991, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P. 6 with the writ petition.
It appears that in June 1991, the employees went on strike.
The petitioners allege that on June 12, 1991, an agreement was reached that "the decision would be taken from the finance department within three months".
A copy of this agreement has been produced as Annexure P. 7 with the writ petition.
Still, nothing was done.
The petitioners submitted a representation.
Having failed to get any decision, the petitioners have approached this court through the present writ petition.
The petitioners allege that even amongst the three Universities in the State of Haryana viz. the Kurukshetra University, Maharashi Dayanand University, Rohtak, and Haryana Agricultural University, Hissar, there is no uniformity regarding posts and scales.
The petitioners submit that "the Panjab University being the mother University, initially its pay scales were being followed but now for no rhyme and reason and because of adamant attitude of the authorities of the Finance Department and Kurukshetra University, the petitioners are being made to suffer..."  3.
Mr. Anil Khetarpal, counsel for the petitioners submits that the posts in the Kurukshetra University having been equated with those in the Panjab University, the petitioners are entitled to parity in the matter of pay scales with their counterparts in the Panjab University.
Is it so ?
4.
The entire claim made by the petitioners is based on the proceedings of the meeting of the Finance Committee held on March 20, 1971.
The decision of the Finance Committee has already been noticed above.
The Committee had decided that the University should ordinarily follow the State Government in the matter of revision of grades.
It was only in the event of there being no equivalent posts in the Haryana Government that the grades of the Panjab University could be adopted.
The is no decision on record to show that the posts held by the petitioners had ever been equated with those in the Panjab University.
Still further, nothing has been produced to show that the Kurukshetra University had decided to follow the grades sanctioned by the Panjab University from time to time.
The mere fact that at one stage, the University had granted the same scales of pay as had been sanctioned by the Panjab University, does not mean that the Kurukshetra University had taken a decision that it would revise the pay scales as and when the Panjab University did so.
5.
Still further, on the petitioners' own showing, it is established on the record that even though, the Panjab University had revised the grades of its employees with effect from April 1, 1976, the Kurukshetra University had done so only w.e.f.
April 1, 1978.
Even this parity had not lasted for long.
When the pay scales were revised w.e.f.
April 1, 1979, the Respondent- University had not followed the pattern of the Panjab University.
Consequently, it is clear that the factual premises on which the petitioners base their claim are non-existent.
6.
Faced with this situation, Mr. Khetarpal submitted that the University being an autonomous body and the two committees constituted by it having recommended the case for revision of scales, the respondents were not entitled to deny the relief merely because the State Government had not approved the proposal submitted by the University.
7.
Even this contention has no merit.
Firstly, a perusal of the resolution passed by the Finance Committee on March 20, 1971 shows that it had been decided that the University should ordinarily follow the Haryana Government in the matter of adoption/revision of grades.
It has not been suggested that the pay scales granted to the petitioners are lower than those sanctioned by the Haryana Government for the employees in various Government colleges.
That being so, the action of the University is in conformity with its decision.
Secondly, the Committee constituted by the University only made a recommendation.
Its proceedings did not embody a decision.
This recommendation was duly considered and it has not been accepted.
Thirdly, it is the admitted position that the financial burden of the salaries is borne by the State Government and the University Grants Commission.
The State has to look into its resources before it can accept the recommendations of a committee.
While considering the matter, the State Government has to also keep in view the facts that if the pay scales of the employees of the University are revised, those working in the Government colleges as also the private colleges would claim a similar revision.
This is bound to add to the already existing burden, on the State exchequer.
Consequently, neither the University can be blamed for seeking the approval of the Government nor can any fault be found with the action of the State Government in refusing to grant the request made by the petitioners.
8.
There is another aspect of the matter.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the Respondent-University it has been categorically stated that after April 1, 1979, "it was decided that the pattern regarding revision of pay scales of the employees of the Haryana Government is to be followed".
It has been further averred that in fact, the pay scales of the teaching staffs in the University were revised w.e.f.
April 1, 1979 and again w.e.f.
January 1, 1986 on the Haryana Government pattern.
In view of the decision of the University to follow the pattern of the Haryana Government, the resolution of the year 1971 (a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P.1 with the writ petition) stands automatically superseded.
It also deserves notice that under Section 12-A of the Kurukshetra University Act, it has been specifically provided that "the University shall not create any non-teaching post or revise the pay scale of the non-teaching employees without obtaining the approval of the Government".
9.
In view of this position, the Respondent-University has no choice in the matter.
In cannot revise the scales of its non-teaching employees without the approval of the State Government.
The University had, in fact, sought the approval of the State Government.
However, the approval having been declined by the appropriate authority, no infirmity can be found in the action of the respondents.
Mr. Khetarpal lastly submitted that the State Government while declining the approval had not recorded any reasons.
Even this contention has no merit.
In this behalf, it deserves notice that the State Government is not exercising a quasi-judicial function so that it may be required to pass what is normally described as a 'speaking order'.
Secondly, the reason for refusal is obvious.
The financial constraints are well-known.
That is the basic reason for declining the request.
10.
It is the admitted position that the petitioners have been getting the pay scales at par with the employees of the State Government.
Nothing has been brought on record to show that they are entitled to be paid more than what the State Government employees are getting.
It is true that the petitioners had resorted to the coercive process of strike to force the employer to accept their demands.
However, in a country were every employee claims higher wages, there is a limit to which the State Government can go and yield to the demand of the employees.
In various States, the total payment on account of salary and perks is almost equal to the total revenue collected by the administration.
This leaves nothing for being spent on development or for the benefit of the tax-payer.
Thus, the civil servant functions to serve himself and not the society.
This is hardly a satisfactory situation.
The periodic revision of scales is not the solution.
We must learn to produce more.
We must pay heed to our duties.
Everyone tries to enforce his rights.
Very few even know that Part IV-A of the Constitution enumerates the 'Fundamental Duties'.
One of these duties is "to strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and collective activity so that the nation constantly rises to higher levels of endeavour and achievement".
If we remember our duties, this nation is bound to rise higher.
11.
No other point has been raised.
12.
In view of the above, we find no merit in this writ petition.
It is, consequently, dismissed.
However, in view of the fact that the petitioners are only employees, we make no order as to costs.