JK Mehra, J (Oral) - Since this case involves only a short point, I decide to hear the parties straightaway.
The main grievance of the petitioners who joined the Air Force on Short Service Commission Technical in the Aeronautical Engineering Branch is that they, while on Short Service Commission, had undergone technical courses in the missile stream exceeding six months in duration.
As a result of some policy decision, the petitioners who were earlier extended the benefit of technical pay like other wings of services, were held to be not eligible for such technical pay, which is granted as a result of acquisition of qualification after undergoing technical courses, as provided in Government of India, Ministry of Defence letter dated 14th April, 1982 bearing No. AIR HQ/23956/100/PP and R-1/1376/D(Pay/Ser).
The Government having first held that they are eligible for technical pay and having disbursed the technical pay, later on vide letter dated 23.9.1992 decided that such officers (Short Service Commissioned Officers) are not entitled to technical pay and started recovering the amounts already disbursed by way of technical pay.
The petitioners approached this Court, seeking relief against such decision.
2.
Mr. Sharma has argued that the Government has since reconsidered the position and taken a policy decision to allow short Service Commission Officers to proceed on courses duration whereof does not exceed six months.
That policy came into force sometime in 1995 and had been in force ever since.
It is contended that it could not be made use of for depriving the officers, who had already acquired after undergoing courses exceeding six months and who were earlier being paid that pay.
A further affidavit has been filed by Mr. Sharma of the Director, Pay, Pension and Regulation, wherein it is provided, inter alia, as under :-  "(1) Whatever payment of Tech.
pay has already been made upto 23 Mar 93 will not be disturbed i.e. further recoveries from this amount will be stopped and recoveries already made will be refunded.
In the Air Force this will hold good till 30 Nov. 92 since all payments had been made only till this date, hence no fresh payment will be made after this date."
The above decision alleviates considerable hardship inasmuch as further recoveries are not being made and refund of the amount already recovered upto 30.11.1992 will be made.
I am unable to appreciate basis on which the amounts which had earlier been paid like any other branch of Armed Forces could be recovered or be refused subsequent to 30.11.1992.
There is no such basis available or furnished before me.
The decisions dated 23.9.1992 and 1391995 in so far those tend to deprive the petitioners of the technical pay appear to be arbitrary and bad in law.
Accordingly, I find that there is no justification in confining the benefit of the aforesaid decision only upto 30.11.1992.
I am informed that pursuant to the policy dated 1391995, no Short Service Commissioned Officer will be sent for courses exceeding six months.
As such, there is no likelihood of any such situation arising in future.
That may be the case for future, but there is no justification or justifiable reason for depriving the petitioners of the technical pay treating them differently even though they have acquired technical qualifications like others.
Therefore, I think that it will be appropriate to make rule nisi absolute and order that the person who have already acquired qualifications and were drawing the technical pay should not be deprived of such pay and should continue to draw the said technical pay and if any deduction has been made, the same should be refunded.
Ordered accordingly.
This writ petition as also the Civil Miscellaneous Application are disposed of in the above terms in respect of the claims of the petitioners.