VK Bali, J (Oral) - Sub Inspector Ramesh Kumar, presently posted at 13 Battalion, PAP, Punjab, Chandigarh through present writ filed by him under Article 226 of the Constitution of India seeks issuance of writ in the nature of certiorari so as to quash order, Annexure P-6, dated September 2, 1993 passed by the Superintendent of Police, Counter Intelligence, Amritsar vide which the period, the petitioner remained suspended i.e. from 2731990 to 1421991 has been treated as non-duty period by further holding that the petitioner shall not be entitled to receive any pay and allowances during the said period.
In wake of setting aside of order, Annexure P-6, petitioner further prays that he be released all the increments to which he is entitled upto 19.6.1993 alongwith all consequential benefits.
The relief, as noted above, is sought to rest on the facts that have been detailed in the petition and need a summary mention.
2.
A complaint was lodged against the petitioner on 20.3.1990 and on the basis thereof, he was put under suspension on 2731990 vide Annexure P-1.
A charge-sheet was issued and Enquiry Officer was appointed.
However, the enquiry could not be completed during the stipulated period and thereafter the Senior Superintendent of Police made a recommendation to the Director General of Police (Intelligence) Punjab, vide letter dated 15111990 that the petitioner be reinstated.
Despite the order referred to above, when petitioner was not reinstated, he got issued a legal notice on 121991 and it is thereafter only that the department considered the case of the petitioner with regard to reinstatement and he was actually reinstated on 1421991 (Annexure P-3).
The Enquiry Officer thereafter submitted the report exonerating the petitioner from all the allegations that were levelled against him.
It is the case of the petitioner that promotion was due to him during this period but inasmuch as enquiry was pending against him, he was not promoted.
He made a representation to the D.G.P., Punjab which was accepted on 30.10.1992 and he was accordingly promoted.
However, salary as well as arrears for the suspension period were not released to him nor was he given the increments to which he was entitled to under the law.
That being the position, he was constrained to get issued another notice and also made representation.
He also appeared before the D.G.P.
(Int.)
but with no tangible results.
He, however, came to know that the respondents had passed orders at his back on 2.9.1993 (Annexure P-6) that this suspension period be treated as non-duty period on the ground that he remained absent wilfully during the period of suspension from duty.
It is the case of the petitioner that this order was never conveyed to him nor any explanation was sought for from him.
A photocopy of the said order was made available to him in the month of May, 1995.
It is in these circumstances that he was constrained to rake up the issue in this court for the relief as already indicated above.
3.
The basic facts, as have been enumerated above, have not been disputed and during the course of arguments, the cause of the petitioner has been opposed on the sole ground the petitioner was wilfully absent from duty during the period of suspension and, therefore, is not entitled to get any pay for the period he remained under suspension.
4.
Petitioner has filed replication, inter alia, pleading that whatever job was entrusted to him during the period of suspension, he had carried out the same.
It has further been categorically denied by the petitioner that he remained absent from duty.
He has further pleaded that during the period of suspension no notice was given to him that he remained absent.
On the other hand, whenever the petitioner was to leave the headquarters, the fact was entered in the rojnamcha duly maintained in the office.
The details of the entries of the rojnamcha have been mentioned in the replication.
It is further the case of the petitioner that he could be granted leave to move from his headquarter and the petitioner was actually granted leave.
It is further his case that he remained present throughout the suspension period and there was absolutely no complaint on that count.
5.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and going through the records of the case, we are the firm view that the cause of the petition is meritorious and, therefore, this petition must succeed.
It is an admitted position that not only that the petitioner was reinstated pending enquiry against him but he was exonerated from the charges levelled against him.
That being the admitted position, the petitioner on his reinstatement and exoneration from the allegations made against him was entitled to full pay for the period he remained suspended.
The same, as mentioned above, has been withheld on the sole count that he was wilfully absent from headquarters.
Concededly, before order, Annexure P-6, mentioning therein that petitioner had remained wilfully absent from duty, came to be passed, he was neither issued show cause nor was heard in the matter.
He was given no chance whatsoever to rebut the allegations with regard to his absence from duty.
May be, what the department asserts is correct and may be it was permissible to hold yet another enquiry against the petitioner and punish him to an extent that may be permissible under the law but surely no punitive orders could be passed against the petitioner, as in the present case, withholding his pay during the period of suspension, without hearing him.
In view of the facts, fully detailed above, order Annexure P-6 deserves to be set aside and the same, is, therefore, quashed.
The petitioner shall be entitled to all consequential benefits that might arise from setting aside of order, Annexure P-6.
If the petitioner was ignored for promotion during the currency of enquiry against him, the department is bound to reconsider his case for promotion to the next higher post from the date persons junior to him were promoted.
Let this exercise of consideration be done within a period of three months from today by which time as also his salary and other arrears that might automatically ensue by quashing of order, Annexure P-6, shall also be paid to him.
It shall, however, be open to the department to proceed against the petitioner that he remained wilfully absent from duty during the period of suspension but as indicated above, no orders adverse to him can be passed till such time a show cause notice is given to him and proper procedure is followed as envisaged under the law.
For the reasons recorded above, this writ petition is allowed in the manner indicated above.
Parties are, however, left to bear their own costs.