THB Chalapathi, J - This writ petition is filed to quash the award dated 25.3.1994 passed by the Industrial Tribunal, Punjab, Chandigarh.
2.
The workmen of Co-operative Spinning Mills Federation Limited at Chandigarh, Mansa, Malout, Abohar, and Sandhwan raised an industrial dispute which has been referred to by the State Government under Section 10 of the Industrial Disputes Act to the Industrial Tribunal, Punjab, Chandigarh.
3.
According to the workmen, the scales of pay for technical employees in the spinning mills should be on the same pattern as that of Punjab Government employees.
It is also their case that the same grades are being given by the other Co-operative establishments like Markfed, Milkfed and Punjab Agro Industries Corporation Limited to their employees on the pattern of scales of Punjab Government.
They have also sought for the provision of free accommodation or house rent in lieu thereof and conveyance allowance on par with the clerical staff and supervisory staff working in all the Mills.
4.
According to the Management, the Mills are running at losses and they are not able to make any profit.
Therefore, there is no comparison of the work in the Spinning Mills with establishments of Milkfed, Markfed and Agro Industries Punjab.
5.
On the basis of the pleadings of the parties, the Industrial Tribunal, Punjab framed appropriate issues.
6.
It was held by the Industrial Tribunal, Punjab, Chandigarh that it would be just and fair to order that the technical workers of the petitioners shall be paid according to the grades which are being paid by the other Co- operative Institutions i.e. Spinfed and Markfed to their employees and so far as house rent allowance, conveyance allowance and uniform allowance are concerned, the technical workers would be entitled to get on par all the allowances or any other allowance which is being paid by the Spinfed, Markfed and Agro Industries to their technical staff.
The technical workers are held to be entitled to the grades and allowances w.e.f.
751991.
7.
After going through the award passed by the Industrial Tribunal, Punjab, I am of the opinion that the award is laconic and it does not give any reasons for the conclusions arrived at by the Industrial Tribunal.
There is no discussion in regard to comparison of work in the Spinning Mills with the work in the Milkfed, Markfed and Punjab Agro Industries Limited.
There is nothing to show that the nature of the work in the Spinning Mills and in the other organisations is similar.
There is also no evidence to show that the Punjab Government has got any technical staff whose nature of work is akin to the technical staff working in the Spining Mills.
There is also no material that all the technical staff working in all the four Spinning Mills or their Union has raised the industrial dispute.
It is brought to my notice that only 84 workmen signed the notice of demand.
While about 7,000 workmen are working in the four different Spinning Mills.
Detailed written arguments have been filed by the petitioner before the Industrial Tribunal raising several contentions in regard to the maintainability of the Reference and that the Reference is bad and also showing that the workmen are not entitled to pay scales on the pattern of the Punjab Government employees and other Corporations like Milkfed, Markfed etc. Several decisions of the Apex Court have been quoted in the said written arguments in support of their contentions but the Tribunal failed to consider any of the points raised in the written arguments in its award.
I am of the opinion that this is a fit case where the matter has to be remanded to the Industrial Tribunal for reconsideration in the light of the submissions made by the petitioners in their written arguments.
As I am of the opinion that it is a fit case for remanding the matter to the Industrial Tribunal, I am not expressing any opinion on the issues involved.
Accordingly, I allow the writ petition, set aside the award of the Industrial Tribunal, Punjab, Chandigarh dated 25.3.1994 and remand the matter to the Industrial Tribunal to decide the case afresh after giving an opportunity to the Managements of the different Spinning Mills and the workmen to adduce such evidence they deem fit.
The Industrial Tribunal is further directed to dispose of the matter within a period of six months from the date of the receipt of this order.
There will be no order as to costs.