THB Chalapathi, J - This writ petition is filed by the petitioner challenging the award of the contract to the 3rd respondent by respondents No. 1 and 2.
2.
Respondents No. 1 and 2 invited offers from the organisations in the field of computer education with proven track record for imparting computer education under 'Class Project' in 100 Senior Secondary Schools located in the State of Punjab.
In response to the said advertisement, the petitioner and the 3rd respondent offered their services alongwith others.
The petitioner offered its services at Rs. 72,900/- per school per annum while respondent No. 3 offered its services at Rs. 72,000/- per school per annum.
A committee was constituted to select the applicants for implementation of the Class Project in the Senior Secondary Schools located in the State of Punjab.
After considering the merits and demerits of the applicants, the contract was awarded to the 3rd respondent for imparting training under Class Project in the Secondary Schools in the computer education for the session 1995-96.
The petitioner, who was unsuccessful to get the contract, filed this writ petition.
According to the petitioner there was no criteria adopted by the Selection Committee and the Ist respondent acted arbitrarily in awarding the contract to the 3rd respondent, who has no proven track record and has no experience whatsoever in the field of computer education and the Committee rejected the tender of the 3rd respondent on 2421995.
Despite that the 3rd respondent has managed to have the contract awarded in his favour.
Further according to the Counsel for the petitioner, since the 3rd respondent has not fulfilled the condition of the deposit of earnest money as required, the contract awarded to the 3rd respondent is liable to be quashed.
3.
Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 filed a written statement denying that the 3rd respondent has no experience in the field of computer education.
They have further stated that the contract was rightly awarded to the 3rd respondent as the tender of the 3rd respondent was lowest.
The Committee, who was constituted for selecting the Contractor, after evaluating the merits and demerits of the applicants selected the 3rd respondents and the 3rd respondent deposited the earnest money and therefore, there is no illegality in giving the tender to the 3rd respondent.
The 3rd respondent filed a separate written statement wherein it has stated that they have sufficient experience and knowledge in the field of computer education.
The contract was awarded to them in the year 1995 and they have started the course successfully and there was no complaint from any quarter.
It is further stated that the Senior System Analyst of the National Informatics Centre has brought to the notice of all concerned about the malpractices indulged in the petitioner's work and, therefore, the petitioner is not entitled to the award of the contract.
It is also stated that the quotation filed by them was the lowest and, therefore, the contract rightly awarded to them.
4.
At the time of giving notice of motion in this writ petition, the Division Bench observed as follows:-  "Contends that respondent No. 3 did not deposit sufficient earnest money and its tender was rejected at the initial stage by the authorities, but later on the same has been given to respondent No. 3 in an illegal manner."
This contention was raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner on the ground that the earnest money was not deposited and its tender was rejected at the initial stage was given up by the learned counsel for the petitioner as it transpired that the 3rd respondent deposited the earnest money by means of a pay or due interest or submitting a demand draft and therefore, the contention which was raised before the Division Bench of this Court at the time of the motion hearing is no longer available to the petitioner.
The learned counsel for the petitioner further contends that the letter said to have been issued by National Informatics Centre is a forged one as can be seen from the fax message received by the petitioner which is filed as Annexure P-9 with the rejoinder.
But the fact remains that the letter said to have been issued by National Informatics Centre on 591994 was not before the Committee which evaluated the tender.
The said letter dated 591994 has not been taken into account at all and it is not the basis for not awarding the contract to the petitioner and question of blacklisting of the petitioner does not arise as contended by the leaned counsel for the petitioner.
Therefore, it cannot be said that the award of the contract given in favour of the 3rd respondent is based on any extraneous considerations.
It is an admitted fact that the petitioner-Company offered its services at Rs. 72,900/- per school per annum for imparting the training in computer education while the 3rd respondent offered its services at Rs. 72,000/- per school per annum.
5.
I have perused the proceedings of the meeting of Computer Literacy (Class Project) dated 2421995 and 1431995.
A perusal thereof clearly shows that the Committee has taken into account all the relevant factors in awarding the contract to the 3rd respondent and the petitioner has not alleged any mala fides or bias.
The record also shows that the 3rd respondent has got experience in commuter training.
Simply because the 3rd respondent gave an advertisement on 751995 calling for Instructors to be appointed by them for the purpose of imparting training in the various schools in the State of Punjab cannot be taken as ground of inexperience on the part of the 3rd respondent.
The contents of the advertisement show that the Contractor must have the provision of one Instructor for each of the Schools to impart the training to the students.
After getting award, the Contractor can make recruitment of the Instructors which could impart training in the computer education.
The contract was awarded for the year 1995-96.
Admittedly, the contract comes to an end on 3131996.
6.
It has been brought to my notice by the learned Counsel for the respondents that the training has been completed and examinations have also been held and the results are to be declared.
Therefore, at this stage, there is no question of awarding any contract to the petitioner when the entire period of contract has almost come to an end.
On this ground, the writ petition is also liable to be dismissed.
In view of my forgoing discussion, the writ petition is devoid of any merit and the same is hereby dismissed.
There will be no order as to costs.