THB Chalapathi, J - This Writ Petition has been filed to quash the order of the Regional Passport Officer dated November 1, 1994.
The petitioner is a travelling agency dealing with the passport matters and air ticketing etc.
The petitioner has been doing the business since 1979 after obtaining a licence from the Regional Passport Office to deal with the Passport Issuing Authority of the Regional Passport Officer.
The Regional Passport Officer vide his order dated March 17, 1979, authorised the petitioner to deal with the passport matters upto September 30, 1979.
Thereafter, the recognition had been approved beyond September 30, 1979, by an order of the Government of India, Ministry of External Affairs dated September 24/25, 1979.
Thus, the petitioner has been dealing with the passport office in regard to the matters relating to the issue of passports and air ticketing and miscellaneous service to the travelling people.
By its impugned order dated November 1, 1994, the Ministry of External Affairs (Government of India) had stopped the petitioner Agency to deal with the passport matters.
Challenging the said order dated November 1, 1994, the petitioner has approached this Court.
2.
Written statement has been filed on behalf of respondents Nos. 1 to 4 stating inter alia that the system of recognition of the travelling agents stands dispensed with by an administrative action.
They further went on stating that the petitioner agency had some times forged documents and also obtained passport by fraudulent acts.
3.
It is, therefore, to be seen whether the office order dated November 1, 1994, (Annexure P-9) can be sustained.
The impugned office order does not give any reasons for stopping in dealing with the petitioner agency in passport matters.
It does not appear that the order is based on any decision of the Government of India to dispense with granting recognition to the travelling agents.
Opportunity of hearing had not been given to the petitioner before passing the impugned order.
Though the order is innocuous, from the averments contained in the written statement it is clear that the order has been passed on some allegations against the petitioner.
If the order is based on allegations against the petitioner, then opportunity of hearing must have been given to the petitioner before passing the impugned order.
No such opportunity had been given.
It is now settled law that even in administrative matters, the principles of natural justice will apply.
As the impugned order has been passed without affording an opportunity to the petitioner, I am of the opinion that the same is liable to be set aside on this sole ground.
I, accordingly, allow the Writ Petition and quash the impugned order dated November 1, 1994.
However, this order does not debar the authorities from taking such action as deemed fit in the circumstances of the case after giving an opportunity to the petitioner to explain his stand.
No order as to costs.