Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner has filed these two writ petitions viz. CWP Nos. 13434 of 1990 and 11149 of 1993.
He claims that he was entitled to be regularised as a Clerk with effect from May 24, 1975 and then promoted as an Assistant with effect from November, 1987.
He further submits that in case these two reliefs are granted, he would be entitled to promotion as a Deputy Superintendent with effect from September 10, 1993, when Mr. Harbans Lal Sardana, who has been impleaded as respondent No. 3 in CWP No. 11149 of 1993 was promoted.
The first two reliefs have been claimed by the petitioner in CWP No. 13434 of 1990.
The prayer for the last relief has been made in the latter case.
2.
It is the admitted position that the petitioner was recruited as a Clerk on purely ad hoc basis on May 24, 1973.
His services were regularised in accordance with the instructions issued by the Department with effect from January 1, 1980.
The petitioner did nothing till October 27, 1986 when for the first time, he submitted a representation and claimed regularisation with effect from May 24, 1975.
This claim was rejected by the respondents vide order dated March 21, 1989.
A copy of this order has been produced as Annexure P-6 with the Civil Writ Petition No. 13434 of 1990.
Thereafter, the petitioner filed a representation dated August 1, 1989 claiming that he was entitled to the benefit of reservation in the matter of promotion to the post of an Assistant.
This representation was rejected vide order dated September 19, 1989.
On February 1, 1990, the petitioner was actually promoted as an Assistant.
The petitioner submits that he was entitled to be considered for promotion as an Assistant in November 1987 against a point reserved for the members of the Scheduled Castes.
Still further, in the year 1993, when a post of Deputy Superintendent fell vacant, the petitioner staked his claim on the ground that he was entitled to be promoted against the solitary post of Deputy Superintendent by treating it as a reserved vacancy.
3.
The respondents contest the petitioner's claim.
It is pointed out that the post against which the petitioner had been appointed as a Clerk on ad hoc basis had in fact to be filled up through the Subordinate Services Selection Board.
However, vide notification dated January 1, 1980, the State Govt. decided to exclude the post from the purview of the Subordinate Services Selection Board.
As a result, the petitioner's services were regularised with effect from January 1, 1980.
Still further, the instructions for reservations in the matter of promotion in Class-III Services had been issued on February 9, 1979.
The petitioner was not entitled to be considered against the reserved posts till he was appointed as a Clerk on regular basis.
After the regularisation of his services, the vacancies which became available were given to the members of the Scheduled Castes in order of their inter-se seniority.
Persons who were far senior of the petitioner were promoted earlier.
In November, 1987, Ms. Lakshman Kaur and Mr. Umrao Singh whose names appeared at Serial Nos. 113 and 114 in the seniority-list while that of the petitioner was at serial No. 138, were promoted.
On the trifurcation of the Department of Industries, the petitioner was allocated to the Department of Mines and Geology in accordance with his option.
On his turn, he was promoted vide order dated February 1, 1990.
In view of this factual position, the respondents claim that there is no merit in CWP No. 13434 of 1990 and should be dismissed.
4.
As for the second case, it has been pointed out that there is only one post of Deputy Superintendent in the Directorate of Mines and Geology, Haryana.
The solitary post cannot be treated as reserved as the instructions issued by the Govt. permit only 20% reservation.
It has been further pointed out that respondent No. 3 was not appointed against the 4th vacancy and as such, even if the roster is followed, the petitioner is not entitled to be promoted.
Consequently, it is prayed that even this writ petition be dismissed.
5.
The petitioner has not controverted the factual position as stated by the respondents in their respective written statements to the two writ petitions:  The questions that arise are :- (1) Is the petitioner entitled to the regularisation of his services with effect from May 24, 1975 ?
(2) Is the petitioner entitled to be promoted as an Assistant with effect from November 19, 1987 ?
and (3) Is the petitioner entitled to be promoted as a Deputy Superintendent by treating the vacancy as reserved for members of the Scheduled Castes with effect from September 10, 1993 when respondent No. 3 has been promoted ?
Reg: (1):  Admittedly, the petitioner's services were regularised with effect from January 1, 1980.
He did not challenge that order even by filing a representation till October 27, 1986.
By that time, even the limitation for instituting a civil suit had elapsed.
The writ petition was admittedly filed on October 22, 1990.
The claim made by the petitioner is highly belated.
In any case, even if the delay is ignored, no rule or instructions have been produced on which the petitioner's claim for regularisation with effect from May 24, 1975 may be based.
Accordingly, the claim made by the petitioner cannot be sustained.
It is consequently rejected.
Reg: (2):  The petitioner's services having been regularised as a Clerk with effect from January 1, 1980, his seniority in the cadre of Clerks had to be determined on that basis.
It has not been shown by the petitioner as to when any person belonging to the general category was wrongly appointed against the point reserved for the members of the Scheduled Castes.
Mr. Jagia submits that according to the information furnished by the petitioner in Annexure P-4 with the writ petition, Smt. Sarjivan Rani was promoted as an Assistant with effect from April 16, 1986.
According to the learned counsel this point should have been given to a member of the Scheduled Castes.
A perusal of the document shows that Mr. Ram Narain Rojha who is a member of the Scheduled Castes was also promoted with effect from April 16, 1984.
His name was borne at No. 108 in the gradation list.
He was admittedly senior to the petitioner.
Consequently, the petitioner cannot claim that he was entitled to be promoted against that vacancy.
Still further, a perusal of this document shows that in November 1987, 3 persons viz. Mrs. Krishna Devi, who belongs to the Backward Class and Smt. Lakshman Kaur as well as Mr. Umrao Singh who were members of the Scheduled Castes were promoted.
They were also admittedly senior to the petitioner.
In this situation, it cannot be said that the petitioner was entitled to be promoted in preference to the other members of the Scheduled Castes or Backward Classes who were actually senior to him.
In any event, none of these persons has been impleaded as a party.
In their absence, it cannot be said that they were wrongly promoted and that the petitioner was entitled to the vacancy given to any one of them.
In this view of the matter, even the second prayer made by the petitioner cannot be sustained.
Reg: (3):  It deserves mention that there is only one post of Deputy Superintendent.
The petitioner submits that respondent No. 3 had been promoted against the 4th vacancy.
The respondents maintain that it was the third vacancy.
No replication has been filed by the petitioner to controvert the submission made on behalf of the respondents in the written statement.
In any event, there is a dispute on facts which cannot be resolved in this writ petition.
Still further, it is the admitted position that only one vacancy had arisen during the year 1993.
Respondent No. 3 who is admittedly senior to the petitioner was promoted against that vacancy.
Mr. Jagia is not contesting that a solitary post cannot be reserved.
He concedes that in view of the decision of their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Indra Sawhney etc. v. Union of India and others, 1993(1) SCT 448 (SC) : AIR 1993 SC 477, a solitary vacancy in a year cannot be treated as reserved.
Accordingly, even this question is answered in the negative.
6.
In view of the above, there is no merit in these petitions.
These are dismissed.
However, in the circumstances of these cases, there will be no order as to costs.