Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner joined service on September 6, 1954.
After serving the Department for more than 38 years, he retired on October 31, 1992.
In spite of the lapse of more than three years, the retiral benefits like pension and gratuity have not been released so far.
Consequently, he has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
He prays for the issue of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to release the full amount of gratuity, pension, leave encashment, commutation of pension etc. with interest at the rate of 18% per annum.
2.
The respondents contest the petitioner's claim inter alia on the ground that on his repatriation to the Department from the Bhakra Beas Management Board in the year 1971, his pay was not correctly fixed.
According to the respondents, the petitioner's pay was fixed vide order dated October 26, 1993.
Still further, it has been stated that "the parent department i.e. PWD (B&R), Haryana, has yet to fix the pay of the petitioner as per rules and owing to such pay fixation of the petitioner, substantial amount shall have to be recovered by the State Government."
The respondents state that the further action to release the gratuity and payment of leave encashment etc. would be taken up "only after finalisation of the issue of pay fixation of the petitioner."
3.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
4.
Mr. JS Malik, learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the petitioner's pay had been duly fixed and he had been drawing his salary in accordance with the rules till the date of his retirement.
The respondents have arbitrarily and without the grant of any opportunity whatsoever to the petitioner, ordered the re-fixation of his pay vide order dated October 26, 1993.
This order was passed without affording any opportunity whatsoever to the petitioner.
It was only a device to deny the petitioner his rightful due after his retirement.
Mr. Khetarpal, appearing for the respondents submits that an employee does not have a right to be heard when his pay is refixed.
5.
Admittedly, the petitioner's pay has been reduced.
As a result, the Department claims that substantial amount has to be recovered by the State Government.
In such a situation, it was imperative for the respondents to give the petitioner a due and reasonable opportunity before his pay was reduced.
It has not been shown that any opportunity whatsoever was granted to him.
Consequently, the order dated October 26, 1993 by which the petitioner's pay was re-fixed, is quashed.
The case is remitted to the respondents for a fresh decision after hearing the petitioner.
The needful shall be done within three months from the date of receipt of a certified copy of this order.
The petitioner's pay, gratuity, leave encashment and other retiral benefits, if any, shall be released within one month thereafter.
If the payment is not made within the aforesaid period, the petitioner shall be entitled to the payment of all the dues with interest at the rate of 15% per annum from the date of accrual till the date of actual payment.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to his costs which are assessed at Rs. 3000/-.