Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioners are working as Peons in the Gurdaspur Central Cooperative Bank Limited, Batala.
They complain that the Respondent-Bank has acted in violation of law while promoting respondents No. 4 to 12 from the posts of Peons to those of clerks.
The petitioners allege that in spite of their being senior to the private respondents, their claim for promotion to the posts of clerks was not considered.
This action of the Bank was a violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
The petitioners, consequently, pray that the impugned order, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-1 with the writ petition, be quashed and that a direction be given to the Respondent-Bank to consider their claim in order of seniority.
2.
The claim made by the petitioners has been contested by the respondents.
Three separate written statements have been filed on behalf of the respondents.
It is not necessary to notice the pleas raised by the respondents in their respective written statements in detail.
In a nut-shell, it has been stated that respondents No. 4 to 7 have been promoted against the posts reserved for members of Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes.
Furthermore, respondents No. 10 and 11 have been appointed against the posts reserved for the category of graduates having three years' experience.
However, the specific plea raised by the petitioners in para 10 that their claim has "not been considered at all for the post of Junior Clerk, even though they fulfil all the qualifications and are seniormost persons" has not been controverted by the Respondent-Bank.
In fact, in reply to this averment, it has been stated that "the petitioners were not considered" as the employees who belong to Scheduled Castes/Backward Class were to be considered for promotion.
3.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
Mr. JC Verma, learned counsel for the petitioners has submitted that the action of the Respondent-Bank in not considering the claim of the petitioners in spite of the fact that they are senior to one or the other of the private respondents No. 4 to 9 and 12, is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
On behalf of the respondents, it has been submitted by Mr. DV Sharma that the appointment of respondents No. 10 and 11 is in strict conformity with the quota prescribed by the Respondent-Bank.
Vis-a-vis the promotion of other respondents, the counsel has submitted that they were promoted against the posts reserved for the members of Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes.
On this basis, it has been claimed that the promotions deserve to be upheld.
4.
It is the admitted position that there are a total of 103 sanctioned posts of Junior Clerks.
It is further admitted that 126 persons are working against the 103 posts.
It is also admitted that quota for promotion is 10%.
Of course, it is subject to the availability of persons who fulfil the prescribed qualifications.
It is also not disputed that the petitioners are senior to one or the other of the private respondents.
Admittedly, the claim of the petitioners for promotion was not considered when persons junior to them were promoted.
In this situation, it is clear that the action of the Respondent-Bank was in violation of the guarantee of equality of opportunity enshrined in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
Thus, the grievance made by the petitioners is legitimate and valid.
5.
So far as respondents No. 10 and 11 are concerned, it is agreed between the counsel for the parties that they have been promoted from amongst the graduates having three years' experience.
The petitioners can have no legitimate grievance in this behalf as they were not eligible to be considered against the posts reserved for the class to which respondents No. 10 and 11 belong.
With regard to the remaining persons, the only defence raised by the respondents is that they belong to the categories of Scheduled Castes or Backward Classes and that they have been promoted against the posts reserved for them.
This claim made on behalf of the respondents cannot be sustained.
Admittedly, only 10% of the vacancies had to be filled up by promotion.
Out of 126 vacancies, the quota of promotees could not have exceeded 13 .
OUt of the 13 posts meant for promotees, at the most three posts could have been reserved for members of Scheduled Castese etc.
The backlog of posts which had to be filed up direct recruitment could not have been transferred to the quota of the promotees.
The claim made on behalf of the respondents that 26 posts were required to be filed up from amongst the members of Scheduled Castes and 5 from amongst the members of Backward Classes, cannot be sustained.
The number of the posts to be filled-up from amongst the members of these two classes had to be separately worked out for the posts falling to the share of the direct recruits and the promotees.
This has admittedly not been done.
Still further, it is not disputed that petitioner No. 2 is also a member of the Scheduled Castes.
Admittedly, persons junior to him have been promoted and his claim was not even considered.
Consequently, it is apparent that the Respondent-Bank did not consider the claim of the petitioners for promotion when respondents No. 4 to 9 and 12 were promoted.
The plea that only members of Scheduled Castes or Backward Classes had to be promoted, is wholly untenable and is rejected.
6.
It has also been suggested that Dev Raj and another persons were promoted in pursuance to the direction given by this Court in CWP No. 5035 of 1992 vide judgment dated November 3, 1992.
It may be so.
No grievance has been made by the petitioners in this behalf.
No other point has been urged.
7.
In view of the above, it is held that the promotion of respondents No. 4 to 9 and 12 was not in conformity with law.
It is, accordingly, quashed.
In so far as respondents No. 10 and 11 are concerned, the grievance made by the petitioners cannot be sustained.
Accordingly, the writ petition is allowed in the above terms.
It is directed that respondents No. 4 to 9 and 12 shall be reverted to the posts of Peons forthwith.
The claim of the petitioners for promotion to the posts of clerks shall be considered.
The needful shall be done within one month from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
On promotion to the posts of clerks, the seniority of the petitioners shall be fixed in the order of their seniority in the Class IV service.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.