Swatanter Kumar, J (Oral)- This writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India raises a limited controversy with regard to the interpretation of Rule 4 of the Punjab Government National Emergency Concessional Rule, 1964, hereinafter referred to as the Rules.
Rule 4 of the said Rules reads as under:-  "Increments, seniority and pension: - Period of Military service shall count for increments, seniority and pension as under:- (i) Increments: - The period spent by a person on military service after attaining the minimum age prescribed for appointment to any service or post, to which he is appointed, shall count for increments.
Where no such minimum age is prescribed the minimum age shall be as laid down in rules 39, 310 and 311 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume II.
This concession shall, however, be admissible only on first appointment.
(ii) Seniority :- The period of military service mentioned in clause (ii) shall be taken into consideration for the purpose of determining the seniority of a person who has rendered military service.
(iii)Pension:- The period of military service mentioned in clause (i) shall count towards pension only in the case of appointments to permanent services or posts under the Govt. subject to the following conditions:- (1) The person concerned should have earned a pension under military rules in respect of the military service in question; (2) Any bonus or gratuity paid in respect of military service by the defence authorities shall have to be refunded to the State Government; (3) The period, if any, between the date of discharge from military service and the date of appointment to any service or post under the Government shall count for pension, provided such period does not exceed one year.
Any period exceeding one year but not exceeding three years may also be allowed to count for pension in exceptional cases under the orders of the Government."
2.
The petitioner was born on 231949 and had joined the Navy on 14121964.
He continued to serve in the Navy upto 3041981 and thereafter was appointed as Assistant Superintendent Jail upon his selection to the said post, he joined the department on 14121983.
The only date relevant is the date when the petitioner attained the age of 21 years which is the minimum age required for appointment as Assistant Superintendent of Jail.
The petitioner became 21 years old on 231970.
There is no dispute to the fact that the benefit of emergency services which the petitioner is claiming in the writ petition was for the period commencing from 14121964 to 1011968.
On these basis the learned counsel for the respondents has submitted that the petitioner is not entitled to get benefit of Rule 4 of the said Rules because when the period of emergency services ended, the petitioner had not attained the age of 21 years as is clear from the above mentioned facts.
This position is not disputed, very fairly, by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
3.
In the facts and circumstances of this case and following the decision of this Court in the case of Captain Lokinder Singh Chaudhary v. State of Haryana, 1989(6) SLR 187, I hold that the petitioner was not entitled to get the benefit of the services rendered by him in Navy during emergency period because he was not fulfilling the basic requirement, that is the qualifying age of 21 years on the date when the benefit of such services ceased to exist i.e. 1011968.
4.
It is to be noted that the Legislature has intentionally used the words "after attaining the minimum age prescribed for appointment to any service or post" in Rule 4(i).
The purpose is more than clear.
The intention of the rule making authority is clear that the Legislature wanted to give benefit of this services to the persons who had attained the minimum age required/prescribed for, under the Rules for appointment to the post, where they serve after the emergency period was over.
There is no merit in this petition.
The same is hereby dismissed.
There shall be no order as to costs.