RP Vyas, J - The instant petition has been filed by the petitioner with the prayer that the judgment and award dated 22112004 may be quashed and set aside.
2.
The brief facts of the case are that an industrial dispute was raised by the non-petitioner Teja Ram before the Conciliation Officer regarding his retrenchment.
The conciliation proceedings failed and a failure report was submitted by the conciliation officer before the appropriate Government.
The appropriate Government vide notification dated 06082003 referred the matter to the Labour Court, Jodhpur for adjudication under the provisions of Section 10 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred to as `the Act of 1947').
3.
The learned Labour Court issued notices to the parties and the respondent claimant filed claim petition, stating, inter alia, that he was initially appointed as sweeper in 1407,1997 and he worked for three years regularly since appointment till 27022001.
On 27022001, his services were terminated without complying with the mandatory provisions of Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred to as `the Act of 1947').
4.
It was further stated that his services have been terminated by violating the provisions of Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 and it was prayed that his termination may be declared ineffective and void and workman be reinstated back in service with full backwages.
The petitioners received the copy of the statement of claim.
A detailed written statement was filed denying the contentions mentioned in the claim application and it was stated that the claimant was not appointed on the post of Class IV employee.
The workman was engaged on contract basis and the workman was engaged on remuneration of Rs. 800/- per month.
The workman on contract was upto 3031998.
It was also alleged that at the time of appointment, the workman himself submitted an affidavit that when he would be removed from the work, he will not claim any regular appointment and will not file any case before the Court.
It was also alleged that the contract of the workman was extended upto 27022001 and thereafter in pursuance of letter dated 17.01.2001, the term of contract of the workman was not extended.
It was also alleged that such contractual employees are never appointed in any manner and, therefore, there is no question of any retrenchment and it was immaterial as to whether the workman has completed 240 days of service or not.
5.
After hearing the arguments, the learned Tribunal allowed the claim petition filed by the respondent-workman and directed the re-instatement of respondent workman with 25% back wages.
6.
In this writ petition, the main submission of the learned Counsel for the petitioner is that the claimant was appointed on the contract basis and at the time of appointment, the workman himself submitted an affidavit that when he would be removed from the service, he will not file any case.
It has also been alleged that the workman was appointed on contract basis and, therefore, he is not a workman and provisions of Act of 1947 are not attracted in this case.
It was also alleged that the workman has raised the industrial dispute after a considerable delay.
It has also been alleged that in view of provisions of Sections 9 and 11 of the Act of 1999, the engagement on contract and daily wage basis is prohibited.
Therefore, the workman is not entitled to get the relief of reinstatement.
Hence, the impugned judgment and award deserves to be quashed and set aside.
7.
On the other hand, the learned Counsel for the respondent workman has stated that since the impugned judgment and award does not suffer from any basic infirmity or illegality and there is no error apparent on the face of the record, the same does not require any interference by this Court under Article 227 of the Constitution of India.
8.
Heard the learned Counsel for the parties.
9.
In my considered opinion, the findings arrived at by the learned Labour Court are based on correct appreciation of evidence available on record.
The learned Labour Court has clearly recorded a finding that the respondent workman was engaged on contract basis till 31031998.
The Department did not produce any evidence to show that the services of the respondent workman were extended after 31031998, meaning thereby after 31031998 to 27022001, the respondent workman was not working on contract basis and during this period he has completed 240 days of service.
However, before terminating his services, provisions of the Section 25-F of the Act of 1947 have not been complied with.
10.
So far as reference to the provisions of Sections 9 and 11 of the Act of 1999 are concerned, the same have already been struck down and hence this argument raised by the petitioners also stands rejected.
11.
The findings of fact recorded by the learned Labour Court are based on correct appreciation of evidence available on record and same do not suffer from any infirmity or illegality.
12.
The learned Counsel for the petitioners has also relied on the decision of this Court in the cases of Ridmal Singh v. State of Rajasthan & Ors. SB CWP No. 356 of 1999. decided on 18022003, Dist.
Animal Husbandry Officer v. The Judge, Labour Court & Anr. SB CWP No. 146 of 2001 decided on 05032002 and Bhagwan Singh & Anr. v. The Superintendent Turtle Breeding Farm & Anr., SB CWP No. 5858 of 19971 decided on 06112001.
13.
In my considered opinion, the aforesaid authorities cited by the Counsel for the petitioner are not applicable in the instant case as all these cases relate to the appointment on fixed tern basis and their term was not extended, whereas in the present case, the respondent workman was allowed to work for a period of about 3 years even after expiry of term of contract and during this period he has completed 240 days of service.
Therefore, the authorities cited by the respondent workman Knot applicable in the instant case.
14.
Apart from that, under Article 227 of the Constitution of India, the High Court cannot interfere with the exercise of the discretionary power vested in the inferior Court or Tribunal, unless its findings are clearly perverse or patently unreasonable.
While exercising the powers under Article 227 of the Constitution of India, the High Court does not act as Court of appeal.
15.
The High Court's power of revision under Article 227 of the Constitution would be restricted to interference in cases of grave dereliction of duty or flagrant violation of law and would be exercised most sparingly, in cases where grave injustice would be done unless the High Court interferes.
It cannot be used as appellate or revisional power nor will the High Court, in exercise of this power, substitute its own judgment for that of the inferior Court, whether on a question of fact, or of law, or interfere with the intra vires exercise of discretionary power, unless it is arbitrary or capricious, or unless there was no evidence at all on which the inferior Court could have come to conclusion it did or there was error of finding on a jurisdictional fact.
16.
From perusing the judgment and award dated 22112004 (Annexure 6) passed by the learned Labour Court, Jodhpur it does not reveal that there is patent illegality and irregularity or error of law apparent on the face of record and the findings recorded by the learned Labour Court are perverse.
17.
For the reasons mentioned above, the present writ petition is dismissed.
No order as to cast.
Petition dismissed.