Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - The petitioner, who is lower division Clerk (C) in the Haryana State Electricity Board, has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, for issuance of a direction to respondents 1 and 2 to accept the resignation submitted by him on 26.3.1996, copy of which is Annexure P-4 to the writ petition, for enabling him to file nomination papers for contesting the ensuing election of the Haryana Vidhan Sabha, last date for which is 341996, despite the fact that he is undergoing disciplinary proceedings and is under suspension on account of serious embezzlement charge involving Rs. 1178 lacs.
2.
The question which has cropped up for our consideration is whether the court can issue direction to the respondents to accept the resignation of the petitioner for enabling him to file nomination despite that fact that disciplinary proceedings have been initiated against him and he is under suspension on account of alleged embezzlement charge involving Rs. 1178 lacs.
3.
It has not been disputed that the petitioner is under suspension and disciplinary proceedings have been initiated against him and it is for the competent authority to accept or not to accept the resignation.
It also remains undisputed that so long as the petitioner is Government servant, he cannot contest the election.
4.
We have heard the learned counsel for the petitioner and perused the paper book.
We are of the view that where the Government servant, who is under suspension, submits resignation, the competent authority should examine with reference to the merits of the disciplinary proceedings pending against the Government employee whether it would be in the public interest to accept the resignation.
Normally, when the Government servants are placed under suspension only in cases of grave delinquency, it would not be correct to accept the resignation of the Government servant, who is under suspension nor any direction can be issued to the authorities to accept the resignation.
5.
Since it is the domain of the competent authority to accept or not to accept the resignation of the petitioner and the authorities concerned have not taken any decision in the matter, we are not inclined to issue any direction in the matter.
6.
The petitioner had submitted his resignation on 26.3.1996 and he has filed the writ petition on 29.3.1996.
The petitioner was charge-sheeted on 24101994.
As such, he was having enough time to submit his resignation.
The prospect of elections taking place was known to the petitioner.
He should have submitted his resignation much earlier and there should have been sufficient time at the disposal of the authorities to enable them to take a decision in the matter.
The petitioner had submitted his resignation only on 26.3.1996 and afterwards there were holidays in the Government offices.
As such, there was not much time with the authorities to take decision in the matter nor any direction can be given to the respondent-Board to take decision on the question concerning whether the resignation should or should not be accepted particularly when the last date for filing nomination is 341996.
For the reason stated above, this writ petition is dismissed in limine.