Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - (Oral) - The petitioner is aggrieved by the order dated October 30, 1991 by which his application for grant of appointment on compassionate grounds has been rejected.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioners was born on May 20, 1969.
About three years later, his father who was working as an Assistant Lineman in the Haryana State Electricity Board died.
Less than a year later, the petitioner's mother remarried.
Somehow, the petitioner survived.
With the help of his uncle, Nawab Singh, the petitioner studied.
He passed the Higher Secondary Examination.
Thereafter, he even qualified the BA Part-I Examination.
According to the petitioner, he submitted an application for the grant of appointment to the Executive Engineer, City Division, HSEB, Sonepat as he was residing in District Sonepat, on October 27, 1987.
When nothing was heard in reply, he submitted an application to the Superintending Engineer, Operation Circle, Sonepat on May 21, 1988.
Copies of both these applications have been produced as Annexures P-3 and P-4 with the writ petition.
He did not hear anything in reply.
On July 30, 1991, he submitted an application to the Board on the prescribed proforma.
This was rejected vide order dated October 30, 1991.
Aggrieved by this order, the petitioner has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
He alleges that the orders are contrary to the instructions issued by the Government which have been adopted by the Board.
He prays that the order dated October 30, 1991 be quashed and the respondents be directed to give him appointment on compassionate grounds.
3.
Written statement on behalf of the Respondent-Board has been filed by its Under Secretary.
The respondent contests the petitioner's claim on the ground that according to the rules, application had to be submitted within three years of the death.
In case of a minor child, the widow has to apply and "get the post reserved within a period of three years from the date of the death of the deceased and when the child attains the age of 17 years, he can claim that post within a period six months ..." According to the respondent, the petitioner had attained the age of 17 years of May 20, 1986.
However, he had submitted the application only on July 30, 1991.
This was "hopelessly barred by time and was rejected vide respondent's letter dated 30101991 ... .."  4.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
5.
The short question that arises for consideration is - is the order rejecting the petitioner's request just and fair ?
6.
Admittedly, the petitioner was about three years old when his father had expired.
Within less than a year, his mother had remarried.
The petitioner was, thus, left alone and was at the mercy of his relations.
Fortunately, he survived.
After passing the Higher Secondary examination, the petitioner submitted the application dated October 27, 1987 to the Executive Engineer.
He submitted a second application on May 21, 1988 to the Superintending Engineer.
It is undoubtedly correct that in the written statement filed on behalf of the respondent, it has been averred that these applications were not received.
However, no affidavit of the Executive Engineer or the Superintending Engineer has been filed.
Admittedly, Superintending Engineer is the appointing authority for Class III and Class IV posts.
The petitioner had submitted an application to the competent authority.
No affidavit has been filed by either or them indicating that the application had not been submitted.
It may be that these officers had not forwarded the petitioner's applications to the office of the Board.
That does not, however, mean that the petitioner had not submitted the application soon after attaining the age of 17 years.
7.
In this behalf, it deserves mention that in the instructions issued by the State Government vide letter dated April 19, 1991, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-10 with the writ petition, it has been inter alia observed that "before 3.11.88, when an employee died during his service tenure, then his dependants could apply for service at any time but on 3.11.88, the Govt. issued instructions where it was mentioned that in future, application should reach within three years of the death of the deceased.....
The Govt. has now decided that those employees who died before 3.11.88 and if their dependants have applied for service within 6 months (upto 3589) of the issue of instructions dated 3.11.88, then such applications may be considered."
It appears that in view of these instructions, the application submitted by the petitioner was within time.
However, the respondent rejected the petitioner's request merely with the observation that it has not been found "feasible of acceptance... " Reference to the instructions dated February 29, 1988 and April 19, 1991 has undoubtedly been made.
However, it is not understood as to how the petitioner's claim was rejected in spite of the fact that he had submitted the applications prior to May 3, 1989 as stipulated in the instructions dated April 19, 1991.
8.
There is another aspect of the matter.
The instructions issued by the Government or even the Board are not notified.
These are not published.
These are merely inter-departmental communications.
The petitioner was merely a child.
Not only that he is not aware of the law, he had even no means of knowing the decisions of the Board.
Still further, his father having died and his mother having re-married, he was left totally at the mercy of his relations.
In such a situation, his condition was totally pepurious.
Still further, the State Government has not framed any statutory rules laying down a period of limitation.
Only instructions have been issued from time to time which are not even published in the Gazette or given any publicity.
In the circumstances of this case, when there is evidence to indicate that the petitioner had submitted two applications before the last date fixed by the Government, it would not be just and fair to reject his claim on the ground of delay.
9.
Accordingly, the writ petition is allowed.
The impugned order dated October 30, 1991 a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-5, is quashed.
The respondents are directed to consider his claim for appointment to a post for which he may be eligible and suitable.
The needful shall be done within three months of the receipt of a copy of this order.
In the circumstance of this case, there will be no order as to costs.
Orders accordingly.