Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioners challenge the advertisement dated March 4, 1996 issued by the Respondent-Board vide which posts of Assistant Lineman and Shift Attendants have been advertised.
This advertisement has been issued by the Board in pursuance to the judgment dated November 22, 1995 by which Civil Writ Petition No. 7382 of 1993 and 22 other petitions challenging the selection made by the Board had been accepted.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
On March 2, 1992, the Haryana State Electricity Board had advertised posts of Assistant Linemen and Shift Attendants.
The selection was made.
The selected candidates were appointed.
The selection made by the Board was challenged through various writ petitions including Civil Writ Petition No. 7382 of 1993.
In these petitions, it was alleged that selections had been made by different committees without following a uniform criterion.
It was also alleged that the Board had made excessive reservation.
The first contention was accepted.
It was held that the selection of various candidates including the present petitioners was vitiated as the Board had not followed a uniform criterion.
However, with regard to the allegation that excessive reservation had been made for Scheduled Castes etc. it was observed that the factual position was not clear.
The Board was directed to examine the issue in the light of the facts as established on the record.
Resultantly, the selection and the consequential appointments to the posts of Assistant Linemen and Shift Attendants were held to be vitiated.
The Board was directed to make fresh selections after issuing an advertisement.
Keeping in view the fact that the work of the Board may not suffer and inconvenience is not caused to the public, it was directed as an interim measure that the persons "already appointed shall be allowed to continue...."  3.
In pursuance to these directions, the Board has issued an advertisement on March 4, 1996.
The petitioners challenge this advertisement on a two-fold basis.
Firstly, it has been alleged that the method of selection and condition of eligibility has been wrongly changed inasmuch as it has now been provided in the advertisement that "selection of candidates will be made on the basis of written test and marks obtained in the ITI certificate/extra curricular/interview."
According to the petitioners, the condition of written test "will amount to change" in the eligibility criterion which is not permitted by law.
Secondly, it has been alleged that there is excessive reservation of posts for different categories of persons like those belonging to Scheduled Castes etc.  4.
We have heard Mr. SK Jain, learned counsel for the petitioners.
5.
Admittedly, the posts of Assistant Linemen and Shift Attendants are being filled up by direct recruitment.
The Board has to choose the best persons out of the candidates who had already applied or may now submit their applications for these posts.
For this purpose, it is not only entitled to lay down the qualifications which a candidate must possess before he is considered for appointment but also the method of selection.
A perusal of the advertisement shows that the Board has decided to determine the merit of the candidates on the basis of a written test, the marks secured by the candidate in the qualifying examination viz. the course at the Industrial Training Institute and the interview.
Certain credit is also sought to be given to candidates who have attained distinction in extra curricular activities.
This criterion for selection appears to be prima facie just and fair.
It has not been shown that the criterion is either arbitrary or unfair.
6.
Mr. Jain, learned counsel for the petitioners submits that the introduction of a written test is wholly arbitrary.
He further submits that the prescription of a written test amounts to a change in the conditions of eligibility.
7.
This contention is wholly misconceived.
On a perusal of the advertisement, we find that academic and technical qualifications have been prescribed.
Besides that, even the requirement of age etc. has been laid down.
These are the conditions of eligibility.
However, the written test has been prescribed for the purpose of determining the suitability of the candidates for different posts.
This is a recognised and accepted norm.
It is one of the objective methods of determining a candidate's suitability for the post.
It is neither arbitrary nor unfair.
It is of uniform application.
The grievance made by the petitioners is wholly lacking in merit and is, thus, rejected.
8.
Mr. Jain has also contended that the reservation made by the Board is in excess of 50% which is illegal.
Such a claim had been made even at the time of the hearing of CWP No. 7382 of 1993.
The claim made on behalf of the respondent was that the reservation had been made to clear the backlog of vacancies.
This petition had come up for hearing before us on April 23, 1996.
We had adjourned the case at the request of the learned counsel for the petitioners so as to enable him to furnish the details regarding the number of posts that actually fell to the share of various categories like Scheduled Castes etc. which had remained un-filled.
Learned counsel states that he has not been able to gather any information.
In the absence of facts in this regard, it is not possible for us to go into the matter at this stage.
The petitioners have not supplied the requisite data.
It has not even been suggested that there is no backlog.
Prima facie, it appears to us that since the petitioners had been permitted to continue working on the posts in spite of the fact that their selection was held to be bad in law, they are interested in delaying the final selection.
Accordingly, we find no ground to interfere at this stage.
We have, however, no reason to doubt that the Board shall take into consideration the factual position and ensure that the posts are not reserved in excess of the legally permissible limits.
Accordingly, we dismiss the petition in limine.
We, however, direct that a copy of this order shall be conveyed to the Board.