Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - Can the State Government restrain the University from releasing the accelerated increments granted by it to the employees ?
This is the short question that arises in this writ petition.
2.
A few facts may be noticed.
3.
The petitioners are the members of the Ministerial Establishment of the Guru Nanak Dev University.
Vide order, dated March 10, 1992, the Vice Chancellor granted accelerated increments to petitioner Nos. 1 to 12.
Petitioner Nos. 13 and 14 who were working as Peons were granted two accelerated increments by the Registrar, vide his order, dated February 29, 1992.
These order were passed under Statute 41.
The release of these increments was stopped by the Auditors.
The Registrar vide his letter, dated July 15, 1992 informed the State Government that the increments had been granted in accordance with the statutory provisions governing the University.
The petitioners also represented.
However, vide letter, dated October 4, 1994 the Deputy Registrar of the University informed one of the petitioners that the release of the accelerated increments had been stopped by the Education Department.
Aggrieved by this action, the petitioners have approached this Court through the present writ petition.
They challenge the action of respondent Nos. 1, 3 and 4 viz., the State Government and its Officers, primarily on the ground that it is without jurisdiction and violative of the provisions contained in Statute 41.
4.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the University, the facts as alleged by the petitioners have been broadly admitted and no reason whatsoever has been assigned to show that the petitioners are not entitled to the grant of accelerated increments.
However, in the written statement filed on behalf of the State of Punjab, the Director Local Fund Accounts and the Deputy Controller (Local Audit) Punjab viz., respondent Nos. 1, 3 and 4, it has been averred that the University cannot exercise unfettered powers as a sizable part of the burden of salary and allowances of the staff is borne by the State Government.
During the pendency of the writ petition, an additional affidavit on behalf of the aforesaid respondents was filed by Mr. DP Karkara, Examiner, Local Fund Accounts, Punjab.
In this affidavit, it has been pointed out that "the Government has inherent authority to see that expenditure is incurred according to conditions under which these grants are given and to check any extravagance".
It has been further stated that day-to-day audit of the University accounts has been entrusted by the Government to respondent No. 3.
Whenever it is noticed that the University has sanctioned an expenditure which is not in keeping with the provisions of the Act and the Statutes made thereunder, a report is made to the State Government which can issue suitable instructions.
In this case, it was noticed that "the University had sanctioned the grant of accelerated increments to its employees which as per policy of the State Government explained below were not admissible".
The State Government had decided that "in no case advance increments are to be sanctioned and in case of work of exceptional merit one time cash award can only be sanctioned.....
Since the decision of the University was not in accordance with the general principles of Administration applicable to the employees of the State Government, the State Government decided to issue instructions to the University to stop payment".
Reference to the provisions contained in Sections 23 and 25 of the Guru Nanak Dev University Act, 1969 has been made in this behalf.
In this basis, the respondents claim that the writ petition should be dismissed.
5.
We have heard Mr. Namit Kumar, learned counsel for the petitioners and Mr. Shergill, Deputy Advocate General, Punjab, on behalf of the State Government, as also respondent Nos. 3 and 4.
6.
The primary contention raised by the learned counsel for the petitioners is that the action of the Vice Chancellor and the Registrar of the University in granting accelerated increments was in conformity with the provisions of Statute 41.
The State Government had no jurisdiction to interfere with this decision or to stop the grant of this benefit to the employees.
7.
On the other hand, Mr. SS Shergill, Deputy Advocate General, has submitted that the State Government which bears the financial burden had the right to stop the release of the increments.
8.
Before proceeding to consider the respective submissions, the relevant provisions of the Act and the Statutes may be, briefly, noticed.
9.
The University was established and incorporated by Punjab Act No. 21 of 1969.
Under Section 14(5) of the Act, the Syndicate shall be the principal executive body of the University and shall have the management and administration of revenue and property of the University.
Section 19 provides for the making, amendment, repeal and operation of Statutes, which reads as under :  "19.
(1) The first statutes of the University shall be made by the State Government and notified in the official gazette.
(2) The Syndicate may, from time to time, make new or additional Statutes or may amend or repeal the Statutes.
(3), (4) and (5)......omitted  (6) Every new Statute or addition to the Statues or any amendment or repeal of a Statute shall require the approval of the Chancellor who may sanction, disallow or remit it for further consideration".
10.
Sections 23 and 25 to which a reference has been made in the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents are in the following terms :  "23.
(1) The State Government may, from time to time, provide such amounts by way of grants for meeting the capital, recurring or other expenditure for the University as it may deem fit.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of foregoing provision, the State Government shall provide a minimum annual grant of fifty lac rupees to the University for meeting its recurring expenditure : Provided that if during any financial year the entire amount of the aforesaid grant is not utilised for meeting the recurring expenditure, the unutilised balance may, with the previous consent of the State Government, be utilised for meeting capital expenditure of the University.
25.
The accounts of the income and expenditure of the University shall be submitted once in every year to the Government for such examination and audit as the Government may direct.
The accounts, when audited, shall be published in the Official Gazette".
11.
A perusal of the above provisions leaves no doubt that the first Statutes of the University were promulgated by the State Government.
However, the Syndicate has the power to make new Statute as also to amend or repeal the existing Statutes.
It is further provided in sub-section (6) that the Statutes framed by the Syndicate required the approval of the Chancellor.
Section 23 authorises the State Government to provide grants for meeting the expenditure.
Under Section 25, the accounts of the incomes and expenditure of the University have to be submitted to the State Government for examination and audit.
No provision has been pointed out which may show that the Government is entitled to interfere with the day-to-day administration of the University or the grant of benefits to the employees.
12.
Furthermore, it appears that the conditions of service governing the employees are embodied in Statutes.
Statue 41 provides as under :  "41.
The Syndicate or the Vice Chancellor or the Registrar, as the case may be, shall have the power to sanction a higher start, than the minimum of the grade, accelerated increments, allowances, etc. as it or he may deem fit".
13.
In the light of the above provision, it is manifest that the Vice Chancellor and the Registrar have the power to sanction the grant of accelerated increments.
14.
On a perusal of the provisions of the Act and Statute 41, it is obvious that the Syndicate is the principal executive body of the University.
It exercises the power of administration and management of the revenue and property of the University.
It is responsible for the conduct of administrative affairs of the University.
The State Government is obliged to provide funds.
Once in a year, the University has to submit the accounts of incomes and expenditure to the State Government for examination and audit.
However, there is no provision which may authorise the State Government to interfere with the day-to-day administration or the grant of benefits to the employees.
It is further apparent that the conditions of service of the employees of the University in the teaching and non-teaching departments are governed by the Statutes contained in Chapter II.
Statute 41 specifically vests the power with regard to the grant of accelerated increments in the Authorities of the University.
The State Government has not been given any power of control or supervision in this behalf.
15.
It is true that the State Government bears the financial burden of the expenses incurred by the University to a considerable extent.
However, in the absence of a provision specifically authorising the Government to interfere with the orders of the competent Authority, it cannot be said that it had the power to stop the grant of accelerated increments to the employees.
Nor is there any provision which may oblige the University to follow the policy of the State Government or "the general principles of administration applicable to the employees of the State Government".
If the Syndicate or the Vice Chancellor or the Registrar of the University considers it appropriate to reward the deserving employees as falling within their respective jurisdiction by the grant of accelerated increments for the good work done by them, as at present, the State Government has no jurisdiction to interfere with their orders.
16.
The provision contained in Statute 41 has a salutary purpose to serve.
It authorises the competent Authority to encourage a deserving employee.
In normal course, every employee earns the increment at the end of the year.
Under the present system, every official gets promotion virtually in his turn.
There is hardly any chance for a meritorious candidate to steal a march over his seniors.
In practice, the archaic rule of seniority is scrupulously followed with the result that there is no incentive for a person to work hard and excel.
The provision in Statute 41 provides a method by which the competent Authority can encourage a deserving person.
It provides an incentive for the employees to put in their best so that they may have the satisfaction of earning a little more than others.
It contemplates the recognition of merit.
It may be that the Government has taken a policy decision to give cash rewards to its employees.
Such a decision, however, it is in no way binding on the University.
17.
Admittedly, a large number of employees are working in the University.
Out of them, a few appear to have been selected for the grant of accelerated increments.
This has been done to reward them for good work.
The expense involved is not such as may amount to extravagance.
It has not been shown that the Authorities have been indiscriminately sanctioning the grant of accelerated increments to all and sundry.
In case it was found that the power was being misused, it may become necessary for the appropriate Authority to amend the Statute or to incorporate other provisions.
However, in the circumstances of the present case, it is not possible to accept the suggestion made on behalf of the respondents that the Government was forced to intervene as the University Authorities were sanctioning increments extravagantly.
18.
In view of the above, the question posed at the outset is answered in the negative.
It is held that the State Government has no jurisdiction to interfere with the order regarding the grant of accelerated increments passed by the Vice Chancellor or Registrar.
19.
Accordingly, the writ petition is allowed.
The impugned action of the respondents is set aside.
It is directed that the orders regarding grant of accelerated increments to the petitioners shall be implemented.
Consequential reliefs in the nature of arrears of salary should be paid to them within one month of the receipt of a copy of this order.
20.
In the circumstances of the case, we leave the parties to bear their own costs.