Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - These three petitions raise a common question viz. Is the action of the Registrar, Co-operative Societies, Punjab in ordering the merger of Clerks and Supervisors who were admittedly working in different scales of pay and granting the Supervisors the benefit of their past service in entirety towards the fixation of seniority, illegal and arbitrary ?
The factual position as emerging from Civil Writ Petition No. 6008 of 1987 may be briefly noticed.
2.
There are Central Cooperative Banks throughout the State of Punjab.
There are various cadres of service including those of Junior Clerks and Supervisors.
The Junior Clerks in the year 1981 were in the scale of Rs. 240-470 while the Supervisors were in the scale of Rs. 110-200.
On March 19, 1981 the Registrar issued an executive order whereby he directed that the Supervisors "be merged into the cadre of clerks from the date they have been working in the Central Cooperative Banks provided they fulfill the qualifications of clerks on the date of their appointment as supervisors."
This decision was partially modified vide letter dated December 23, 1981 whereby provision for relaxation of educational qualification of Matric Second Division to Matric Third Division, was made.
It was further clarified that the pay of the Supervisors merged into the cadre of clerks may be fixed from the date of their joining the Bank but arrears shall be paid to them only w.e.f.
March 19, 1981.
As for the fixation of seniority, it was directed that the date of joining the respective cadres would be the criteria.
However, such Junior Clerks as have already been promoted as Senior Clerks or Junior Accountants shall not be adversely affected.
3.
These instructions were implemented by different Banks.
On Lachman Singh filed a petition before the Registrar under Section 27(3) of the Punjab Cooperative Societies Act, 1961, challenging the seniority assigned to various persons.
He pointed out that the Supervisors being in a lower scale of pay could not be declared as senior to those working in a higher scale of pay.
It was also pointed out that some of the persons who were working as supervisors were in fact not eligible for the posts of clerks.
Consequently, the seniority fixed by the Bank was challenged.
The Registrar vide his order dated January 3, 1984, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-3 with the writ petition, accepted the challenge and held that the seniority has to be determined in strict conformity with the instructions issued by the Government.
The order passed by the Bank was, consequently, quashed.
As a result, the Supervisors did not get seniority over the persons who were already working as clerks.
In the case of Gurdaspur Central Cooperative Bank, wherein the petitioners and respondents Nos. 3 to 20 are working, a tentative seniority list was prepared, on the basis of the instructions issued by the Registrar.
However, the present petitioners were promoted to the posts of Senior Clerks in spite of the fact that they were junior to one or the other of the persons who were initially working as supervisors.
Consequently, certain persons including respondents Nos. 4 to 20 filed a petition before the Registrar.
It was accepted.
The promotion of the petitioners was quashed.
Aggrieved by this order, the petitioners have approached this Court through the present writ petition.
4.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the Respondent-Bank.
It has been averred that the benefit of seniority had to be given only to those supervisors who fulfilled the qualifications prescribed for the posts of clerks.
The instructions issued by the Registrar vide letter dated December 23, 1981 (a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-2 with the writ petition) were not clear as it was not specifically mentioned as to under which rule of the Punjab Government the seniority had to be fixed.
It has also been averred that the qualifications were wrongly relaxed in favour of the Bank's Supervisors.
In view of the this position, the Bank had sought clarification from the Registrar about the fixation of seniority of the Junior Clerks vis-a-vis the Supervisors.
It has also been stated that respondents Nos. 3 to 20 had given an affidavit to the Bank that they were not interested in availing the benefit of the orders dated July 14, 1989 passed by the Registrar and that they shall wait for their promotion at the discretion of the Management.
A copy of this affidavit has been produced as Annexure R2/1 with the written statement.
Even in reply to various sub-paras of para 18, the Bank is critical of the orders passed by the Registrar.
No written statement has been filed by respondents 3 to 20.
Even the Registrar, Cooperative Societies, who has been impleaded as respondent No. 1, has not filed any affidavit.
5.
Mr. DV Sharma, learned counsel for the petitioners has contended that the impugned action is wholly arbitrary and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution inasmuch as unequals have been treated as equals.
On the other hand, Mr. Kang, appearing for the respondents submits that the two cadres having been merged, the impugned order passed by the Registrar is perfectly legal and valid.
6.
It is true that merger of cadres is a purely administrative matter and is normally within the jurisdiction of the competent authority.
However, in the present case, certain facts stand out.
Firstly, the posts of Junior Clerks and Supervisors were not equal in rank and status.
Furthermore, it is also clear that the Junior Clerks were eligible for promotion to the posts of Senior Clerks etc. As against this, the Supervisors had no avenue of promotion.
Still further, the pay scales of the two categories of posts were materially different.
While the Junior Clerks were in the scale of Rs. 240- 470, the Supervisors were placed in the much lower scale of pay viz. Rs. 110- 200.
It is, thus, clear that persons holding these categories of posts were not manning equivalent posts.
It may be that either on account of the pressure of the Union or otherwise, the Registrar felt that the Supervisors needed to be provided with an avenue of promotion.
With that object in view, a decision to merge the two cadres was taken.
However, the action in directing that the inter se seniority shall be fixed on the basis of the date of initial appointment, as appears to be the intention from the impugned order, resulted in material mis-carriage of justice.
A person working in a lower scale of pay became senior to a person in a much higher scale of pay.
This was permitted irrespective of the fact that the person working as Supervisor did not even possess the qualifications for appointment to the post of Junior Clerk.
Resultantly, unequals were actually treated as equals.
As aconsequence, the promotion of Clerks including the petitioners was adversely affected.
It was probably to avoid such a consequence that the bank promoted the present petitions in preference to others who had been initially appointed as Supervisors.
This action was undone by the Registrar.
The grievance of the petitioners that the action of the Registrar was unfair, is manifest.
Firstly, the instructions issued by the Registrar have not been equally applied.
In case of employees of the Moga Central Cooperative Bank, the Registrar took the view that since the grade of Supervisors was lower than that of the clerks, the seniority had to be determined from the date of encadrement.
However, in the case of the petitioners, a diametrically opposite view was taken.
Consequently, the employees of the two categories though similarly situated, were treated differently.
7.
Taking the totality of circumstances into consideration, it is clear that the action of the Registrar in accepting the claim of respondents 3 to 20 in spite of the fact that they were working in a lower scale of pay has resulted in denial of equality of opportunity to the petitioners.
The grievance made by them deserves to be upheld.
8.
Accordingly, the writ petition is allowed.
The impugned order passed on July 14, 1987 by the Registrar, is set aside.
It is directed that the Bank shall re-determine the seniority of the Clerks and Supervisors.
The inter se seniority of the Supervisors shall be fixed on the basis of their encadrement and not on the basis of their initial appointment to the posts of Supervisors.
9.
In Civil Writ Petition No. 3974 of 1988, the challenge is to the final seniority list only.
In view of the reasons given above, it is directed that the seniority of the Supervisors shall be fixed on the basis of date of their encadrement and not on the basis of the date of their initial appointment as Supervisors.
The list, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-6 with the writ petition in so far as it relates to the petitioners and respondents 4 to 15, is quashed.
10.
As regards Civil Writ Petition No. 13802 of 1992, the seniority list by the Respondent-Bank is still tentative.
The petitioners claim to have filed objections against this list.
The respondent-Bank is directed to consider those objections in the light of the above observations and to finalise the seniority accordingly.
The needful shall be done within three months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
After finalisation of the seniority, further promotion etc. shall be made in accordance with the position assigned to the petitioners.
In the circumstances of these cases, there will be no order as to costs.