Jawahar Lal Gupta and SC Datta, JJ.
- The petitioner, a Sub-Inspector in the Transport Department, was awarded the penalty of stoppage of two increments with cumulative effect vide order dated October 28, 1993.
He filed an appeal.
It has been rejected by the appellate authority vide its order dated December 9, 1994.
Aggrieved by these orders, he has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
2.
Mr. Gurdev Singh, learned counsel for the petitioner, has challenged the orders on three grounds.
Firstly, it has been contended that while issuing the show cause notice, the disciplinary authority had prejudged the matter and as such, the impugned order of penalty is vitiated.
Secondly, the counsel has submitted that the orders passed by the disciplinary authority as well as the appellate authority are not speaking orders.
Lastly, the validity of Rule 7(6) of the Haryana Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1987, has been challenged.
3.
As for the first contention, the position appears to be that the Enquiry Officer had virtually exonerated the petitioner of all the three charges.
The disciplinary authority disagreed with the conclusion recorded by the Enquiry Officer and found that he had adopted a very soft attitude toward the delinquent official.
Accordingly, it recorded its reasons.
It further came to a tentative conclusion that the penalty of stoppage of two increments with cumulative effect should be imposed.
It gave a show-cause notice to the petitioner.
Alongwith the show cause notice, a copy of the enquiry report was also furnished to the petitioner.
In this notice, it was inter alia mentioned that on a perusal of the record, the disciplinary authority was provisionally of the view that the penalty of stoppage of two increments with cumulative effect should be imposed.
Formation of such a tentative view does not amount to pre-judging the matter.
If such a tentative view is not expressed, it may not be possible for the delinquent official to show-cause effectively.
The action of the authority was in conformity with law.
We are unable to accept the contention raised by the learned counsel.
4.
Equally untenable is the plea that the impugned orders passed by the disciplinary and appellate authorities are not speaking orders.
On a perusal of the orders, we are satisfied that the contentions raised by the petitioner were duly considered.
5.
The last submission raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner regarding the validity of the provisions contained in Rule 7(6) is also untenable.
Rule 7(6) provides for the issue of a show cause notice before the imposition of a penalty.
The provision is in no way inconsistent with the constitutional guarantee enshrined under Article 311(2) of the Constitution.
It ensures compliance with the principles of natural justice.
6.
No other point has been urged.
7.
Accordingly, we find no infirmity in the impugned order which may call for interference in the exercise of our extra-ordinary jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution.
The petitioner was found wanting in the performance of his duties.
The punishment imposed is totally commensurate with the guilt established.
The petition is wholly lacking in merit.
It is, thus, dismissed in limine.
Petition dismissed.