Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - Can the Government order the 'voluntary retirement' of an officer inspite of the fact that he had withdrawn his request before the date stipulated by him in his notice ?
This is the short question that arises in this case.
Few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner was working as a Chief Accounts Officer with the State of Haryana.
He, unfortunately, developed a handicap.
His hearing was impaired.
On September 3, 1992, the Director Treasuries and Accounts, Haryana asked the petitioner to report for medical examination.
Feeling embarrassed, the petitioner, vide his letter dated September 15, 1992 requested the Government to grant him voluntary retirement w.e.f.
April 30, 1993.
On October 13, 1992, the State Government passed an order suspending the petitioner.
No charge- sheet was issued to him.
On January 6, 1993, the petitioner addressed a communication to the Government pointing out that due to uncertainty created by continuing suspension without issue of any charge-sheet, he was withdrawing his offer of voluntary retirement with effect from April 30, 1993 submitted by him on September 15, 1992.
No intimation was sent to the petitioner.
The date for 'voluntary retirement' viz. April 30, 1993 as stipulated by the petitioner passed without issue of any order.
The petitioner faced a dilemma.
Consequently on June 3, 1993 the petitioner again informed the Government that in case he was reinstated without delay and allowed to enjoy pensionary benefits etc., he was willing to retire voluntarily.
He even sent a notice through his counsel.
On June 15, 1993, the Government conveyed the impugned order dated May 28, 1993 to the petitioner.
He was informed that he was "permitted to retire pre-maturely from Government service w.e.f.
April 30, 1993 under Rule 532-B of Punjab Civil Services Rules Volume II without prejudice to the action that may be taken as a result of disciplinary proceeding pending against him."
Aggrieved by his order, the petitioner has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
He challenges this order as being wholly illegal and violative of the rules.
3.
In the petition, prayer for quashing of the order of suspension has also been made.
However, at the hearing, learned counsel for the petitioner has given up his challenge to this order.
Consequently, the pleading of the parties in so far as these relate to the validity of the order dated June 15, 1993, a copy of which has been appended as Annexure P-7 to the writ petition, are being noticed.
4.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents.
It has been averred that the petitioner's request for withdrawing his notice regarding voluntary retirement "was not accepted as he was physically incapable to perform his official duty."
It has been further stated that the petitioner was not fit even after using a hearing device.
It has also been pointed out that the petitioner has "wrongly fixed the pay of several teachers and caused huge losses to the State exchequer."
According to the respondents, voluminous record had to be examined and, therefore, the charge- sheet could not be issued to him.
On these premises, it has been asserted that "retirement of the petitioner has been rightly and legally ordered on his own request."
5.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
Mr. Jagia, learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that the request for voluntary retirement having been withdrawn by the petitioner on January 6, 1993, the Government had no jurisdiction to pass the impugned order on June 15, 1993.
On the other hand, Ms. Bahri, learned Assistant Advocate General, Haryana has submitted that the action of the Government was in conformity with the Provisions of Rule 532-B of the Punjab Civil Services Rules.
6.
Admittedly, the petitioner had completed the qualifying service as stipulated under the rules so as to be entitled to pension etc. On September 15, 1992 he had requested the Government to permit him to voluntarily retire w.e.f.
April 30, 1993.
The petitioner's effort was to save himself from embarrassment.
He was, however, placed under suspension on October 13, 1992.
He waited for more than 2 months.
No charge-sheet was issued to him.
On January 6, 1993, the petitioner withdrew his offer to voluntarily retire from service w.e.f.
April 30, 1993.
This date as stipulated by the petitioner had passed without issue of any order by the Government.
Presumably, he continued to perform his duties.
On May 28, 1993, the Government passed the impugned order.
However, admittedly, it was not issued till June 15, 1993.
In the meantime, on June 3, 1993, the petitioner had again made an offer to the Government that in case he was reinstated without delay and allowed to enjoy all pensionary benefits, he was willing to retire voluntarily.
Thereafter, as already noticed, by the impugned order, he was retired from service retrospectively w.e.f.
April 30, 1993.
This too was done with a sting.
The petitioner was informed that his retirement was "without prejudice to the action that may be taken as a result of the disciplinary proceedings pending against him."
7.
The sequence of events as delineated above shows that even after the petitioner had made an offer of voluntary retirement w.e.f.
April 30, 1993 he was suspended from service and threatened with disciplinary proceedings.
In this situation, he was entitled to say that please prove the charges against him if you have any and I will stay in service.
Consequently, he had written to the Government on January 6, 1993 regarding withdrawal of his offer of voluntary retirement.
He was entitled to do so because till April 30, 1993, his request for voluntary retirement was inchoate.
It was his offer and he had right to withdraw it at any time prior to the stipulated date.
He having done so, there was nothing with the Government which could have been accepted.
8.
Ms. Ritu Bahri points out that under the provision of Rule 5.32-B Punjab Civil Services Rules, Government's permission was necessary before the offer of retirement could be withdrawn.
It is true that the Rules provide for the Government's permission.
However, the Government had no jurisdiction to act arbitrarily.
It must have relevant and valid reason for declining the permission.
In the present case, Government having threatened the petitioner with disciplinary proceedings, he had a good reason for withdrawing his request and the government could have only proceeded to charge-sheet him and initiate disciplinary proceedings if it had any material against him.
It was asserted by Mr. Jagia and confirmed after verification by Ms. Ritu Bahri that in fact no charge-sheet had been issued to the petitioner till today.
If the Government had actually come across any serious irregularity on the part of the petitioner and had even proceeded to suspend him vide order dated October 13, 1992, it is unthinkable that it would not even issue a charge-sheet in spite of the lapse of almost three years.
In any case, the action in suspending the petitioner was not the reason for declining his request.
The only reason indicated in the written statement is that the petitioner was having a handicap.
His condition had not improved in spite of the use of the hearing aid.
If this was so, there was no need to place him under suspension.
His request for voluntary retirement could have been accepted forthwith.
This was not done.
Even otherwise nothing has been proved on record to show that in fact an order declining the petitioner's request for withdrawal of his offer to voluntarily retire had been passed.
At least, no order to that effect was conveyed.
9.
It is also the admitted position that the petitioner was born in November 1935.
He was due to retire after attaining the age of 58 years on November 30, 1993.
He had to serve for about five months when the Government conveyed to him the impugned order.
Admittedly, there was nothing against him so far as the record of service is concerned.
10.
Taking the totality of the circumstances into consideration, it appears that the Government had in fact not conveyed any order declining the petitioner's request dated January 6, 1993 for withdrawal of his offer of voluntary retirement.
In any case, no good reason has been shown.
In this situation, the action of the Government in retiring him vide order dated June 15, 1993 with retrospective effect from April 30, 1993 was arbitrary and illegal.
It cannot, thus, be sustained.
11.
It deserves mention here that the petitioner was under suspension on October 13, 1992.
He was being paid only subsistence allowance.
There was a cloud over him.
He could not have been compulsorily retired by the Government before removing the cloud.
It appears that the Government adopted a dubious method by passing the impugned order and retiring him from service with effect from April 30, 1993 when it could not have achieved the same object in a straightforward manner by ordering his premature retirement.
12.
Accordingly, the impugned order (Annexure P-7 to the writ petition) is quashed.
It is declared that the petitioner shall be deemed to have been continuing in service till November 30, 1993 when he attained the age of superannuation.
13.
The Writ Petition is allowed and the petitioner shall be entitled to all consequential relief i.e. arrears which shall be paid to him within three months from the date of the receipt of copy of this order.
In case the payment is not made within the aforesaid period, the petitioner shall be entitled to interest at the rate of 12% from the date of accrual till the date of actual payment.
In the circumstances of the case, there would be no order as to costs.