Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - Is the action of the respondents in determining the petitioner's seniority with effect from the date of his regular appointment as Kanungo and in not taking into consideration the period from December 10, 1987 to June 26, 1991 during which he had remained under training, illegal and contrary to the rules ?
This is the short question that arises for consideration in this case.
2.
The petitioner's father was working as a civil servant.
On his death, the State Government granted appointment to the petitioner on compassionate grounds.
Vide order dated December 2, 1987, the Collector, Sonepat issued an order regarding the petitioner's appointment as Kanungo (A Class).
A copy of this order is on record as Annexure P-1.
It was provided that before his appointment, the petitioner shall have to undergo a training of three and a half years and pass the Kanungo examination to be conducted by the Director, Land Records, Haryana.
The petitioner was to be paid a stipend of Rs. 50/- per month for a period of six months.
Thereafter, he was to be given the salary of a Patwari for a period of two years and that of a Kanungo Consolidation for a period of one year.
The petitioner completed the training and passed the Kanungo examination.
Thereafter, he was appointed as a Kanungo and placed on probation.
3.
Initially, the petitioner was assigned seniority on the assumption that he had joined as a Kanungo on December 10, 1987, which was the date on which he had actually reported for training.
He was placed at Sr. No. 21 in the seniority list.
However, vide letter dated November 8, 1994, a show cause notice was issued to the petitioner.
He was asked to explain "as to why his name in the seniority list should not be included w.e.f.
2761991 after the completion of training of 3-1/2 years and instead of his name at Sr. No. 21 be down-graded in between 44 and 45 of Sarvshri Fateh Singh and Raja Ram at Sr. No. 44-A".
The petitioner submitted a reply.
He referred to Rule 11 of the Haryana Kanungo Service (Group C) Rules, 1981 and contended that the seniority has to be fixed on the basis of length of service and that the seniority assigned by the Selection Board or the appointing authority on the basis of merit cannot be disturbed.
He, consequently, prayed that his name should continue to appear at Sr. No. 21.
After consideration of the matter, the Commissioner, Rohtak Division, vide his order dated January 2, 1995, held that the petitioner can be considered as a member of the Service "only when he passed the Kanungo training and has been appointed on the post of Field Kanungo..." Accordingly, he ordered that the petitioner be assigned seniority at Sr. No. 44-A A copy of this order has been produced as Annexure P-10 with the writ petition.
The petitioner filed a representation before the Financial Commissioner.
Vide order dated July 6, 1995, the petitioner's representation was rejected.
A copy of this order has been produced as Annexure P-12 with the petition.
Aggrieved by these orders of the respondents, the petitioner has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
The petitioner alleges that the action of the respondents is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution as also the rules governing the service.
4.
In response to the notice of motion, a written statement has been filed on behalf of respondent No. 5.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
5.
Mr. SK Bansal, learned counsel for the petitioner has made a two-fold submission.
Firstly, the learned counsel has referred to the provisions of Rule 11 to contend that the seniority of a Kanungo has to be determined with effect from the date of his continuous appointment.
According to the learned counsel, the petitioner had been appointed as a Kanungo on December 10, 1987.
As such, his seniority should have been determined on that basis.
He has further urged that the action of the respondents is discriminatory inasmuch as the persons who are appointed by promotion are given the benefit of service with effect from the initial date of appointment, while in case of others, the seniority is given with effect from the date of qualifying the Kanungo examination.
Learned counsel has also pointed out that in other divisions, the Department has adopted a different criteria.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioner has been controverted by the counsel for the respondents.
6.
It is useful to briefly notice the provisions of the rules.
The conditions of service governing the petitioner are admittedly laid down in the rules called 'The Haryana Kanungo Service (Group C) Rules, 1981, (hereinafter referred to as the Rules).
Rule 7 provides that "no person shall be appointed to any post in the Service unless he is in possession of qualifications and experience specified in column 2 of Appendix B to these rules in the case of direct recruitment and those specified in column 3 of the aforesaid Appendix in the case of appointment other than by direct recruitment".
A perusal of Appendix B shows that besides the academic qualifications, it is necessary for a person to pass the "Kanungo examination held by the Director".
It, thus, appears that no one is eligible for appointment as a Kanungo till he has passed the examination conducted by the Director of Land Records.
It is the admitted position that the petitioner had joined training in December 1987.
He completed the three and a half years of training in June 1991.
He has been granted seniority with effect from June 27, 1991.
It is also the admitted position that during the period of training the petitioner was initially paid a stipend of Rs. 50/- per month.
Thereafter, he was paid the salary of the post on which he was undergoing training.
It was only on completion of the training and the passing of the examination that he had become eligible for appointment.
He has been considered as a member of the service of Kanungos with effect from that date.
In this situation, it cannot be said that the petitioner's seniority should have been fixed with effect from a date when he was not even eligible for appointment.
Still further, it was categorically provided in the order dated December 2, 1987 that "before his appointment on the post.....he shall have to undergo training of 3-1/2 years...." It is, thus, clear that in December 1987, the petitioner had not been appointed as Kanungo.
He had, in fact, been promised an appointment.
This was subject to the successful completion of the training.
7.
In view of the above, it appears that the action of the respondents in fixing the seniority of the petitioner with effect from the date when he completed his training, is in conformity with the rules.
8.
Mr. Bansal also made a submission that the order of merit fixed at the time of selection cannot be altered.
In principle, learned counsel appears to be right.
However, in the present case, it deserves mention that the petitioner had not competed with the other eligible candidates for appointment to the post of Kanungo.
He had not been selected by the Board.
In fact, the petitioner had been granted appointment on compassionate grounds as his father who was working with the Government had died.
The respondents showed a concession to the petitioner inasmuch as he was granted appointment without any competition.
He is not entitled to the further relief of seniority with effect from a date when he had not even become eligible for appointment.
9.
It was then contended by the learned counsel that the action suffers from the vice of discrimination inasmuch as the promotees are granted seniority with effect from the date of initial appointment.
10.
It is no doubt correct that the post of Kanungo in the Directorate can be filled up by promotion from amongst the Assistant Office Kanungos and qualified Patwaris.
Similarly, even the posts of Field Kanungos etc. are also filled up by promotion.
However, it is equally clear that persons who are recruited as Patwaris or as Assistant Field Kanungos undergo training and have the experience on the post before they are promoted.
The promotees undergo the training which is imparted to a direct recruit while they are in service.
However, the persons like the petitioner who are fresh from educational institutions have no experience whatsoever.
There is, thus, an essential difference between the promotees and those who are freshly appointed.
A differential treatment of these two categories of employees in the matter of determination of seniority cannot be said to suffer from the vice of discrimination.
11.
It was also contended that the seniority of Kanungos working in various other divisions of Haryana has been fixed with effect from the date of initial appointment.
It may be so.
However, the fact remains that under the rules, a person becomes eligible for appointment as a Kanungo only on completion of training and passing the examination conducted by the Director of Land Records.
The action of the respondents in fixing the petitioner's seniority with effect from June 27, 1991 when he had completed the training cannot be said to be contrary to the rules.
Equally, the respondents cannot be blamed for following the rules in case of the petitioner.
If certain officials have been given seniority in violation of the rules, the petitioner is not entitled to claim that the action is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
12.
Lastly, it also deserves mention that the petitioner claims that he is entitled to be placed at Sr. No. 21 in the list.
Those whose names appear from Sr. Nos. 22 to 44, are not parties in this petition.
The acceptance of the petitioner's claim would adversely affected their interests.
No order to their prejudice can be passed in their absence.
In view of the above, the claim made by the petitioner cannot be accepted.
The question posed at the outset is answered in the negative.
It is held that the action of the respondents is not illegal or contrary to the rules.
It does not even suffers from the vice of discrimination.
Accordingly, there is no merit in this writ petition.
It is dismissed in limine.