Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - Is the action of the respondents in ordering the premature retirement of the petitioner vide order dated December 23, 1992 legal and valid ?
This is the short question that arises in this case.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner was selected for appointment as a temporary Engineer in January 1966.
On January 15, 1966, he was deputed for six months' training.
On July 15, 1966, he was appointed as temporary Engineer and was finally allocated to the State of Haryana.
He was promoted as an Executive Engineer in the year 1978.
While he was working as such, the order of his premature retirement was issued by the Government vide letter dated December 23, 1992.
Aggrieved by this order, the petitioner has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
Since the Motion Bench had vide its order dated January 15, 1993 stayed the operation of the impugned order, the petitioner has continued to hold the post of Executive Engineer.
3.
The short question that arises for consideration is - was there any material on the basis of which the competent authority could have arrived at the conclusion that it was in public interest to prematurely retire the petitioner?
4.
Mr. Jaswant Singh, learned counsel for the respondents has produced the summary of the petitioner's record which was produced before the committee that met to consider the cases of various officers for retention in service beyond the age of 50 years.
It is taken on record as Mark 'A'.
A perusal of this summary shows that the adverse remarks had been conveyed to the petitioner for the period from November 26, 1967 to March 31, 1968.
In this report, his reputation about honesty was described as 'shady'.
However, there is a note that Mr. PP Caprihan, the then Financial Commissioner had remarked on October 28, 1977 that "the entry regarding integrity in the ACR for 1967-68 is based on suspicion as after enquiry nothing was substantiated."
A warning was issued to the petitioner vide letter dated September 21, 1971.
However, in spite of the adverse report regarding 'integrity ' and the letter of warning, the petitioner was promoted as an Executive Engineer in the year 1978.
So, the adverse report really lost its sting.
5.
The next report which deserves mention is for the period from May 7, 1979 to March 31, 1980.
Herein adverse remarks regarding integrity were recorded.
It was mentioned that the petitioner's "reputation for honesty was not above board and there were serious complaints from contractors about delay in payments for ulterior motives."
These remarks were conveyed to the petitioner.
He represented.
His representation was partly accepted.
The report was modified to read as follows :-  "As average officer.
There were serious complaints from contractors about delay in payments which were found to be correct."
It appears reasonable to conclude that even if there was delay in payment, it was not on account of any extraneous consideration and as such, the petitioner's reputation for integrity was not doubtful.
The last adverse remarks were for the period from August 6, 1987 to March 31, 1988.
Herein, his general reputation for integrity was stated to be not good.
However, even these remarks were expunged by the Government vide letter dated January 3, 1992.
6.
On a perusal of the confidential reports, the summary as prepared by the respondents shows that the petitioner had earned 2-10/12 reports which were 'Very Good."
There were 4-7/12 reports which were considered as 'Good' and the remaining reports were graded as 'Average'.
For a period of 1-2/12, there was no report.
The petitioner had, thus, earned 61% good or above reports.
7.
On the basis of this record, Mr. Jaswant Singh is not even in a position to justify as to how the petitioner could be described as dead-wood.
He only submits that in spite of expunction, the sting of the reports remains.
This contention can't be accepted.
If the Government itself felt that the reports were not justified and had chosen to expunge the adverse remarks, the petitioner cannot be described as a dishonest or an inefficient officer.
Another fact which can't be lost sight of is that the petitioner is due to retire in July, 1997.
His recent reports are 'Good' to 'Very Good'.
In fact, in the report recorded after the passing of the impugned order, the petitioner has been graded as 'Good' or 'Very Good'.
Even in the summary put up before the officers' Committee, it was indicated that he had secured 80% good or above reports after the reports for the years 1989-90 and 1991.
In this situation, it cannot be said that there was any material on which it could be concluded that it was in public interest to retire the petitioner.
Accordingly, the impugned order is set aside.
It is declared that the petitioner shall be deemed to have continued in service.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.