Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner who was recruited as a Ward Servant in the Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh, claims that he is actually discharging the duties of the post of Junior Laboratory Technician.
He, consequently, prays for the issue of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to pay him the salary of the post of Junior Laboratory Technician from June 1981.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner was recruited as a Ward Servant on September 9, 1967 in the pay scale of Rs. 30-35.
With effect from June 1, 1968, this post was placed in the pay scale of Rs. 70-95.
The pay scale was still further revised to Rs. 300-430, with effect from January 1, 1978.
In 1985, the petitioner claims that he was promoted to the post of Lab.
Attendant and placed in the scale of Rs. 400-600 which has since been revised and raised to Rs. 950-1800 with effect from January 1, 1986.
According to the petitioner, he is actually performing the duties of a Junior Laboratory Technician in the ECG Laboratory at the PGI since, 1981.
He is doing "E.C.G.
investigations independently" which are the prescribed duties of a Medical Technologist.
Having performed these duties of a higher post to the satisfaction of the Institute, he claims to be entitled to the pay scale admissible to the Junior Technicians.
The petitioner has produced copies of the various duty rosters in support of his claim.
He submits that the Institute is not recruiting Junior Laboratory Technicians and is, thus, saving an amount of Rs. 15 lacs annually which should be actually paid to the persons like the petitioners who are performing the duties of the higher posts.
3.
The respondents controvert this claim.
A written statement had been filed by Dr. BNS Walia, the then Director of the Institute.
It has been stated that the petitioner was never promoted as Laboratory Attendant under the 'backlog promotion scheme'.
However, he was placed in the special grade of Rs. 400-600 in status of a Class IV Ward Servant w.e.f.
January 1, 1985.
It has been further stated that recruitment rules of the Institute provide that the promotion be made by selection from amongst the Class IV employees possessing the qualification of Matric with Science to the post of Laboratory Attendant.
The vacancies were actually circulated on July 3, 1991.
The petitioner was not eligible for appointment to the post of Laboratory Attendant as he does not possess the requisite qualification of Matric with Science.
He did not even apply for the post.
According to the respondent, the job of a Ward Servant is to carry/transport the equipment to various wards and to help the Technicians in performing their duties.
Whenever a Class IV employee is posted singly, he works as a messenger for calling the Technicians.
The duties of a Laboratory Attendant and a Junior Laboratory Technician are of a much higher responsibility than those of a Class IV employee.
The post of Junior Laboratory Technician is technical in nature and persons possessing the qualification of BSc/BSc Medical Technology alone are eligible for appointment to the post.
The petitioner's averment that he is independently performing the duties of a Junior Laboratory Technician, has been described as incorrect and denied.
The duty rosters do not prescribe the nature of duties to be performed by an individual including the petitioner.
According to the rules, the post of a Junior Laboratory Technician is to be filled by direct recruitment and not by promotion.
The petitioner has, thus, no right to be given the pay scale of the post of Junior Laboratory Technician.
4.
A separate written statement has also been filed by Dr. RP Sapru, Head of the Department of Cardiology, P.G.I.
He has stated that the petitioner is working as a Ward Servant in the ECG Laboratory of the Department.
In this capacity, he is required to clean the Laboratory areas, perform the duties of a messenger and transport laboratory stores from one area to another.
The duties which are required to be performed by a Junior Laboratory Technician have been delineated.
He has to carry out E.C.G.
recordings with the help of a single channel E.C.G.
machine or perform the tests and record data on more sophisticated equipments like Three Channel ECG Machine, Phonocardiogram, Systolic Time Intervals, Stress Tests etc. None of these duties are performed by the petitioners or any other Ward Servant in the ECG Laboratory.
It has been further mentioned that the Junior Laboratory Technicians or a common cadre and are liable to be transferred from one Laboratory to another.
They can be posted in the Laboratories of the Department in which highly sophisticated investigations are performed on patients.
These investigations include Cardiac Catheterization and Angiography, Treadmill Test, Echocardiography, Holter Monitoring etc. Ward Servants are not trained to handle equipment and are as such not transferred to these Laboratories.
It has been further stated that "Ward Servants working in the ECG Laboratory are trained to carry out E.C.G.
recordings only with the help of a single channel E.C.G.
machine.
The petitioner has been working as a Ward Servant and has carried out E.C.G.
recordings on a single Channel ECG machine only".
The petitioner who does not fulfil the minimum qualifications for the post of a Junior Laboratory Technician like B.Sc.
Medical Technology, is not entitled to claim the salary of the post.
5.
The petitioner has filed separate replications to the two written statements.
He has reiterated his stand in the writ petition and controverted the averments made in the respective written statements.
6.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
Relying on the principle of 'Equal Pay for Equal Work', Mr. Saron has submitted that the petitioner is entitled to the salary of the post of Junior Laboratory Technician since 1981 when he was appointed in the ECG Laboratory.
He has referred to the decisions in BN Saxena v. New Delhi Municipal Committee and others, 1990(4) SCC 205 and Karnataka State Private College Stop-gap Lecturers Association v. State of Karnataka and others, 1992(1) SCT 599 (SC) : JT 1992(1) SC 373.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioner has been controverted by Mr. DS Nehra, learned counsel for the respondents.
He has submitted that the petitioner was never appointed to the post of Junior Laboratory Technician.
He is not qualified for the post.
As such, he is not entitled to the pay of the post of Junior Laboratory Technician.
Mr. Nehra has placed reliance on the decisions in Ramakant Shripad Sinai Advalpalkar v. Union of India and others, 1993(3) SCT 586 (SC) : AIR 1991 SC 1145 and Rajbir v. State of Haryana and others, 1996(1) SCT 481 (P&H)(DB) : 1995 (1) SCT 166.
7.
A perusal of the record shows that the petitioner was initially recruited as a Ward Servant.
He was later on placed in the scale of Rs. 400- 600 which has since been revised to Rs. 950-1800.
This is really the pay scale attached to the post of a Laboratory Attendant.
It is also the admitted position that the petitioner does not fulfil the qualifications for appointment even to the lower post of Laboratory Attendant much less than to the post of Junior Laboratory Technician.
Admittedly, the prescribed qualification for the post is B.Sc.
The petitioner does not possess this qualification.
Even for the post of Laboratory Attendant, the prescribed qualification is Matric with Science.
The petitioner does not fulfil even this qualification.
Consequently, it is apparent that the petitioner is not eligible even for the post of Laboratory Attendant.
Still further, nothing has been produced on the record to show that the petitioner was less than that of a Junior Laboratory Technician.
Having not been appointed to the post of Junior Laboratory Technician, he can have no legitimate claim to the salary attached to that post.
Accordingly, the claim made by the petitioner that he is entitled to the salary of the post of Junior Laboratory Technician, cannot be sustained.
8.
It also deserves notice that Dr. Sapru in his affidavit has clearly delineated the duties of the post of Junior Laboratory Technician.
It has been pointed out that the petitioner is only trained to carry out E.C.G.
recordings with the help of a single channel machine.
He cannot handle a three channel machine, Phonocardiogram or carry out the stress test etc.
He is also not trained for assisting in the Cardiac Catheterization, Angiography, Treadmill Test and Holter Monitoring etc. Keeping in view the fact that the petitioner was trained to carry out E.C.G.
recordings, it appears that he was placed in the scale of Rs. 400-600 which has since been revised to Rs. 950-1800.
This is admittedly the scale sanctioned for the post of a Laboratory Attendant.
The action of the respondents in giving him extra salary for the work being done by him appears to be totally just and fair.
9.
Coming to the decisions cited by the learned counsel for the petitioner, it may be observed that these are clearly distinguishable on facts.
Neither of these cases is an authority for the proposition that a person who does not fulfil the qualifications for a higher post and has not been appointed thereto, is entitled to claim the salary.
In BN Saxena's case (supra), the rule provided that a person should be eligible for promotion from the post of Senior Draftsman to that of Head Draftsman if he possesses the qualification of diploma with a minimum three years' service as Senior Draftsman or a total of six years' service as Senior and Junior Draftsman.
It was held that "the second limb of the rule was evidently to benefit all those persons who have gained sufficient experience as Senior and Junior Draftsmen without possessing any qualification".
Consequently, a person who did not have the qualification of diploma but fulfilled the requirement of six years' service, was held eligible for promotion to the post of Head Draftsman.
In the case of Karnataka State Private College Stop-gap Lecturers' Association (supra), the claim of persons appointed on temporary basis for equal pay with those who were working on regular basis, was upheld.
In this case, it has nowhere been held that the principle of 'Equal Pay for Equal Work' shall apply even though a person is not eligible for a particular post.
Consequently, the petitioner can derive no advantage from the decisions relied upon by him.
The present case is, in fact, closer to that of Ramakant (AIR 1991 SC 1145), decided by their Lordships of the Supreme Court.
It was held that asking an officer who substantively holds a lower post merely to discharge the duties of a higher post cannot be treated as a promotion.
In such a case, he does not get the salary of the higher post; but gets only what in service parlance is called a 'charge allowance'.
In the present case, the petitioner has been given even the salary of the post of Laboratory Attendant though he is not qualified for appointment thereto.
10.
In view of the above, it is held that the petitioner has no claim to the salary of the post of Junior Laboratory Technician.
The principle of 'Equal Pay for Equal Work' can be invoked only when a person fulfils the qualifications for the post and is discharging all those duties which are being discharged by the regular incumbents of the higher post.
In the present case, the petitioner is neither qualified nor is he in fact discharging the duties attached to the higher post.
Accordingly, his claim cannot be sustained.
As a result, I find no merit in this writ petition.
It is, consequently, dismissed.
However, in the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.