TS Doabia, J - In the present petition preferred under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, challenge has been made to the action of the respondent-bank in not permitting the petitioner to take part in the written test.
Had he been permitted to do so it would have enabled him to get possible appointment as Clerk-cum-Cashier with the respondent bank.
The brief facts for the purposes of this petition be noticed.
2.
A decision was taken by the respondent-Bank.
Copy of this has been placed on the record as Annexure P/3.
This is dated 21st of September, 1993.
About 103 vacancies were notified.
Eligible persons were supposed to submit their applications.
The further fact is that another policy decision was also circulated.
This is Annexure P/3-A.
This is dated 4th of July, 1995.
Paras 1 and 2 of this Annexure P/3-A are relevant and may be noticed.
These read as under :-  "Following consensus emerged in the joint meeting held on 22.6.1995 at Head Office between the Management and the representatives of All India Allahabad Bank Employees Co-ordination Committee, it has now been decided to hold the written test of all eligible/provisionally eligible candidates of the above promotion process, in terms of the relative provisions as contained in Chapter - V of the memorandum of settlement dated 2241989.
Accordingly, all eligible/provisionally eligible candidates whose names appear in the enclosed list of this Circular should be advised to participate in the said written test.
3.
In pursuance of Annexure P/3A, test was to be held on 22nd of August, 1995.
4.
The case of the petitioner is that he submitted his application.
Copy of this is Annexure P/5.
He wanted to take part in the written test.
This letter is dated 11th of August, 1995.
This was received by the Manager of the Bank on 12th of August, 1995 at 2PM The petitioner was given a reply.
This reply is to the effect that the name cannot be considered as he had not indicated his option and has not submitted the application which according to the Bank, the petitioner was supposed to submit in pursuance of Annexure P/3.
The petitioner submitted further application on 24th of August, 1995.
This is annexure P-7.
In this application, he has stated that policy Annexure P/3 dated 21st of September, 1993 was not brought to his notice.
According to him, he was under suspension when this Annexure P/3 was circulated.
Here, it would be apt to mention that the petitioner was suspended on 20th of July,1993 and was reinstated on 4th of April, 1994.
There is no dispute with regard to this fact.
5.
When Annexure P/7 was submitted the Bank took a stand that as no application was submitted in pursuance of Annexure P/3, therefore, the petitioner cannot take part in the written test.
He was accordingly, not permitted to take part in the written test.
This is how this petition has come to be filed in this Court.
Another fact which is relevant to be noticed is the stand taken in Annexure R-3.
This be noticed.
It reads as under :-  "The deponent received the circular No. 4184 from Personnel Administration Deptt.
Head Office, Calcutta in the matter of promotion of subordinate staff to the cadre of clerk-cum-cashier etc. on 27.7.1995.
The said circular was displayed on the Notice Board on 28.7.1995.
The said circular was in respect of the fact that the written teste were going to be held on 27th August, 1995.
The letters of introduction were to be issued to eligible candidates as per Annexure-I and to provisional candidates in term of Annexure -2.
The petitioner in the said duration was very well working in the Branch as Peon-cum-Daftari but the petitioner did not apply to the Branch and never showed any intention to earlier appear in the written test.
Had the petitioner applied for appearing in the written test, the deponent would have taken steps to accommodate him to appear in the written test."
6.
Thus, the basic stand taken by the Bank is that as the petitioner did not submit his application in pursuance of Circulars Annexures R3 and P/3A, therefore, he was not eligible to take part in the written test.
7.
I am of the view that this stand taken by the Bank cannot be accepted.
The reasons for this are as under :-  (i) This stand is contradictory to stand taken in R-3A.
It is incorrect the petitioner did not submit his application.
His applications are P-3 and P-7.
As such it is wrong to suggest that the petitioner did not want to take part in the test.
This above reason is alone good for granting relief to the petitioner.
However, other reasons given below also support the petitioner.
(ii) It be seen that circular Annexure P/3A was issued on 4th July, 1995.
This Annexure indicates that on the basis of some consensus arrived at between the management and the representatives of the employees, it was decided to hold an examination.
This decision was taken on 22nd of August 1995.
Therefore, all those persons who had become eligible by this date should have been given a chance to appear in the test.
This becomes apparent from perusal para 2 of Annexure P-3A.
This para does not indicate that the parameters fixed in Annexure P/3 were to be taken into consideration for permitting candidates to appear in the test.
It merely states that all eligible candidates would be permitted to take part in the written test.
It is not the case of the respondent-Bank that the petitioner was not eligible to participate in the written test.
It has not been pointed out that the petitioner lacked qualifications.
In the return it has been projected that intermediate qualifications in second division, is the basic requirement.
However several circulars placed on the record which deal with the selection process do not lay down any such condition.
Therefore, conclusion is recorded that the petitioner was eligible to take part in the process of selection and he should have been permitted to take part in the test which was to be held in pursuance of Annexure P/3A.
8.
The Counsel for the Bank has argued that only those candidates who had applied in pursuance of Annexure P/3 were supposed to take part in the process of written test.
I am of the view that this is not correct reading of Annexure P/3A.
The eligibility criteria no doubt was that mentioned in Annexure P/3 but it is difficult to not spell out that only those candidates who had become eligible in 1993 would be permitted to take part in the test.
During the intervening period that is from 21st of July 1993 to 4.7.1995, many more persons must have also become eligible to take part in the process of written test.
They should also have been permitted to take part in the test.
This is how the circular is to be read.
If the circular is read in the manner in which the respondent-Bank wishes, then this would lead to arbitrary results and this would clearly be hit by Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
The only reasonable interpretation of Annexures P/3 and P/3A would be that all those candidates who had become eligible as per para metres indicated in Annexure P/3, should have been permitted to take part in the process of written test.
This becomes all the more apparent from Annexures P/3 and P/3A if read together.
9.
The contention raised that the petitioner did not choose to give an application and therefore he could not sit in the examination be also examined.
It be seen that when Annexure P/3 was issued, the petitioner was under suspension.
It be further seen that the petitioner was not permitted to enter the branch during the period under suspension.
Thus, it could not be possible for the petitioner to become aware of the contents of Annexure P/3.
With a view to meet this objection, it has been argued that Annexure R/1 was sent to the petitioner on 9th October, 1993.
It is alleged that the petitioner was informed that he is supposed to file his application by 6th of November, 1993.
There is an endorsement on this letter that the petitioner has refused to accept this letter.
10.
However, I am of the view that sending or nonsending of the communication is totally immaterial because independently of Annexure P/3, the petitioner had a right to take part in the examination.
This right was conferred on him by Annexure P/3A and this could not have been taken away by the Bank.
The petitioner had written specific letters.
These are Annexures P/4 and P/6, and P/7.
The Bank did not permit the petitioner to take part in the written test.
As a matter of fact, the stand taken by the bank that compliance of Annexure P3A is mandatory is a stand which is contrary to Annexure R/2.
In annexure R-2 in para 3, it is stated that had petitioner submitted an application the petitioner could have been permitted to take part in the process of written test.
This stand is not apt and as indicated above is not sustainable.
11.
The petitioner has sent several communications to the respondent.
These are Annexures P/5 and P/7.
The categoric reply given by the Bank was that the petitioner cannot take part in the process of written test.
This reply is dated 25th of August, 1993.
12.
In view of the above discussion, I am of the view :  (i) that benefit of taking part in the examination should have been given to him.
The rights conferred under Annexure P/3A are independent of what has been stated in Annexure P/3; (ii) that the above conclusion drawn is in consonance with the stand taken by the Bank in Annexure R/2; (iii) that the petitioner had submitted applications to the bank.
These are Annexures P/5 and P/7.
These were not forwarded for reasons which are not sustainable.
13.
If the narrow interpretation as is sought to be given by the Bank is to be accepted and the argument of the bank that applications should have been submitted in terms of Annexure P/3 is to be accepted then this would not be in consonance with the principles of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
Several persons had become eligible during this period and they could not be deprived of their right to seek promotion by taking part in the examination.
Accordingly, this writ petition is allowed and a direction is given to the respondent-bank to take remedial measures within a period of two months.
Arrangement may be made for holding an examination individually for the petitioner or his case be considered without holding a test.
Appeal allowed.