Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The Government of India allocated 22 seats out of which 18 were for the courses leading to the degree in Engineering at different Institutes throughout the country.
The State of Haryana had not nominated the candidates for admission to these courses.
It advertised these seats and invited applications from the candidates who had appeared in the Common Engineering Entrance Test, 1995.
The petitioner was one of the candidates.
He was recommended for nomination against a seat in the Maharashtra State for a course leading to the degree of Bachelor of Pharmacy.
However, he was not considered for admission to the Engineering course on the ground that he had already been admitted against one of the paid seats at the Vaish Engineering College, Rohtak.
Aggrieved by this action, the petitioner had approached this Court through the present writ petition.
He prays for the issue of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to consider his claim for admission against one of the 18 seats.
2.
In pursuance to the interim directions given by the Division Bench on October 30, 1995, the petitioner was duly interviewed.
The result of this interview has been disclosed in the written statement filed on behalf of respondents 1 and 2.
It has been inter alia pointed out that "the petitioner is eligible for admission, as per the conditions of the Institution in Gujarat State.
However, it is submitted that as per conditions mentioned in P-6, the petitioner cannot be nominated against these seats, as he has already got admission in Engineering in the College of Haryana."
3.
Mr. Kundu, learned counsel for the petitioner states that the petitioner has already withdrawn from the Vaish Engineering College, Rohtak.
That being so, the disqualification does not subsist.
He further submits that the petitioner is the only candidate who fulfils the qualifications prescribed by the State of Gujarat and in case, he is not nominated, the seat would be wasted.
The counsel further submits that the action of the State Government in excluding the candidates who had been admitted in various courses against paid seats from consideration, is wholly arbitrary and unfair.
4.
Mr. SS Khetarpal, learned counsel for the respondents concedes that at the moment, the petitioner is the only eligible candidate for the seat in the State of Gujarat.
In this situation, it appears to be unjust and unfair to exclude the petitioner from consideration only on the ground that he had been admitted to an Engineering College in the State of Haryana.
In any event, this disqualification does not subsist today as he had already withdrawn from that institution.
5.
In view of the above, the respondents are directed to consider the petitioner's claim for nomination against the seat in the State of Gujarat.
If it is found that petitioner is not studying at the Vaish Engineering College any more, his claim for nomination shall be considered in accordance with the rules.
6.
The writ petition is, accordingly, disposed of.
Order accordingly.