Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was commissioned in the Army Medical Crops on February 2, 1963.
He was promoted to the rank of Major in the year 1973.
On August 2, 1984, the petitioner was promoted to the rank of Lt.
Colonel.
In the year 1992, certain posts in the rank of Colonel were available in the Army Medical Corps.
A Selection Board was constituted to consider the claims of eligible officers.
It met on November 24, 1992 and considered the cases of various officers including the petitioner.
In spite of the fact that the Board had found the petitioner fit for promotion, the orders regarding his actual promotion were not being issued.
Since a Lt.
Colonel retires at the age of 55 years and a Colonel is entitled to continue in service upto the age of 57 years, the petitioner apprehended that he might be retired before the actual issue of the orders of his promotion and, thus, deprived of the promotion as well as the extension of tenure by two years.
He, consequently, approached this Court with a prayer that the respondents be directed to declare the result of the proceedings of the Board held in November 1992 and in case, the petitioner has made the grade, to grant him promotion and to allow him to continue in service upto January 31, 1995.
Before this petition could be taken up for hearing, the petitioner retired on January 31, 1993.
Ultimately, the Government of India approved the proceedings of the Board on May 11, 1993.
The necessary orders were issued by the Government on May 12, 1993.
These are the admitted facts.
2.
The short question that arises is - Is the petitioner entitled to a declaration that he will be deemed to have been promoted as a Colonel and, thus, deemed to have continued in service till January 31, 1995.
3.
Mr. RS Randhawa, learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the posts being actually available and the petitioner having been found suitable, the action of the respondents in delaying his promotion was totally arbitrary and unfair.
The claim has been controverted by Mr. SK Pipat who has appeared on behalf of the respondents.
The file showing as to why the proceedings of the Selection Board were not approved by the Government till May 1993, has not been produced in spite of the fact that a specific direction in this behalf was given vide orders dated May 3, 1995 and May 17, 1995.
4.
Admittedly, the petitioner was working as a Lt.
Colonel since August 2, 1984.
He was eligible to be considered for promotion to the rank of Colonel.
The vacancies were available prior to November 1992.
The Board had met on November 24, 1992 and found the petitioner suitable for promotion.
In the normal course, he should have got the promotion soon after his selection by the Board.
However, the Government of India took almost six months to approve the panel.
As a result, the petitioner retired on January 31, 1993.
In my view, the approval granted by the Government on May 11, 1993 relates back to the original date of selection and a person who has been found suitable prior to his retirement should have been granted promotion.
In any event, even if he has retired from service, it has not been pointed out that any rule debars him from being actually promoted after the approval of the panel.
That being so, the petitioner was entitled to be granted the promotion alongwith others especially those who were junior to him.
The action of the respondents in denying him the actual promotion was clearly unjust and unfair.
5.
It has been contended on behalf of the respondents that the person should be in service before he can be considered for promotion.
Since the petitioner had retired prior to the approval of the panel, he cannot be granted actual promotion as he was no longer in service.
Such a contention, if accepted, would lead to unfair results.
It would enable the respondents to take advantage of their own wrong.
By delaying the approval of the panel, they will be able to deny an officer his rightful due.
This would be arbitrary and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
By this process, juniors would gain an advantage over a senior person who has already been declared fit for promotion.
This is all the more so in view of the fact that on promotion as Colonel, an officer gets extension in service by two years.
The position may have been different if the Government had taken a conscious decision that it did not need to fill up the posts in the higher rank.
In that situation, it may have been permissible to say that none junior to the petitioner having been promoted, he has no cause for grievance.
However, in the present, case, it has not been disputed that various officers juniors to the petitioner were actually promoted and that he was denied his rightful due only on account of the fact that a Lt.
Colonel can continue in service only upto the age of 55 years.
An officer who has served the Army to the satisfaction of the authorities is entitled to have a reasonable expectation of promotion to a higher rank.
The petitioner having been found suitable, does not deserve to be denied that promotion.
In view of the above, it is held that the petitioner shall be deemed to have been promoted to the rank of Colonel and retired as such an January 31, 1995.
6.
Mr. Randhawa submits that the petitioner should be paid the arrears of salary on the assumption that he had worked as a Colonel till January 31, 1995.
Learned counsel for the respondents opposes this prayer.
Since the petitioner had not actually discharged the duties of the post of a Colonel, it does not appear to be fair to allow him full arrears of salary.
However, in the circumstances of the case, it appears to be just and reasonable to direct that he will be paid 50% of the salary that would have been admissible to him on promotion to the rank of Colonel.
Furthermore, his pension and other retiral benefits shall be computed on the basis that he had actually retired as a Colonel w.e.f.
January 31, 1995.
The needful shall be done by the respondents within three months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
In this circumstances, there will be no order as to costs.