Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - Can the Food Corporation of India carry over the vacancies arising in a particular year to the next year ?
The petitioner says that in accordance with the provisions of Regulations 241 and 242 adopted by the Respondent-Food Corporation, it is not permissible to carry over the vacancies.
On the other hand, the Corporation maintains that the petitioner has tried to mislead this Court by referring to Regulation 242.
It does not exist in the Corporation.
The matter is in fact governed by the provisions of Regulation 16(3) of the Staff Regulations, 1971.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner is a member of the Scheduled Castes.
He was appointed as an Assistant Manager in the year 1977.
In 1985, he became a Deputy Manager (Quality Control).
Four years later in the year 1989, the petitioner became a Joint Manager (General).
In 1994, the cases of various officers including the petitioner, were considered for promotion from the rank of Joint Manager (General) to that of Manager (General).
On account of pendency of a vigilance enquiry, the recommendations of the Departmental Promotion Committee in respect of the petitioner were kept in a sealed cover.
Orders regarding the promotion of 14 officers were issued.
Three of these officers namely S/Shri Vardharajan, Mool Chand and PG Rao decided to forego promotion.
Two of the resultant three vacancies were filled up by promotion of S/Shri D.Basak and Suraj Parkash.
The third vacancy remained unfilled.
Two more vacancies were available.
Thus, three posts of Managers (General) remained unfilled in the year 1994.
The petitioner claims that the Departmental Promotion Committee had to meet and prepare a panel for filling these three vacancies in the year 1994 itself.
He further claims that in accordance with the instructions dated June 1, 1982 circulated by the respondent-Corporation, the three officers who had foregone their promotion w.e.f.
February 19, 1994 had to be debarred from consideration for a period of one year and could not be included in the list of eligible candidates.
He further alleges that the "respondent had merged the vacancies of 1994 with those of 1995 and forwarded the same to the DPC for preparation of panel which is in contravention of its own regulation Nos. 2.4.1 and 242".
The petitioner prays that the Corporation should be directed to fill up the vacancies of the year 1994 in accordance with the circular letter dated March 10, 1989.
He further prays that the proceedings of the Departmental Promotion Committee held on May 9, 1995 and in July 1995 as also the select list, if any, prepared by the committee, be quashed.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been alleged that the petitioner has "deliberately mis-stated the facts..." In particular, it has been pointed out that Regulation 242.
"does not exist in the FCI Regulations".
According to the respondent-Corporation, the matter is governed by the provisions of Regulation 16(3)(ii)(a&b).
It has been further pointed out that the petitioner's claim was considered alongwith all eligible candidates in the year 1994.
The recommendations were kept under a sealed cover in view of the fact that he was involved in a vigilance enquiry.
On the conclusion of the enquiry, the sealed cover was opened and "it was found that he could not merit selection".
As for the three officers viz. S/Shri Vardharajan etc. it has been pointed out that they were debarred for promotion for a period of one year w.e.f.
March 1994.
Their cases had to be considered on the basis of the instructions issued by the Corporation vide circular No. 37 of 1993 dated 7.12.93.
According to this communication, "an employee undergoing period of debarment for promotion due to his/her refusal to accept the promotion on an earlier occasion may be considered for promotion in the subsequent meetings of the DPC/ZPC but his promotion will be released only after he/she has completed this period of debarment".
Even though these instructions were modified vide circular dated March 31, 1995, the claims of the three officers had to be considered on the basis of instructions dated 7.12.93 "and not on the basis of the instructions dated 31.3.95 as no administrative instructions can be made to take effect" retrospectively.
With regard to the instructions dated April 10, 1989 issued by the Central Government, it has been pointed out that the Board of Directors of the Corporation had adopted these instructions "to the limited extent of zone of consideration".
According to the respondent, the Corporation was competent to carry over the vacancies of the year 1994 to the next year and the names of the three officers had to be included in the list of eligible candidates.
On these premises, it is claimed that the action is legal and deserves to be sustained.
3.
The petitioner has filed a replication.
He avers that the "stand taken by the respondents is non est in the eyes of law as it is settled law that the Government of India instructions issued are either adopted in toto or rejected.
No pick and choose policy can take place while implementing all the instructions issued by the Govt. of India..." He further avers that Regulation 16(3) relates to determination of seniority and does not permit carry over of vacancies.
Accordingly, it is maintained that the provisions contained in the instructions of the Government of India, are applicable.
Since the action of the respondents is not in conformity with those instructions, the writ petition deserves to be allowed.
4.
The short question that arises for consideration as noticed at the outset is - Can the Corporation carry over the vacancies of the one year to the next year ?
To answer this question, the provisions in the Staff Regulations which have been framed under Section 45 of the Food Corporation Act, 1964, deserve to be noticed.
5.
The procedure for promotion had been laid down in Regulation 10.
It has been inter alia provided that promotion in respect of selection posts which includes category of Managers "shall be made on the basis of merit, seniority being considered only when the merit of contending candidates is approximately the same".
It has been further provided that "all promotions shall be considered by a Promotion Board duly constituted for this purpose and shall be regulated by the general instructions to be issued by the Board of Directors, in regard to the field of choice of candidates, the size of the panel and the validity of the panel".
Regulation 16 relates to the determination of seniority.
Clause (3) apparently relates to the determination of relative seniority of direct recruits and promotees.
However, the provision deserves to be noticed.
It reads as under :-  "16(3) Relative seniority of direct recruits and Promotees : (i) The relative seniority of direct recruits and promotees will be determined according to the rotation of the vacancies as between direct recruits and promotees as based on the quotas reserved for direct recruitment and promotion respectively.
(ii)(a) Vacancies arising in a calendar year shall be filled up during the same calendar year, as far as possible.
(b) Notwithstanding anything stated above, if for any reasons whatsoever, any vacancy or vacancies arising during a calendar year reserved for promotion of direct recruitment, as the case may be, remain unfilled by the prescribed mode such vacancy or vacancies shall be carried over to the subsequent calendar year.
The inter se seniority of such persons as are promoted or recruited against such vacancy or vacancies shall be fixed as if such earlier year's vacancies for promotion or direct recruitment, as the case may be, had arisen during such subsequent calendar year and the persons selected against the additional vacancies shall be placed en block below the last promotee or the direct recruit, as the case may be, in the seniority list based on the rotation of vacancies for that year."
6.
On a perusal of the above provisions as contained in Regulations 10 and 16, it is clear that the respondent-Corporation is competent to constitute promotion Boards for consideration of claims of eligible persons.
These promotions have to be made in accordance with the general instructions which can be issued only by the Board of Directors.
These instructions can relate to the field of choice of candidates, the size of the panel and the period for which the panel shall remain valid.
In other words, the instructions issued by the Government of India are not ipso facto applicable to the employees/officers of the Corporation.
The power to lay down norms vests only in the Board of Directors.
In exercise of this power, the Board can prescribe the zone of consideration.
It can lay down as to how many candidates shall be considered in respect of a particular number of vacancies.
It can also lay down the size of the panel which shall be drawn and the period for which it would remain valid.
Regulation 16(3) apparently relates to seniority.
However, it contains a significant provision in sub-clause (3)(ii)(a) which provides that "as far as possible", the "vacancies arising in a calendar year shall be filled up during the same calendar year".
It has been further provided that "if for any reasons whatsoever, any vacancy or vacancies arising during a calendar year.....remain unfilled....such vacancy or vacancies shall be carried over to the subsequent calendar year".
It is, thus, clear that the Regulation specifically permits the carrying over of vacancies from one year to the next year.
The provision is clear and categorical.
There is no ambiguity.
It has to be followed by the Corporation.
7.
Mr. V Ramswaroop, learned counsel for the petitioner, however, submitted that the Corporation had adopted the instructions issued by the Government vide its circular dated March 10, 1989.
According to these instructions, the Corporation had to frame year-wise panels.
In a case, where vacancies which could not be foreseen at the time of placing facts before the DPC arise, a second DPC should be held to prepare a panel in respect of those vacancies.
As a result, the counsel submits, that a DPC should have been constituted in respect of the three vacancies which had arisen in the year 1994 and the Corporation could not have carried over these vacancies to those of the year 1995.
8.
It is true that when rules are silent, the competent authority can fill the gap by issue of administrative instructions.
Such instructions, however, have to conform to the provisions of the rules.
In the present case, however, in so far as the provisions and rules are concerned, we find that there is no gap or lacuna.
The regulation specifically provides for the carrying over of vacancies when these have remained unfilled in a particular year for any reason whatsoever.
This is precisely what has been done.
Accordingly, we are unable to accept the submissions of the learned counsel for the petitioner that the Corporation had erred in carrying over the vacancies.
9.
Mr. Ramswaroop then submitted that the Corporation cannot adopt part of the instructions issued by the Government and leave out the rest.
10.
We find no merit in this submission.
It has been averred by the respondent-Corporation that the instructions have been adopted only in respect of the zone of consideration.
This is perfectly legal.
Under Regulation 10, "the field of choice of candidates" can be regulated by the Board of Directors.
This has been done by adoption of instructions.
We find no infirmity.
11.
There is another aspect of the matter.
The basic guarantee to an employee is that he should have equality of opportunity.
This is the mandate of Article 16.
The petitioner's case was considered for promotion in the year 1994.
It has been considered by the DPC in the year 1995.
The consideration is not in violation of the regulations or the instructions as adopted by the respondent-Corporation.
The guarantee under Article 16 has, thus, not been violated.
Accordingly, the petitioner can have no cause for grievance which may be remediable through the present proceedings.
12.
With regard to the claim that the names of the three officers namely S/Shri Vardharajan etc. could not be included in the list of eligible candidates, we find that none of these officers is a party in this petition.
In their absence, no direction to their prejudice can be given.
Even otherwise, we are prima facie of the view that in accordance with the instructions dated December 7, 1993, the claim of the officers for promotion has to be considered.
The order of promotion, if any, shall come into operation after the period of debarment has elapsed.
13.
No other point was urged.
14.
In view of the above, we find no merit in this petition.
It is, consequently, dismissed in limine.
In the circumstances of the case, we feel that the respondent should have its costs.
We order accordingly.
Petition dismissed.