GS Singhvi, J - This petition has been filed to quash the departmental inquiry initiated against the petitioner vide charge-sheet (Annexure P-1) dated 2351980 and for quashing the appointment of the Inquiry Officer.
2.
During 1969-71, the petitioner remained posted as Sub Divisional Officer (Civil), Rajpura.
He was also ex-officio Chairman of the Committee constituted by the Government for assessment of the price of plots in Lalru Mandi and for allotment of the same.
The Committee made certain allotments when the petitioner was its Chairman.
Some funds were also collected by the officials in connection with 5th centenary celebrations of the birthday of Guru Nanak Dev.
After the petitioner's transfer from Rajpura, notice dated 15101971 was served upon him and the petitioner was called upon to explain irregularities in the allotment of plots at Lalru Mandi.
He submitted a detailed reply in the year 1971 itself and thereafter no action was taken by the Government.
3.
After about nine years of his transfer from Rajpura, the petitioner was served with Memo (Annexure P-1) whereby the Government ordered initiation of inquiry against him under the Punjab Civil Service (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970.
The charges levelled against the petitioner are that he acted beyond his powers and committed irregularities in the allotment of plots.
He has also been charged with the allegation that he was not keeping control over his subordinates and that resulted in the embezzlement of Rs. 1,725/- and Rs. 1,285/- by two employees, namely, Behari Lal and Om Parkash.
The petitioner submitted his reply on 1781980 but the Government did not take any steps for further inquiry for a period of another four years and it was only in the year 1984 that regular inquiry came to be entrusted to an Inquiry Officer.
4.
The petitioner has challenged the initiation of the inquiry on the ground that there is an abnormal delay of nine years in the issue of charge-sheet and another four years in the appointment of inquiry officer.
His case is that due to delay in the initiation of inquiry, he has suffered serious prejudice and it will not be possible for him to defend himself properly.
5.
The writ petition has been opposed by the respondents who had pleaded that the petitioner had allotted plots in violation of the Government instructions and lacked supervisory control over his subordinates who embezzled the amount collected.
The delay in the initiation of the inquiry has been sought to be explained on the basis of the assertion that after the reply was submitted by the petitioner, comments of the Director, Vigilance Bureau, were called for and after the receipt of the comments in the year 1982, opportunity of personal hearing was given to him by the Chief Secretary, Government of Punjab, on 2511983.
The points were again examined in details and then it was decided to entrust the inquiry to the Inquiry Officer (Vigilance).
According to the respondents, there was no intention on their part to delay the inquiry proceedings and merely because there is a delay in the initiation of the inquiry, the petitioner is not entitled to a writ of mandamus to quash the proceedings.
Respondents have further stated that after receipt of the report of the vigilance inquiry in the year 1972, the matter was examined but some clarification was sought.
Thereafter, draft charge-sheet was received on 981973 but it took sufficiently long time to get further clarification.
A supplementary report was received from the vigilance department on 31.1.1975 and ultimately modified charge-sheet was received on 141980.
The competent authority approved the same on 2351980 and thereafter memo was issued to the petitioner.
6.
The only point which requires determination by the Court is - whether the inquiry initiated against the petitioner in the year 1980 should be quashed on the ground that there is unexplained delay of nine years in the initiation of inquiry and another four years in the appointment of the Inquiry Officer.
7.
There is no denying that the petitioner stood retired from the service in the year 1986 before he attained the age of superannuation and even if he was to continue in service till the age of superannuation, the petitioner would have retired in 1987.
As on date, the matter has become 24 years old with reference to the years of incident, i.e. 1969-71.
There is no allegation against the petitioner of misappropriation of public funds, cheating, fraud or breach of trust.
The allegation levelled against him is that he committed irregularities in the allotment of plots, being ex-officio Chairman of the Committee constituted by the Government.
No doubt, the respondents have offered some explanation regarding the delay in the appointment of the inquiry officer, but no cogent reason has been assigned as to why it took nine years to the Government to issue a charge-sheet to the petitioner when his explanation was called as early as in the year 1971.
The casual and lop-sided approach adopted by the respondents is evident from the fact that the draft charge-sheet is alleged to have been prepared in the year 1973, it was issued to the petitioner only in the year 1980.
Even the supplementary report was made available in January, 1975 and from that date also it took more than five years to the Government to initiate the inquiry.
In my opinion, in the facts of this case delay of nine years in the initiation of inquiry and another period of four years in the appointment of the inquiry officer, justify the quashing of the proceedings.
If at all the Government is allowed to proceed with the inquiry, the inquiry at this late stage, i.e. after 24 years after the alleged irregularities committed by the petitioner, will serve no purpose.
It would be extremely difficult for the department to produce evidence and will be impossible for the petitioner to defend himself in respect of his working in the year 1970.
The petitioner has suffered enough because he has not got full retiral benefits due to the pendency of the inquiry.
The allegation of supervisory negligence also cannot be allowed to form foundation for inquiry after lapse of almost two decades and half.
8.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is allowed.
The proceedings initiated against the petitioner vide Annexure P-1 are quashed.
The petitioner shall get all consequential benefits.
Petition allowed.