Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was a candidate for admission to the course leading to the degree of Bachelor of Architecture/Planning.
He appeared in the entrance test held on May 28, 1995.
The result was declared on June 22, 1995.
The petitioner was placed at No. 448 in order of merit.
After having qualified in the entrance test, the petitioner submitted his application which was received in the office of the respondents on July 3, 1995.
The petitioner appeared in the interview held on July 17, 1995.
According to the petitioner, he was placed in the waiting list.
When he appeared for the consideration of his claim on August 13, 1995, he was informed that his application form has been rejected on the ground that the certificates had not been attached therewith.
Aggrieved by this action of the respondents, the petitioner has approached this court through the present writ petition.
The petitioner alleges that he had produced all the certificates with the application form and that the action of the respondents in rejecting his claim, is arbitrary and unfair.
2.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been admitted that the petitioner had appeared in the combined entrance test for admission to the Engineering/Architecture/Planning Courses.
However, on scrutiny of the application form, it was found that the required documents/attested photostat copies of certificates had not been attached.
Consequently, the petitioner's application was rejected in accordance with the stipulation in the Information Brochure wherein it had been specifically provided that "incomplete application or application not supported by the requisite attested photostat copies of the documents... will not be entertained."
3.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
4.
The short question that arises for consideration is - Did the petitioner submit an incomplete application form ?
5.
The original application form submitted by the petitioner on July 1, 1995 has been produced by the learned counsel for the respondents.
A perusal thereof shows that the petitioner has given all the requisite information in respect of the qualifying examination passed by him.
The name of the Board, the college, the year of passing, the Roll Number and the marks secured by the petitioner in each of the subjects, have been indicated.
Still further, there is an interview proforma submitted by the petitioner on August 13, 1995 in which he has given the result of the 10+2 examination.
The entries in this form have been checked and verified by some officer of the respondents.
Furthermore, there is a categoric averment in para 4 of the petition that he had been "placed in the waiting list the interview for which is to be held on 1381995."
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, this averment has not been categorically denied.
Additionally, the petitioner has produced the original certificates showing that he had passed the matriculation examination in the year 1993 and the 12th class examination in the year 1995.
It is also apparent that the certificates for passing the Matriculation, the 10+1 and the 10+2 examination had been issued much prior to the submission of the application in July 1995.
Taking the totality of circumstances into consideration, it is difficult to accept the claim made on behalf of the respondents that the petitioner had not attached the certified copies of the certificates with his application form.
Had it been so, his application would have been rejected on July 17, 1995 and he would not have been placed on the waiting list.
Still further, on August 13, 1995, the information supplied by him could not have been checked and verified.
6.
Mr. Jaskirat Singh, learned counsel for the respondents states that the University had no animus against the petitioner and they could have had no legitimate reason to detach the certificates from the application form.
He could be right.
However, it is not impossible that the certificates may have got detached during the course of handling of the applications.
It is not disputed by the learned counsel that the petitioner was eligible and candidates who had secured lesser marks than him have already been admitted.
Still further, the genuineness of the certificates produced by the petitioner now has not been doubted.
7.
The petitioner was admittedly eligible.
At least three persons below him in order of merit have already been admitted.
In this situation, excluding the petitioner from consideration shall be patently unjust and unfair.
It is admitted that certain seats are yet to be filled up.
According to the notice issued by the Punjabi University, Patiala, the interviews for these seats are fixed for October 19, 1995.
It would be in the interest of justice that the respondents should consider his claim.
8.
Accordingly, the writ petition is allowed.
The action of the respondents in rejecting the petitioner's application form is set aside.
The respondents are directed to allow the petitioner to appear in the interview scheduled for October 19, 1995.
The petitioner shall produce the certificates for the consideration of the authorities.
His case shall be considered on the hypothesis that he was eligible.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
9.
Copy of this order be given dasti to the counsel for the parties.