Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner is aggrieved by the order dated August 26, 1992 by which respondents 4 and 5 have been declared senior to him the cadre of Senior Scale Stenographers.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner as well as respondents 4 and 5 were recruited as Camp Clerks on May 2, 1978, October 17, 1980 and December 24, 1984 respectively.
They were promoted to work as Senior Scale Stenographers on ad hoc basis on different dates.
Vide order dated July 24, 1991, the petitioner as well as respondent No. 4 were appointed as Senior Scale Stenographers on regular basis with effect from November 6, 1989.
Respondent No. 5 was appointed as such with effect from January 12, 1990.
It appears that respondent No. 5 submitted a representation claiming seniority over the petitioner and respondent No. 3.
Vide letter dated May 29, 1992, the Excise and Taxation Commissioner, Haryana-Respondent No. 2 issued a show cause notice to the petitioner as well as respondent No. 3 to explain as to why the seniority be not redetermined.
The petitioner submits that his request for a copy of the representation was not answered.
However, by the impugned order, he was declared junior to respondents 4 and 5.
Aggrieved by this order, the petitioner has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been inter alia averred that "the petitioner and respondents 3 to 5 were promoted to the post of Senior Scale Stenographer on ad hoc basis on passing first language test of shorthand/typing with the condition that they will be made regular on the clearance of second language test by them within a stipulated period.
As per Government instructions and policy, seniority amongst Senior Scale Stenographers is fixed on the basis of passing of second language test.
The seniority as Camp Clerk is not relevant for the purpose of determining seniority amongst the Senior Scale Stenographers.
Whosoever clears/passes both the tests earlier is ranked senior".
According to the State Government, the two respondents having cleared the second language test earlier than the petitioner, they have been rightly declared senior to him.
To a similar effect is the written statement filed on behalf of respondents 4 and 5.
4.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
The short question that falls for consideration is - Is the inter se seniority of the Senior Scale Stenographers to be determined on the basis of the date of passing the test ?
5.
Admittedly, the petitioner as well as respondents 3 to 5 are members of the Haryana Excise and Taxation Department, Subordinate Offices, Ministerial (Group-C) Service (hereinafter referred to as the Service).
Their conditions of service are laid down in the rules called the Haryana Excise and Taxation Department, Subordinate Offices, Ministerial (Group-C) Service Rules, 1981.
Rule 7 provides the qualifications which a person has to fulfil for appointment to different posts in the service.
These qualifications have been separately indicated in case of direct recruitment as well as promotion etc.
So far as the post of Senior Scale Stenographer is concerned, the requirement of the rule is as under :-  "Sr. No.
Designation of Post Academic qualification & experience, if any for direct recruitment Academic qualifications and experience, if any, for the appointment other than by direct recruitment.
1 2 3 4. xx xx xx.
7.
Sr.
Scale Stenographer (1) Matric or its equivalent.
(2) Knowledge of Hindi upto Matric standard.
(3) English shorthand at 100 words per minute and transcription thereof at 20 words per minute.
(4) Hindi shorthand at 80 words per minute and transcription thereof at 15 words per minute.
(5) 4 per cent mistakes on the typed material will be allowed.
Three years' experience as Steno-typist of Camp Clerk having English and Hindi Speed in shorthand at 100/80 words per minute and transcription thereof at 20/15 words per minute respectively.
4 per cent mistakes on the typed material will be allowed.
6.
The petitioner as well as respondents 3 to 5 had admittedly worked for more than three years as Camp Clerks before they were promoted to the posts of Senior Scale Stenographers.
They have also qualified the tests in English and Hindi Stenography.
While the petitioner and respondent No. 3 had passed both the tests on June 24, 1991, respondent No. 3 is said to have qualified these tests on December 2, 1989 and respondent No. 5 on March 10, 1990.
The provision regarding determination of seniority is contained in Rule 11.
According to this provision, the inter se seniority of the members of the Service has to be determined "by the length of continuous service on any post in the Service".
In case, two or more members have been appointed on the same date by promotion, their seniority has to be determined "according to the seniority of such members in the appointments from which they were promoted...." It is, thus, clear that according to the provisions of the statutory rules, in a case where two or more persons have been promoted to a higher post on the same date, the seniority of the posts from which they have been promoted, determines their inter se position in the higher rank.
Admittedly, the petitioner and respondents 3 to 5 had been promoted as Senior Scale Stenographers from the posts of Camp Clerks.
It is also not disputed that the petitioner as well as respondents 3 and 4 have been regularly promoted w.e.f.
November 6, 1989 while respondent No. 5 was promoted w.e.f.
January 12, 1990.
Still further, it is also the admitted position that in the seniority list of Camp Clerks, the names of the petitioner and respondents 3 to 5 appear at Sr. Nos. 276, 322, 451 and 565 respectively.
The petitioner and respondents 3 and 4 having been appointed on the same date, he (the petitioner) had to rank senior to them in view of his seniority in the cadre of Camp Clerks.
So far as respondent No. 5 is concerned, his date of regular appointment is admittedly later than that of the petitioner as well as respondents 3 and 4.
According to the rule, he would rank junior to all the three.
7.
The second respondent has determined the inter se seniority by the impugned order on the basis of the date of qualifying the tests.
In the order, it has been categorically observed that "whatsoever clears both the tests earlier is ranked senior".
That is also the plea taken in the written statement.
On a perusal of the rules, I find that there is no reference to any written test in the rules.
So far as determination of seniority is concerned, the relevant consideration is the date of continuous appointment and not the date of passing the test.
Ms. Bahri has shown to me a letter dated August 19, 1981.
This letter does not show that the Government had issued any general instructions regarding the determination of inter se seniority of Senior Scale Stenographers in the Excise and Taxation Department.
In fact, in the opening part of the letter, it is clearly stated that the Haryana Civil Secretariat had not issued any instructions.
However, only a clarification had been given according to which such persons who qualify the stenography tests in Hindi and English and are promoted as Senior Scale Stenographers prior to a person to them, shall be entitled to get seniority in the higher post.
This clarification is not relevant for the present case as according to the admitted position, the petitioner as well as respondents 3 and 4 had been admittedly appointed on regular basis w.e.f.
the same date viz. November 6, 1989 and respondent No. 5 had been promoted w.e.f.
January 12, 1990.
Consequently, learned counsel can derive no advantage from this letter.
According to the statutory rule, the date of passing the test is not the relevant consideration for determination of seniority.
Accordingly, the impugned order which is based on the hypothesis that the inter se seniority has to be determined on the basis of qualifying both the tests, cannot be sustained.
It is, accordingly, quashed.
8.
It has been urged on behalf of the respondents that the petitioner was not qualified to be a Senior Scale Stenographer on November 6, 1989 as he had not established his eligibility by passing the tests in Hindi and English Stenography.
According to the respondents, he had qualified the tests on June 24, 1991 only.
On this basis, it has been contended that the petitioner cannot be treated as senior to respondents 4 and 5 who had qualified both the tests prior to him.
9.
The validity of the order dated July 24, 1991 by which the petitioner was appointed as Senior Scale Stenographer on regular basis w.e.f.
November 6, 1989 has not been questioned before me.
It is further clear that even respondents 3 to 5 have been given regular appointments w.e.f.
the dates prior to their qualifying both the tests.
Besides this, if respondents 1 and 2 be of the view that the petitioner was not eligible for regular appointment on account of the fact that he had not proved his proficiency in English and Hindi Stenography in accordance with the provisions of Appendix 'B', they will determine the factual position in accordance with law.
If after hearing all concerned, and on consideration of the matter, it is found that the dates of regular promotion need to be varied, it would be open to the respondents to do so.
However, as at present, the impugned order, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-5, is not in conformity with the provisions of the statutory rules.
It cannot be sustained.
Accordingly, it is quashed.
As a result, this writ petition is allowed.
The order, Annexure P-5 is quashed.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.