HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - By the present judgment I propose to dispose of RSA Nos. 3871 and 3239 of 1987 and CWP No. 1620 of 1983.
The facts have been taken from RSA No. 3871 of 1987.
2.
Amrik Singh appellant was appointed as a Divisional Head Draftsman in the Punjab State Electricity Board on 12th August, 1974, whereas the respondent Sadhu Singh Bathal was appointed as a Junior Engineer on 22nd September, 1970.
It is the admitted case that both the posts are inter-changeable.
The appellant qualified the AMIE examination on 581978 whereas the respondent obtained this qualification on 10.2.1979.
It is the admitted case that the services of the appellant as well as the respondent No. 1 were governed by the Punjab State Electricity Board Services of Engineers (Civil) Regulations, 1965 (hereinafter referred to as the Regulations).
The Regulations as applicable to the parties provided that for promotion to the post of SDO (Civil) or Assistant Engineer Class-II from the post of Junior Engineer and Divisional Head Draftsman, the necessary requirement was a minimum of five years of service along with AMIE qualification.
As per proviso sixthly (a) of Regulation 16(1) of 1965 Regulations, it was provided that in case two or more members from different categories became eligible for promotion to the rank of Assistant Engineer Class-II, the seniority was to be determined in order of their acquiring the prescribed qualification of AMIE degree in Engineering and the subordinates who cleared the final examination in an earlier batch and had compeleted a minimum of five years service would be placed above those fulfilling these two conditions subsequently.
The appellant, Amrik Singh, no doubt was promoted to the post of Assistant Engineer by the Board as he had cleared the AMIE examination on 5th August, 1978 whereas the respondent who had qualified the examination of AMIE on 10th February, 1979 was, as per this regulation required to be treated as Junior to the appellant.
In the meantime, however, the Board in its meeting held on 9th December, 1981 (Ex.P1) took a decision to the following effect :  "The Punjab State Electricity Board is pleased to order that the date of passing the AMIE should not disturb the inter se seniority of the technical subordinates eligible for promotion to the post of A.E.
(Elect/Civil) at a given time.
Such technical subordinates who have passed the AMIE examination later than those who are junior to them, but are eligible for promotion on the basis of AMIE qualification, shall continue to be senior to the latter and will have prior right of promotion subject to other conditions being fulfilled.
Similarly amongst the other categories of technical subordinates persons of higher ranks, as for example Junior Engineers who have acquired the AMIE qualification and are eligible for promotion at the time of consideration shall rank higher than the lower ranks of technical subordinates.
Necessary amendment in the PSEB Service of Engineers (Electrical and Civil) Regulations 1965 is being carried out separately."
The net result of this amendment was that though the respondent had acquired the AMIE qualification subsequent to the appellant, yet that particular date was ignored and the seniority in the lower post was not to be disturbed by these events.
The respondent Sadhu Singh aggrieved by the aforesaid order sought to challenge the same by way of a civil suit.
The suit was decreed and the appeal taken by Amrik Singh appellant was dismissed on the short ground that the order of December 9, 1981 had been passed by the Board by virtue of the powers conferred under Section 79 of the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948 (for short 'the Act') and as the Board had the powers to make the amendment in question, it would have the force of law as soon as it was made though not formally promulgated.
Aggrieved thereby the present appeal has been filed.
3.
Mr. SS Nijjar, learned Senior Advocate, appearing for the appellant has sought to contend that as the proposed amendment dated 9th December, 1981 has not been notified in terms of Section 79 of the Act, it would not have any force and as it had been formally notified on 1661983 vide Ex.DW3/4 it could not be said to operate prior to that date and as such no benefit could accrue to the respondent.
4.
Mr. Rajiv Atma Ram, learned counsel for the respondent, has however argued that the Act as per the provisions of section 79 as holding the field on 9th December, 1981, and there was no requirement of the Act that an amendment could be effected by a notification so as to make it enforceable and this amendment in section 79 of the Act requiring a formal notification had come only on 1531984 for the first time.
He has also urged that keeping in view this particular fact, this court in a Division Bench decision in US Grewal and others v. The Punjab State Electricity Board (CWP No. 397 of 1979) decided on 23rd March, 1979 had held that where the board had taken a decision in a meeting to effect an amendment in the regulation the amendment would come into force on the day of the decision itself.
5.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, I find no merit in the appeal.
A bare comparison of section 79 as amended in 1984 with that of the unamended provisions, clearly indicates that as of now an amendment in the regulation in order to become effective must be notified in the official gazette but such a requirement did not exist in the unamended provisions.
This distinction by itself clarifies the legal position conclusively.
It is, therefore, apparent that once it has been decided by the Board to make an amendment no further formalities were required to make it enforceable.
That being the situation, there was no requirement of law that the decision of 9th December, 1981 was to be notified in order to become operative and on the contrary the decision taken in the meeting in question had the force of law and could be implemented effectively.
In the light of what has been held above, the other questions raised need not be considered.
For the reasons recorded above, the appeals as also the writ petition are dismissed.