Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner who had undergone heart bye-pass surgery at the Escorts Heart Institute and Research Centre, New Delhi in May 1994, has filed the present petition with the prayer that the Respondent-State of Punjab be directed to reimburse the medical expenses incurred by him.
2.
The State of Punjab contests this claim on the ground that in accordance with the instructions dated January 25, 1991, issued by the Health Department, the employees "who want to get treatment out of the State should seek the permission of the Medical Board or Director, Health Department, Punjab, Chandigarh."
It has been further stated that "the petitioner was under medical treatment at Fazilka in 2/94 and operated on 21.5.1994.
He had sufficient time to refer (sic) the case for getting the permission of Medical Board through the Department.
But he did not do so".
Accordingly, the bill submitted by the petitioner for an amount of Rs. 1,56,05000 was returned to him on September 6, 1995.
3.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
Mr. SC Nagpal, learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the petitioner had been referred to the Escorts Heart Centre by the Doctors at the Civil Hospital, Fazilka.
On account of his condition, the petitioner had to undergo the surgery.
The bill alongwith the necessary vouchers and certificates was examined by the Principal and endorsed to the Department.
After the lapse of more than a year, the bill was returned to the petitioner.
Since the bill has been duly verified and was found to be in order, the respondents are bound to reimburse the amount of the expenses incurred by the petitioner.
He has further submitted that the Escorts Hospital is one of the institutions recognised by the State Government and that being so, the reimbursement cannot be denied on the ground that the petitioner had not sought the permission of the Medical Board or Director, Health Department, before undergoing the surgery.
Learned counsel has placed reliance on the decisions of this Court in Sadhu R Pall v. State of Punjab, 1994(1) SCT 552 and in Ashok Kumar v. Secretary, Department of Education, Punjab Chandigarh, C.W.P.
No. 1900 of 1995 decided on April 21, 1995.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioner has been controverted by Mr. Parminder Singh, appearing for the respondents.
4.
Admittedly, the petitioner had undergone Coronary Artery Grafting Bye-Pass surgery on May 21, 1994.
It is also not disputed that prior to that he had been under treatment at the Civil Hospital in February 1994.
It was on the advice of the treating physician that the petitioner had gone to the Escorts Heart Institute on May 12, 1994.
He was admitted and ultimately, the surgery was performed.
The discharge summary given by the Institute to the petitioner shows that "he had been having angina on exertion."
It was further found that he had "history of old interior wall myocardial infarction in the past."
After conducting various tests, it was found that his left ventricle ejection function was only 40%.
Normally, it should be about 60%.
It was after conducting various tests that the decision to perform surgery was taken by the Hospital.
Admission to the hospital was not avoidable.
Surgery was necessary.
The petitioner's life was in danger.
He had no choice.
In this situation, the respondents cannot refuse to reimburse the expenses on the ground that he had not taken prior permission.
It further deserves notice that in Sadhu R Paul's case (supra), the Bench after examining the various instructions etc. had categorically held that the respondents were bound to reimburse the expenses incurred by the petitioner therein on his treatment at the Escorts Heart Institute.
In Ashok Kumar's case (supra), the Bench had not only directed the respondents to reimburse the expenses but also awarded 15,000/- as costs.
The Bench also granted liberty to the petitioner "to submit separate bill for reimbursement of the travelling expenses incurred by him in the course of medical treatment."
5.
In spite of the above decisions, the State Government has persisted in denying the payment of the petitioner.
Their action cannot be supported either in law or otherwise.
6.
Accordingly, the writ petition is allowed.
The petitioner shall present the bill on account of the medical and travelling expenses to the Director, Public Instructions within one week from today.
The payment shall be made to the petitioner within one month thereafter.
In case, the payment is not made within the time specified, he will be entitled to the payment with interest at the rate of 12% from the date of initial submission of the bill till the actual reimbursement to him.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to his costs which are assessed at Rs. 5,000/