VK Jhanji, J - In this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, petitioner is seeking a writ in the nature of Certiorari quashing charge-sheet dated 17111980 (Annexure P-7), order dated 3181987/8101987 (Annexure P-11) whereby one increment of the petitioner has been stopped and order dated 24/27.1.1992 (Annexure P-15) passed in appeal by the appellate Authority.
The petitioner is also seeking a Writ of Mandamus directing the respondents to promote the petitioner to the post of Assistant Manager (Depot) from the date his juniors were promoted and to grant all other consequential benefits from that date.
2.
Petitioner had initially been appointed as Assistant Grade-III and was promoted as Assistant Grade-II and then Assistant Grade-I(D).
The next promotion from the post of Assistant Grade-I(D) is to the post of Assistant Manager (Depot).
It is the case of the petitioner that when his name was to be considered for promotion, he was served with charge-sheet dated 3081986 for some imaginary store loss, but subsequently the charge-sheet was withdrawn by the respondents on 2511989.
It has also been averred that because of pendency of charge-sheet, the promotion case of the petitioner was defferred.
However, many persons of 1987 and 1988 penal were promoted.
The details and particulars of the persons who were junior to the petitioner and were promoted ahead of him, have been given in para 10 of the writ petition.
After the charge-sheet was withdrawn, the petitioner represented to the respondents for considering his name for promotion to the post of Assistant Manager on the ground that there is no case pending against him.
It has also been averred in the writ petition that further promotions were made by the respondents vide order dated 14/16101989, but however the petitioner was again not considered and his juniors were given promotions.
Petitioner, thus, has made grievance that mere issuance of charge-sheet upon him could not become the reason for withholding his promotion.
The other grievance made in the writ petition is that for the period between 18th of July, 1977 to 30th July, 1977, when the petitioner was working as Assistant Grade-II(D) in Food Corporation of India, F.S.D.
District Patiala, the petitioner was issued charge-sheet vide letter dated 17111980 but the charge-sheet was served on the petitioner only on 1611987, i.e. after a lapse of ten years from the date of incident.
Along with the charge-sheet, the petitioner was served with statement of imputations containing the allegation that during the course of Audit/PV of the gunny bags, the Audit team found shortage of gunny bags as given below.
As per Book As per P.V.
Remarks A Class BT 15,100 15,095 5 Damaged B Class repairable 2,143 2,149 +6 C Class  3,245 3,764 + 519 (Subsequently it was found that 315 gunnies belonged to the Pvt. Party).
Hence, the excess comes to 204 gunnies."
It was also alleged in statement of imputations that petitioner on his transfer from FCI FSD Rajpura to FCI FSD Sirhind did not hand over the charge as well as relevant record to his successor.
On these allegations, petitioner was charged for negligent conduct, mala fide intention, responsible for shortage in gunny bags and not handing over the charge to any other official, thereby infringing Regulations 31 and 32 of the Food Corporation of India (Staff) Regulations, 1971 (hereinafter referred to as 1971 Regulations).
Petitioner in his reply dated 2711987 submitted that he never handled/took charge of gunny bags at F.S.D.
Rajpura.
He submitted that though he was ordered to take over the charge of gunny bags, but the same was never taken because the stock of 'B' and 'C' class were lying in the open on the mercy of watch and ward.
He submitted that he requested for safe custody of gunny bags on which a lock and key could be applied and therefore, on his request, the orders were revised and Sh. Pritam Lal, Asstt.
Grade- I(D) and Sh. Kapil, Asstt.
Grade-II(D) took over the charge of gunny bags jointly.
He also submitted that on 12.8.1977, he received his transfer orders for F.S.D.
Sirhind and was relieved on the same day.
His case, thus, in the reply was that he never took/handled the physical charge of gunny bags F.S.D.
Rajpura and the charges levelled against him are absolutely contrary, unjust and unfair.
The reply of the petitioner did not find favour with the disciplinary Authority and therefore, in exercise of powers conferred under the 1971 Regulations, the disciplinary Authority decided to impose upon the petitioner the penalty of stoppage of one increment without cumulative effect w.e.f.
111988.
In appeal, the said order was maintained.
Petitioner submitted a review petition to the Managing Director who vide order dated 311992 accepted the review petition and set aside the order of the appellate Authority and remitted the case to the appellate Authority for examining the appeal on merits and passing a proper speaking order.
The appellate Authority again vide order dated 24/27.1.1992 dismissed the appeal.
In this petition, petitioner seeks to challenge the order of the respondents not promoting him in preference to his juniors and also the order whereby penalty of stoppage of one increment without cumulative effect has been imposed upon him.
3.
Mr. JC Verma, Sr. Advocate, counsel for the petitioner, has contended that the case of petitioner for promotion as Assistant Manager (Depot) was deferred only due to the reason that charge-sheet was pending against him, but since the same was later on withdrawn the petitioner is entitled to be promoted with effect from the date his juniors were promoted as such.
He also contended that the orders of the disciplinary Authority and also of appellate Authority stopping one increment without cumulative effect are liable to be set aside being cryptic and non-speaking one.
In answer to this, Mr. Hemant Kumar, Advocate, counsel for the FCI submitted that the post of Assistant Manager (Depot) is a selection post and as per procedure laid down in Regulation 10(ii) of 1971 Regulations formulated under powers conferred by Section 45 of FCI Act 37 of 1964, the same is filled in case of promotion on the basis of merit, seniority being considered only when merit of contending candidates is approximately the same.
He contended that the petitioner was considered for promotion to the post of Assistant Manager (Depot) as and when his name came within the consideration zone, but since he did not merit selection he was not promoted.
As regards the order stopping one increment without cumulative effect, he contended that the order has been passed after considering the reply of the petitioner and thus, it calls for no interference by this Court.
4.
The procedure for promotion has been provided in 1971 Regulations.
Admittedly, the post of Assistant Manager (Depot) is a selection post indicated in Regulation 10(ii) of 1971 Regulations and is to be made on the basis of merit, seniority being considered only when the merit of contending candidates is approximately the same.
It has come in the written statement that the petitioner has been considered for promotion, irrespective of the issuance of the charge-sheet.
Petitioner had been so considered during 1987 and 1988, whereas he did not fall within the consideration zone during the years 1990 and 1991.
In this regard, the following averments made in the written statement are to be noticed :-  "The petitioner was accordingly considered for promotion to the post of AM (D) for the panel of years 1987 and 1988 when he came within the consideration zone.
The petitioner did not fall within the consideration zone at the time of formation of the required panel for the year 1990 and 1991.
Shri Surinder Kumar petitioner was considered for promotion as AM (D) during 1987 vis-a-vis his juniors.
There were 118 vacant posts of AM(D) and the Confidential reports of the officials appearing in provisional Zonal Seniority upto No. 565 issued as on 31.12.1981.
(Consideration zone was 354 officials belonging to general category) were referred to.
He was considered by the Zonal Promotion Committee.
The Confidential Reports for the year 1984, 1985 and 1986 were depended upon.
Shri Surinder Kumar was figuring in provisional zonal seniority at Serial No. 563.
Based on his service records (CR Dossier) for the year 1984, 1985 and 1986, he did not merit selection.
Similarly, he was again in the zone of consideration against the year 1988.
There were 92 vacancies during this year and the zone of consideration was 276, i.e. upto tentative zonal seniority No. 487 of AGI (D) issued as on 31.12.1986.
The provisional zonal seniority number of Shri Surinder Kumar was at ZS List No. 407.
Though his case was deferred by the Zonal Promotion Committee in its meeting held on 2891988 to 3101988, due to non-availability of the CR Dossier, the same on receipt of Confidential Report Dossier was placed before the Zonal Promotion Committee, along with other similar case, in its meeting held on 16121988.
The Confidential Reports for the year 1985, 1986 and 1987 were referred to but the petitioner could not "Merit Selection" even in 1988.
During 1989, no regular panel of AM (D) was drawn in North Zone of FCI Promotions effected during 1989 were in respect of those officials whose cases were deferred against earlier panel but later cleared by the Zonal Promotion Committee in 1988-89.
In 1990, the number of vacancies of AM(D) available was 12 (for 1990) panel and the last General category official figured in consideration zone was of Provisional Zonal Seniority No. 113 whereas Shri Surinder Kumar was too much junior (Provisional Zonal Seniority No. 407) and was not in consideration zone.
In 1991 also, the vacancy of AM(D) available to draw a panel was 25 and the last general category official who figured in consideration zone was of Provisional Zonal Seniority No. 216.
Shri Surinder Kumar was again too Junior (Provisional Zonal Seniority No. 407) and was not in the consideration zone."
In view of the stand taken by the respondents in para 4 of the written statement, it is apparent that as and when the petitioner came within the consideration zone he was considered for promotion, but on the basis of his confidential reports he did not merit selection.
It is also not the case of the petitioner that his confidential reports were far better than those who have been selected in preference to him.
In this view of the matter, the grievance of the petitioner that he was not considered for promotion because of pendency of charge-sheet is without any substance.
5.
As regards the order imposing penalty of stoppage of one increment without cumulative effect, the petitioner is justified in contending that the disciplinary Authority as well as the Appellate Authority have not properly applied their mind to the explanation submitted by him.
It is true that where a minor punishment is sought to be imposed the procedure for holding enquiry need not be followed unless otherwise prescribed by the disciplinary Rules.
However, this does not mean that it is entirely subject to the pleasure of the disciplinary Authority.
The disciplinary Authority is required to apply its mind to the facts and circumstances of the case as disclosed in the representation of the employee and other available material.
The order must disclose that the explanation submitted by the employee has been properly dealt with.
The only charges levelled against the petitioner were that while he was working in FCI FSD Rajpura from 1871977 to 30719677, five 'A' Class BT gunny bags were found damaged and that he did not hand over the charge to his successor.
In his reply dated 2711987, petitioner explained that when he was ordered to take charge of the gunny bags, he did not do so because the stock of 'B' and 'C' Class were lying in the open on the mercy of watch and ward and he requested for its safe custody on which a lock and key could be applied.
On his repeated protest, the order was revised and Pritam Lal and Kapil were given the charge jointly.
Thus, his case in the reply was that since he never took charge of these gunny bags, the question of handing over its charge at the time of his transfer did not arise.
The disciplinary Authority as well as the appellate Authority in their orders have not dealt with this explanation of the petitioner.
So much so, when the Reviewing Authority while reviewing the order of the appellate Authority asked it to decide the matter afresh, the appellate Authority did not choose to deal with the explanation submitted by the petitioner.
What has been said by the appellate Authority is that "there is sufficient evidence on record about the reluctance of Sh. Surinder Kumar, AG.I (D) to take the charge and as a result of this reluctance he was transferred and was relieved on the same day.
The Disciplinary Authority while passing the order took due cognizance of this negligence and undesirable conduct of Sh. Surinder Kumar AGI(D) and after going through the record and also submissions made by Sh. Surinder Kumar AGI(D) in his appeal, the undersigned finds that the contentions raised by him in his appeal lack substance".
It is, thus, clear that the appeal has been dismissed on the ground that the petitioner was reluctant to take charge, but this was never the charge against the petitioner; rather the charge against him was that he did not hand over the charge and deliver relevant record to his successor.
Since the petitioner never held or handled the charge of gunny bags, the question of handing over the charge or the record does not arise.
In this view of the matter, order dated 31.8.19897/8.10.1987 (Annexure P-11) and order dated 24/27.1.1992 (Annexure P-15) cannot be sustained.
6.
On setting aside of the orders, the usual course would have been to ask the disciplinary Authority to pass a fresh order, but considering that the incident relates to the year 1977 and the charge-sheet was served on the petitioner in 1987, it would be an exercise in futility if the disciplinary Authority is asked to pass a fresh order.
Consequently, the writ petition is allowed only to the extent that charge- sheet, Annexure P-7, order, Annexure P-11 and order, Annexure P-15, shall stand quashed.
Deduction, if any, made as a consequence of orders, Annexures P-11 and P-15, shall be refunded to the petitioner within a period of three months from the date of communication of this order.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.