Ashok Bhan, J - Petitioner has sought the quashing of impugned order dated 29.5.1995 Annexure P4 rejecting his representation to grant benefit of military service towards seniority rendered by the petitioners during national emergency in the war with China in 1962 and in 1965 in the war with Pakistan.
2.
Petitioner joined as Wireless Constable in the Army w.e.f.
871963.
Petitioner was discharged from service at his own request on 10.1.1970.
He joined as Wireless Constable with the respondents aft erhis release from the Army w.e.f.
16.4.1971.
Petitioner is at present working as Sub Inspector at Police Radio Station, Jagraon.
3.
For those who served the country at the call of nation during the Chinese aggression and Indo-Pak War in 1962 and 1965 respectively, certain concessions were granted after their discharge from military service by the State of Punjab by framing Rules called as Punjab Govt. National Emergency (Concession) Rules, 1965 (hereinafter referred to as the 1965 Rules).
These concessions were granted towards increments, seniority and pension.
Petitioner applied to the respondents for grant of benefit of military service rendered during the operation of emergency towards increments, seniority and pensionary benefits in 1986.
Petitioner was granted benefits of military service towards increment and pension vide order dated 1291987.
Since petitioner was not granted the benefit towards seniority, representations were filed by him seeking relief for seniority in terms of the 1965 Rules.
Petitioner was asked to supply the original discharge certificate which was supplied by the petitioner.
Since petitioner was discharged from the military service at his own risk on compassionate grounds, the relief claimed by the petitioner for benefit towards seniority was declined aggrieved against which the present writ petition has been filed.
4.
Notice of motion was issued in response to which written statement has been filed.
Basic facts regarding rendering of military service during emergency, joining of service as Wireless Constable and his present posting as Sub Inspector at Police Radio Station, Jagraon, are admitted by the respondents.
Stand taken by the respondents is that petitioner is not entitled to the benefit towards seniority as petitioner had been discharged from service at his own request and not due to demobilisation or reduction.
Further stand taken by the respondents is that petitioner had wrongly been allowed the benefit towards increment and pension and that petitioner is not entitled to the grant of military service benefits towards increments, seniority and pension.
5.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
Relying upon Raj Pal Sharma and others etc. etc. v. State of Haryana and others, AIR 1985 SC 1263, counsel for the petitioner contended that petitioner could not be denied the benefits of a military service towards increments, pension and seniority only because of the reason that he had been discharged from service at his own request or on compassionate grounds.
We find force in this submission of counsel for the petitioner.
The (sic) the State of Haryana was violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India and no distinction could be made between the persons who were released on compassionate grounds and those who were released on other grounds; that the grounds on which they were released are not material.
If once they are held to be ex-military servicemen they are entitled to the benefits of Rule 4.
It was observed by their Lordships as under :-  "It is true that the principle of equality in Article 14 of the Constitution does not take away from the State the power of classifying persons for legitimate purposes.
Every classification in some degree is likely to produce some inequality and mere production of inequality is not enough.
Differential treatment does not per se Constitute violation of Article 14.
It denies equal protection only when there is no reasonable basis for differentiation.
If a law deals equally with members of a well-defined class, it is not obnoxious and it is not open to the charge of denial of equal protection on the ground that it has no application to other persons.
What Article 14 prohibits is a class legislation and not reasonable classification for the purpose of legislation.
If the legislature takes care to reasonably classify persons for legislative purposes and it deals equally with all persons belonging to a well defined class, it is not open to the charge of denial of equal protection on the ground that the law does not apply to the persons.
In order, however, to pass the test of permissible classification two conditions must be fulfilled; (1) that the classification must be founded on an intelligible differentia which distinguishes persons or things that are grouped together from others left out of the group, and (2) that the differentia must have a rational relation to the object sought to be achieved by the statute in question.
In the instant cases the petitioners are all ex- military personnel.
They have also been released from military services.
All those persons released from military service constitute one class and it is not possible to single out certain persons of the same class for differential treatment.
There appears to be no reasonable classification between the persons who were released on compassionate grounds and those who were released on other grounds and in this respect the petitioners have been deprived of the equal opportunity.
The amendment, therefore, is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution and, therefore, bad.
In this view of the legal position, the petitioners herein are also entitled to the benefit of Rule 4 and the mere fact that they were released from military service on compassionate grounds cannot disentitle them as they satisfy the requirement of Rule 4 of the Punjab Rules as it originally stood.
The grounds on which they were released are not material.
If once they are held to be ex-military servicemen they are entitled to the benefits of Rule 4."
Respectfully following the authoritative pronouncement of their Lordships of the Supreme Court, we hold that action of the respondents denying benefits of military service towards seniority is bad in law.
For the reasons stated above, this writ petition is accepted and, a writ in the nature of mandamus is issued to the respondents directing them to confer the benefits of military service rendered during emergency to the petitioner, within a period of six months from the receipt/production of a certified copy of this order.
No costs.