Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner approached this Court with the grievance that he had been arbitrarily excluded from admission to the Bachelor of Engineering Course in Computer Sciences on the ground that he had not produced the certificate indicating that he had passed the 10+2 examination.
According to the petitioner, he had produced the detailed marks certificate issued by the Punjab School Education Board and had been unable to produce the other certificates as none had been issued by the Board.
He has further pointed out that various other candidates who had also produced the detailed marks certificate only had been duly admitted.
2.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has not been disputed that the petitioner had produced the detailed marks certificate.
It has also not been denied that candidates who were below him in order of merit and had only produced a certificate similar to the one produced by the petitioner had been duly admitted.
They, however, submit that according to the information contained in the Brochure, the candidate had to submit the original certificate issued by the School Education Board which alone could have shown that the candidate had passed the qualifying examination.
This certificate having not been produced, the petitioner is not entitled to any relief.
3.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
Mr. Gur Rattan Pal Singh, learned counsel for the Respondent-University has produced before me a copy of the Information Brochure-cum-Application form.
At page 13, the check list of enclosures was mentioned.
The first entry reads as under :  "Qualifying Examination (10+2) Certificate including detail marks".
A perusal of the above entry clearly shows that a candidate has to produce the detailed marks certificate.
The purpose is obvious.
It is to enable the authority to verify that the candidate has actually passed the qualifying examination.
Furthermore, it has not even been suggested that the certificate had been actually issued.
In fact the written statement filed by the respondent-College through its Principal shows that the Vice Chancellor of the University had verified the fact that the Board had not issued the certificate and had, thereafter, sent a communication to respondent No. 2 to accept the detailed marks certificate.
According to the written statement filed by respondent No. 13, the orders from the Vice Chancellor in this behalf had been received at 130 PM while the petitioners had appeared for interview prior thereto.
It was in this situation that the petitioner was excluded from admission.
4.
Keeping in view the fact that the petitioner had actually produced the detailed marks certificate which had been accepted in case of others as also the fact that persons lower in merit had been admitted, the action of the respondents in excluding from admission was not just and reasonable.
It was wholly arbitrary.
Still further, it is the admitted position that in pursuance to an interim order passed by the Motion Bench on October 22, 1993, the petitioner was admitted to the course.
Mr. Chopra states that the petitioner has already passed the fourth semester examination.
In this situation, the provisional admission granted to the petitioner deserves to be confirmed.
It is ordered accordingly.
5.
In view of the above, this writ petition is allowed.
It is declared that the petitioner was wrongly excluded from admission.
He will be allowed to complete the course.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.