RS Mongia, J - The petitioner, who was working as a Junior Engineer in the Municipal Committee, Bhiwani, impugned the action of the respondents in not promoting him as Municipal Engineer in preference to Respondent No. 3, Shri Ramesh Kumar, who was promoted as such vide order dated March 1, 1989.
It may be observed here that the petitioner has since retired from service on November 30, 1994.
2.
It has been averred in the petition that the petitioner was senior to Respondent No. 3 as per Gradation List published by the respondents on January 1, 1995, where the petitioner's name appears at Sr. No. 7 and of Respondent No. 3 at Sr. No. 8.
He was again shown senior to Respondent No. 3 in another Gradation List published on January 1, 1989, he being at Sr. No. 3, whereas Respondent No. 3 being at Sr. No. 4.
3.
It has been further averred in the petition that his record of service has been 'Very Good' to 'Outstanding'.
It has even been admitted by the respondents that the petitioner's record from 1985-86 to 1992-93 was as under :-  1985-86 Very Good.
1986-87 Not written.
1987-88 Outstanding.
1988-89 Outstanding.
1989-90 Very Good.
1990-91 Very Good.
1991-92 Very Good.
1992-93 Outstanding.
4.
When Respondent No. 3, Shri Ramesh Kumar, was promoted as Municipal Engineer vide order dated March 1, 1989 (copy at Annexure R. 1 with the written statement), it was mentioned therein as under :-  ".......
The promotion of Shri Ramesh Kumar is subject to the final decision in the disciplinary proceedings that are pending against Sarvshri Krishan Lal Vermani, Sube Singh and GC Chaudhary, Junior Engineers and he shall have no right of seniority over these Junior Engineers if they are found fit for promotion after the decision of the disciplinary proceedings."
5.
The petitioner has filed a Misc.
Application and in paragraphs 11 and 12 thereof it has been mentioned that the petitioner has been exonerated and there is no justification with the respondents not to consider the petitioner's case for promotion with effect from his junior, Shri Ramesh Kumar was promoted as a Municipal Engineer.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has placed on record a copy of the order dated March 26, 1993, endorsed on May 5, 1993, which is in vernacular, issued by the Director, Local Bodies, Haryana, which is to the effect that on the basis of the enquiry held against the petitioner he has been warned to be careful in future and the entire period of suspension has been treated to be on duty.
6.
On the basis of this order, learned counsel for the petitioner argued that the petitioner is entitled to be promoted from the date his junior was promoted by taking into consideration his previous record of service as nothing was found against the petitioner in the enquiry and only he was asked to be careful in future, which cannot be said to be a punishment at all.
7.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that there is merit in the submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
The order of promotion of Respondent No. 3 specifically mentions that the same was subject to the outcome of the enquiry pending against the petitioner, who was admittedly senior to Respondent No. 3.
The petitioner after the conclusion of the disciplinary proceedings in which he had only been warned to be careful in future, was entitled to be considered for promotion with effect from the date his junior, Shri Ramesh Kumar, Respondent No. 3 was so promoted, on the basis of his record of service, which, as observed above, ranges from 'Very Good' to 'Outstanding'.
This is especially so in view of the condition attached to the order of promotion of Respondent No. 3  8.
As observed above, the petitioner has since retired and the benefit which he may get on promotion from the date when Respondent No. 3 was promoted would be the difference in his pension and may also be found entitled for the payment of arrears of salary.
Consequently, I allow this writ petition and direct Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 to consider the case of the petitioner for promotion to the post of Municipal Engineer by taking into consideration the annual confidential reports upto the date when Shri Ramesh Kumar, Respondent No. 3, was promoted, i.e. March 1, 1989 as also the 'warning', within a period of 3 months of the receipt of a copy of this order either from this Court or a certified copy thereof from the petitioner.
Needless to mention here that on the passing of the order of promotion of the petitioner he will be entitled to all consequential benefits ensuing therefrom which should be given to the petitioner within two months of the passing of the order of promotion.
No costs.