VK Jhanji, J - In this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, petitioner is seeking a writ in the nature of Mandamus directing the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner for appointment as SS Master by taking into consideration the experience certificates, Annexures P-3 and P-4.
2.
In brief, the facts are that through the advertisement published in The Tribune dated 2971991, the Director of Secondary Education, Haryana, invited applications for three categories of posts of teachers.
For SS Master, qualification prescribed was BA/B.Ed.
from a recognised university.
It is the case of the petitioner that members of the Interview Committee headed by respondent No. 3 refused to take cognizance of the teaching experience certificates (Annexure P-3 and P-4) on the ground that the petitioner has not acquired the teaching experience by virtue of his appointment as SS Master.
According to the petitioner, the Selection Committee gave the benefit of teaching experience to one Om Parkash, Laboratory Assistant in Govt. Sr.
Secondary School, Hissar, while selecting him for the post of Lecturer in History.
The said Om Parkash had taught classes like the petitioner in addition to his own duties while working as Laboratory Assistant.
Petitioner has also made a mention that the Selection Committee headed by District Education Officer has given benefit of teaching experience acquired by one Surinder Mohan in addition to his own duties as Laboratory Assistant/Clerk in different schools, and on the basis of his selection Surinder Mohan has been appointed as SS Master in District Kaithal.
The petitioner, thus, has averred that the action of the respondents in not recognising the teaching experience acquired by him in addition to his duties as Clerk is discriminatory, particularly when the respondents have recognised such teaching experience in the case of aforesaid Om Parkash and Surinder Mohan.
The petitioner has also placed reliance upon a judgment of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 9276 of 1993 (Satish Kumar v. State of Haryana and others) on 2221994.
3.
The stand taken by the respondents in the written statement is again the one which was taken in Satish Kumar's case (supra).
Counsel for the State has contended that certificates, Annexures P.3 and P.4 could not be taken into consideration as the petitioner was not working as SS Master but was a Clerk.
This very contention of counsel for the State did not find favour with the Division Bench in Satish Kumar's case as it was found that the petitioner, Satish Kumar possessed the requisite educational qualification i.e. BA, B.Ed.
and for two years' teaching experience, weightage was also to be granted.
Here the experience certificates (Annexures P-3 and P-4) furnished by the petitioner have not been taken into consideration on the ground that he was only a Clerk and worked as SS Master only in addition to his duties.
The said experience certificates were countersigned by Sub Divisional Education Officer, Narnaul.
The certificates show that the petitioner had taught students for the period from 1.1.1990 to 31.12.1990 and from 111991 to 3171991.
The contention that aforesaid Om Parkash and Surinder Mohan had taught classes like the petitioner in addition to their duties while working as Laboratory Assistants/Clerk, has not been specifically denied by the respondents.
In this view of the matter, I am of the view that the respondents were not justified in ignoring the certificates of teaching experience particularly when the Sub Divisional Education Officer, Narnaul had countersigned the same.
Counsel for the State has also not been able to show that as to how the case of the petitioner is distinguishable from that of Satish Kumar's case.
Consequently, this writ petition is allowed and the respondents are directed to consider the case of the petitioner for appointment as SS Master, giving due weightage to the experience certificates, Annexures P-3 and P-4.
Let this direction be complied with within three months from the date of communication of this order.
No costs.