TS Doabia, J - The petitioner, is this writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, challenges the issuance of a charge-sheet, copy whereof is Annexure P/6.
The matter which is going to be subject-matter of enquiry is an alleged concession of unauthorised overdrawing to one firm by the name of M/s. Radhakrishna Construction Company.
This overdrawing is to the tune of Rs. 6,34,600/-.
A further overdraft to the extent of Rs. 99, 14612. to M/s. RD Muchal, Weight Division is also a subject-matter of the enquiry.
This enquiry is going to be held under UCO Bank Officer Employees' (Discipline and Appeal) Regulations, 1976.
This was issued on 18th of March, 1994.
By preferring this petition on 3rd of June 1995, a challenge has been made to the initiation of this enquiry.
This is being challenged on the following grounds :  (i) Delay; (ii) estoppel; (iii) mala fides.
2.
So far as the mala fides is concerned, it is alleged that earlier litigation is pending in this Court.
It is stated that petitioner was due for promotion to Middle Management Grade Scale III.
When he was not promoted, he preferred writ petition No. 1839/90.
It is alleged that thereafter, stale matters were made subject-matter of departmental enquiries.
These are Writ Petition Nos. 36/92 and 443 of 1994.
All these matters have been dealt with separately and orders have been passed in all those cases today.
I am of the view that for the reasons recorded in those writ petitions, it is difficult to infer that the bank was proceeding mala fide against the petitioner.
3.
With regard to the ground of delay, it is apparent that the charge-sheet was issued in March, 1994 and the subject-matter of enquiry is a transaction for a period between 31st of July 1990 to 24th of March, 1991.
As such, it cannot be said that the incident is such which can fall within the definition of the term "stale".
As a matter of fact, in writ petition No. 36/92, this aspect of the matter has been considered in detail and it has been concluded that unless and until, it is established that on account of delay, some prejudice is likely to be caused to the delinquent, the proceedings are not to be quashed.
Delay is relevant only where the matters are such where the delinquent or the witnesses may not be able to recall the past happenings.
In the present case, the allegation is that overdraft was given and this was given without following the due procedure.
There is nothing in the charge which the petitioner would be unable to recollect.
It is all a matter of record.
As such, it is not possible to interfere in the present petition on the ground of delay.
4.
Another serious argument which has been raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner that for this very act, the petitioner has been censured.
He is relying on Annexure P/5.
The last line on which much reliance has been placed be noticed.
It reads as under :-  "You are advised to desist in future from such indiscriminate exercise of powers."
I am of the view that this advice cannot fall within the definition of the term "censure" and it cannot be said that the petitioner has already been punished.
5.
The question of punishment would have arisen only if the matter was made subject-matter of enquiry.
The explanation given by the bank that this letter was written with a view to advise the petitioner that in future he should not be a party to such transaction.
Thus in no way, the lapse in question was condoned.
In view of the above, this petition is without merit and is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.