MS Liberhan, J - Factual matrix is not in dispute in this writ petition.
Petitioner jointed as Sub Divisional Engineer on 591972 and was promoted as Executive Engineer in 1986.
The petitioner along with his subordinate was charge-sheeted for embezzlement.
Enquiry officers found the petitioner not guilty of the charge attributed.
Punishing Authority did not agree with the enquiry report and proposed dismissal from service of the petitioner.
Approval of the Punjab Public Service Commission for the proposed punishment was sought.
In the meanwhile parallel proceedings were initiated against the petitioner by issuing a fresh charge-sheet, including the earlier charges.
Enquiry Officer found him not guilty of charges attributed vide his report dated 3091992.
The said report was accepted by the State.
Petitioner challenged the issuance of show cause notices dated 3151991 and 2671991 by way of a Civil Suit.
The Subordinate Court passed a decree in favour of the petitioner quashing the charge sheet and show cause notices issued to him.
Petitioner was dismissed from service vide impugned order dated 3061995 Annexure P-16.
2.
The respondents made a feeble attempt to support the order of dismissal, inter alia, contending since the Punjab Public Service Commission granted approval for dismissal of the petitioner, therefore he was dismissed from service.
The sum and substances of the arguments put forth is that though the Government did not favour the impugned dismissal of the petitioner yet since the Public Service Commission granted the approval of his dismissal, consequently as natural corollary thereof, the impugned order of removal from service of the petitioner was passed.
3.
We find no force in the submission of the learned counsel for the respondents.
Mere granting of approval by an advisory authority as Public Service Commission cannot be termed as mandate for proposing the act by the Punishing Authority.
Approval by itself is not mandatory for Punishing Authority.
Inspite of the approval of the proposed punishment the Punishing Authority is competent to award lesser or no punishment.
Approval of an act does not mean performance of the act.
Doing of an act and approval before or after the act are two distinct acts envisaged by law.
Public Service Commission is only an advisory authority whose approval is required to act, while the State is in fact the acting authority.
No power has either been delegated by the State to the Public Service Commission to act on its behalf nor it is even remotely referred to during the course of arguments.
Thus the impugned order cannot be sustained on the grounds, it was attempted to be sustained.
4.
Petitioner cannot be tried twice over on the same charges.
Once the petitioner was found not guilty of the attributed charges by the Inquiry Officer, whose report was accepted by the Punishing Authority, he cannot be punished for the same charges in an enquiry though held prior in time than the one, when he was found not guilty of these very charges.
It is the final decision which brings down the curtain on the charge attributed.
State cannot be permitted to keep open its options on an enquiry held earlier on the charges and proceed with another enquiry on the same charges along with some new charges.
Charges having been found not proved, the State cannot be permitted to pass two contradictory orders one holding the petitioner guilty and the other not guilty.
The respondents cannot be permitted to approbate and reprobate with respect to the same charges in the same breath.
It is well established that a person cannot be tried twice on the same charges.
5.
In view of the observations made above, the impugned order (copy Annexure P-16) cannot be sustained and the same is quashed.
The writ petition is allowed.
The petitioner is reinstated with all the consequential reliefs No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.