Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner, a Head Constable in the Punjab Police, was charge-sheeted.
After a departmental enquiry, it was found that he had taken Rs. 6,000/- from a constable for issuing a clearance certificate.
A show cause notice calling upon him to explain in as to why he be not dismissed from the Police Department "for extorting Rs. 6,000/- by cheating and a criminal case be not registered him....." was issued to him.
After considering his reply, the Commandant vide his order dated July 23, 1993, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-1 with the writ petition, took a lenient view and ordered that five years' approved service be permanently forfeited, and five yearly increments earned by him be "reduced from his pay".
It was further ordered that he would not be paid anything beyond the subsistence allowance for the period during which he had remained under suspension.
The appeal filed by the petitioner against this order was dismissed by the Deputy Inspector General vide order a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-2 with the writ petition.
Almost simultaneously, the petitioner was conveyed adverse remarks vide letter dated August 17, 1993.
It was inter alia observed that he was "intelligent but cunning".
His reputation for honesty was "doubtful".
The factum of the pendency of the departmental enquiry was also recorded.
A copy of this communication is Annexure P-3 with the writ petition.
The petitioner represented.
Vide order dated February 28, 1994, his representation was rejected.
Thereafter vide letter dated December 29, 1993, the petitioner was conveyed adverse remarks for the period from April 1, 1993 to July 30, 1993.
He was conveyed the following adverse remarks :-  "2.
Reputation for honesty  Dishonest 3.
Amenability to discipline.
Below average 12.
General remarks including any complaint received against him.
- Departmental enquiry was initiated against him for taking bribe of Rs. 6,000/- for compensation of three SLR magazines, while he was posted as KHC and punishment of five years service forfeiting was awarded to him vide order book No. 88/93, dated 2371993".
2.
A copy of this communication is at Annexure P-5.
The petitioner submitted a representation which was rejected vide order dated April 4, 1994.
A copy of the order is Annexure P-6.
The petitioner filed the present writ petition challenging the orders at Annexures P-1 to P-6.
The case was listed for motion hearing before a Division Bench on May 4, 1994.
Their Lordships directed the issue of notice of motion only in respect of the petitioner's challenge to the adverse report for the period from April 1, 1993 to July 30, 1993 vide Annexure P-5 and the rejection of his representation vide order, dated April 4, 1994, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-6.
With respect to the other matters, their Lordships found "no ground for interference."
Accordingly, this matter has come up for hearing before us.
3.
A written statement has been filed by the Commandant on behalf of the respondents.
It has been inter alia stated that the petitioner had demanded Rs. 6,000/- from Constable Gurbax Singh.
He was paid Rs. 4,000/- on September 2, 1992 with a promise that the remaining amount shall be paid on the next day.
However, before making any other payment, the constable had narrated the facts to the senior officers.
Consequently, a trap was laid.
The amount of Rs. 2,000/- was paid to the petitioner on September 3, 1992.
The money was recovered from his pocket.
On the basis of these facts, it has been pleaded that the remarks recorded against the petitioner are well-merited.
4.
We have heard Mr. SK Sharma, learned counsel for the petitioner.
He has contended that there is no basis for the allegation that the petitioner's reputation for integrity was doubtful.
He has, consequently, submitted that the confidential report as also the order regarding the rejection of his representation deserve to be quashed.
Learned counsel for the respondent has controverted the claim made on behalf of the petitioner.
5.
The facts of the case as revealed by the pleadings and the documentary evidence on record are self-eloquent.
The charge of extorting an amount of Rs. 6,000/- from a junior colleague has been established against the petitioner in a departmental enquiry.
In this situation, it is clearly established that he had no sense of honesty.
Normally, dark-deeds are performed in utmost secrecy.
Directed evidence of corruption or acceptance of illegal gratification is rarely available.
In the present case, however, there is more than ample evidence which clearly establishes that the petitioner is not an honest police official.
The charge of extorting an amount of Rs. 6,000/- from a colleague was clearly established against the petitioner during the enquiry.
He was let off rather lightly.
Still the petitioner has chosen to challenge the order.
We find no infirmity in the action which may call for interference in the exercise of discretionary jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution.
6.
Mr. Sharma referred to the decision of a Division Bench of this Court of Daya Nand v. State of Haryana and others, 1995(1) SCT 423(P&H) : Civil Writ Petition No. 11695 of 1993, decided on November 30, 1994.
In this case, it was found as a fact that there was no material on the basis of which any adverse comments regarding the integrity of the official could be made.
Such is not the position in the present case.
7.
We find no merit in this petition.
It is, accordingly, dismissed in limine.
Petition dismissed.