Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner's father was working as an Executive Officer till his death on February 24, 1986.
It is the petitioner's claim that he had worked as Executive Officer, Class I since November 1, 1965 when he had joined service.
However, the respondents wrongly treated him as Executive Officer, Class II.
As a result, on his death, the pay and the retirement benefits were not correctly computed and paid.
The petitioner, consequently, prays for the issue of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to fix his father's pay in the rank of Executive Officer, Class I and to direct the payment of all arrears with interest at the rate of 18% from the date of accrual till the date of actual payment.
2.
The respondents disputed the petitioner's claim and maintain that his father was never promoted as Executive Officer, Class I.
It has been averred that the arrears of pay as actually found due viz. Rs. 20,11160 were paid to the petitioner through his counsel on July 21, 1992.
The respondents maintain that the petitioner's father having not been promoted to Class I, he is not entitled to the relief prayed for by him.
3.
I have heard Mr. Pawan Bansal, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. GS Cheema for the respondents.
4.
On a perusal of the documents placed on the record, it appears that the petitioner's father had been factually discharging the duties of an Executive Officer, Class I.
The averment in paragraph 2 of the writ petition that the petitioner's father had joined as Executive Officer, Class I on November 1, 1965, has not been specifically denied in the written statement.
Furthermore, the orders dated August 10, 1978, May 31, 1982, June 25, 1982.
January 11, 1983 and April 30, 1984 which have been placed on record show that Mr. Gurbachan Singh was treated as an Executive Officer, Class I Copies of these orders are on record as Annexures P-1 to P-5.
The first order was for the "postings and transfers of Executive Officers, Class I....".
The name of the petitioner's father appears at Sr. No. 4.
Similar is the position in the four other orders.
It has also been conceded that the Municipal Committees of Bathinda, Malout, Phillaur, Rajpura and Kapurthala where Mr. Gurbachan Singh was posted vide different orders, are Class I Municipal Committees and only Executive Officers Class I could man those posts.
Still further, it appears that when the petitioner had been actually posted on a Class II post, he was informed vide order dated February 2, 1983, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-8 with the writ petition that "You are again appointed in a Class I Municipal Committee against a vacant post".
In view of this documentary evidence on record, it is not clear as to how the respondents maintain that the petitioner's father was never promoted as Executive Officer, Class I.
It has been pointed out in the written statement that he had been placed under suspension on account of the "alleged recovery of currency note accepted by him as illegal gratification".
That may be so.
However, the averment in paragraph 2 that Mr. Gurbachan Singh had joined as Executive Officer, Class I on November 1, 1965 having not been specifically denied, it can be inferred that the petitioner's father had been actually working as Executive Officer, Class I since November 1965.
Five posting orders referred to above further support the claim made on his behalf.
Mr. Cheema points out that the averments in para 2 have been denied.
The denial is "for want of knowledge".
This is in law no denial.
Reference in this behalf may be made to the decision of their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Jahuri Sah v. DP Jhunjhunwala, AIR 1967 SC 109 wherein their Lordships were pleased to hold that "every allegation of fact in the plaint, if not denied specifically or by necessary implication or stated to be not admitted in the pleading of the defendant shall be taken to be admitted, to say that a defendant has no knowledge of a fact pleaded by the plaintiff is not tantamount to a denial of the existence of that fact not even an implied denial."
5.
Even if it is assumed for the sake of argument that no specific order appointing Mr. Gurbachan Singh to a Class I post had been passed, it appears to be clearly established on the record that he had actually discharged the duties of Class I post.
The only interruption appears to have occurred in the year 1982.
At that time, it appears that the petitioner's father had written a letter dated August 18, 1982 to the respondents.
In pursuance thereto, he was informed vide letter dated February 2, 1983 that he is again appointed in a Class I Municipal Committee against a vacant post.
No order has been produced to show that the petitioner's father had actually performed duties of the post of Executive Officer, Class II.
If the respondents posted the petitioner's father as Executive Officer, Class I and be discharged the duties thereof, they were bound to pay him the salary of the post on which he had actually worked.
The principle of "equal pay for equal work", implies that a person must be paid the wages for the duties actually performed by him like others holding posts of an equal rank.
6.
Both on facts and in principle, the claim, for the salary of the post of Executive Officer, Class I appears to be well-merited.
The respondents are, consequently, directed to work out the period for which Mr. Gurbachan Singh had actually worked as Executive Officer Class I.
His pay and other benefits shall be re-fixed in accordance with the rules.
The arrears found due on account of salary and other benefits shall be computed and paid to him within a period of three months from the date of the receipt of a copy of this order.
If the payment is not made within the aforesaid period of three months, the petitioner shall be entitled to the payment of all the arrears along with interest at the rate of 15% from the date of accrual till the date of actual payment.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.