P Ray, J - The petitioner joined the Similipal Forest Development Corporation (hereinafter referred to as the 'SFDC') as Accounts Assistants respondent on different dates between 2nd February, 1984 and 28th December, 1987 on daily wage basis.
Subsequently they were regularised in the post of Accounts Assistants on diverse dates between 20.4.1988 and 2061990.
The SFDC was merged with the Orissa Forest Corporation which was subsequently renamed as Orissa Forest Development Corporation Ltd (hereinafter referred to as the ('OFDC').
It appears from the office order No. 795/Secy/115/90-91 dated 19th April, 1991 being Annexure-4 that at the time of merger it was decided that all benefits of OFDC pattern would be extended to the employees of SFDC with effect from October 1, 1990 i.e. the date of taking over of the employees by OFDC  2.
After merger the petitioners were assigned the posts of Accounts Assistants in the OFDC In OFDC the Accounts Assistants were in the pre-revised pay scale of Rs. 890-1830, but the petitioners who were also working as Accounts Assistants, were kept in the pre-revised pay scale of Rs. 750-1150/-.
The OFDC redesignated the posts of Accounts Assistants as Junior Accountants, but did not give the said designation to the Accounts Assistants of erstwhile SFDC The pay scale of the Accounts Assistants (redesignated as Junior Accountants) was revised to Rs. 1400-2300/-.
The OFDC redesignated the petitioners as Junior Clerks and placed them in the revised pay scale of Rs. 950-1500/-, which is the pay scale of Lower Division Assistant in OFDC The OFDC also sought to transfer the petitioners from the Accounts Department and post them in the general department as Junior Clerks.
In the present writ application, the petitioners have challenged the said orders/decisions by which they have been treated as LD Assistant and sought to be transferred to the General Department.
It has been submitted by Mr. Dora, the learned Advocate for the petitioners that the petitioners are still discharging the duties of Accounts Assistants.
The petitioners have also claimed that they are entitled to be treated as Junior Accountants in the OFDC and to get the same pay scale i.e. Rs. 1400-2300/- as that of the Junior Accountants.
3.
The OFDC have filed a counter to the writ application.
It is the case of the OFDC that the Accounts Assistants of OFDC were enjoying a lower pay scale than that of the Accounts Assistants in Orissa Forest Corporation and that the Accounts Assistants of erstwhile SFDC cannot be treated to be equal to the Accounts Assistants of the Orissa Forest Corporation.
It has been stated in the counter that a committee was set up to resolve the anomalies which arose due to merger.
In paragraph 8 of the counter it has also been stated that pre-merger scale of pay in the respective organisations has been taken as the status for determination of equivalence and placement in reorganised cadres after merger.
The OFDC has also disclosed the terms of reference and the report of the committee as Annexure-O & D to the counter.
4.
Relying upon the said counter the learned Advocate for the opposite parties submitted that equivalence having been determined by a committee set up for the purpose this Court should not interfere with such determination and the actions taken in pursuance of the said determination.
It has also been submitted that the pay-scale of the Accounts Assistants in the erstwhile SFDC was equal to that of the Lower Division Clerks in the O.F.D.
(now, OFDC) and as such the petitioners cannot claim equal status, rank and pay as that of the original Accounts Assistants (redesignated as Junior Accountants) of the OFDC  5.
It is admitted position that the petitioners were working as Accounts Assistants in OFDC before merger, that after merger they were also assigned the posts of Accounts Assistants in the merged organisation and that the petitioners were discharging the same duties and functions as the other Accounts Assistants of OFDC Although the petitioners were discharging the same duties and functions, they were being given a lower pay scale which, according to us, was in clear contravention of the settled principle of 'equal work equal pay'.
6.
It is also an admitted position that the committee set up for removal of anomalies purported to determine equivalence only on the basis of pay scale without considering the nature of the job and the responsibilities of the concerned posts.
7.
Though the determination of equivalence is primarily an administrative exercise, it is required to be determined on objective consideration of criteria relevant for the purpose.
It is now well settled that if determination of equivalence is found to be arbitrary, unreasonable or irrational, the same offends the guarantee contained in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India and is liable to be interfered with.
We find that the purported determination by the committee having been made solely on the basis of pay-scale ignoring the duties and responsibilities of the concerned posts, is unreasonable and unsustainable.
8.
Considering the undisputed facts and circumstances and the submissions made on behalf of the parties, we are of the view that the OFDC has acted discriminatorily and unreasonably in treating the petitioners as Junior Clerks in seeking to transfer them to general cadre and in allocating pay-scale lower than that of the Accounts Assistants now redesignated as Junior Accountants.
Before such redesignation and even thereafter the petitioners have been discharging the same duties and functions as the present Junior Accountants.
The redesignation and transfer orders have been issued only to create an artificial distinction.
The impugned orders and actions are clearly violative of the conditions of merger, arbitrary, discriminatory and are unsustainable in law and on facts.
9.
Accordingly, the writ application is allowed, the impugned order being Annexure 11 to the writ application is set aside and quashed.
The opposite parties are directed to treat the petitioners as Junior Accountants and to accord them the same pay-scale and allowances which have been given to the Junior Accountants from the date of the merger i.e., 1st October, 1990.
No costs.
Petition allowed.