Jyotirmay Bhattacharya, J - The validity and/or legality of the order of transfer issued by the Personal Manager (Empl.& Trf.)
Eastern Coalfields Limited CMD's Office Sanctoria dated 6th May, 2005,is under challenge in this writ petition at the instance of the petitioners.
2.
By the said transfer order, the petitioner No. 1 who is an O.T.
Assistant of Central Hospital, Kalla was transferred to Sanctoria Hospital in his existing capacity with immediate effect.
3.
By the said order of transfer, the petitioner No. 2 who was the Security Guard of Central Hospital, Kalla was transferred to Kajora area in his existing capacity with immediate effect.
4.
The petitioners have filed this writ petition challenging the said order of transfer without however, annexing a copy of the said order of transfer to the writ petition.
5.
An exception was taken to such defect in the petition by Mr. Ashok Dey, learned Senior Advocate, appearing for the respondent who submitted that the writ petition itself is not maintainable, as the order of transfer which is the subject matter of challenge was not filed by the petitioners along with the writ petition.
6.
Mr. Ghosh, learned Advocate, appearing for the petitioners, submitted that the order of transfer was not served upon the petitioners.
As such, the order of transfer could not be annexed to the writ petition.
Mr. Ghosh submitted that only the release orders which were served upon the petitioners, were annexed to the writ petition.
Mr. Ghosh further submitted that since the order of transfer could not be annexed, a writ in the nature of certiorari was prayed for by the petitioners in this writ petition.
7.
Be that as it may, facts remain that the copy of the transfer order has been filed by the respondents along with their affidavit-in-opposition being annexure `A' thereto.
Thus, since the order of transfer is now before the Court, this Court can very well consider the validity and/or legality of the said order of transfer by ignoring the preliminary objection regarding the maintainability of this petition, as raised by Mr. Dey.
8.
Such an order of transfer has been challenged by the petitioners on various grounds which are follows:  (i) The order of transfer was issued in violation of the transfer policy as contained.
in the Certified-Standing Orders in respect of Eastern Coalfields Ltd Clause 21 of the said Certified-Standing Orders provides for transfer in case of exigencies of work from one station to another.
Clause 21 of the said Standing Orders is set out hereunder as follows:-  "21.
Transfer:  Workmen may be transferred due to the exigencies of work from one station to another, from one coal mine to another or from one establishment/ department/section to another within the same company or same holding company provided that the pay, grade and other conditions of service including continuity bf service of the workmen are not adversely affected by such transfer and provided further that if a workman is transferred from one job to another, the job should be of similar nature and such as he is capable of doing and provided further that (i) except in case of emergency minimum notice of two weeks time is allowed in case of transfer from one station to another."
(ii) The order of transfer was issued without disclosing any reasons for such transfer which is unknown to service jurisprudence.
(iii) The order of transfer, which was issued under the influence of some other person to accommodate Smt. Abraham, is not in the interest of exigencies of service.
(iv) The order of transfer which was issued under the direction of the rival union with a motive to punish the petitioners, is a mala fide transfer.
(v) The order of transfer which was not issued either for administrative exigencies or for public interest cannot be sustained as the said order of transfer was issued by way of penalty during the pendency of the disciplinary proceeding against the petitioners which were initiated on the basis of the unconfirmed complaint made by another lady employee Smt. Abraham.
9.
These are the grounds on which the legality and/or validity of the order of transfer was challenged by the petitioners in this writ petition.
10.
Let me now consider the merit of this writ petition.
11.
Mr. Ghosh rightly pointed out that the transfer order does not disclose any reason for issuance of such order of transfer.
The order of transfer is totally silent about the reasons for such transfer.
Undisputedly it is not a case of routine transfer.
The transfer order also does not disclose that such transfer order was issued in aid of administrative exigencies.
12.
Mr. Ghosh contended that the said order of transfer was issued in violation of the said guideline.
Even two weeks' notice was not given to the petitioners prier to such transfer.
The consent of the Medical Officer, Central Hospital and the General Manager, Kajora area was not taken by the concerned authority before issuance the order of transfer.
Whether the service of the petitioners was required in the transferred posts, has also not been ascertained before issuance of such transfer order.
As such, such transfer was not made in exigencies of work.
13.
On perusal of the Standing Order, it appears to this Court that clause 21 of the Certified Standing Orders, as mentioned above, provides for transfer in aid of exigencies of work and for no other reason.
Nothing is apparent from the records that the service of the petitioners is needed in the place where the petitioners were transferred.
As such, it cannot be said that transfer was made in exigencies of work.
Even in case of exigencies of work, two weeks' time is required to be allowed in case of transfer from one station to another except in case of emergency.
14.
Nothing is apparent from the transfer order itself that the said transfer order was.
issued in an emergent situation.
Then why such order of transfer was issued?
15.
The reasons for issuance of the said order of transfer were sought to be explained by the respondents in paragraph 6 of their affidavit, wherein it was stated that the transfer order was issued for the beneficial interest of smooth running of the said hospital.
It was further alleged therein that Central Hospital, Kalla in Asansol is a big hospital in the areas having capacity of 350 beds.
The said hospital has huge infrastructure to render medicine and surgery to patient.
The said hospital has also emergency unit to treat the acute patient.
Due to the incident which took place in the hospital on 1st May, 2005 for which a complaint was lodged Smt. Sunita Abraham to the Officer- in-Charge of North Asansol Police Station as well as to the Chairperson, Sexual Harassment Committee, the order of transfer was issued for smooth functioning of the hospital.
16.
The reasons for issuance of the said transfer order is thus apparent from the aforesaid statements made by the respondents in their affidavit.
17.
Mr. Ghosh submitted that paragraph 6 of the said affidavit-in- opposition wherein the reasons for issuance of the order of transfer was sought to be disclosed, having not been properly verified, cannot be taken into consideration at all.
Mr. Ghosh pointed out that the source of information of the deponent affirming the said affidavit, has not been disclosed in the affidavit.
18.
On perusal of the said affidavit, it appears to this Court that the statements made in paragraph 6 of the said affidavit has not been properly verified as the source of information has not been disclosed by the deponent in the said affidavit.
But still then, even without giving much importance to such defect in the technical rules of pleadings, this Court finds that the reasons for issuance of the transfer order which have been disclosed in the affidavit in opposition are the real reasons for issuance of the said order of transfer.
19.
The said conclusion is arrived at by this Court on consideration of the sequence of the following events leading to the issuance of the said order of transfer :  (i) Admittedly some incident had taken place on 1st May, 2005 involving the petitioners and Smt. Abraham.
Who is responsible for the incident is still unknown to this Court, as the departmental proceeding which was initiated against the petitioners on the complaint of Smt. Abraham have not yet been concluded by the concerned authority.
The charges for which the said departmental proceeding was initiated are as follows : Clause 264 : Gambling, disorderly on indecent behaviour at the place of work.
Clause 26.18: Threatening to assault, abuse co-worker or subordinate or superior while on duty or otherwise in connection with employment.
(ii) Show cause notices containing the said charges were delivered to the respective petitioners on 2nd May, 2005 for their answer.
(iii) The petitioners have replied to the said show cause notice denying the charges within the period allowed to the petitioners for the said purpose.
But the departmental proceedings have not yet been concluded though the enquiry commenced from 5th May, 2005.
(iv) Immediately on the very next day the order of transfer was issued on 6th May, 2005 with a request to the CMO, Central Hospital, Kalla to release the petitioners within three days with an advice to join them at the respective place of posting.
(v) Immediately on the receipt of the said transfer order on the very same day, the release order was issued to the petitioners by the CMO (IC), Kalla, vide annexure `P-6' to the said petition.
20.
The aforesaid chain of events shows that the transfer orders were issued as a consequence of the incidents which allegedly had taken place on 1st May, 2005 involving the petitioners and Smt. Abraham.
21.
Mr. Ghosh submitted that the concerned authority ought not to have issued the transfer orders without ascertaining the correctness of the allegations levelled against the petitioners.
Departmental proceedings are yet to be concluded and as such the concerned authority should have waited at least till the conclusion of the departmental proceedings.
22.
Mr. Dey, however, refuted the said submission of Mr. Ghosh by submitting that when the concerned authority before issuing the show cause notice formed a prima facie opinion regarding the commission of acts of misconduct by the petitioners, formation of such prima facie opinion is sufficient to pass an order of transfer, as detailed enquiry is not necessary with regard to the charges levelled against the petitioners in the said show cause notice prior to issuance of the order of transfer.
In support of such submission Mr. Dey relied upon a decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Union of India v. Janardhan Debnath reported in (2004) 4 SCC 245, wherein it was held as follows :  "14.
The allegations made against the respondents are of serious nature, and the conduct attributed is certainly unbecoming.
Whether there was any misbehaviour is a question which can be gone into in a departmental proceeding.
For the purposes of effecting a transfer, the question of holding an enquiry to find out whether there was misbehaviour or conduct unbecoming of an employee is unnecessary and what is needed is the prima facie satisfaction of the authority concerned on the temporary reports about the occurrence complained of and if the requirement, as submitted by learned counsel for the respondents, of holding an elaborate enquiry is to be insisted upon the very purpose of transferring an employee in public interest or exigencies of administration to enforce decorum and ensure probity would get frustrated.
The question whether the respondents could be transferred to a different division is a matter for the employer to consider depending upon the administrative necessities and the extent of solution for the problems faced by the administration.
It is not for this Court to direct one way or the other.
The judgment of the High Court is clearly indefensible and is set aside.
The writ petitions filed before the High Court deserve to be dismissed when we direct.
The appeals are allowed with no order as to costs."
Mr. Ghosh seriously contended that the principles which were laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the said decision has no application in facts of the instant case, as the said decision was delivered by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in a case where transfer was permissible on account inefficiency or misbehaviour, while in the present case standing order does not provide for transfer either for inefficiency or misconduct.
23.
It is true that ratio of a decision applies to a case only when the facts are similar to each other.
Thus if the facts are different from each other, then the ratio of a decision cannot be applied to the other.
No doubt it is true that in the facts of the present case transfer is not permissible either on account of inefficiency or for misconduct of an employee unlike the case before the Hon'ble Supreme Court where transfer was permissible for inefficiency or misconduct, but still then the ratio of the said decision is that a detailed enquiry of the charges is not needed for issuance of transfer order.
The nature of charges for which transfer can be directed is irrelevant here.
Only thing what is relevant is that transfer order can be issued on prima facie satisfaction of the occurrence of such incidents.
24.
If that be so, then I have no hesitation to hold that there is no infirmity in issuance of the said transfer order as prima facie satisfaction of the occurrence of the incidents by the petitioners, is apparent from the show cause notice itself.
25.
Let me now consider the other ground of challenge, i.e., the ground of mala fide.
26.
On perusal of the writ petition it appears that the petitioners challenge the said order of transfer on ground of mala fide but the particulars of the allegations from which the Court can ascertain the mala fide action on the part of the respondent in issuing the said order of transfer, has neither been specifically pleaded nor the evidence in support of such claim has been disclosed by the petitioners in this petition.
Making mere allegations regarding malafide action, is not sufficient enough for holding that the action of the authority was actuated by mala fide motive.
Pleadings and proofs regarding mala fide action, are required to be furnished in details in the writ petition.
27.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court in case of EP Royappa v. State of Tamil Nadu, reported in AIR 1974 SC 555 explained as to how mala fides are to be proved.
It was held therein that the burden of establishing mala fides is very heavy on the person who alleges mala fides.
The allegations of mala fides are often more easily made than proved and the very seriousness of such allegations demands proof of high order of credibility.
28.
If the said principle is applied in the instant case then it appears that that allegations regarding mala fides are absolutely vague as the petitioners have not given the details of such mala fides in the petition.
29.
The petitioners alleged that the said order of transfer was issued due to rivalry between the two unions without specifying the particulars of the union to which the petitioners belong and the union to which their adversaries belong.
The petitioners further alleged that the order of transfer was issued under the influence of the rival union without giving details of the said rival union which influenced the authority to issue such order of transfer.
Even the authority upon which such influence was exerted for issuance of such transfer order, has not been disclosed in this petition.
The petitioners further alleged that the said order of transfer was issued to accommodate somebody of the choice of the authority in the place of the petitioners without specifying the particulars of such choice able person whom the authority wants to accommodate in the place of the petitioners.
Such allegations are also absolutely vague not deserve any judicial scrutiny.
30.
Mr. Ghosh, however, relied upon various decisions of different High Courts as well of the Hon'ble Supreme Court wherein it was held that if the order of transfer is made mala fide or for some ulterior purpose, such order of transfer should be set aside as mala fide exercise of power is not considered to be legal exercise of power given by law.
31.
Since the pleadings and proof regarding mala fides are insufficient and vague, this Court does not feel it necessary to consider those line of decisions cited by Mr. Ghosh.
32.
Thus, the only point which is to be considered by this Court is as to whether the order of transfer which was issued in violation of the standing order and without disclosing the reason for such transfer, can be sustained or not.
33.
Admittedly the petitioners are in transferable service.
Thus, transfer is not only the incidence of service of the petitioners but it is a condition of their service.
An employee who is in transferable service cannot claim that he should be retained at one place of posting forever.
The employer can transfer his employee to any place where the service of the employee is required.
Transfer for administrative reason is also permissible.
As such, when the concerned authority issues an order of transfer to such an employee on administrative reason for maintenance of discipline in office, such order of transfer cannot be challenged by the employee except on the ground that the transfer order was made mala fide and/or was issued in violation of the transfer policy.
34.
I have already indicated above that though the petitioners have failed to prove that the transfer order was made mala fide but still then the issuance of the transfer order in violation of the Standing Order, has been proved by the petitioners.
35.
But is it sufficient to interfere with the order of transfer in facts of the instant case wherefrom it appears that the said order of transfer was issued to maintain discipline in the place of work?
36.
The aforesaid question was answered by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Shilpi Bose v. State of Bihar, reported in 1991 Supp.
(2) SCC 659 in paragraph 4 therefore it was held as follows :  "4.
In our opinion, the courts should not interfere with a transfer order which is made in public interest and for administrative reasons unless the transfer orders are made in violation of any mandatory statutory rule or on the ground of mala fide.
A government servant holding a transferable post has no vested right to remain posted at one place or the other, he is liable to be transferred from one place to the other.
Transfer orders issued by the competent authority do not violate any of his legal rights.
Even if a transfer order is passed in violation of executive instructions or orders, the courts ordinarily should not interfere with the order instead affected party should approach the higher authorities in the department.
If the courts continue to interfere with day-to-day transfer orders issued by the government and its subordinate authorities, there will be complete chaos in the administration which would not be conducive to public interest.
The High Court overlooked these aspects in interfering with the transfer orders."
The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of M/s. Nova.
Steel (India) Ltd. v. MCD reported in AIR 1995 SC 1056, held that the courts or tribunals are not appellate forums to decide on transfer of officers on administrative grounds.
The relevant paragraph of the said decision is set out hereunder, as follows :  "4.
It is contended for the respondent that the respondent had already worked at Jagdalpur from 1982 to 1989 and when he was transferred to Bhopal, there was no justification to retransfer him again to Jagdalpur.
We cannot appreciate these grounds.
The Courts or Tribunals are not appellate forums to decide on transfers of officers on administrative grounds.
The wheels of administration should be allowed to run smoothly and the Courts or Tribunals are not expected to interdict the working of the administrative system by transferring the officers to proper places.
It is for the administration to take appropriate decision and such decisions shall stand unless they are vitiated either by mala fides or by extraneous consideration without any factual background foundation.
In this case we have seen that on the administrative grounds the transfer orders came to be issued.
Therefore, we cannot go into the expediency of posting an officer at a particular place."
Here the conditions of service of the petitioners are not protected by statutory rules.
As such, the order of transfer issued in violation of the Standing Order having no statutory force, cannot be interfered with.
That apart, it is rightly pointed out by Mr. Dey that the order of transfer cannot be lightly interfered with by this Court as a court of appeal.
The question involved as to whether the transfer order was passed due to political pressure or not is a disputed question of fact which in my opinion, cannot be considered by this Court in its constitutional writ jurisdiction.
37.
The above conclusion is drawn by this Court by following the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of State of UP v. Gobardhan Lal reported in AIR 2004 SC 2165.
38.
Following the ratio of the said decisions of the Hon'ble Supreme Court, this Court declines to interfere with the impugned order of transfer which was issued for administrative reason to maintain office discipline.
39.
The writ petition, thus, stands dismissed.
There will be, however, no order as to costs.
40.
Urgent xerox certified copy of this order, if applied for, be given to the parties, as expeditiously as possible.
Petition dismissed.