PS Patwalia, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was a regular employee in the National High School, Bhikiwind, District Amritsar.
While he was discharging his duties as JBT teacher the School was taken over by the Punjab Government w.e.f.
25.10.1966 by an order dated 29.11.1966.
The service of the petitioner was also taken over by the aforesaid order.
The relevant extract of the order is hereunder :-  "OFFICE OF THE DISTRICT EDUCATION OFFICER, AMRITSAR Order No. 1E, 2E, 3E, 5E, 9E (Apptt.
Taken Over)-66/70684-88 dated Amritsar, the 29th November, 1966.
*** *** *** Sub : Taking over of National High School, Bhikhiwing and appointments.
National High School, Bhikhiwind has since been taken over by the Government w.e.f.
25.10.1966 vide DPI Punjab's Memo No. 9805-pr-17/17-64Pr(n2) dated 25.10.1966.
Till the services of the below mentioned officials are regularized, they are hereby appointed on temporary basis for a period of six months w.e.f.
25.10.1966, at the pay and grade given against each :- Sarvshri 1.
Chanan Singh M.A.BT At Rs. 110/- in the grade of Rs. 110/250.
2.
Jaspal Singh BABT -do- -do- -do- 3.
Didar Singh BA, BT -do- -do- -do- 4.
Faquir Chand OT/PBI at Rs. 72/- in the grade of Rs. 60/120.
5.
Balwant Rai Drg.
Teacher -do- -do- -do- 6.
Sohan Singh JBT at Rs. 60/- in the grade of Rs. 60/175.
7.
Surain Singh, PTI -do- -do- -do-" xx xx xx xx xx Sd/- District Education Officer, Amritsar."
2.
As a result of his appointment in the education department of the State of Punjab, the petitioner was transferred from Bhikhiwind to Government Middle School, Bachiwind, Tehsil Ajnala, District Amritsar.
He served there up to 3061982 on which date he retired upon attaining the age of superannuation.
The petitioner, therefore, discharged his duties with the State Government with effect from 25.10.1966 up to 3061982.
For this period of service, he claims that he is entitled to pension.
3.
The petitioner submits that he visited the Block Primary Education Officer, Block Chogawan II as well as the District Education Officer (Primary) at Amritsar for completion of his service book and the grant of pensionary benefits.
However, he was not granted the same.
Ultimately he even served a legal notice under Section 80 of CPC in August 1991.
A copy of the said notice has been appended as Annexure P-2 with this writ petition.
Having failed to receive any response from the respondents, the petitioner filed a suit in November, 1991 seeking the grant of pension.
The said suit, however, was dismissed by the trial Court with the following observations :-  "The jurisdiction of the Hon'ble High Court as well as the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in granting relief in such like cases is very wide but the jurisdiction of the civil Court in such like cases is very limited.
In writ jurisdiction the law of limitation is not applicable while in a civil suit Limitation Act is applicable.
If any case is not covered by any of the articles of the Limitation Act then the same will be covered by the residuary Article ie 113 of the Limitation Act which prescribes a period of three years for filing a suit or in other words if limitation is not prescribed regarding any kind of suit then the limitation for filing the suit would be governed by Article 113 of the Limitation Act.
The limitation for filing the suit would be governed by Article 113 of the Limitation Act.
The limitation for filing the present suit in a civil Court is three years from the date of retirement of the plaintiff.
The suit of the plaintiff in such a case cannot be said to be within limitation.
This issue is accordingly decided against the plaintiff."
4.
Having failed to succeed in the Civil Suit, the petitioner has filed the present writ petition claiming a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondent-authorities to grant pension/retiral benefits to the petitioner after treating his service as a regular employee in the education department w.e.f 25.10.1966 up to the date of his retirement.
He has also claimed interest @ 18% per annum on the said pensionary benefits.
5.
When the writ petition came up for preliminary hearing on 2171994, notice of motion was issued in the same with the following order :-  "Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that in spite of the dismissal of petitioner's suit as time barred, the petitioner can still maintain this writ petition as denial of the right to pension is a continuing wrong.
Notice of motion for September 19, 1994."
6.
As a result of issuance of notice, the respondent-State has filed written statement.
It has been stated that cause of action as pleaded in the present writ petition is the same as pleaded in the Civil suit.
Since the suit was dismissed in May, 1994, this writ petition is barred by the principle of res judicata.
It is further stated that the claim of the petitioner is barred by delay and laches.
Apart from this, it has been stated that since the service of the petitioner had never been regularized by the State of Punjab, he is not entitled to pension.
7.
I have heard Mr. Gurbachan Singh and Mr. Harnek Singh, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner and Mr. GC Gupta, DAG, Punjab for the respondents.
8.
Before I deal with the contention of limitation and the effect of the Civil suit on the present writ petition, I would consider the claim of the petitioner for pension on merits.
9.
The facts of this case would show that the petitioner was working as a regular JBT teacher in the National High School, Bhikhiwind, District Amritsar.
The school was taken over by the Government by an order dated 29.11.1966, extracted herein above.
A reading of the order would show that the teachers working in the School were also taken over by the Government.
It is mentioned in the order that they are working on temporary basis for a period of six months till their services are regularized.
Since the petitioner was a regular employee whose services were taken over by the State Government, he was entitled to be ultimately regularized in the government service.
The written statement does not disclose any reason as to why the petitioner was not regularized.
Even during the course of arguments, no reason is forth-coming as to why he was not regularized.
It is clearly a case of official lethargy.
It appears that no body bothered to give attention to the petitioner's case regarding regularization of his service.
The petitioner has, thus, suffered for inaction of the State Government.
Being a regular employee in the private school, he was entitled to be regularized in the State Government.
There is thus no justification for the respondents not to have regularized the services of the petitioner.
Moreover, no reason has been disclosed as to why the services of the petitioner could not have been regularized either in the written statement filed or during the course of arguments.
It is, therefore, ordered that the petitioner shall be considered to be a regular employee of the State Government from 25.10.1966.
He has thus, served the government from 25.10.1966 up to the date of his superannuation which was 3061982 and is therefore, held to be entitled for pensionary benefits for this period.
10.
The question now arises is as to what is the impact of the Civil suit filed by the petitioner.
A perusal of the operative portion of the judgment of the trial Court would show that the suit was dismissed only on the ground that it was barred by limitation.
It is now settled law that the pension and gratuity are no longer any bounty to be disturbed by the Government.
The same are granted to an employee as a result of hard work put in by the employee during the course of service and are valuable rights as property in the hands of the employee.
For this reliance can be placed on judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court in State of Kerala and others v. M Padma Nathan Nair, the relevant observation of the Supreme Court are as under :-  "Pension and gratuity are no longer any bounty to be distributed by the Government to his employees on their retirement but have become under the decision of this Court valuable right as property in their hands and any culpable delay in settlement and disbursement thereof must be vested (visited ?)
with the penalty of payment of interest at the current market rate till actual payment."
The necessity for prompt payment of the retirement dues to the Government servant immediately after his retirement cannot be over emphasized and it would not be unreasonable to direct that the liability to pay penal interest on these dues on the current market rate should commence at the expiry of two months from the date of retirement."
11.
It is in this background that the question of delay is now to be considered.
Every employee has a right to receive his due salary for the period when he remains in service.
Thereafter, he has a right to receive his due pension.
The right to receive the due and correct salary and pension is a recurring right.
It accrues to an employee every month.
Therefore, if an employee does not receive his correct salary or pension for a period of time it gives rise to a recurring cause of action every month.
This proposition of law has been enunciated by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in India in a case of MR Gupta v. Union of India, reported as 1996(1) SCT 8 : 1996(1) SCT 8.
The relevant observation of the judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court is as under :-  "The appellant's grievance that his pay fixation was not in accordance with the rules, was the assertion of a continuing wrong against him which gave rise to a recurring cause of action each time he was paid a salary which was not computed in accordance with the rules.
So long as the appellant is in service, a fresh cause of action arises every month when he is paid his monthly salary on the basis of a wrong computation made contrary to rules.
It is no doubt true that if the appellant's claim is found is correct on merits, he would be entitled to be paid according to the properly fixed pay scale in the future and the question of limitation would arise for recovery of the arrears for the past period.
In other words, the appellant's claim, if any, for recovery of arrears calculated on the basis of difference in the pay which has become time barred would not be recoverable, but he would be entitled to proper fixation of his pay in accordance with rules and cessation of a continuing wrong if on merits his claim is justified."
12.
Similar view has been taken by a Full Bench of this Court in Saroj Kumari v. State of Punjab, reported as 1998(3) SCT page 664 (P&H).
The precise question referred to before the Full Bench was as to whether a writ petition for proper fixation of pay scales can be entertained even after the period of limitation prescribed by the Limitation Act for filing a civil suit has already expired.
A Full Bench after considering a number of judgments of the Supreme Court ultimately answered the question as hereunder :  "After hearing learned counsel for the parties on this point we are of the view that in case where a person invokes the jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India for fixation of his pay under relevant rules/instructions or even on the basis of a judgment of a competent Court, the question of delay and laches would not come in as it would be a case of a continuing wrong and every month the person is paid the salary which according to him is not in accordance with the relevant rules and instructions a fresh cause of action would arise every month.
Such a case is not a case of one time action like the case of termination or dismissal from service.
As observed by the Apex Court in MR Gupta's case (supra) that the Court while granting relief regarding the payment of arrears may apply law of limitation.
Since a civil suit would be maintainable for realising arrears of three years and two months, the writ Court would be justified in restricting the payment of arrears to three years and two months prior to the filing of the writ petition."
13.
In the light of the aforementioned judgment, I am of the opinion that the claim of the petitioner for pension cannot be rejected on the ground of delay and laches.
However, the arrears payable to him would have to be restricted for a period of 38 months prior to the date of filing of the writ petition.
Since the suit filed by the plaintiff was dismissed only on the ground of limitation and the Civil Court itself was of the view that in such cases, the jurisdiction was vested in this Court, I am of the opinion that in the peculiar facts of this case, the plaintiffs' claim for pension cannot be denied merely on the ground that he had earlier filed a Civil Suit.
14.
The petitioner is, therefore, entitled to pension for the service which he has rendered with the State of Punjab from 25.10.1966 up to 3061982 i.e. the date when he retired from service.
The respondent would compute the amount of pension treating him to have retired from service on 30th June, 1982.
The arrears would be released to the petitioner within a period of four months from the date of receipt of certified copy of the order by the respondents.
In case, the petitioner had been paid any amount in lieu of pension, the same shall be adjusted in the arrears of pension due and payable to the petitioner.
However, arrears of pension would only be paid for a period of 38 months prior to the filing of this writ petition.
It is clarified that the present writ petition was filed on July 20, 1994.
15.
In the present case, it is clear that on merits the petitioner has been denied his pension due to the lethargy and inaction on the part of the respondent-State.
It is incumbent upon the respondents to have considered the claim of the petitioner for regularization during the period when he was actually in the service of the State of Punjab.
For the inaction of the State Government, the petitioner has suffered as he has been denied his pension from the date of his retirement upto 38 months prior to the filing of this writ petition.
Therefore, this is a fit case where the petitioner is also entitled to receive interest on the arrears of pension now payable to him.
The petitioner would be entitled to interest at the rate of 12% per annum on the arrears of pension payable to him.
The writ petition is allowed in the aforementioned terms.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.