Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was appointed as a Sub-Inspector in the office of the Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Punjab on May 13, 1960.
The post of Sub-Inspector was in the pay scale of Rs. 110-4-130/5-160-EB-5- 200.
The petitioner was due to cross the Efficiency Bar at the stage of Rs. 160/- by May 14, 1972.
No order was passed.
However, in the year 1977, three orders dated April 18, 1977, July 20, 1977 and August 17, 1977 were passed.
It was ordered that the petitioner was not fit to cross the Efficiency Bar.
Finally, vide order dated March 21, 1983, a copy of which has been produced on record as Annexure P-5 with the writ petition, the petitioner was allowed to cross the Efficiency Bar with effect from May 1, 1983.
The petitioner represented against this order.
Copies of some of those representations have been placed on the record.
Vide order dated March 12, 1991, the representations were rejected.
Aggrieved by the action of the respondents, in not allowing the petitioner to cross the Efficiency Bar with effect from May 1, 1972 and in rejecting his representations, the petitioner has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
2.
The respondents have filed a written statement.
A summary of the petitioner's record of service has been given in paragraph 14.
On the basis thereof, it has been stated that the petitioner was not considered to be suitable for crossing the Efficiency Bar prior to May 1, 1983.
It has been further averred that the matter is governed by the instructions issued vide letter dated July 5, 1948, according to which, a person must earn 50% good reports before he can be considered suitable for crossing the Efficiency Bar.
A copy of these instructions has been produced on record as annexure R.I with the statement.
In these instructions, it has been inter alia provided as under :-  "(2) For the purpose of crossing the efficiency bars, Govt. servants will broadly fall into three divisions as below and their case will be dealt with as explained against each.
(a) Good - Are those who consistently earn good reports and will in the ordinary course be permitted by competent authority to cross the efficiency bars.
(b) Fair - Are those who secure at least 50 per cent good reports.
They should not be permitted to cross the bar unless the head of department is satisfied, on a careful study of the record, that they merit promotion and give promise of satisfactorily filling the heavier charges in the grade.
(c) Poor - Are remainder and they will not be permitted to cross the bar."
3.
It is averred that the petitioner's case was considered in accordance with the above instructions and he was allowed to cross the Efficiency Bar with effect from the year he fulfilled the criteria of 50% good reports.
On these premises, the respondents support their action in not allowing the petitioner to cross the Efficiency Bar prior to the year 1983.
4.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
Mr. Randhir Sharma, learned counsel for the petitioner, has made a two-fold submission.
Firstly, it has been contended that the petitioner had not been communicated a single adverse report during his entire career.
Accordingly, the reports by which he was graded as 'below average' or 'poor' cannot be treated as adverse and should not have formed the basis of the impugned action.
Secondly, the learned counsel submits that even on the basis of the executive instructions produced by the Government, the impugned action cannot be sustained.
Mr. Jaswant Singh, appearing for the respondents, has controverted the petitioner's claim.
5.
After hearing counsel for the parties, I find that the instructions referred to by the respondents are totally vague.
In these instructions, it has been inter alia observe that "those who secure atleast 50% good reports" shall be graded as 'Fair' but should not be permitted to cross the Efficiency Bar unless the Head of Department is satisfied that they give promise of satisfactorily filling the heavier charges in the grade.
Prima facie, it implies that the entire service record of an employee has to be taken into consideration.
If that be so, the respondents had to consider the petitioner's record of service with effect from May 13, 1960 when he had joined service and not with effect from June 30, 1966 as they appear to have actually done.
Mr. Jaswant Singh states that in fact, the respondents have considered the record of seven years preceding the relevant date.
There seems to be no warrant for such an assumption.
The instructions do not lay down that only seven years' record preceding the date on which the employee has to cross the Efficiency Bar should be taken into consideration.
That being so, it is clear that the petitioner's claim was not considered in accordance with the instructions at Annexure R-1 with the written statement.
6.
It is also not disputed that the reports for the years 1965-66 to 1971-72 wherein the petitioner was graded as 'Average' to 'Poor' were never conveyed to him.
Equally, it is also not disputed that there was no yearly review of the petitioner's case.
This action of the respondents was grossly unfair.
Firstly, the remarks recorded as far back as 1965-66 or thereafter, were never conveyed to the petitioner.
He had no chance of knowing that his performance had been adjudged as 'below average' or "poor".
If the remarks had been conveyed, it would have been possible for the petitioner to either show that the assessment was not correct or atleast to improve his performance.
The action of the respondents in not conveying the remarks continuously for a number of years, was wholly violative of the principles of natural justice and fair play.
Secondly, the respondents should have considered the petitioner's claim for crossing the Efficiency Bar every year.
This, in fact, is the clear import of Rule 4.8 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules wherein it has been inter alia provided that "the cases of all officers held up at the efficiency bar should be reviewed annually with a view to determine whether the quality of their work has improved and generally whether the defects for which they were stopped at the bar have been remedied to an extent sufficient to warrant the removing of the bar".
Even this was not done.
Inevitably, it follows that respondent No. 2 viz. the Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Haryana did not act in conformity with the principles of fair play as also the statutory rules.
7.
Lastly, it appears that the respondents have been considering the record of the petitioner for a period of seven years with the object of determining his suitability for crossing the Efficiency Bar.
Assuming this to be a valid criteria, it does not appear to be correct to say that the petitioner should have been allowed to cross the Efficiency Bar only in the year 1983.
By the year 1977-78, the petitioner had earned good reports.
He was, therefore, suitable to cross the Efficiency Bar even on that basis.
Yet, the respondents have permitted him the benefit only with effect from May 1, 1983.
Even Mr. Jaswant Singh has not been able to explain as to how this action of the respondents can be sustained.
8.
Taking the totality of circumstances into consideration, I am unable to sustain the impugned order passed on March 21, 1983, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-5 with the writ petition.
It is, consequently, quashed.
As a result, even the order dated March 12, 1991 by which the petitioner's representations were rejected, is set aside.
The respondents are directed to re-decide the petitioner's case within a period of three months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
His pay shall be refixed in accordance with the final decision.
The arrears of salary that may become due to the petitioner shall also be paid to him keeping in view the fact that the respondents did not act in conformity with the provisions of the rules and the principles of fair play, whatever the amount due to the petitioner by way of arrears, shall be paid to him with interest at the rate of 12% from the date of accrual till the date of actual payment.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to his costs which are assessed at Rs. 3,000/-.