Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioners along with respondents 6 to 8 and two other persons (who are in the service of the State Government) wee considered for selection and appointment to the Punjab Civil Service (Executive Branch).
They were interviewed by a committee consisting of two members of the Public Service Commission on September 9, 1994.
The petitioners were rejected.
Respondents 6 to 9 were selected.
The petitioners impugn the selection of respondents 6 to 8 in this petition.
2.
Mr. PS Patwalia, learned counsel for the petitioners, has contended that the selection is vitiated as :-  i) The selection was made by a committee consisting of only two members of the commission and even an expert was not associated.
ii) The State Government did not properly forward the records of the petitioners and respondents 6 to 8. iii) Respondent No4 being a relation of respondent No. 6 was biased in his favour.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioners has been controverted by the learned counsel for the respondents.
3.
It may be noticed at the outset that this petition had come up for hearing before us on August 9, 1995.
We had asked the learned counsel for the State of Punjab to produce the files containing the confidential reports of the parties before us.
These were produced on August 10, 1995.
We perused those files.
We found that all the seven officers had good record of service.
If at all, the record of respondents 6 to 8 was certainly a shade better than that of the petitioners.
In this situation it cannot be said that the action of the authorities in selecting respondents 6 to 8 was in any way unfair, unjust or arbitrary.
With this background, we proceed to consider the contentions raised on behalf of the petitioners.
4.
Re :(i)  Firstly, it has been contended that the selection has not been made by the Commission but only by a committee consisting of two members.
Furthermore, even this committee did not associated a Subject Expert, as contemplated under Rule 17 of the Rules of Procedure framed by the Public Service Commission.
According to the counsel, the selection made by the committee without associating any expert is, thus, vitiated.
On the other hand, Mr. Hira Lal Sibal, learned counsel for respondents 6 to 8 submitted that the rules framed by the Commission are meant to regulate the functioning of the Commission and are not mandatory.
5.
Rule 17 inter alia provides that the Commission may "from time to time decide to constitute Board(s) or Committee(s) of one or more members for holding interviews of candidates for recruitment to various posts or for the purpose of any of its other functions".
The composition of the Board or committee has to be decided by the Chairman.
It is further provided that any "decision made or order of preference settled by" the Board or the Committee shall be placed before the Commission for approval and confirmation.
In clause (iv), it has been inter alia provided that "where more than one Member constitute a board for holding the interview, the senior most Member shal preside assisted by  6.
Subject Expert(s)"  (i) The short question that arises for consideration is - Is it mandatory that the full Commission should meet for making the selection and is it necessary to associate a "subject expert" ?
6(ii) The commission is a constitutional body.
Persons of eminence are selected and appointed to be the members of the Commission.
No rule or law requires the Commission to frame any regulations to govern its internal working.
If it frames any rules, these are necessarily in the nature of guidelines, which should be normally followed.
Strict adherence to these provisions may not be necessarily insisted upon.
The object of framing the rules is to ensure proper functioning.
However, a minor deviation or an occasional departure from the rules cannot be interpreted to mean that the recommendations of the Commission are vitiated.
6(iii) Even under the provision of Rule 17, It is permissible for the Commission to form committees.
Such a committee can consist of one or more members.
It is permissible for the Commission to associate subject expert(s).
The obvious purpose of the provision is to ensure that the expert is able to question the candidates on technical matters.
It is calculated to ensure that the Commission should be able to select the best candidates.
In the present case, the Commission had to make the selection from amongst the candidates recommended/nominated by the Government.
The Commission had to examine the service record of the candidates and also to adjudge their suitability on the basis of their performance during the interview for appointment to the Punjab Civil Service.
However, the posts in the civil service are not technical posts.
These are administrative posts.
If in this situation, the Commission considered it unnecessary to associate any expert, it cannot be said that it violated the mandatory provision of law which should result in vitiating its recommendation.
It may be added here that even though, the learned counsel for the petitioners contended that the selection was made only by the committee, it has not been averred in the petition that the recommendation of the committee was not placed before the Commission for approval and confirmation.
That being so, the action the Commission was in conformity with the provisions of Rule 17.
6(iv) In our view, the action of the Commission in constituting a committee and in not associating an expert does not vitiate the selection.
Consequently, the contention raised on behalf of the petitioner is rejected.
7.
Re :(ii)  (i) It was then contended that the State Government did not forward the complete records of the petitioners and the private respondents.
The Commission could not, as such, adjudge the suitability of the candidates properly.
In particular, it was pointed out that respondent No6 had been awarded a censure vide order dated December 7, 1988.
Another order of censure had been conveyed to him on June, 1989.
Even his increment had been stopped with cumulative effect vide order dated November 8, 1991.
However, this record was not forwarded to the Commission.
It has been further submitted that respondent No7 had been given an adverse report for the year 1992-93.
Even this report was not forwarded to the Commission.
As for respondent No.8, it was conceded that there is nothing against him.
On behalf of the respondents, it was pointed out that so far as the order of censure dated December 7, 1988 is concerned, a suit was filed by respondent No6 and the matter is pending before the Additional District Judge, Bathinda.
The order of censure passed on June 5, 1989 has already been set aside by the Court in September 1993.
Similarly, even the punishment of stoppage of one increment imposed on respondent No6 had been set aside by the Government.
Consequently, these orders were not required to be forwarded to the Commission.
With regard to the allegation that respondent No7 had been given an adverse report in the year 1992-93, it has been averred in the written statement on behalf of the State Government that according to the instructions issued by the Government vide letter dated May 28, 1993, a copy of which was produced as Annexure R-1, it had been decided that the confidential reports should be completed by the end of the year.
In case, it was not done, a 'no report certificate' shall be placed on the file.
In other words, if the annual confidential report in respect of an officer is not finalised by the end of the calendar year, then it is not placed on the personal file.
It was in view of this position that a 'no report certificate' in respect of respondent No7 regarding the year 1992-93 had been placed on the file.
Furthermore, it has also been pointed out that petitioner No3 had been awarded the punishment of censure vide order dated September 25, 1989.
Furthermore, complaints are pending against petitioners 1, 2 and 4.
The complaint against petitioner No.2 was said to be of a serious nature.
An embezzlement/misuse of official grants was involved.
In all the three cases, enquiries are pending before the Additional Deputy Commissioners of the respective districts.
7(ii) It is true that while considering the competing claims of the candidates, the Commissioner should have not only the confidential reports but also the other relevant record before it.
However, it has nowhere been pleaded that information with regard to the order of censure etc. had not been conveyed to the Commission.
Furthermore, on the admitted facts as borne out from the pleadings of the parties, the claim made by the petitioners that "all of them have been given compliments and appreciation letters for their work and conduct" or that "none of them has ever been inflicted any punishment....
They have never been administered any warning", does not appear to be accurate.
In fact, petitioner No3 himself who has verified the averments in the petition was awarded the punishment of censure vide order dated September 25, 1989.
Even enquiries are pending against them.
In this situation, the petitioners cannot claim that their record of service is better than that of respondents 6 to 8 or that the Government had not made the complete record available to the Commission prior to the date of interview.
Consequently, even the second contention is rejected.
8.
Re :(iii)  (i) It was then argued that respondent No6 is related to respondent No4 and the selection is vitiated on account of bias.
The allegation has been categorically denied by respondent No6.
Not only that, even the exact relationship has not been disclosed by the petitioners.
The averment in this behalf is contained in para 6 of the petition.
The relevant portion is extracted below :-  "That it would be relevant to mention here that respondent No6 is the cousin nephew of mother of respondent No4 i.e. the mother of respondent No4 is a cousin 'Bua' of respondent No6.
Though respondent No6 is not real cousin of respondent No4 yet their relations are so close that the same are more than real.
It may also be highlighted here that respondent No4 was residing at Circuit House, Patiala and whenever respondent No6 visited Patiala, he used to stay with respondent No4, though there is no evidence to this effect.
Due to closeness of relationship, the respondent No6 was so much confident that even before facing the interview he had declared that he will definitely be selected.
This averment made by respondent No6 before facing the interview has also been highlighted by some of the candidates by making a representation dated 791994."
Even if the grammatical mistakes made by the petitioners are ignored, it is not possible to make out as to what is the precise relationship.
Still further, even though, it has been suggested that respondent No6 had stayed with respondent No4 at the Circuit House, it has been conceded that "there is not evidence to this effect".
Moreover, even this vague suggestion has been denied.
Taking the totality of facts into consideration, it appears that the petitioners have only made a wild allegation without any basis.
8(ii) It was emphasised by the learned counsel for the petitioners that two days prior to the interview, one of the petitioners had sent a letter to the Chief Justice of India alleging that Bhupinder Singh (Respondent No6) and Ajmer Singh (Respondent No7) had struck a deal with the Chairman of the Commission and respondent No4.
Learned counsel submitted that this letter was an intrinsic evidence of the fact that respondent No4 was biased against the petitioners and that he was in fact related to respondent No6.
8(iii) We are unable to accept this contention.
Firstly, if the petitioners were sure of the relationship, they should have given the details in the petition.
They have not.
Secondly, if all of them or at least one of them knew about the relationship, then they should not have appeared in the interview.
They should have objected and asked for a re-constitution of the committee.
They did not.
It is, thus, apparent that they took their chance.
Having failed at the interview they have chosen to file the petition and challenge the selection.
It appears that they were sitting on the fence.
They cannot be permitted to do so.
Having taken their chance, they are now estopped from challenging the selection on the ground that respondent No4 was wrongly included in the selection committee or that he was not capable of making an objective selection.
8(iv) On behalf of the respondents, it was suggested that the letter was probably written by the petitioners only to create evidence.
The suggestion does not appear to be totally baseless.
No other point was urged.
9.
Before parting with the judgment, we may observe that the averments made in the petition are not accurate.
There is a deliberate attempt to over-state the case by the petitioners.
Allegations have been made without due care and caution.
The averment that the service record of the petitioners is absolutely clean, is belied by the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents.
In particular, it deserves mention that petitioner No3 who has verified the contents of the petition, has made a wrong averment that even a warning had not been administered to the petitioners.
As already noticed,he had been censured in the year 1989.
The petitioners will do well to eschew the temptation to make inaccurate statements.
Reluctantly, we leave the matter here.
In view of the above, we find no merit in this writ petition.
It is dismissed.
The petitioners shall pay costs to Respondents 6 to 8.
The costs are assessed at Rs. 5,000/-.