NK Sodhi, J - The prayer made in Civil Misc. 5783 of 1995 is for a direction to the respondents to treat the period from May 1, 1986 to June 4, 1987 as the period spent on duty and for the release of pay and other consequential benefits to the petitioner.
When this application came up for hearing today, counsel for the parties requested that the petition itself be disposed of.
The request was granted.
2.
As per the averments made by the petitioner he was transferred from Garhshankar to Janauri Chohal Construction Sub Division as per order dated 24.4.1986 but he was not allowed to join there.
Thereafter, the transfer order is stated to have been cancelled by the Government and he was again transferred to Janauri Sub Division where also, according to the petitioner, he was not allowed to join and was kept waiting for his posting order.
On the other hand, the case of the Department is that the petitioner remained absent without leave for the period from 1.5.1986 to 461987 and that departmental proceedings had been initiated against him after serving a charge-sheet on him.
3.
The primary claim made by the petitioner in the writ petition is for payment of salary for the aforesaid period and for other consequential benefits.
It is not disputed that the Department had initiated a departmental inquiry against the petitioner which has since concluded and the Enquiry Officer has submitted his report.
Mr. Grewal states that in view of the interim order passed by this Court on 3.3.1989, the final order on the inquiry report could not be passed.
4.
After hearing counsel for the parties, I vacate the interim order and direct the competent authority to pass an appropriate order on the inquiry report and in case the petitioner is exonerated, his salary and other consequential benefits be released to him within three months thereafter.
The competent authority is directed to pass an order within two months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
The writ petition as well as the application stand disposed of in the above terms.