GS Singhvi, J - After serving with 112 I.NF BN.
(TA), the petitioner was invalidated out of service on the recommendations of the Medical Board which categorised him "CEE(P)" on account of contracting disease - Ani- sometropiat Amblypia in the right eye.
After his discharge from service, the petitioner applied for disability pension on the ground that he had suffered disability of 20% during the course of employment and his disability was attributable to the military service.
Request of the petitioner was rejected by the Officer-in-charge, Records, Dogra Regiment, Faizabad vide communication dated 541989 Annexure P-1 on the ground that the disability suffered by the petitioner was not attributable to the military service.
The appeal filed by the petitioner against the decision taken by the Officer-in-charge, Record has been rejected by the Government of India vide Annexure R-2.
In the writ petition, it has been alleged that the petitioner had contracted the disease during the Army service and it was aggravated during the training camp with 112 INF.
BN.
(TA) and for this, the respondents were responsible.
The petitioner has prayed for issue of a writ of mandamus to the respondents to pay him disability pension in accordance with the rules.
He has prayed that the decision taken by the respondents rejecting his claim for grant of disability pension be declared illegal and be quashed.
2.
The writ petition has been opposed on the ground that the petitioner has no right to claim disability pension because his disability was constitutional and it could not be attributed to the military service or aggravated thereby.
Respondents have pleaded that the petitioner did not suffer disability either during the service or during the training camp and, therefore, his claim for grant of disability pension cannot be entertained.
3.
Mr. Sarwan Singh, learned counsel for the petitioner, argued that in view of the provisions contained in Rule 7 of the Government of India, Ministry of Defence Instructions, which have been quoted in para-15 of the Writ Petition, it is for respondents to note the constitutional disability of a person in the military service on his initial appointment and if no such note has been prepared, there must exist a reasoned medical opinion that the disability could not have been detected at the time of medical examination in entry in service and as in the case of petitioner, no such note was recorded at the time of his entry in the service, the disability suffered by the petitioner must be treated as attributable to the service.
Learned counsel relied on an order dated 8111993 passed in C.W.P.
No. 2863 of 1993 : 1994(1) SCT 653 (Surjit Singh v. Union of India and another) and submitted that his case is squarely covered by the decision in Surjit Singh's case.
4.
From the averments made in the reply, filed by the respondents, it is clear that the respondents have not pleaded that the disability suffered by the petitioner was of such nature which could not have been detected on medical examination prior to the petitioner's entry in service.
They have simply pleaded that the disability suffered by the petitioner is constitutional and, therefore, it cannot be attributed to the service or aggravated on account of service.
Respondents have not given any explanation as to why a note in accordance with rule 7 of the rules framed by the Government of India, Ministry of Defence for grant of disability pension was not recorded at the time of entry in services.
5.
Surjit Singh's case which has been decided on 8111993, is identical to the case of the petitioner.
In that case, this Court has considered the provisions contained in rule 7 and held that unless the provisions of rule 7(b) are complied with, the respondents cannot deny disability pension to an employee who is discharged on medical grounds.
6.
Apart from the decision in Surjit Singh's case, we are of the considered opinion that on a plain reading of rule 7(b), it becomes clear that there is a presumption of the disability being caused due to military service unless a note to that effect is appended at the time of an individual's acceptance of military service or there is a medical opinion that such disease could not have been detected on medical examination prior to the acceptance of service.
7.
Since the respondents have not justified the denial of disability pension to the petitioner in the context of rule 7, we hold that the denial of disability pension to the petitioner is patently illegal and the decisions contained in Annexure P-1 and Annexure R-2 are liable to be quashed.
8.
Consequently, the writ petition is allowed.
Annexures P-1 and R-2 are quashed.
The respondents are directed to grant the benefit of disability pension to the petitioner.
Necessary exercise for making payment of disability pension to the petitioner with effect from the date of determination of disability should be undertaken and finalised by the respondents within a period of two months of the submission of a certified copy of this order and the entire payment be made to him within next one month.
If it is not done, the respondents shall have to pay interest to the petitioner at the rate of 18% from the date of discharge on the ground of disability.
The parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.