VK Jhanji, J - In this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, petitioner is seeking a writ in the nature of Certiorari quashing order dated 171992 vide which services of the petitioner have been dispensed with by respondent No. 4 as no longer required and also advertisement dated 671992 by which the post of Lecturer in Punjabi held by the petitioner has been re-advertised.
2.
Ramgarhia Girls College, Ludhiana (in short the College) managed by its Managing Committee is affiliated to Panjab University, Chandigarh.
The College gets grant-in-aid from the State of Punjab to the extent of 95 per cent.
All appointments made to the college have to be approved by both the Panjab University, Chandigarh (in short the University) to which college is affiliated as well as the Director Public Instructions (Colleges) Punjab (in short, DPI).
Pursuant to advertisement in the year 1990, applications for two posts of the Punjabi lecturers against temporary but likely to continue basis were invited.
After interview the candidates were called before the Selection Committee.
Mrs. Jagdish Kaur and Jaspal Kaur were selected for the post of Punjabi lecturer whereas the petitioner was placed in the waiting list.
As Mrs. Jagdish Kaur failed to join, vide letter dated 14.9.1990 the petitioner was appointed as lecturer in Punjabi on temporary basis.
Vide order dated 171992 petitioner was informed that his services are no longer required w.e.f.
171992 and he was paid salary of one month in lieu of one month's notice period by way of cheque dated 3061992.
Order dated 171992 is being impugned in this petition inter alia on the ground that under regulation 23 of the Regulations as contained in Panjab University Calendar Vol.
I, Chapter VIII(E) Edition 1989, a teacher is ordinarily appointed on one year's probation after which he is normally confirmed if his work and conduct is found satisfactory.
Under the regulation, it is obligatory on the part of the governing body of the College to notify the teacher in writing before the expiry of one year's probation that whether he has been confirmed or his period of probation has been extended.
It has been alleged that no notice whatsoever as contemplated by Regulation 23. was issued to the petitioner or served on him informing him that his period of probation has been extended.
Consequently on the expiry of one year w.e.f.
14.9.1990 the petitioner was deemed to have been confirmed as lecturer in Punjabi and the petitioner could not have been dismissed or removed from service except after enquiry and that too after he had been informed about the charges against him and given reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of those charges.
In this respect, reference is made to Sections 2-A, 3 and 4 of the Punjab Affiliated Colleges (Security of Service Act, 1974 (in short the 1974 Act).
Order is also being impugned on the ground that under Section 7 of the 1974 Act an employee of an affiliated college can be retrenched only after the approval of the Director and further the employee who is retrenched is to have preference for appointment to future vacancies.
It has been alleged that the order impugned has been passed because of shifting of plus-one and plus-two classes from government and non-govt. affiliated colleges to schools and thus the petitioner could not have been retrenched without the prior approval of the DPI.
Another ground on which the order is being impugned is that after the petitioner was removed from service, the Managing Committee vide advertisement in The Tribune dated 671992, i.e. merely five days after removal, advertised two posts of Lecturer in Punjabi from which it is patent that the college required the services of lecturer in Punjabi and reasons assigned in the offer of termination are vitiated.
Advertisement dated 671992 vide which two posts of Lecturer in Punjabi were advertised is being impugned on the ground that through this advertisement only applications from lady lecturers have been invited and petitioners have been totally excluded from being considered to the post of lecturers.
The action of the Managing Committee in seeking to appoint only lady lecturers is contrary and violative of Article 16 of the Constitution of India as it discriminates against the petitioner on the ground of sex.
3.
Written statement on behalf of respondents 3 and 4, i.e. College and the Managing Committee, has been filed by Nirmal Singh, General Secretary, Managing Committee, Ramgarhia Educational Council, Ludhiana.
In the written statement it has been submitted that services of the petitioner being temporary were rightly dispensed with and as such he has got no cause of action and cannot invoke the extraordinary writ jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
It has been averred that the College is a minority institution and is exclusively meant for girls and is protected under Article 30(1) of the Constitution and therefore, the present writ petition is not maintainable.
On merits, respondents have stated that in view of policy decision of the Government to shift plus-two class from the colleges to senior secondary schools, there was a fall in admission in plus- one class.
Admission to plus-one class in the year 1991 was 341 (Arts) whereas in 1992, it was 217 (Arts) meaning thereby that there was a fall of 124 students for admission to plus-one class and on account of this reduction in admission of students to plus-I and plus-II classes, respondents made temporary appointments which were likely to continue.
The services of the petitioner which were temporary but likely to continue were rightly dispensed with as the petitioner was junior to all lecturers in Punjabi.
In regard to getting 95 per cent grant-in-aid from the State of Punjab, it has been averred that for this post, the Managing Committee is not getting 95 per cant grant-in-aid from the State of Punjab.
The DPI had given approval to the post of lecturer held by the petitioner upto 3131991.
The allegation of the petitioner that he was appointed on one year's probation has been denied in the written statement.
As regards application of regulation 23 and sections 3, 4 and 7 of the 1974 Act, respondents have averred that after expiry of one year, services of the petitioner were renewed on 2881991 for a period of one year in accordance with instructions of the University as contained in Format `A'.
Petitioner was informed vide order dated 171992 that his services were no longer required with effect from 171992 and in lieu of one month's notice he was given a cheque for one month's salary.
As regards the inviting of applications from the lady lecturers, the respondents have submitted that college is exclusively meant for girls and preference is given to the lady lecturers, if suitable lady lecturers are available with requisite qualifications and competence.
After dispensing with the services of petitioner, a resolution was passed by the Managing Committee that temporary posts of lady lecturers be advertised and that too for a limited period i.e. temporary upto end of academic session and accordingly, the action was taken.
Respondents have denied that the alleged retrenchment of the petitioner has occasioned as a result of decision to induct into service female teachers in the institution.
Respondents have stated that it has occasioned as a result of issuance of orders dated 1661989 and 1121992 to DPI whereby a decision had been taken not to allow plus-one class in Arts subject in the college from the academic session 1992-93 and the college had been directed not to admit the students in plus-one class (arts group) from session 1992-93.
4.
The matter in controversy in this petition and as contended by learned counsel for the petitioner is :  (i) Whether action of the Managing Committee in dispensing with the services of the petitioner is violative of provisions of Sections 3 and 4 of the 1974 Act; (ii) Whether advertisement dated 671992 whereby applications for the post of two lady lecturers on temporary basis upto the end of academic session had been invited, is vitiated in view of Section 7 of the 1974 Act ?
The University with whom the College is affiliated has framed a uniform policy for appointment to the post of College Lecturers.
The University has provided for four kinds of appointments, namely :-  Nature of vacancy Nature of appointment.
Permanent Permanent on probation for one year from the date of joining the period of probation can be extended by another year.
Temporary but likely to become permanent The appointment will remain temporary till the post becomes permanent.
Confirmation can be granted from the date the post becomes permanent provided the period of temporary service preceding it exceeds one year and the work and the conduct of the teacher have been satisfactory.
Temporary but likely to continue Temporary appointment for one year in the first instance to be renewed year after year as long as the post continues provided the work and conduct of the teacher have been satisfactory.
Temporary Temporary appointment upto the end of the Session.
The Managing Committee of the College advertised in The Tribune dated 2261990 for filling up certain vacancies of Lecturers.
In the advertisement it was specifically mentioned that there were two posts of Punjabi lecturers on temporary but likely to continue basis.
After receipt of applications in this regard, the candidates were called for interview before the Selection Committee which consisted of nominee of Vice Chancellor, two experts of the Vice Chancellor, a nominee of DPI (Colleges), a subject-expert appointed by the DPI, Principal of the College and General Secretary of the Managing Committee of College.
Mrs. Jagdish Kaur and Jaspal Kaur were selected for appointment as lecturers whereas petitioner was placed in the waiting-list.
As Jagdish Kaur failed to join, petitioner who was at No. 1 of the waiting list was appointed as lecturer in Punjabi on temporary but likely to continue basis.
In this regard, appointment letter dated 14.9.1990 was issued to the petitioner in pursuance of which he joined the College.
After the selection, approval was received from the University and also from the DPI.
Vide office order dated 2981991, services of the petitioner were renewed for a period of one year.
On 171992 petitioner was informed that his services are no longer required w.e.f.
171992 and in lieu of one month's notice he was given a cheque for one month's salary.
The nature of appointment of the petitioner was purely temporary.
5.
On these facts, it requires to be considered as to whether services of the petitioner could be terminated without the approval of DPI as has been contended by learned counsel for the petitioner.
6.
The relevant provisions of the Punjab Affiliated Colleges (Security of Service) Act, 1974 (in short the 1974 Act) are as under :-  "Section 3: Dismissal, removal or reduction in rank not to be ordered except after inquiry: No employee shall be dismissed or removed or reduced in rank except after an inquiry in which he has been informed of the charges against him and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of those charges.
"Section 4: Procedure to be observed before dismissal and removal : 1.
The penality of dismissal or removal from service shall not be imposed unless the same is approved by the Director.
2.
Where after the inquiry referred to in section 3 it is proposed to impose the penality of dismissal or removal from service the proposal shall be referred to the Director alongwith the relevant record and intimation about the proposal having been so referred shall be sent to the employee concerned also simultaneously.
3.
The employee may, within a period of thirty days of the receipt of the intimation referred to in sub-section (2), make a representation against the proposed penalty to the Director, who may, after examining the record and giving to the parties an opportunity of being heard, by an order in writing give his approval to the imposition of the proposed penalty of dismissal or removal from service, as the case may be, or refuse to give approval if the proposal is found to be mala fide or by way of victimisation or not warranted by the facts and circumstances of the case.
4.
Any party aggrieved by an order of Director under sub- section (3) may file an appeal to the College Tribunal which may after giving to the parties an opportunity of being heard, pass such order as it may deem fit.
"Section 6: Sections 3, 4 and 5 not to apply in certain cases - The provisions of Sections 3, 4 and 5 shall not apply - (i) to the termination of service of any employee who is appointed for a temporary period only; (ii) to the termination of service of any employee appointed on probation, during or at the end of the period of probation, on account of his work or conduct being unsatisfactory; and  (iii) to an employee who is dismissed or removed or reduced in rank on the ground of conduct which has led to his conviction on a criminal charge."
Section 3 prohibits dismissal, removal or reduction in rank of a teacher without reasonable enquiry.
Under Section 4, the teacher can be dismissed or removed with the approval of DPI It also provides for an appeal to the College Tribunal.
Section 6, however, clarifies that provisions of Sections 3 and 4 will not apply to the termination of services of a teacher who is appointed for a temporary period or of a teacher who is on probation, during or at the end of the period of probation, if his work and conduct is not found satisfactory, or where the teacher has been dismissed or removed or reduced in rank on the ground of conduct which has led to his conviction on a criminal charge.
As noticed, appointment of the petitioner as lecturer was purely temporary and therefore, it was not necessary for the Managing Committee of the College to hold an enquiry or to obtain the prior approval of the DPI before terminating the services of the petitioner.
Thus, the contention that dispensing with services of the petitioner is violative of provisions of Sections 3 and 4 of the 1974 Act, is without any merit.
7.
It was next contended by Mr. Rajiv Atma Ram, Counsel for the petitioner, that under Regulation 23 of the Regulations as contained in Panjab University Calendar, Volume-I, Chapter VIII(E) Edition 1989, a teacher is ordinarily appointed on one year's probation after which he is normally confirmed if his work and conduct is found satisfactory, and in case he is not notified before the expiry of one year that he has been confirmed or his period of probation has been extended, he would be deemed to have been confirmed.
In this context, he also made reference to Section 2-A of the 1974 Act to contend that a teacher appointed against a vacancy likely to exist for more than one year has to be on probation for a period of one year which can be extended from time to time, but in all cannot exceed two years.
He contended that the petitioner would be deemed to have been appointed on probation initially for a year as he was appointed against a vacancy which was likely to exist for more than one year and he having not been notified before the expiry of one year of probation would be deemed to have been confirmed and so, services of a confirmed teacher could only be terminated in accordance with the provisions of Sections 3 and 4 of the 1974 Act.
Regulation 23 and Section 2-A reference of which has been made by the counsel read as under :-  Regulation 23:  A teacher will ordinarily be appointed on one year's probation after which he will normally be confirmed if his work and conduct are found satisfactory.
It would be obligatory on the part of a Governing Body to notify to the teacher in writing before the expiry of one year's probationary period, whether he had been confirmed or his period of probation had been extended and in absence of such a notice the teacher would be deemed to have been confirmed.
The probationary period shall in no case be extended beyond two years from the date of appointment.
Section 2-A: An employee appointed against a vacancy likely to exist for more than one year shall remain on probation for a period of one year which may be extended from time to time: Provided that the total period of probation including extension, if any, shall not exceed two years."
A perusal of Regulation 23 shows that it would apply only where a teacher is appointed on probation.
The advertisement against which the petitioner had applied and was appointed as lecturer and also the appointment letter which was issued to him in this regard make it abundantly clear that the appointment of the petitioner was against a vacancy which was only temporary.
It was not a permanent vacancy nor was it temporary but likely to become permanent.
It is only in the case of a permanent vacancy that a teacher is on probation for a period of one year and in the case of temporary vacancy but likely to become permanent one, the teacher remains temporary till the post becomes permanent.
He, of course, can be confirmed from the date the post becomes permanent, provided the period of temporary service exceeds one year and the work and conduct of the teacher has been satisfactory.
However, petitioner was not appointed against these two type of vacancies but was appointed against temporary vacancy which was likely to continue.
Against this nature of vacancies, the appointment ordinarily is for one year in the first instance which can be renewed year after year as long as the post continues provided that work and conduct of the teacher is satisfactory.
Regulation 23 of the University Calendar thus is not applicable to the case of the petitioner as he was not appointed on probation, rather the vacancy against which he was appointed was purely temporary.
8.
Likewise, Section 2-A of the 1974 Act could have been made applicable to the case of the petitioner in case he had been appointed against a vacancy likely to exist for more than one year.
However, it has not been shown that he was appointed against such a vacancy.
It has rather come on record that the vacancy against which the petitioner was appointed was not likely to exist for more than a year.
In 1989 the Government had informed all the Principals of Government and Non-Govt.
Colleges in the State of Punjab about its decision to shift plus-II classes from the Government as well as Non-Government Colleges by 1993 in the case of Arts classes and by 1995 in the case of Sciences/Commerce classes.
In this regard, they were informed that there shall be no admission in plus-I class w.e.f.
the year 1993 in Arts Faculty and with effect from the year 1995 in the Science/Commerce faculty and further that no extra post would be sanctioned to meet the requirements of these classes from the session 1990.
Again this position was reiterated vide memo.
dated 1121992 and the College Principals were directed not to admit students in plus-I class in Arts subjects from the academic session 1992-93.
It was because of the decision of the Government to shift plus-I classes from colleges to Senior Secondary Schools that the appointment of the petitioner was on temporary basis and no grant-in-aid was received by the college from the Government for the post of lecturer on which petitioner was appointed.
In these circumstances, merely because before the expiry of one year the services of the petitioner were extended would not mean that he was appointed against a vacancy which was likely to exist for more that one year.
The protection of 1974 Act would have become available to the petitioner only if he could show that the post against which he was appointed is not temporary or his employment was not in the nature of probation as provided under Section 6 of the 1974 Act.
Since Section 2-A of the 1974 Act has no application to the case of the petitioner, it is not necessary to deal with the judgments cited by counsel for the petitioner for the proposition that after the expiry of one year period of probation in absence of notice for extension of probation, the petitioner would be deemed to have been confirmed.
9.
Faced with this situation, learned counsel for the petitioner contended that immediately after dispensing with the services of the petitioner the Managing Committee vide advertisement dated 671992 invited applications for the post of two lady lecturers on temporary basis upto the end of the academic session, but no preference in this regard was given to the petitioner.
Reference in this respect was made to sub-section (2) of Section 7 of the 1974 Act which provides that where an employee is relieved from an affiliated college as a result of retrenchment, he shall have preference for appointment to future vacancies in the affiliated college in which he was serving immediately before retrenchment or in another affiliated college under the same managing committee.
The case of the petitioner is not covered by this provision as he was not retrenched, rather his services were dispensed with in terms of his appointment and accordingly, no preference for appointment to future vacancy was required to be given to him.
Counsel is also not correct in contending that the decision of the Managing Committee was to get rid of the petitioner as immediately after dispensing with his services, two posts of Punjabi lecturers were advertised.
The Managing Committee in the written statement has given very valid reasons for adopting such a course.
As already noticed, the Government of Punjab had taken a decision to shift plus-I classes from colleges to Senior Secondary Schools and in view of this decision there was a considerable fall in admission to plus-I classes.
The proceedings of the meeting held on 19.6.1992 have revealed that the College received a letter from the DPI containing the decision of the Government to shift plus-I classes from colleges to Senior Secondary Schools and not to allow the admission of students in plus-I classes (Arts group) in college.
In view of the said letter, the position of the staff was discussed, besides the discussion regarding financial crisis being faced by the college on account of start of MA class in the subject of Music (Vocal) for which no grant was received from the Government.
In order to cope with MAI in Music (Vocal) more posts were required to be filled which would have resulted in adding to the financial burden on the college.
Accordingly, it was resolved to abolish the posts of lecturers recruited on `temporary but likely to continue basis' with immediate effect from 171992.
In this meeting, it was also resolved that till the negotiation with the Government for continuing plus-I classes in colleges is concluded, the posts be advertised and it should be made clear in the advertisement that all these posts would be temporary upto the end of the academic session.
It was because of this decision that two temporary posts of lecturers upto the end of academic session were advertised.
It also deserves to be noticed at this stage that during the pendency of the writ petition, on 9111992 the respondents offered to take the petitioner back in service in terms of advertisement, Annexure P-6, but the petitioner was ready to accept the offer only with the condition that the order terminating his services be first set aside.
This course was not acceptable to the College as his services had been terminated in terms of his appointment.
In this view of the matter, it is not open to the petitioner now to say that preference ought to have been given to him against the vacancy which was advertised after dispensing with his services.
For the reasons recorded above, the writ petition fails and is accordingly dismissed.
There shall be no order as to costs.