ML Kaul, J - This Letters Patent Appeal is directed against the judgment of the learned Single Judge dated 19.11.1993, whereby Writ of Certiorari has been issued and the order of applicant No. 3 i.e., Deputy Sales Tax Commissioner, Jammu, dated 881990 has been quashed, by virtue of which the services of respondent Syed Qamar Ali were terminated with effect from 6.2.1990 within the purview of Article 128 of the Jammu and Kashmir Civil Services Regulations.
2.
The facts of the case which have given rise to this appeal are that the respondent was serving as an orderly in the Sales Tax Department Jammu on substantial basis.
He applied for medical leave of a period of thirty days with effect from 6.2.1990 and the same was recommended to be sanctioned in his favour by his immediate officer, i.e.
Excise and Taxation Officer concerned.
It is alleged that the respondent was relieved by the Excise and Taxation Officer from the date of application and during the course of his sickness some extraordinary exigency occurred in his family that his uncle died suddenly at Bagga, a place situate in Pakistan occupied Kashmir.
The respondent was required to accompany his parents to that place to attend the mournings and to share the grief of the bereaved family.
Under the circumstances and the dictates of the situation beyond his control, he was left with no time to complete the formalities in the department and left for Pakistan occupied Kashmir.
However, he kept on seeking extensions of leave by submitting his applications, through his brother from Jammu.
On his return from Pakistan occupied Kashmir, he went to his office to report for his duty where through the appellant No. 3, he came to know about the impugned order dated 881990 mentioned supra.
He preferred a representation to the concerned Advisor to the Governor, in the form of an Appeal against the impugned order but the same was rejected.
4.
The case as set up by the appellant No. 3 was that the respondent had applied for sick leave for a period of thirty days with effect from 6.2.1990 and the said application was forwarded by the Excise and Taxation Officer and as the said application was not supported by a medical certificate, therefore, the leave was not sanctioned.
After that another two applications were submitted by the respondent for extension of his leave which were received by the Department.
According to the appellants, the Excise and Taxation Officer had asked the respondent to submit a medical certificate in support of his application and that letter sent by registered cover was received by the Deptt.
back unserved for the respondent was not available as his home address.
The appellant No. 3 again sent a letter to the respondent as his home address to resume his duty within ten days, which too could not be served on him.
Ultimately, a notice was published in the newspaper Daily Excelsior in its issue dated 1161990, asking the respondent to explain his position and to show cause as to why his services be not terminated under Article 128 of the J & K C.S.R.
Upon that the order impugned dated 881990 mentioned supra, was passed.
4.
The learned Single Judge after hearing both the parties and having considered legal position of the case quashed the impugned order dated 881990 and allowed the writ petition of the respondent and also imposed costs of Rs. 5,000/- to be paid to the respondent by the appellants 2 and 3.
5.
Aggrieved of the judgment and order of the learned Single Judge, the present LPA has been preferred by the appellants.
6.
Heard learned counsel for the parties and also perused the record on the file.
7.
The short controversy which had arisen, both before the learned Single Judge and before this Bench as well, for adjudication is as to whether the appellants were competent to terminate the services of the respondent with the ambit of Article 128 of the J & K Civil Services Regulations, without any formal enquiry having been conducted by the appellant No. 3 himself or through some other competent authority subordinate to him.
8.
It is an admitted case of the parties that the respondent is a government servant and was working against a substantive post of orderly in the Sales Tax Department.
It is not disputed that he applied for thirty days leave with effect from 6.2.1990 and the same was recommended in his case by the immediate officer i.e. the concerned Excise and Taxation Officer.
There is no proof available on the file that the respondent did not go Pakistan occupied Kashmir to accompany his parents on the sudden demise of his uncle and left instantaneously for Pakistan occupied Kashmir after his leave was recommended by his immediate officer, for its sanction.
While on leave, presumably found to have been sanctioned by his immediate officer, an emergency arose that his uncle died in Pakistan occupied Kashmir and, therefore, he could not complete the formalities for getting the leave sanctioned by the authorities and he admittedly all along has applied for extension of leave through his brother from time to time.
9.
It is evident, and not disputed by the appellants as well, that the respondent was not at his home when the appellant No. 3 sent letters to him for resumption of his duties and also notices were published in the Daily Excelsior and the same could not be communicated to him, as he was not at Jammu, but had gone to Pakistan occupied Kashmir.
Admittedly, the Daily Excelsior does not have any circulation in the Pakistan occupied Kashmir and the respondent did not get any knowledge about the issuance of aforesaid notices for his resumption of duties.
10.
Although it is presumed as correct that the notices were given to the respondent through registered post on his home address at Jammu when he was in Pakistan occupied Kashmir and the notice was also published in the Daily Excelsior Jammu, when he was not in Jammu, the fact remains as to whether mere giving of a notice to an absentee government servant with regard to the resumption his duty, which notice too was not served upon him, is in itself sufficient to terminate his services unless the procedure for such termination established by law, is followed.
11.
Article 128 of the J&K Civil Service Regulations reads as under :-  "Absence without leave or after the end of leave involves loss of appointment, except as provided in Article 203 (b) or when due to ill-health in which case the absentee must produce the certificate of Medical Officer."
It contemplates that absence without leave or after the end of the leave involves loss of appointment of a government servant, but this Article nowhere provides any mode as to how this dictum contained in Article 128 of the aforesaid Regulations, is to be regulated and followed for the purposes of terminating a government servant from services, who loses his appointment if found absent without leave or after the end of the leave.
12.
It is an established principle of law that a government servant enjoys the protection of his service, as contained in Article 311 of the Constitution of India, corresponding to Section 126 of the Constitution of J&K.
The Jammu and Kashmir Civil Service (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1956, provide the procedure which is to be followed by a competent authority, as a mandate of law, while imposing a punishment on any government servant for any misconduct.
The absence of a government servant without leave or after the end of leave, which involves loss of appointment cannot be deviated from the definition of misconduct in the broader terminology of the Jammu and Kashmir Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1956, and thus the procedure as laid down in the Appeal Rules mentioned above, was to be followed by the competent authority, before taking action against the respondent within the purview of Article 128 of the aforesaid Regulations, by virtue of which a government servant loses his appointment if found absent without leave or after the end of the leave.
13.
The learned Single Judge in the impugned judgment has referred to some case entitled : Dr. Zaffar Mehdi v. State which has been decided by his Lordship and involved facts of similar nature and that judgment has been upheld by the Division Bench of this Court, wherein it was held that mere notice to a government servant, allegedly unauthorisedly absent, is not sufficient to terminate his services and Article 128 (supra) does not contemplate an order of dismissal without an inquiry into the alleged absence.
14.
In the present case it appears that the Government has sought the legal opinion from its Law Department about the correctness or otherwise of the order of the appellant No. 3 by which the services of the respondent have been terminated without an enquiry.
The said opinion is contained in Annexure P/H to the writ petition filed by the respondent which for the sake of facility is reproduced below :-  "Government of Jammu & Kashmir  Finance Department, No.1 DT-STS/488-91 Dated.
10682.
To The Commissioner Sales Tax, Jammu & Kashmir Government, Srinagar, Subject :- Recruitment to all sanctioned posts falling outside the purview of State Subordinate Service Recruitment Board.
Sir, Shri Qamar Ali had submitted a petition to rejoin his duties which was forwarded to you under letter No. even dated 1981991 with the directions to examine treating the same as an appeal against the order of Dy.
Commissioner Sales, Tax (Administration) Jammu.
Vide your letter No. P-STC/2052/Adm.
dated 531992 you have informed Shri Qamar Ali that the petition cannot be treated as an appeal and that there is no reason to interfere with the orders of Dy.
Commissioner, Sales Tax (Administration) Jammu.
The ex-employee submitted another petition before the Advisor (H) who desired to examine with reference to rules.
The case has accordingly been examined in terms of J&K KCS (CCA) Rules 1956 and Law Department also consulted.
Termination of service for unauthorised absence from duty is a major punishment and can be inflicted upon a member of the service only after following the procedure.
A formal charge-sheet has to be issued and after the reply or no reply, an inquiry officer is to be appointed.
In the absence of enquiry the order of termination is bad in law and cannot be sustained.
The stage for appointment of an IO is already over.
As such the appeal authority has to pass appropriate order on the appeal which can include quashing of impugned order merely for non-compliance of procedure.
I am accordingly directed to advise you to again examine the case accordingly and furnish a report about action taken to this department.
Your faithfully,  Sd/-Special Secy.
to Government, Finance Department."
15.
It appears that the Law Department has opined that termination of service for unauthorised absence from duty is a major punishment and cannot be inflicted upon a member of service without following the procedure as established by law.
A formal charge sheet has to be issued and after the reply or no reply, an Enquiry Officer to be appointed.
In absence of enquiry the order of termination is bad in law and cannot sustain.
16.
This opinion ipso facto proves that even the Legal Remembrancer of the respondent-State has found that no proper enquiry has been conducted in the present case and the termination of service for unauthorised absence being a major punishment, could not be inflicted upon the respondent, for no charge-sheet has been issued in the matter and no enquiry has been conducted by any Inquiry Officer to have been appointed by the authorities and in absence of such an enquiry the order of termination was found bad in law and not sustainable.
17.
In the case on hand it is apparent that the grounds on which the appellants proposed to take action against the respondent, was not reduced in the form of a definite charge or charges, which were to be communicated to the person charged, together with the statement of allegations on which each charge was based or any other circumstances which it was proposed to take into consideration for passing the termination order.
If it was found by the appellants that the respondent was absent from duty, they could have formulated a charge or charges against him along with the statement of allegations and if those could not be served upon him, for his abode was not known to them, the appellants could publish it through a publication to be made in some paper and thereafter, if found that he was not available they could have collected evidence in ex parte and passed the order of termination, after satisfying the requirement of conduction of an Inquiry, as laid down under Section 33 of the Jammu and Kashmir Civil Services (C.C.A) Rules, 1956.
18.
No inquiry as contemplated under various provisions of the rules of 1956, especially as laid down in Sections 33 and 34, has been conducted by the appellants, therefore, they could not terminate the service of the respondent, that too retrospectively taking refuge within the contemplation of Article 128 of the Jammu and Kashmir Civil Service Regulations and could not terminate his service unless in due course of law, as established under provisions of the Constitution and the procedure laid down for the said purpose, as mentioned supra.
19.
Hence this appeal fails and is dismissed.
However, as exorbitant costs have been imposed on the appellant by the learned Single Judge, the same are reduced from Rs5,000/- to Rs.500/- (Rs. five hundred only), which are to be paid by the appellants 2 and 3 to the respondent.
Appeal dismissed.