Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - In these two writ petitions, viz. CWP Nos. 13373 and 14660 of 1994, the dispute is regarding inter se seniority of two officials namely Paramjit Kaur (hereinafter referred to as 'the petitioner') and Sudesh Kumari (hereinafter referred to as 'the respondent').
A few facts, as admitted by both the parties, may be briefly noticed.
2.
On December 20, 1975, the Director of Technical Education and Industrial Training sent a requisition for recruitment of 14 Clerks/Typists to the Subordinate Services Selection Board.
A competitive selection was conducted by the Board.
The petitioner and the respondent competed.
The petitioner was placed at No. 348 while the respondent was placed at No. 213 in the merit list prepared by the Board.
In pursuance of the selection the Board sent its recommendations to different departments including the Directorate of Technical Education vide its letter dated September 3, 1976.
So far as the petitioner is concerned, her name was forwarded to Respondent No. 2.
However, in spite of the fact that respondent-Sudesh Kumari was working in the Directorate of Technical Education on ad hoc basis since May 20, 1976, the Board forwarded her name to the office of Deputy Commissioner, Patiala.
Apprehending this, the respondent had already submitted two representations dated June 10, 1976 and August 16, 1976, copies of which have been produced as Annexures R. 5/1 and R. 5/2 with the written statement to Respondent No. 2 and the Board respectively.
It appears that initially vide letter dated December 20, 1976, a copy of which has been placed on record as Annexure P-4, the Board recommended the name of Respondent No. 5 to respondent No. 2.
After about 2- 1/2 months, respondent No. 2 issued a letter of appointment to Respondent No. 5 in pursuance of which he joined on the same date and was treated as a regular Clerk, Thereafter, the Directorate of Technical Education circulated a tentative seniority list of Clerks on May 7, 1977.
In this list, the petitioner's name appeared at Sr. No. 79 while that of respondent No. 5 was shown at Sr No. 81.
In the office order by which this list was circulated it was inter alia mentioned that "the persons who were appointed as Clerks after 1111966, have been assigned seniority on the basis of the merit intimated by the Subordinate Services Selection Board/any other recruiting agency or from the date of their appointment on regular basis in the cadre at Headquarters or from the date of their joining the cadre on account of transfer from the other cadre/office."
Since the inter se seniority was stated to have been determined on the basis of the inter se merit as conveyed by the Board, the respondent did not represent against it.
As a result, even in the final seniority list issued on March 17, 1978, the position as shown in the tentative seniority list was reflected.
Another seniority list was issued on February 6, 1981.
A copy of this has been produced as Annexure P-8 with the writ petition.
In this list also, the petitioner's name appeared above that of respondent No. 5.
Resultantly, the respondent was treated as junior to the petitioner.
3.
The department conducted a test for promotion of Clerks to the post of Senior Assistants.
The petitioner and Respondent No. 5 appeared in this test.
Their result was declared on March 14, 1987.
Both of them qualified the test.
On the availability of the leave vacancies of Assistant, the petitioner and the respondent were promoted vide order dated July 27, 1990.
However, on August 17, 1990 respondent No. 5 submitted a representation claiming seniority above the petitioner.
A copy of this representation has been produced as Annexure P-12 with the writ petition.
In this representation, it was claimed by her that she was senior to Smt. Paramjit Kaur as she was placed at No. 213 in the merit list drawn by the Board while Smt. Paramjit Kaur had been placed at No. 348.
She also pointed out that she had been working in the Directorate of Technical Education since May 20, 1976 on ad hoc basis and that her name had been wrongly forwarded by the Board to the office of the Deputy Commissioner, Patiala.
Relying on the instructions issued by the State Government vide letter dated March 15, 1962, she claimed that she should be treated as senior to Smt. Paramjit Kaur.
However, before this representation could be decided a regular vacancy in the cadre of Assistant became available on account of the retirement of one Mr. MM Khanna, who was working as Superintendent Grade-I Since the representation submitted by Respondent No. 5 had not been decided, the department adjusted the petitioner against the regular post.
Ultimately, vide order dated October 24, 1991, the department accepted the representation of respondent No. 5 and declared her senior to the petitioner.
A copy of this order has been produced as Annexure P.10 with the writ petition.
The petitioner represented against this order.
However, vide order dated September 14, 1994, the petitioner as well as Respondent No. 5 were reverted from the post of Senior Assistant to that of Senior Clerk.
It may be mentioned that the post of Assistant has been redesignated as Senior Assistant by the Government.
As a result, Respondent No. 5 has filed a Civil Writ Petition No. 1373-1/94 impugning the order dated September 14, 1994, by which she has been ordered to be reverted from the post of Senior Assistant to that of Senior Clerk.
The petitioner has filed CWP No. 14660 of 1994 to impugn the order dated October 24, 1991 by which she was declared junior to Respondent No. 5 and the order dated September 14, 1994 by which she was ordered to be reverted.
A challenge has also been levelled against the instructions issued by the Government vide its letter dated March 15, 1962 These are the facts.
It is in the background of this factual position that the dispute regarding the inter se seniority between the petitioner and Respondent No. 5 has to be settled.
4.
It is the admitted position that there are no statutory rules governing the conditions of service of the employees in the Directorate of Technical Education and Industrial Training.
That being so the validity of the order dated October 24, 1991 by which the representation of Respondent No. 5 for the grant of seniority above the petitioner has been accepted has to be examined on first principles.
The contention of Mr. TP Singh, learned counsel for the petitioner, is that the petitioner's seniority could not have been altered after the lapse of 14 years.
It has been further submitted that Respondent No. 5 having been appointed in the office of the Deputy Commissioner vide order dated September 30, 1976, she could have been appointed in the Directorate only by transfer and her seniority could have been determined only w.e.f.
the date of her joining.
Learned counsel has also submitted that there being no statutory rules governing the conditions of service of the employees in the department, the date of joining could be the only method for determination of seniority.
Lastly, it has been contended that the instructions issued by the Government vide letter dated May 13, 1962 lay down a totally arbitrary method for determination of seniority and cannot be sustained.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioner has been controverted by the learned counsel for the respondents.
5.
It is the admitted position that Respondent No. 5 has been working in the Directorate of Technical Education since May 20, 1976.
While she was working as such, she had competed for regular recruitment to the post of Clerks.
She was admittedly placed higher than the petitioner in order of merit determined by the Subordinate Services Selection Board.
In fact, the petitioner was placed 135 places above the respondent.
In this situation, when respondent No. 5 was already working in the Directorate, the Board should have forwarded her name to the Directorate.
Instead of doing that, the Board forwarded the name of Respondent No. 5 to the office of Deputy Commissioner, Patiala.
The respondent had already submitted representations to the Board as well as the department that on selection she should be appointed in the Directorate.
This representation was ultimately accepted and vide letter dated December 22, 1976, the Board had recommended her case to respondent No. 2 for appointment.
In pursuance of this recommendation, the letter of appointment was given by the Directorate to respondent No. 5 on March 4, 1977 and she had joined on the same date.
In the background of this factual position, it is evident that the respondent had continued to serve in the Directorate since May, 1976 and on September 3, 1976 when her name was recommended to the office of the Deputy Commissioner, she was already working as a Clerk in the Directorate.
Still further, she was much higher than the petitioner in order of merit as determined by the Board.
In this situation, the action of the department in considering her to be senior to the petitioner in the cadre of Clerks cannot be said to be either arbitrary or unfair.
Admittedly, the respondent is drawing more pay, has a longer length of service and was higher than the petitioner in the merit list.
Accordingly, it would not be fair to treat her as junior to the petitioner.
In any event, the action of the department in accepting her representation cannot be said to be grossly arbitrary or unfair.
6.
Whenever a competitive selection is held, the appropriate selection Board determines an order of merit.
Even if the appointment orders are issued on the same day, it will not be possible for everyone to join on the same date either on account of the reason of distance or on account of some other reason which may well be beyond the control of an individual.
The selected candidates join on different dates.
Subject to any specific rules governing the matter, the determination of inter se seniority of such direct recruit on the basis of the order of merit determined by the Selection Board is the safest and the fairest method by which all arbitrariness is excluded.
If the seniority of such person is determined on the basis of the date of joining it can happen that a person who is at No. 1 in order of merit may become junior to others who are far below him in order of merit, merely because he has joined a few hours or days later than the others.
Such a method can lead to injustice and unfair results.
In order to obviate such a situation, it appears to be fair that the inter se seniority should be determined on the basis of the order of merit.
This is precisely what appears to have been done in the present case.
Accordingly, it cannot be said that the respondents have acted unfairly or arbitrarily.
7.
Mr. TP Singh, learned counsel for the petitioner, submits that the order regarding seniority has been reviewed after the lapse of 14 long years and on that ground alone, the impugned order should be set aside.
I am unable to accept this contention.
In view of the admitted facts, the action of the department appears to be fair.
The injustice done to the respondent having been undone by the authorities, the order cannot be set aside merely on account of the lapse of time.
Furthermore, it appears that respondent No. 5 had good reason for not challenging the order of determination of her seniority earlier.
As already noticed, while issuing the seniority list vide letter dated May 10, 1977, it had been clearly given out by the department that the seniority had been assigned in the order of merit as intimated by the Board.
This could have misled the various officials to believe that it was actually so.
Consequently, the respondent did not submit her representation.
Subsequently, when she realised the correct position, she submitted a representation.
In view of this situation, it would not be fair to deny justice to respondent No. 5.
In any case, since the Government has taken the view that the respondent No. 5 is senior to the petitioner, and has undone the injustice, no interference under Article 226 is called for.
8.
Learned counsel for the petitioner points out that perusal of the letter dated December 20, 1976 issued by the Board shows that the merit number of the petitioner was indicated.
Consequently, the learned counsel submits that she was aware of her place in the merit list.
A perusal of this letter shows that it was addressed to the Director.
A copy has been endorsed even to the Deputy Commissioner.
However, none appears to have been endorsed to Respondent No. 5.
Consequently, it cannot be said that this letter was ever conveyed to respondent No. 5.
Still further, even if it is assumed for the sake of arguments, though it is controverted on behalf of the respondent that she was aware of her position in the merit list, she has no means of knowing the place which had been assigned to the petitioner in the said list.
Consequently, she could not have been aware of her inter se position vis-a-vis the writ petitioner.
In view of the above, the first contention raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner is wholly lacking in merit and cannot be accepted.
9.
Equally futile is the contention that the respondent should be deemed to have been appointed by transfer and that too with effect from the date she actually joined in pursuance of the order dated March 4, 1977.
It is the admitted position that she had continued to serve in the Directorate of Technical Education since May, 1976.
She had never joined the office of the Deputy Commissioner.
In case she had joined the office of the Deputy Commissioner, the question of appointment by transfer may have arisen.
However, when the respondent had actually continued to serve in the Directorate of Technical Education, the question of her appointment by transfer cannot arise.
Nor can it be said that she should be deemed to have been appointed on regular basis only with effect from March 4,1977, when she had joined in pursuance to the order of appointment in the Directorate.
She having been selected for regular appointment and her name having been recommended on September 3, 1976 alongwith that of the petitioner, though in different offices, the determination of inter se seniority on the basis of the order of merit is perfectly fair.
10.
Mr. TP Singh then submitted that in the absence of rules, the date of joining is the only method for determination of seniority.
Normally, it is so.
However, in a case where candidates are appointed as a result of one selection, the action of the respondent in assigning inter se seniority to all persons belonging to one batch on the basis of the order of merit cannot be said to be either unfair or illegal.
It does not violate any rule or instructions issued by the Government.
Accordingly, the contention raised by the counsel cannot be accepted.
11.
Lastly, it has been urged that the instructions issued by the Government vide letter dated March 13, 1962 are arbitrary and unfair and, thus, violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
Learned counsel has referred to paragraph 2 of these instructions.
This reads as under :  "2.
It has been decided that in the case of such officials as are recommended to another office for regular absorption; but are allowed to remain in their parent office in the interest of work or on the request of the official concerned, their seniority will be determined with reference to the date of the Board's original recommendations for their regular absorption in other offices."
A perusal of the above shows that in a peculiar situation, the Government has decided to determine the inter se seniority with reference to the date of recommendation by the Selection Board.
This is a rule of uniform application.
It excludes arbitrariness.
It cannot be said to be unfair or arbitrary.
It does not violate Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
12.
It may be noticed that in the present case, the recommendations were made by the Board in respect of the petitioner and respondent No. 3 on September 3, 1976.
The respondent was already working on the post.
She was higher than the petitioner by 135 places.
In this situation, the action of the respondents appears to be absolutely fair.
It calls for no interference.
Accordingly, the challenge to the order dated October 24, 1991, Annexure P 16, is wholly lacking in merit.
The order is absolutely just and fair.
There is no ground to quash it.
13.
Mr. TP Singh also raised a vague plea that the decision taken by the Director on September 16, 1991 had not been signed by him and that the impugned order dated October 24, 1991 had been merely issued by the office Superintendent.
Mr. DS Dhillon, learned counsel for respondent Nos. 1 to 4, has produced before me the original file.
A detailed order of which Annexure P16 appears to be a translation appears at Page Nos. 417 and 418 of the file.
It bears the signatures of the Director.
Thereafter, at Pages 419 and 420 is the order issued vide endorsement dated October 24, 1991 under the signatures of the Office Superintendent (Admn.).
In this situation, it is clear that a duly authenticated order signed by the Director exists on the original record.
Consequently, the plea raised by the learned counsel is wholly lacking in merit.
14.
This brings me to the consideration of the second part of these two cases regarding the validity of the order of reversion passed on September 14, 1994.
A copy of this order has been produced as Annexure P.7 with Civil Writ Petition No. 13373 of 1994 and Annexure P21 in Civil Writ Petition No. 14660 of 1994.
This order appears to have been passed by the Government in pursuance to the instructions dated May 18, 1994 which were a sequel to the Full Bench judgment of this Court in Surinderjit Singh and ors. v. State of Punjab and others, 1994(2) SCT 665 (P&H)(FB) : ILR 1994(2) Punjab and Haryana 175.
By this judgment, the Full Bench had upheld the order of the Government dated January 22, 1991 by which it had granted exemption from the passing of the Assistant Grade Examination to all clerks who had completed 18 years of service.
The short question that arises for consideration is - Could the petitioner who had qualified the Assistant Grade Examination in the year 1987 be reverted to make room for persons who had been granted exemption vide order dated January 22, 1991 ?
15.
Learned counsel for the parties are agreed that the instructions dated January 22, 1991, issued by the Government are prospective.
Consequently, with effect from January 22, 1991, the promotions have to be made in accordance with the rules on the basis of the inter se seniority.
The claim of the exemptees and those who have qualified the test has to be considered in accordance with the rules on the basis of their seniority.
However, the vacancies which had occurred prior to the issue of the instructions dated January 22, 1991 had to be admittedly filled upon the basis of the rules and without taking into consideration the claims of those who had been subsequently granted exemption.
These had to be filled up from amongst the persons who had qualified the Assistant Grade Examination.
Mr. Dhillon concedes this position.
That being so, the only question that arises is - Was there a vacancy prior to January 22, 1991 in the cadre of Senior Assistant ?
Learned counsel for the petitioner concedes that there was one vacancy which had occurred on November 1, 1990, on the retirement of Mr. KK Khanna, Superintendent Grade-I This vacancy had to be filled up from amongst the eligible candidates on the basis of seniority.
Consequently, this vacancy shall have to be filled up from amongst the persons who had qualified the Assistant Grade Examination in the order of seniority.
Since Respondent No. 5 has been found to be senior to the petitioner, her claim shall be considered prior to that of Smt. Paramjit Kaur in accordance with the Rules.
16.
In view of the above, it is held that Smt. Sudesh Kumari is senior to Smt. Paramjit Kaur in the cadre of Senior Clerks.
She would have a right to be considered for appointment to the post of Senior Assistant prior to Smt. Paramjit Kaur.
The writ petitions are accordingly disposed of.
So far as C.W.P.
No. 14660 of 1994 in respect of the challenge to the orders at Annexures P-13 and P-16 is concerned, it is dismissed.
In the circumstances of these cases, there will be no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.