VK Jhanji, J. (Oral) - Petitioner, Gurdev Singh, while serving in Army in the rank of Junior Commissioned Officer made an application in June, 1990, seeking voluntary premature retirement on compassionate grounds.
In his application, he submitted that "I am serving under your command since 5 years.
Sir, since last one year, economic conditions of my home is not so good.
We are two brothers.
Both of us are serving in the Army.
My younger brother has not yet completed pensionable service in the Army.
Due to some domestic problems at home, my brother's family is with him at duty station.
Now my aged father and mother are at home alone whose ages are about 70 and 60 years respectively.
At this time, no male member of my family is at home to look after my old parents.
We are also facing great difficulty to look after our landed property at home.
Now, my home problems are compelling me to go on premature retirement from Army service, so that I can look after my aged parents and landed property at my home, otherwise, after some time, I will bear a great loss."
The Unit Petition Committee consisting of six officers of 288 Medium Regiment, in June, 1990, recommended the case of the petitioner for premature retirement.
Vide order dated 1861990, Commanding Officer accepted the recommendations of the committee and recommended to the Commandant, Army Records, Nasik Road Camp, for issuance of discharge orders, which were so issued vide letter dated 2071990.
As per this letter/order, petitioner was to be discharged from Army w.e.f.
3131991 (AN).
However, vide letter dated 1781990, the date of his discharge was amended to 2821991 (AN) so that the petitioner could avail his leave entitlement of one month.
Petitioner vide his letter dated 291990 addressed to the Chief of Army Staff, levelled all sorts of allegations against one Major Narinder Nath and requested that since he was going to be discharged from Army w.e.f.
31.1.1991, he be attached to Brigade Headquarters or Station Headquarters.
Vide letter dated 1.12.1990 addressed to the Commanding Officer, petitioner submitted that his pension papers be cancelled.
The Committee examined the original application as also the application for cancellation of premature retirement.
Having considered the matter in detail, the Committee recommended that the application for cancellation of premature retirement be rejected.
The Commanding Officer vide order dated 431991 agreed with the recommendation of the Unit Petition Committee.
As provided under Army Rule 11(2) the matter was placed before the Superior Officer who having gone through the entire case personally, directed that the petitioner be discharged from service as directed by Army Records.
Accordingly, the petitioner was despatched to Arty.
Records on 17.3.1991 and he proceeded on premature retirement w.e.f.
30.4.1991 and his name was struck off w.e.f 151991.
In this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner is praying a writ in the nature of Certiorari for quashing order of his discharge passed on his request for voluntary retirement, on the ground that he had withdrawn it much earlier to the date of its acceptance.
2.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that petitioner sought voluntary retirement because of harassment meted out to him by Major Narinder Nath.
The nature of harassment was brought out by the petitioner in his letter dated 291990 addressed to the Chief of Army Staff.
The Commanding Officer heard the petitioner on this matter, whereafter he recommended that the case of the petitioner be treated as finally closed.
Counsel has thus, contended that once the case was ordered to be finally closed, the petitioner could not have been made to discharge from Army Counsel further contended that before his request could be accepted, petitioner withdrew the request and thus, the action of the respondents in discharging him from Army is totally unjust.
In answer to these submissions, learned counsel for the respondents has contended that application of the petitioner for withdrawal of request for premature retirement was considered by the Unit Petition Committee who recommended that application for cancellation be rejected.
These recommendations were considered by one Brig.
SD Mahanti, Commandant, 33 Arty.
Brigade who passed order dated 1431991 affirming the recommendations of the Commanding Officer.
Counsel for the respondents thus submitted that the petitioner having been discharged in terms of the rules, no interference is called for by this Court.
3.
In order to appreciate the respective contentions of learned counsel for the parties, relevant rules in this respect may be noticed.
Rule 13 describes the Authorities who are empowered to authorise discharge, whereas Rule 11 deals with discharge.
For the facility of reference, Rules 11 and 13 are reproduced hereunder.
"11.
Discharge not to be delayed - (1) Every person enrolled under the Act shall, as soon as he becomes entitled under the conditions of his enrolment to be discharged, be so discharged with all convenient speed:  Provided that no person shall be entitled to such discharge, if the Central Government has, by notification suspended the said entitlement to discharge for the whole or a part of the regular Army.
(2) The discharge of a person, validly sanctioned by a competent authority, may, with the consent of the discharged person, be cancelled by any authority superior to the authority who sanctioned the discharge either without any conditions or subject to such conditions as such discharged person accepts."
"13.
Authorities empowered to authorise discharge -  (1) Each of the authorities specified in column 3 of the Table below shall be the competent authority to discharge from service person subject to the Act specified in column 1 thereof on the grounds specified in column 2.
(2) xxx xxx xxx  (2A) xxx xxx xxx  (3) In this table "Commanding Officer" means the officer commanding the corps or department to which the person to be discharged belongs except that in the case of junior commissioned officers and warrant officers of the Special Medical Section of the Army Medical Corps, the "commanding officer" means the Director of the Medical Services, Army, and in the case of junior commissioned officers and warrant officers of Remounts, Veterinary and Farms Corps, the "Commanding Officer" means the Director Remounts, Veterinary and Farms.
Category Grounds of discharge Competent authority to authorise discharge Manner of discharge.
1 2 3 4 Junior Commissioned Officers 1.
(i)(a) On completion of the period of service or tenure specified in the Regulations for his rank or appointment, are on reaching the age limit whichever is earlier, unless retained on the active list for further specified period with the sanction of the Chief of Army Staff or on becoming eligible for release under the Regulations.
Commanding Officer.
(b) At his own request on transfer to the pension establishment.
Commanding Officer.
(ii) xxx xxx xxx (iii) xxx xxx xxx xxx (II) xxx xxx xxx xxx (III) xxx xxx xxx xxx (IV) xxx xxx xxx A perusal of the above-mentioned rules makes it abundantly clear that the Commanding Officer at the request of the petitioner was competent to discharge him from Army.
Request for voluntary retirement was made in June, 1990, which was considered by the Unit Petition Committee consisting of six officers and they recommended the case of the petitioner for premature retirement.
The recommendations were sent to the Commanding Officer who also found the case to be genuine and accordingly recommended the premature retirement case of the petitioner on 1861990.
Pursuant to this order, Army Records, Nasik Road Camp issued discharge orders vide letter dated 2071990.
Copy of the same has been attached with written statement as Annexure R-3.
Order of discharge having been conveyed vide letter dated 2071990, counsel for the petitioner is not justified in saying that the petitioner withdrew his request for voluntary retirement before the same was accepted.
31st of January, 1991 was the date fixed for discharge from Army only for the reason that the petitioner could avail his entitlement of leave of one month and his papers with regard to pension etc. and other formalities could be completed.
This date was later on amended to 2821991 and again to 30.4.1991, because the papers with regard to decision on his application for premature retirement had not been received by the Army Records.
It may also be noticed at this stage that under sub-rule (2) of rule 11 of the Army Rules, 1954, the authority superior to the authority who sanctioned the discharge, is competent to cancel the discharge of a person with the consent of discharged person either without any conditions or subject to such conditions as such discharged person accepts.
In the case of the petitioner request for cancellation of premature retirement was firstly considered by the Unit Petition Committee who recommended that petitioner's application for cancellation of premature retirement be rejected.
This recommendation was accepted by the Commanding Officer, whereafter the papers were placed before the Authority superior to the Commanding Officer who after having gone through the entire case, vide order dated 431991 did not accept the request of the petitioner.
The allegation of the petitioner that he sought voluntary retirement because of harassment from Major Narinder Nath was not found to be correct and was considered to be an afterthought.
The order having been passed in accordance with the rules by the Authority competent to pass it, the same cannot be set at naught merely on the asking of the petitioner.
Moreover, once the request of the petitioner for voluntary retirement has been accepted, no matter it was to take effect from a future date, the petitioner has no right to withdraw it.
Counsel for the petitioner is also not correct in saying that the order was not conveyed to him.
In his representation dated 291990, Annexure P-1, the petitioner acknowledged that his application for discharge from Army was sanctioned by Records Office and intimation in this regard was sent to his Unit that he stood discharged from Army w.e.f.
3131991.
He also acknowledged that the Records Office had instructed his Unit Office to send his pension papers.
4.
In view of the discussions made above, this writ petition fails and is accordingly dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.