VK Jhanji, J. (Oral) - In this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, petitioners are seeking a direction to the respondents not to recover over-time allowances paid to them during the period from December, 1982 to May, 1987, as provided under the Punjab Shops and Commercial Establishments Act, 1958.
2.
In brief, the facts are that petitioners are the employees of Food Corporation of India, Haryana Region (in short, the FCI) and at the relevant time were working at Pingli Road and Tara Singh godowns in Karnal.
According to the petitioners, the said godowns are abutting Karnal City and are in the revenue estate of Karnal.
In December, 1982, a decision was taken for payment of over-time allowance to all the employees of the FCI at the rates prescribed under the Punjab Shops and Commercial Establishment Act, 1958 (in short, the Shops Act).
Accordingly, the petitioners were paid the over- time allowance from December, 1982 to May, 1987.
After May, 1987, the respondents are said to have taken a decision to withdraw these godowns from the provisions of the Shops Act and instead of paying them the overtime allowance, wages at normal rate were paid.
In regard to overtime work which petitioners had done from December, 1982 to May, 1987, a decision was taken to recover the amount paid to the petitioners on the ground that wages at the normal rate were required to be paid.
3.
Respondents in their written statement have stated that on the basis of erroneous report of Municipal Committee, Karnal, that the godowns at Pingli Road and Tara Singh godowns are within the municipal limits of Karnal, over- time allowance to the employees of these godowns was given.
Later on, the matter was clarified from the Municipal Committee, Karnal.
Vide letter dated 3111988, the Municipal Committee informed that on the western side, the municipal limits of Karnal are upto Yamuna Canal, whereas the godowns in question are beyond Yamuna Canal.
It has further been averred that the matter has finally been clinched by the Municipal Committee, Karnal, vide its report dated 591989, wherein it has been stated that the godowns in question are not within the municipal limits of Karnal.
In view of this, it has been stated that petitioners are legally bound to refund the over-time allowance erroneously drawn by them.
4.
It is not disputed that before taking a decision to recover the amount or for taking a decision that provisions of the Shops Act do not apply to the godowns in question., no show-cause notice was given to the petitioners.
It has come on record that when proposal was being made to recover the amount on the plea of Shops Act being not applicable to the godowns, representation, Annexure P-3, was made by the petitioners wherein they had submitted that godowns in question are attached/adjacent to Karnal and question of non- implementation of Shops Act does not arise.
They had also represented that it has already been held that godowns are situated in urban area.
Petitioners have also averred that they never gave any undertaking to the FCI that the amount can be deducted from their pay.
In this view of the matter, I am of the view that the petitioners were paid overtime allowance on account of Shops Act having been made applicable to the godowns where they were working.
No recovery can be effected from the petitioners without giving an opportunity to submit their case and to show-cause in this regard.
The benefit, having been given, cannot be withdrawn without following the principles of natural justice.
The action of the respondents, thus, being violative of principles of natural justice, cannot be sustained.
Accordingly, the order of the respondents, seeking to recover over-time allowance already paid to the petitioners, is quashed.
Respondents are further directed to decide the representation, Annexure P-3, within three months from the date of receipt of order of this Court.
If the petitioners desire, they shall also be given personal hearing before any decision is taken on their representation.
5.
With this direction, the writ petition stands disposed of.
No costs.
Order accordingly.