Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner Joined the Defence Security Corps on March 9, 1983.
It is admitted position that prior to that he had already completed 9 years of service as a Combatant.
While working in the Defence Security Corps, the petitioner was served with a chargesheet dated March 22, 1988, alleging that he had fired one round in the air from his rifle.
He was ordered to be tried by summary court martial.
On April 12,1988 he was ordered to be dismissed from service.
The petitioner submitted a post confirmation petition.
It was decided vide order dated March 23, 1989.
The punishment of dismissal was commuted and he was ordered to be discharged from service.
2.
Even though, in the writ petition, several grounds have been raised by the petitioner to challenge the impugned action, Mr. RS Randhawa, learned counsel for the petitioner, states that having remained unemployed since the year 1989, the petitioner is in a bad shape and that he would be satisfied if the authorities reconsider his claim for grant of pension sympathetically.
He points out that the petitioner had rendered more than 15 years of service by March 23, 1989, when he was ordered to be discharged.
He further submits that in fact one of the factors which had weighed with the authorities while commuting the punishment was that the petitioner shall be able to earn his pension.
He submits that if the authorities consider his claim sympathetically in this behalf, the petitioner would be able to subsist and look after his family.
3.
Mr. SK Pipat, learned senior standing counsel for the Union of India submits that if the petitioner makes a representation to the competent authority within one month from today, it would be considered and decided sympathetically.
4.
In view of the above, it seems to be fair that the petitioner should be allowed to make a representation to the respondents for the grant of pension.
If the petitioner makes a representation within one month from today, the competent authority shall consider it sympathetically and decide it as expeditiously as possible.
Keeping in view the fact that the petitioner had completed more than 14 years of service on the date of dismissal and more than 16 years on March 23, 1989, when he was ordered to be discharged from service, it shall be fair and proper if his claim is considered sympathetically.
In fact, so far as the petitioner is concerned, there would be no difference to him between the dismissal or discharge from service unless his claim is considered for the grant of pension.
5.
Keeping in view the totality of circumstances the writ petition is disposed of with direction that the petitioner shall make a representation within one month from today.
It is clarified that in case the respondents consider his claim for the grant of pension, he shall not be entitled to claim any arrears of pension etc.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Orders accordingly.