NC Jain and ML Kaul, JJ.
- The petitioner Mewa Ram promoted as Assistant Welder in the office of General Manager, Haryana Roadways, Kurukshetra, by virtue of Annexure P-5 dated 331994 is seeking its quashment on the ground that he is entitled to promotion with effect from 25.1.1993 when his junior, respondent No3 (Bhola Ram) was promoted.
He further seeks the issuance of a writ of mandamus directing respondent Nos1 and 2 to promote him as Assistant Welder with effect from 25.1.1993 when his junior has been promoted.
2.
The pleas raised in the writ petition are that respondent No3 who is junior to him was appointed as Helper (Welder) on 7.11.1990 and the petitioner was appointed as Helper (Welder) on 26101988.
The petitioner was charge- sheeted by the authorities and, on enquiry, was found innocent and, as such, the enquiry against him was dropped.
In consequence thereof, he was promoted by Annexure P-5 (supra) on 331994 while his junior Bhola Ram was promoted on 25.1.1993.
Once the petitioner has been exonerated and found innocent, he was, therefore, entitled to promotion from the date his junior (respondent No3) has been promoted.
3.
During the pendency of this writ petition, the representation of the petitioner was considered by the competent authority, i.e., General Manager, Haryana Roadways, Kurukshetra, and the petitioner was deemed to have assumed the promotion of the post with effect from 25.1.1993 and was made entitled to all the benefits of seniority as Assistant Welder from 25.1.1993 and was entitled to benefits of pay from the date of his joining as Assistant Welder, i.e., from 331994.
Therefore, no pay was paid to him from 25.1.1993 to 331994 on this post.
4.
Already by the act of the State, the mistake has been rectified by the authorities by issuance of Annexure R-1/T deeming the petitioner to have derived the benefits of his promotion from 25.1.1993 from the date his junior (respondent No3) has been promoted.
He has been also made entitled to all the benefits of seniority as Assistant Welder from 25.1.1993 but has been denied higher pay from 25.1.1993 to 331994.
5.
It was argued by the learned counsel for the respondents that the normal rule of ``NO WORK NO PAY" is applicable to this case and as the petitioner has not worked on the promoted post from 25.1.1993 to 331994, therefore, he is not entitled to the enhanced pay of the higher post for the said period.
6.
We have not been in any manner impressed by the contentions advanced on behalf of the authorities.
In no manner the normal rule of ``NO WORK NO PAY" is applicable to the present case, for the fact although the employee was all along willing to work on the promoted post, was kept away from work by the authorities for no fault of his.
He was charge-sheeted for some alleged lapse and was found innocent by the Enquiry Officer and the said Report was accepted by the competent authority as well.
The normal rule of ``NO WORK NO PAY" is applicable in a case where the employee remains away from work for his own reason although the work is offered to him.
In the case on hand, the petitioner was unnecessarily charge-sheeted as a consequence of which his junior got promoted and there was no lapse on his part to work on the higher post which was neither offered to him nor he was promoted on such post.
It is a beaten point of law that when an employee is completely exonerated or is not visited with the penalty, even of censure, indicating thereby that he was not blameworthy in the least, he should not be deprived of any benefits including the salary of the promotional post.
In this regard, we are fortified in JT 1991 (3) SC 527 : 1991(3) SCT 317 (SC) (Union of India etc. v. KV Jankiraman etc.) in which their Lordships of the Supreme Court have held that the normal rule of ``NO WORK NO PAY" is not applicable to cases such as the present one where the employee although willing to work is kept away from work by the authorities for no fault of his.
7.
It was urged on behalf of the respondent authorities that in the case the petitioner is not entitled to the salary of the post, for the fact that he did not assume the charge of the same on 25.1.1993.
We are not satisfied with the argument of the learned counsel for the respondents in this behalf, for the fact that the petitioner was denied promotion by the respondents, for he was charge-sheeted upon a false case where he has been found innocent and, therefore, no promotion was offered to him on the relevant date and he, therefore, could not join the post.
Although it is an elementary rule that a person is to be paid only for the work he has done and not for the work he has not done, but, in the case on hand, it was pointed out and found that the petitioner was involved in some frivolous proceedings, may be at the instance of some frustrated persons with a specific object of giving promotion to others and, as a consequence of this, the petitioner had unnecessarily suffered both mentally and financially and this agony can be mitigated once he is paid the emoluments on the post for which he has been promoted retrospectively with his paramount right to be promoted on the post when his junior has been promoted.
8.
Once the authorities have themselves rectified the mistake and have given him the promotion from the date his junior has been promoted, therefore, as a matter of right, he is entitled to pay and emoluments as per Rules on the post from the date when he is assumed to have been promoted with effect from 25.1.1993.
Hence, we order that the petitioner shall be paid the pay on the present post from 25.1.1993 and, in this regard, Annexure P-5 stands quashed and Annexure R-1/T shall remain operative with a direction to the respondent Nos1 and 2 that the petitioner shall be entitled to pay on the promoted post from 25.1.1993 and not from 331994 only.
The writ petition is accepted accordingly.