V K Jhanji, J. (Oral) - In this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, petitioner is seeking a writ in the nature of certiorari, quashing order dated 641992, Annexure P 9 whereby the petitioner was informed by the Director, Health and Family Welfare Punjab (hereinafter referred to as the Director) that her case for medical reimbursement has been rejected by the Government after consideration.
Petitioner is also seeking a writ in the nature of mandamus, commanding the respondents to reimburse to the petitioner the medical expenses incurred by her towards emergent and operation conducted abroad when she was on leave.
2.
Petitioner who is an Assistant Working in the office of DHS Punjab had gone to Canada on sanctioned leave.
Petitioner for her return journey had booked the ticket, but few hours before her departure, while she was proceedings towards the airport, she developed an acute pain in the renal region which had occurred for the first time and at the airport itself, she was advised to be admitted in the hospital.
She was removed to hospital in a very serious condition where she was operated upon on 2111989.
On her return to India, petitioner applied for reimbursement of the amount, i.e. medical expenses and the hospital expenses, vide her application Annexure P 4.
Petitioner's case though had been recommended by the Director, but on consideration by the Government, it was rejected vide letter dated 641992 (Annexure P 9).
The grievance made in the petition is that action of the respondents in depriving the petitioner of her right to medical reimbursement is arbitrary and discriminatory.
Thus, prayer has been made that the order in question be quashed and the respondents be directed to reimburse to the petitioner the medical expenses incurred by her.
3.
Written statement has been filed by Dr. Nirmal Singh Aneja, Deputy Director, Health Services, on behalf of respondents No. 1 and 2.
The only plea taken in the written statement is that petitioner was on Ex. India leave during the period of her treatment.
It has further been stated that Government never allow reimbursement when an employee is on leave especially Ex. India leave, for the reason that excellent insurance cover at nominal payment is available for illness abroad which should be availed of, and if this is not done, then it is entirely the person's fault.
Further, the payment of medical treatment is in dollars.
The State Government cannot reimburse the same in Indian rupees unless Reserve Bank of India first sanctions the foreign exchange.
The Government can only pay the amount in Indian rupees for which the Reserve Bank of India sanctions foreign exchange.
4.
Having heard the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that the petition deserves to be allowed.
The Punjab Government has issued instructions in regard to reimbursement of expenditure towards medical treatment obtained outside India.
Clause (7) of the said instructions, which is relevant is reproduced hereunder :-  ``(7) It shall be competent for the Punjab Government (in Health and Family Welfare Deptt.)
to authorise reimbursement of expenditure on medical treatment obtained outside India if it is satisfied that prior approval could not be obtained by the Punjab Government Employee/Pensioner due to circumstances beyond control.
I resided that the Government employee fulfils all other conditions relating to medical treatment outside India.''
The afore mentioned clause of instructions provides for reimbursement of expenditure on medical treatment obtained outside India.
If the employee can satisfy that prior approval could not be obtained due to circumstances beyond control.
In the case of the petitioner it has not been disputed by the respondents that the petitioner suffered an attack of left renal colic all of a sudden while she was on her way to airport.
Due to significant urinary tract infection, an emergency left ureterolithotomy had to be performed.
On her return to India, when petitioner submitted a medical bill special Medical Board under the chairmanship of Director, was constituted who on 19.7.1990 opined that ``since the patient, Smt. Mohinder Kaur had developed acute obstruction of left kidney due to a stone just below Pelviuretic junction and there was infection and she needed I/V antibiotics and urgent surgical intervention.
Under the circumstances, this emergency surgery was justified as is clear from the letter of the Urologist Dr. H Bochinski of Edmonton Alberta Hospital, Canada.''
On the basis of proceedings of the Special Medical Board, the Director vide letter dated 1991990 addressed to the Secretary to Government of Punjab, Health and Family Welfare Department, Chandigarh recommended that since the petitioner has spent a sum of 4,88430 dollars, she be reimbursed a sum of Rs. 62,616/-, i.e. the amount equivalent to dollars spent by her, which be debited under the Head ``2210-Medical and Public Health''.
On some querry raised by the Government, Director again vide letter dated 2511991 informed the Secretary to Government of Punjab, Health and Family Welfare Department, Chandigarh that the medicines were not purchased from outside and all the bills are from the hospital only.
No T.A./D.A.
has been included in the bill.
Diet money too has been deducted from the bill.
Thereafter, bill for Rs. 62,616/- was re-submitted for sanction.
Some more objections were raised by the Government and the Director vide letter dated 811992 informed the Secretary to Government of Punjab Health and Family Welfare Department, Chandigarh, that the Medical Board after considering the material on record had opined that operation was done on finding the petitioner in a serious condition and therefore, the treatment was justified.
The stand taken by the respondents in the written statement that when the petitioner was operated upon she was on Ex. India leave and the Government never allow reimbursement when an employee is on leave, especially Ex. India leave, cannot be accepted for the reason that the operation which had been performed upon the petitioner was an emergency one and this has been so found by the Special Medical Board on consideration of material placed before it.
The Medical Board too had found that it was beyond the control of the petitioner to get prior sanction as the operation was got done in a serious condition.
The plea of the State that since payment of medical treatment was in dollars, the State Government cannot reimburse the same in Indian rupees unless sanction is obtained from Reserve Bank of India, is also not acceptable.
Petitioner is not seeking medical reimbursement in dollars, but seeking reimbursement in Indian currency.
The Director in his communications dated 1991990 and 2511991 has informed the Government that the amount in Indian currency comes to Rs. 62,616/- which is equivalent to 4,88430 dollars.
No instructions, either of the Government of Reserve Bank of India have been placed on record by the respondents which would show that any prior sanction from Reserve Bank of India is required.
In any case, it was for the respondents to obtain sanction, if any required.
Thus, I am of the considered view that petitioner is entitled to medical reimbursement in terms of instructions of the Punjab Government as contained in letter No. 7/7/85-3HBV/13855 dated 2751987.
5.
Accordingly, this writ petition is allowed with costs, which are quantified at Rs. 2,000/-.
The order dated 641992 (Annexure P 9) is quashed.
Respondents are directed to reimburse to the petitioner the medical expenses, which has been duly recommended by the Director vide Annexures P-6, P-7 and P-8, within three months from the date of communication of order from this Court.
Petitioner shall also be entitled to interest on the amount payable, at the rate of 18% per annum, with effect from 2511991, i.e. the date when bill was resubmitted by the Director for sanction till the date of payment.