GS Singhvi, J - Order (Annexure P-3) passed by the Director, Higher Education, Haryana, whereby the petitioner has been punished with stoppage of two increments with cumulative effect as well as the Order (Annexure P-5) by which the rejection of appeal of the petitioner was conveyed to him deserve to be quashed on two short grounds, which I shall set out hereinunder.
2.
Notice (Annexure P-1) was issued to the petitioner on 2061988 with a proposal to take action against him under Rule 8 of the Haryana Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules 1987.
The petitioner submitted his reply (Annexure P-2).
Without any further enquiry, the Director, Higher Education, passed the order (Annexure P-3) dated 16111988 and imposed penalty of withholding of two increments of the petitioner with cumulative effect.
Petitioner filed a detailed appeal under Rule 9 of the 1987 Rules and the same has been rejected vide order Annexure P-5.
3.
It is admitted position that no regular departmental enquiry was held against the petitioner for imposing a major penalty on him.
In Kulwant Singh Gill v. State of Punjab, 1991(2) SCT 30 (SC) : 1991(1) RSJ 413, the Supreme Court has held that withholding of increments with cumulative effect is a major punishment and such punishment cannot be awarded without a regular departmental enquiry under the relevant service rules.
In view of the fact that no enquiry was held against the petitioner for inflicting the major penalty the order Annexure P-3 is liable to be quashed.
4.
Order (Annexure P-5) by which the petitioner's appeal has been dismissed contains no reason whatsoever.
It is an order which is cryptic to the core and arbitrary to the hilt.
Without any hesitation, I hold it to be non-speaking order and on that ground alone it is liable to be upset.
5.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed.
Orders (Annexure P-3 and P-5) are declared illegal and are hereby quashed.
However, this order shall not operate as bar to the taking of fresh action by the respondents against the petitioner in accordance with law.
Petition allowed.