Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - Smt. Saroj Siwatch, petitioner, has impugned the transfer order dated August 7, 1991 (Annexure P-1 ) whereby she was transferred to Reweri as special Collector which was stayed by this Court vide its order dated September 16, 1991 and the writ petition was also admitted.
2.
In the writ petition, the petition had also alleged malafides against certain respondents.
During the pendency of the writ petition, the State Goverment vide its order dated April 4, 1992 (Copy Annexure R-2/2 to the Civil Misc.
Application) cancelled the transfer order (Annexure P-1).
3.
Now this Civil Misc. application has been filed by the State with a prayer that since the impugned order of transfer has been cancelled, the writ petition has become infructuous and the same be dismissed as such.
4.
Notice of Civil Misc.
Application was issued to the petitioner.
In response thereto, the petitioner has filed an affidavit in which she has stated that her husband suffered two consecutive heart attacks on 2141994 and 2941994 and he was referred to All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi for further investigation and treatment.
She further stated that firstly angiougraphy was done on her husband and subsequently angioplasty/surgery was performed.
He still continues to be unwell.
It is contended on behalf of the petitioner that in view of serious nature of ailment of the petitioner's husband he requires constant medical check up and may require emergency medical aid at any time.
In order to fortify the submissions, the petitioner placed on record certain certificates issued by Nehru Hospital, Chandigarh as well as All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi.
The petitioner has expressed apprehension that after the impugned order of transfer having been withdrawn, she will be transferred to some other place.
5.
On consideration of the matter and in view of the fact that the impugned order of transfer has been cancelled by the State and the petitioner has been retained at Chandigarh, now she cannot have any legitimate grouse in the matter.
However, keeping in view the difficulties expressed by her, it will be desirable that if the State ever intends to transfer the petitioner, then the difficulties expressed by her are to be kept in view.
It is expected that the State Govt. being a Model Employer shall look after the welfare of its employees and shall also appreciate the difficulties expressed by her.
Since the State Govt. has cancelled the impugned order of transfer, there is no need to go into the allegations of mala fides and this unfortunate controversy has come to an end.
6.
With the above observations, Civil Misc.
Application and writ petition stand disposed of.
Order accordingly.