Harjit Singh Bedi, J - The present case represents another example of a tug of war between direct recruits and promotees with regard to the principles that have to be followed regarding the fixation of seniority inter se.
The facts of the case are as under :  1.
The petitioner-Sh. Sansar Chand was recruited as an Architect Class-I through direct recruitment by the Haryana Public Service Commission in an open competition and was issued a letter of appointment dated 931976, Annexure P1 to the petition.
It has been averred in the petition that the services of the petitioner and similarly situated architects were governed by the Haryana Service of Architect Class I Rules, 1974 (hereinafter referred to as the `Rules') and as per Rule 7 of the Rules, 67 per cent of the vacancies in the service were to be filled up by promotion from amongst the Assistant Architects and the remaining 33 per cent by direct recruitment.
It has been averred that in the year 1975 a screening committee was constituted under Rule 10 of the Rules to adjudicate the capability of the Assistant Architects working in the department of Architecture for promotion to the post of Architects.
On June 20, 1975 the said Committee held its meeting and considered the names of nine officers including respondent Nos. 5 to 11 for promotion.
Respondent Nos. 5 to 8 were found suitable for regular promotion against six promotion quota posts, whereas the names of respondent Nos. 9 to 11 were approved and put on the waiting list to be promoted whenever vacancy occurred.
A copy of the minutes of the screen by committee has been appointed as Annexure P2 to the petition.
Pursuant to the said direction, vide Annexures P3 and P4 respondent Nos. 5 to 11 who were earlier promoted provisionally on ad hoc basis to the post of Architects were given officiating appointment as Architects for a period of six months subject to the availability of the posts and in anticipation of approval of the Haryana Public Service Commission.
It is now the conceded case that during the pendency of the writ petition, respondent Nos. 5 to 10 have retired and respondent No. 11 Shri S R Midha is the only contesting respondent now.
Meanwhile the petitioner relieving himself to be senior to the respondents made a representation to the State Government requesting that his name be considered along with respondent Nos. 5 to 11 for promotion as Senior Architect, but respondent No. 5 was promoted as Senior Architect on June 24, 1980 vide Annexure P6.
It appears that subsequently respondent Nos. 6 to 8 were also promoted as Senior Architects on September 5, 1980 and April 3, 1981, respectively.
The petitioner was thereafter afforded a personal hearing by the State Government on November 2, 1981 to consider his representation with regard to the seniority over respondent Nos. 5 to 11 and after going into the matter, the same was rejected vide the impugned orders Annexures P7 and P8 whereby the petitioner was shown junior to respondent Nos. 5 to 11.
Aggrieved thereby the present petition has been filed.
2.
Notice of motion was issued to the State and various replies have been filed by the State Government as also by the private respondents.
In the replies filed by the respondents, there has been a divergence of opinion with regard to the applicability of the rules which governed the service as the State Government has relied on the Draft Rules of 1972 which the other respondents have alleged that there were no rules applicable to the service as the Draft Rules were promulgated and became effective as the Haryana Services of Architects Class I Rules 1978 and as the petitioner and the private respondents had been inducted as architects before that date, they could not be relied upon.
In the reply filed by respondent No. 11, the solitary contesting respondent, the stand taken is that he had been inducted as an architect though on officiating basis on September 25, 1975 i.e. prior to the appointment of the petitioner and he had been confirmed in service vide Annexure R11/1 dated 361985.
It has also been stated in the written statement that he was found suitable for promotion as Architect with effect from February 18, 1974 subject to the approval of the Haryana Public Service Commission which was received by the Govt. on July 21, 1977 and as such from his actual date of promotion i.e. February 18, 1974 he was entitled to claim seniority in the service from that date as the approval of the Haryana Public Service Commissioner would relate back thereto in terms of the judgment of this Court reported as Shri H P Sood v. State of Punjab and others, 1970 SLR 483 and G P Doval v. Chief Secretary Govt. of UP and others, 1984(11) SLR 555.
It has also been argued that in the absence of Rules, total length of service was to be kept in view in defining seniority and as he was entitled to seniority over the petitioner.
3.
On the facts, as stated above, Mr. R K Malik learned counsel for the petitioner, has raised only argument before me.
He has urged that as per the case of the parties there were 11 posts available in the cadre of architects and on March 11, 1976, these posts were duly occupied as reflected in the Chart Annexure P 10 and, as such, the question of respondent No. 11 securing any retrospective promotion with effect from February 11, 1974 would not arise as vide Annexure P 4 the officiating promotion of respondent No. 11 was to be made subject to availability of a post.
He has further urged that the promotion of respondent No. 11 as also the other respondents was merely fortuitous as the post given to him had fallen vacant in the cadre because of the incumbent thereon having gone to Ex cadre post as would be apparent from Annexure P10.
Mr. Malik had however conceded that he would not press his argument with regard to the applicability of the rules on which reliance has been placed in the writ petition.
4.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties at length, I find that this petition deserves to succeed.
It is to be borne in mind, first and foremost, that the petitioner was working in the Department as an Assistant Architect along with the respondents at the time of his appointment as architect in the year 1976.
He was junior to the respondents as Assistant Architect and he thereafter appeared before the Haryana Public Service Commission and was inducted into Class I service as a direct recruit, whereas the respondents continued in the lower post.
It is also apparent from Annexure P4 that the promotion of respondent No. 11 made thereby was on an officiating basis subject to the availability of a post and for a period of six months initially.
Mr. Malik therefore seems to be right that the stand of the respondent that on the approval given by the Haryana Public Service Commission to the promotion of respondent No. 11 vide Annexure R 1 with effect from 1974 was not tenable as there was no post available on that day or even on March 11, 1976 to which reference has been made in Annexure P 10.
Mr. Malik also appears to be on sound footing when he urges that there were only 11 cadre posts available in the Department and 7 additional posts became temporarily available as some of the members in the cadre had gone on deputation and as the persons who had gone on deputation could return to the present cadre at any time as they held lien in the cadre, no post in fact was vacant to induct respondent No. 11 into Class II service of Architects with effect from 1974.
In this connection he has relied on the definition of `lien' given in 235 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume I, Chapter II which reads that lien means ``the title of a government employee to hold substantively, either immediately or on the termination of a period or periods of absence, a permanent post, including a tenure post, to which he has been appointed substantively''.
Relying on this definition he has urged that as the lien was held by the aforesaid 11 persons mentioned in Annexure P 10, respondent No. 11 was not entitled to be inducted against that post.
He has further relied on the definition of `officiate' given in Rule 242 of the aforesaid Services Rules which reads as under:  ``A government employee officiates in a post when he performs the duties of a post on which another person holds a lien.
A competent authority may, if it thinks fit, appoint a government employee to officiate in a vacant post on which no other government employee holds a lien.''
A cumulative effect of the reading of these indicates that an officiating government employee cannot be deemed to hold a lien as he is performing the duties on a post on which another person holds a lien.
To my mind, applying the aforesaid rules to the facts of the present case, it is apparent that the argument of the respondents that the approval given by the Commission vide Annexure R 1 dated 21.7.1977 would relate back to the year 1974 was not justifiable as there was no post available against which respondent No. 11 could be appointed as per the stipulation contained in Annexure P4 as all the posts were filled up by regular appointees in the cadre on that day.
In view of what has been held above, the argument of Mr. Midha based on the various judgments cited by him that in the absence of rules continuous length of service would determine the date of seniority is not relevant.
For the reasons recorded above, the present petition is allowed; Annexures P 7 and P 8 are quashed and a direction is issued that the petitioner would be deemed to be senior to respondent Nos. 5 to 11.
No costs.