GS Singhvi, J(Oral) - None has appeared for the petitioner.
I have heard Shri Aftab Singh Bakshi, learned counsel for the respondent-Board.
2.
A look at the pleadings of the parties shows that according to the petitioner he was engaged as a Helper in the service of the Punjab State Agricultural Marketing Board on 18111982 on a fixed salary of Rs. 1022/- per month.
The petitioner continued in service till the date of filing of the writ petition on 2.11.1988.
The petitioner says that after having render continuous service of almost six years he has acquired a right to be regularised he has acquired a right to be regularised in service.
3.
His claim has been contested by the respondents who have pleaded that the petitioner was engaged in the regular pay scale of Rs. 300-450/-.
It has been then pleaded by the respondents that on the allegation of absence from duty more than one show-cause notices have been issued against the petitioner and employer is taking action against him in respect of the allegation of absence from duty.
4.
Argument of the learned counsel for the respondents is that even though the petitioner has rendered more than 12 years of service by now, in view of the notices issued to him in October and November, 1988, the employer has the jurisdiction to take action against the petitioner in respect of allegation of delinquency.
5.
This argument of Shri Bakshi does not require detailed elucidation.
There can be no manner of doubt that even as a regular employee, the petitioner will be subject to the disciplinary jurisdiction of his employer, namely, the Board.
It is open to the Board to pass appropriate order after holding inquiry in consonance with the principles of natural justice into the allegation levelled against the petitioner.
However, jurisdiction of the employer to take disciplinary action against a permanent/temporary and even a daily-wage employee cannot be confused with the employee's right to be regularised.
These two are entirely different matters.
6.
Having worked for over 12 years by now, the petitioner has acquired a right to be regularised in service.
This is more so because as per the averment made in the reply itself, the petitioner was appointed in the regular pay scale of Helper as early as in 1982.
By now the petitioner has worked for a period which is almost 1/4th of the total service span of the Government employee.
Therefore, there is no justification for keeping him as a temporary employee without regularisation of his service.
7.
Consequently, the writ petition is disposed of with a direction to the respondents to regularise the service of the petitioner within a period of two months from today.
This order of the Court shall not amount to condoning the allegation of delinquency levelled against the petitioner and it would be open to the competent authority to take against the petitioner in accordance with the provisions of law and the principles of natural justice.
Costs made easy.