Jawahar Lal Gupta, J )Oral).- The petitioners who are working as Assistants/Accounts Assistants in the Haryana State Small Industries & Export Corporation Ltd (hereinafter referred to as the Corporation) are aggrieved by the order dated March 30, 1989 (Annexure P-2 with the writ petition) by which respondent No2 has been promoted as Deputy Superintendent against the post of Superintendent.
The Solitary grievance made by the petitioners is that their claim for promotion was not considered in spite of the fact that each one of them was senior to respondent No2.
2.
The respondents contest this claim on a two-fold ground.
Firstly, it has been averred that the promotions in the Corporation are made on the basis of merit-cum-seniority and as such, the petitioners had no right to be considered for promotion on the basis of their seniority.
Secondly, it has been averred that respondent No2 had been working in the Establishment Branch for about 7 years before he was promoted to the post of Deputy Superintendent.
Since respondent No2 was the senior most Assistant posted in the Establishment Branch, he was promoted to the post of Deputy Superintendent.
The specific averment in the petition that the claim of the petitioners was not considered has not been denied.
3.
Mr. Baij Nath Sharma, learned counsel for the petitioners has contended that in accordance with the Service Bye-Laws framed by the Corporation in the year 1972, the petitioners had a right to be considered.
The action of the respondent-Corporation in not considering the claims of the petitioners is violative of the Bye-laws as well as the provisions of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
On behalf of the Corporation, Mr. Taccoria, has contended that merit being the primary consideration, the petitioners had no right to be considered on the basis of their seniority alone.
Mr. Sumeet Mahajan, learned counsel for respondent No2 has submitted that so far as the Accounts Assistants are concerned, they have a separate channel of promotion.
Reliance in this behalf has been placed on the instructions dated March 26, 1977 issued by the Managing Director of the Corporation, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure R-2/5 with the written statement.
Learned counsel has further submitted that respondent No2 had been initially appointed as a Purchase Assistant and as such his name should not have been included in the seniority list of Assistants and Accounts Assistants.
Lastly, it has been contended that while the respondent was working as Purchase Assistant, a person junior to him had been promoted as Purchase Officer.
The Corporation has merely undone the injustice by promoting the respondent to the post of Deputy Superintendent.
4.
The Bye-laws determine the conditions of service.
They lay down that the criterion for promotion shall be ``merit-cum-seniority".
Accordingly, whenever the competent authority considers a case for promotion, it must determine the comparative merit of the persons who fall within the zone of consideration for a post and promote the person who is most meritorious.
In case of two persons being equally meritorious, the one who is senior has to be promoted.
5.
What is the position in this case?
It is admitted that the petitioners are senior to respondent No2.
In the seniority list issued in the year 1982, the names of the petitioners appear at different Nos. between serial 20 to 66 while that of respondent No2 is No. 67.
Similarly, in the seniority list issued on March 13, 1991, vide Annexure P-11 to the writ petition, the names of the petitioners are mentioned at different places from serial No3 to 35, while that of respondent No2 appears at serial No.36.
It is thus clear that the petitioners are senior to respondent No2.
6.
Since the petitioners are admittedly senior to respondent No2, they had a right to be considered for promotion.
It is only on consideration that their merit could have been determined.
Without considering their claims, it could not have been said that respondent No2 was more suitable than them.
It has not been shown that the claims of the petitioners were at all considered.
In this situation, it is clear that a junior person was promoted without considering the claims of persons senior to him.
This was illegal and cannot be sustained.
7.
Mr. Mahajan has referred to the letter dated March 26, 1977, to contend that Accounts Assistants can only be considered for promotion to the post of Accountants.
Consequently, the learned counsel has submitted that they had no right to be considered for the post of Deputy Superintendent.
This argument cannot be accepted.
Firstly, it has not been shown that the Managing Director was competent to issue these instructions.
Assuming he was, it has not been shown that the mere fact that the Accounts Assistants were made eligible for the post of Accountants, renders them ineligible for promotion to the post of Deputy Superintendent.
Still further, the contention loses sight of the fact that petitioner Nos.2, 4, 8, 9 and 11 in fact working as Assistants and were admittedly senior to respondent No2.
Even their claims have not been considered.
Consequently, even this contention as raised by the learned counsel for respondent No2 cannot be sustained.
8.
Mr. Mahajan then submitted that in fact petitioners cannot be treated as senior to respondent No2.
According to the counsel, the second respondent having joined service as Purchase Assistant, his name should not have been included in the seniority lists of Assistants issued by the Corporation in the years 1982 and 1991.
The argument is suicidal.
If the name of respondent No2 is excluded from the seniority list, he would not have any right to be considered for promotion to the post of Deputy Superintendent.
Therefore, there is no merit even in this contention.
9.
Lastly, Mr. Mahajan has submitted that Respondent No2 having been appointed as Purchase Assistant had a right to be considered for promotion to the post of Purchase Officer and when a person junior to him had been promoted as Purchase Officer without considering his claim, the authority had merely undone the injustice by passing the impugned order.
10.
The argument is misconceived.
The validity of appointment to the post of Purchase Officer has not been questioned before me in these proceedings.
The second respondent has not approached this Court for setting aside the promotion of a person junior to him.
The issues raised by the petitioners are only against the promotion of Respondent No2 as Deputy Superintendent.
Consequently, the plea raised by Respondent No2 is wholly untenable.
Still further, two wrongs will not make a right.
The fact that respondent No2 is alleged to have been ignored at a certain point of time did not entitle the first respondent to cause any injustice to the petitioners.
11.
In view of the above, it is clear that the promotion of respondent No2 as Deputy Superintendent vide order dated August 30, 1989 was in violation of the provisions contained in Bye-law 3.4(b).
It cannot thus be sustained.
Consequently, the impugned order is quashed, and the respondent-Corporation is directed to proceed further in accordance with law.
In the circumstances of this case, there will be no order as to costs.