MM Kumar, J - This order shall dispose of CWP No. 881 of 1986, titled as Desh Raj Lamba v. State of Haryana and others; CWP No. 2104 of 1987, titled as Laxmi Narain and others v. State of Haryana and others and CWP No. 4082 of 1985, titled as Vinod Kumar Jain and others v. State of Haryana and another.
The dispute raised in these petitions is in respect of inter se seniority of the petitioners vis-a-vis respondents.
They have been working on the post of Clerk/Assistant in the Haryana Civil Secretariat at Chandigarh or under the Director of Employment, Haryana.
2.
Few facts would be necessary to put the controversy in its proper perspective, which are being mentioned from CWP No. 881 of 1986.
The case of the petitioner is that an advertisement was issued in the year 1970 for appointment to the post of Clerk.
The petitioner applied and was selected.
Accordingly, he was issued a letter of appointment dated 2871971 and he joined the State Service Class III at the Haryana Civil Secretariat as a Clerk on 1681971 (P-1).
The petitioner was confirmed against the post of Clerk w.e.f.
6.2.1973 (P-2) after satisfactory completion of probationary period prescribed under Rule 8 of the Punjab Civil Secretariat (State Service Class III) Rules, 1952 (for brevity, to be referred as `the 1952 Rules').
The name of the petitioner, in the order of his confirmation is mentioned at Sr. No. 10.
3.
Respondent Nos. 2 to 37 were also appointed on the post of Clerk when they applied in pursuance to another but later advertisement issued by the Haryana Subordinate Services Selection Board (P-3).
It is appropriate to mention that the advertisement had sought to fill up the posts of Clerk reserved for Ex- servicemen in various Government departments in the State of Haryana.
They also went through the selection process and were appointed as Clerks in State Service Class III in the Haryana Civil Secretariat against temporary vacancies.
A copy of the appointment letter dated 2511973 issued to one of the respondents has been placed on record as Annexure P-4.
It is claimed that for the first time regular vacancies became available on 29111977 and as such respondent Nos. 2 to 37 should have been considered against those posts for confirmation.
Reliance has been placed on Rule 9 of the 1952 Rules, which stipulates determination of inter se seniority on the basis of `substantive appointment' on such posts.
A copy of the seniority list as it stood on 111979, which was prepared by keeping in view Rule 9 of the 1952 rules, was issued wherein the name of the petitioner has been shown at Sr. No. 148 by reflecting the date of his entry into service as 1681971.
It further shows that the petitioner was substantively appointed to the post of Clerk on 6.2.1973.
The names of respondent Nos. 2 to 37, in the seniority list figure under sub-heading `Temporary Clerks' and they have been allocated the date of entry into service between 2511973 to 26.2.1973.
The column concerning substantive appointment has been kept vacant and special remarks have been added showing them to be Ex-servicemen.
4.
Respondent No. 1 sent a communication to the petitioner to show cause as to why respondent Nos. 2 to 37 should not be granted benefit of military service.
A proposed seniority list was also sent along with that communication wherein the benefit of military service has been proposed to be granted to respondent Nos. 2 to 37, in pursuance to the Punjab Government National Emergency (Concession) Rules, 1965 (for brevity, `the 1965 Rules').
As a consequence their deemed date of appointment was proposed to be changed between November, 1967 to 2271971 after giving benefit of 4 to 5 years of military service.
The aforementioned list was issued on 14101985 (P-6/A) and the petitioner had filed his objections on 18101985 (P-7).
After duly considering the objections/representation filed against the proposed seniority (P-6/A), which was prepared after granting benefit of military service to respondent Nos. 2 to 37, respondent No. 1 finalised the seniority list.
A final seniority list was issued on 27121985 (P-8) and respondent Nos. 2 to 37 were shown senior to the petitioner.
In the final seniority list, the petitioner has been rendered junior to respondent Nos. 2 to 27 and the same is subject-matter of challenge in this petition.
The petitioner has claimed that respondent Nos. 2 to 27 were confirmed on 29111977 and according to Rule 9 of the 1952 rules their date of joining in 1973/1974 cannot constitute the basis for determining their seniority.
It has also been alleged that the requirement of age and educational qualification as prescribed by respective Rules 4 and 5 of the 1952 Rules have also not been fulfilled nor any power of relaxation has been exercised, which under the 1952 Rules is vested in the Chief Secretary.
The petitioner even after grant of benefit of military service to respondent Nos. 2 to 37 would rank senior as his date of confirmation is February, 1973.
After giving benefit of military service to respondent Nos. 2 to 37, their date of substantive appointment to the service would not be anterior to February, 1973 when the petitioner was confirmed.
In the connected petition, namely, CWP No. 4082 of 1985, an additional issue has also been raised that the hearing before changing the seniority of the petitioners vis-a-vis respondents was granted by one officer and the decision in fact was taken by the Chief Secretary, which is impermissible in law.
5.
The stand of the respondent State in its written statement is that the petitioner as well as respondents were recruited through the Haryana Subordinate Services Selection Board on purely temporary basis as no permanent vacancy was available at the time of their recruitment and they could not be confirmed.
The petitioner was confirmed as Clerk on 6.2.1973 and respondents were confirmed as Clerk on 29111977 when permanent posts of Clerk became available and the incumbent had completed probation period satisfactorily.
It is further claimed that the question of fulfilling educational qualification or the age bar would not arise as instructions have been issued by the Chief Secretary to relax/waive off minimum qualification with regard to age and education in respect of Ex-Servicemen by treating them as a Class.
A reference in that regard has been made to circulars dated 1571970 and 19.6.1972 (R-1/1 and R-1/2 respectively).
On facts, it has been denied that after granting the benefit of military service, respondent Nos. 2 to 37 would not become senior to the petitioner.
It has been maintained that the 1965 Rules and 1952 Rules have been religiously followed.
In the connected petition bearing CWP No. 4082 of 1985, it has been pointed out that Shri Bani Singh Yadav (respondent No. 2) had filed a writ petition in this Court, which was dismissed and his Civil Appeal No. 2550 of 1980 was allowed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court vide judgment dated 591984 along with a bunch of other appeals arising out of bearing Writ Petition Nos. 6436-37 of 19870.
The judgment is reported as KC Arora v. State of Haryana, 1984(3) SCC 281.
It was in pursuance to the aforementioned direction of the Supreme Court that the benefit of military service rendered by Bani Singh Yadav and other similarly situated persons have been granted towards seniority after giving show cause notice to the petitioner.
6.
Sarv Shri RK Malik, DS Patwalia and Subhash Ahuja, learned counsel for the petitioners have argued that the petitioners should be deemed to be appointed on 10.9.1971.
According to the learned counsel, respondent Bani Singh Yadav and others Ex-Servicemen Clerk could be confirmed in November, 1977 and, therefore, even if five years benefit of military service is granted to them in accordance with the 1965 Rules, the petitioners would still rank senior to them.
Learned counsel have maintained that granting benefit of more than five years of military service would be absolutely illegal because in 1971-72 no vacant posts were available and it would not be possible to confirm these Ex-Servicemen in the absence of any sanctioned post.
They have further submitted that the 1952 Rules were amended on 1731978 (P-12) by amending the qualification for the post of Clerk, which had made a simple matriculate belonging to Ex-Servicemen category eligible for appointment to the post of Clerk.
However, it is submitted that the amendment has been made applicable w.e.f.
1111966, which would mean that simple matriculate belonging to Ex- Servicemen category like the respondents have been made eligible.
The retrospective operation of amendment made in 1978 is impermissible under law.
Learned counsel have been argued that even the respondents were not eligible for appointment under Rule 4(b) of the 1952 Rules because they were more than 25 years of age on the date of appointment and no relaxation, in fact, was ever granted to them by the Chief Secretary in accordance with the 1952 Rules by passing a specific order.
It is maintained that the circulars dated 1571970 and 19.6.1972 (R-1/1 and R-1/2) issued by the Chief Secretary cannot be regarded as part of the service rules because the relaxation was required to be exercised in individual cases by passing a specific order laced with reasons.
The last argument advanced by the learned counsel for the petitioners is that the principles of natural justice have been violated, inasmuch as, after issuance of show cause notice, order dated 27121985 passed by respondent No. 1 is cryptic and non-speaking.
The argument has been further substantiated with the submission that personal hearing was granted by Shri RS Aggarwal, IAS, Deputy Secretary, who was not entitled to determine their inter se seniority, whereas the order dated 27121985 has been passed by the Chief Secretary.
7.
Mr. Harish Rathee, learned State counsel has argued that the nature of appointment of both the petitioners as well as the respondents is identical and there is hardly any difference between letter of appointment issued to the petitioner on 2871971 (P-1) and the appointment letter dated 2511973 (P-4) issued to one of the respondents, namely, Kesho Ram.
Learned counsel has drawn my attention to clause 2 of the appointment letter, which shows that the offer of appointment was to a purely temporary post, which was liable to be abolished at any time and it carried no promise of subsequent permanent employment.
It was further pointed out in both the cases that if no permanent vacancy was to become available then their services could be terminated without notice.
According to Mr. Rathee specific orders by the Chief Secretary have been issued granting relaxation in age to a class of person like Ex- Servicemen, vide order dated 1571979 (R-1/1) and with regard to qualification vide order dated 19.6.1972 (R-1/2).
Therefore, the learned State counsel has argued that no fault can be found on account of lack of educational qualification or requirement of age.
Learned counsel has then argued that in pursuance to the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in KC Arora's case (supra), law has been declared and the respondent State being bound under the Constitution, was obliged to implement the same.
He has maintained that there was no right of hearing for implementation of a judgment of the Supreme Court, yet, as an abundant caution opportunity of hearing was granted to the petitioner and all similarly situated persons.
Referring to the amendment made in 1978 and operating it retrospectively, learned counsel has argued that even if amendment is ignored the respondents are fully eligible on account of the specific order passed in favour of class of persons of Ex- Servicemen on 1571970 (R-1/1) and 19.6.1972 (R-1/2).
8.
Mr. Amit Jain, learned counsel for respondent Nos. 2 to 37 has submitted that they were fully eligible as per the terms and conditions of the advertisement, dated 7.1.1972 (P-3).
He has drawn my attention to clause dealing with age, which states that the lower and upper age limit as on 721972, for the post of Clerk was 17-25 years.
The age was relaxable by virtue of Entry (5) of the advertisement, which provides that for an Ex- Serviceman the upper age limit is relaxable to the extent of his military service added by three years provided he had rendered continues military service for a period of not less than six months before his release.
Another condition is that such a person should have been released otherwise than by way of dismissal or discharge on account of misconduct or inefficiency.
Learned counsel has maintained that there are no averments in the whole petition pleading that the respondents did not fulfil the qualification of age by showing their total military service plus three years and then proving that they were barred being overage.
9.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, perusing the averments made in these petitions along with annexures, written statements filed by the respondents and the rules applicable, I find that there is no merit in these petitions which are liable to be dismissed.
It could not be successfully disputed that the petitioner was substantively appointed as Clerk on 6.2.1973 although he had joined through Haryana Subordinate Services Selection Board on 1681971.
Similarly, respondent Nos. 2 to 37 might have joined on 24.9.1972 but they were confirmed on a substantive post with effect from 29111977.
A perusal of the impugned seniority list dated 27121985 would show that large number of respondents have been granted the benefit of service rendered during emergency w.e.f.
26101962 to 10.1.1968, which comes to five years two months and fourteen days.
This period has been worked out in accordance with Rule 4(ii) of the 1965 Rules.
On the basis of the aforementioned period, deemed date of substantive appointment has been given.
The deemed date has been worked out to be 11111967.
On the basis of the aforementioned deemed date of appointment, the availability of post has been worked out as is evident from various entries made in column 7 of the seniority list.
In other words, the date of confirmation of the respondents had also undergone change by adjusting their names in places which were occupied by those persons who have become junior to the respondents.
By way of illustration a look at entry 1 dealing with Narayan Prashad Sharma would show that his name has been brought up at Sr. No. 109-A between Shri Kewal Krishan Chopra at No. 109 above Shri Jai Ram at Sr. No. 110.
Similarly, Shri Kesho Ram Sharma has been brought up at Sr. No. 109-B son on and so forth.
The aforementioned calculation is the net result of the benefit flowing from the grant of military service to the respondents.
10.
It is necessary to briefly refer to the issue involved in KC Arora's case (supra).
In order to avoid the benefit of military service to the Ex- Servicemen employees who have joined civil service, the State of Haryana had amended Rule 4(ii) read with the definition of expression `military service' in Rule 2.
The rule as it stood before amendment dated 981976 was as under :-  "2.
Definition.
- For the purposes of these rules, the expression `military service' means enrolled or commissioned service in any of the three wings of the Indian Armed forces (including service as a Warrant Officer) rendered by a person during the period of operation of the proclamation of emergency made by the President under Article 352 of the Constitution of India on October 26, 1962 or such other service as may hereafter be declared as military service for the purposes of these rules.
Any period of military training followed by military service shall also be reckoned as military service."
A perusal of the aforementioned definition of the `military service' would show that military service was to include enrolled or commissioned service in any of the three wings of the Indian Armed Forces rendered by a person during the period of operation of the proclamation of emergency made by the worthy President under Article 352 of the Constitution on 26101962.
It is, thus, evident that the definition of military service did not make any distinction between those persons who have joined Indian Armed Forces after declaration of emergency by choosing the army as a career.
However, the aforementioned definition was sought to be amended by a notification dated 981976 and operating the same retrospectively w.e.f.
1111966.
The amendment changed the definition of `military service' as given in Rule 2 of the 1965 Rules and it recognised only that military service which has been rendered by a person who had been enrolled or commissioned during the period of proclamation of emergency.
The amended definition reads as under :-  "For the purpose of these rules the expression `military service' means the service rendered by a person, who had been enrolled or commissioned during the period of operation of the proclamation of emergency made by the President under Article 352 of the Constitution of India on October 26, 1962 in any of the three wings of the Indian Armed Forces (including the service as a Warrant Officer) during the period of the said emergency or such other service as may hereafter be declared as military service for the purpose of these rules.
Any period of military training followed by military service shall also be reckoned as military service."
11.
It is further appropriate to mention that on 2231976, another amendment was made in Rule 4(ii), which had provided for reckoning of military service for the purposes of determining seniority but the proviso was sought to be added which contemplates that if a person has availed concession with regard to age limit and minimum qualification as postulated by Rule 3(iii) then he was not entitled to the benefit of seniority.
Both these amendments were challenged before the Supreme Court and were struck down as ultra vires of the Constitution.
The last para of the judgment in KC Arora's case (supra) would bring out the aforementioned position and for a ready reference the same is extracted below :-  "24.
For the foregoing discussion the writ petitions as well as the appeals are allowed and the orders of the High Court dated October 10, 1980 are quashed and the impugned Rule 4(ii) of the Punjab Government National Emergency (Concessions) Rules, 1965, as amended by the Haryana Government Gazette Notification No. GSR 77/Const/Art309/Amend/(1)/76 dated March 22, 1976 and the Notification No. GSR 182/Const/Art.
309/Amend (2)/76 dated August 9, 1976 amending the definition of the expression `military service' in Rule 2, are declared to be ultra vires the Constitution, insofar as they affect prejudicially persons who had acquired rights as stated above.
A writ in the nature of mandamus is issued directing respondents 1 and 2 to prepare the seniority list afresh in the light of the decision of this Court taking into consideration the military service rendered by the petitioners as well as the appellants."
12.
It is further appropriate to mention that clarification application was filed by the respondent State, which was accepted by the Hon'ble Supreme Court by holding that the amendment was to be declared as ultra vires only to the extent of retrospectivity.
In other words, the amendment was to operate prospectively.
13.
The judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in KC Arora's case (supra) has also disposed of Civil Appeal No. 2550 of 1980, which was filed by Shri Bani Singh Yadav, respondent.
The order in C.A.
No. 2550 of 190 has been placed on record of this case.
It has been rightly submitted by the learned State Counsel that the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court laying down a principle of law is binding on all authorities within the territory of India as per Article 141 of the Constitution and, therefore, the judgment was required to be implemented, which has been done by issuing show cause notice and obtaining reply of the petitioner.
I also find substance in the argument raised by the learned State Counsel that principles of natural justice in such like cases cannot be stretched to the extent of granting personal hearing albeit the efforts were made by the authorities to comply with the same.
It is well settled that the principles of natural justice are not required to be followed when the Hon'ble Supreme Court has laid down the law and the same is sought to be implemented, as has been done in the present case.
Moreover, if the impugned seniority-list dated 27121985 (P-8) is set aside on the ground that hearing was not given by the authority which have passed the order then it would result into revival of an earlier seniority-list, which would be against the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in KC Arora's case (supra).
Such a course is not permissible in view of the opinion expressed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the cases of Gadde Venkateswara Raw v. Government of AP, 1966(2) SCR 172 and MC Mehta v. Union of India, 1998(2) RCR(Civil) 567 : 1999(6) SCC 237.
In the case of Gadde Venkateswara Rao (supra) the Hon'ble Supreme Court has upheld the view taken by the High Court even when there was violation of the principles of natural justice.
At page 189, his Lordship has observed and concluded as under :-  "Both the orders of the Government, namely, the order dated 7.3.1962, and that dated 1841963, were not legally passed; the former, because it was made without giving notice to the Panchayat Samithi, and the latter, because the Government had no power under Section 72 of the Act to review an order made under Section 62 of the Act and also because it did not give notice to the representatives of Dharmajigudem village."
His Lordships concluded as follows :  "In those circumstances, was it a case for the High Court to interfere in its discretion and quash the order of the Government dated 1841963 ?
If the High Court had quashed the said order, it would have restored an illegal order - it would have given the Health Centre to a village contrary to the valid resolutions passed by the Panchayat Samithi.
The High Court, therefore, in our view, rightly refused to exercise its extraordinary discretionary power in the circumstances of the case."
14.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court in MC Mehta's case (supra) has followed and approved the aforementioned ratio in the case of Gadde Venkateswara Rao (supra) and held as under :-  "The above case is a clear authority for the proposition that it is not always necessary for the Court to strike down an order merely because the order has been passed against the petitioner in breach of natural justice.
The Court can under Article 32 or Article 226 refuse to exercise its discretion of striking down the order if such striking down will result in restoration of another order passed earlier in favour of the petitioner and against the opposite party, in violation of the principles of natural justice or is otherwise not in accordance with law."
If the principles laid down in the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court are applied to the facts of the instant case, it becomes evident that the impugned seniority-list has granted the benefit of military service in accordance with the un-amended 1965 Rules as per the directions issued in KC Arora's case (supra).
If the seniority-list is set aside merely for the reason that the authority which granted opportunity of hearing is different than the one that has passed the order, would result into revival of the earlier seniority-list.
The earlier seniority-list cannot be considered consistent with the view taken by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in KC Arora's case (supra).
Moreover, the Civil Appeal by Shri Bani Singh Yadav has been disposed of along with the judgment in KC Arora's case (supra), which is sought to be implemented.
Therefore, the argument raised on behalf of the petitioner is liable to be rejected.
15.
I further find that a consistent policy of granting concession to civilian employees and others who had joined military service has been followed by the respondent State.
There are set of instructions on the aforementioned subject, which have been amended from time to time.
It appears that these instructions were issued on 871963 before formation of the State of Haryana.
On 2141966, these instructions were further amended by embodying of the provisions of the 1965 Rules.
However, the policy instructions were again revised on 1571970 (R-1/1).
The relevant amendment has been incorporated in paras 6(i) and 6(iii) and the same reads as under :-  "6(i) Maximum age limit and minimum qualifications.
- The maximum age limit prescribed for appointment to any service or post, shall be relaxed in favour of a person who has rendered military service to the extent of his military service added by the three years provided he had rendered continuous military service for a period of not less than six months before his release and further provided that he had been released otherwise than by way of dismissal or discharge on account of misconduct or inefficiency."
"6(iii) The appointing authority will have the power, in case of a person who joined military service during the Emergency, to relax or waiver the minimum qualifications prescribed for any post if the said authority is of the view and certifies that the person has qualifications similar in nature to those that are prescribed and/or has experience of work similar to that of the post, and by virtue of those qualifications/experience he will be able to discharge the duties of the post satisfactorily."
It is pertinent to notice that clause 5 of the advertisement dated 7.1.1972 (P-3) in terms incorporates relaxation with regard to age as provided by Para 6(i).
In respect of educational qualification, the appointing authority has been empowered to relax or waive the minimum qualification prescribed for the post.
Accordingly, the Chief Secretary has passed an order in favour of all the Ex-Servicemen relaxing the requirement of particular division of a degree/diploma or any other educational qualification in favour of Ex- Servicemen.
Therefore, it cannot be argued that the relaxation incorporated by amendment of the 1952 Rules in 1978 with regard to age and educational qualification in favour of Ex-Servicemen has been applied with retrospective effect.
The case of the petitioner would be fully covered by various policy circulars issued in favour of the Ex-Servicemen granting concession in respect of age and educational qualification.
Moreover, the petitioner has failed to make out a case that the respondents lack the essential qualification or did not fulfil the requirement of age as contemplated by the advertisement.
Therefore, such an argument would not be available.
For the reasons aforementioned, these petitions fails and are accordingly dismissed.
However, there shall be no order as to costs.
Petitions dismissed.