GS Singhvi, J - Petitioners Balbir singh, Jitender Kumar, Panni Singh, Suresh Kumar, Sanjay Kumar and Ranbir Singh, have jointly filed this petition for issue of a direction to quash the selection and appointments of respondents No. 4 to 20, who were working as Conductors in the Haryana Roadways.
They have also prayed for issue of a direction to the respondents to consider their case for appointment afresh.
2.
The case set up by the petitioners is that during indefinite strike of the employees of Haryana Government which commenced from 7121993, the petitioners offered themselves for service.
Petitioners No. 1 to 5 were appointed on 7121993 and petitioner No. 6 was appointed on 14.12.1993.
Many others were appointed during the strike period.
After the strike was over, the employees again joined their duties.
Continuance of all the persons appointed during the strike period would have caused huge financial burden on the public exchequer and, therefore, the Haryana Government framed policy for absorption of persons who had served during strike.
This policy is reflected in Annexure P-2.
In accordance with Annexure P-2 all the persons who had served during the strike period were required to be interviewed by a screening committee.
The petitioners were also entitled to be called for such interview, the Committee constituted under the Chairmanship of Additional Transport Commissioner held interviews without intimation to the petitioners who were working at Sub Depot, Loharu.
On the recommendation of the Screening Committee a list of 17 candidates (Annexure P-3) was notified and these candidates have been sent for training as a preclude to their regular appointments.
The petitioners have questioned the action of the selection committee by alleging that they had not been given any opportunity or notice to appear in the interview and without considering their cases, the committee has arbitrarily selected respondents No. 4 to 20.
Another ground to challenge is that the candidate like Dharampal, Dalbir and Narinder Kumar have been included in the list of selected candidates, even they did not appear in the interview.
This according to the petitioner, has happened because political influence brought by these candidates.
3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondents No. 1 to 3, it has been admitted that the petitioners and a large number of other persons were engaged during the strike period.
The respondents have, however, stated that all these candidates have been taken on duty without completing the procedure prescribed under the rules.
After the strike had ended, the government constituted screening committee to regularise the service of those, who had been appointed during the strike period.
All the candidates including the drivers and conductors were directed to appear before the screening committee headed by the Additional Transport Commissioner.
However, 17 candidates were selected by the Committee.
They were put on one month's training and, thereafter, they were appointed on contract basis.
The respondents have pleaded that the petitioners did not appear before the screening committee and, therefore, they have no right to make a complaint of discrimination.
4.
In regard to Dharmpal, Dalbir and Narinder Kumar a separate return has been filed wherein it has been stated that these candidates were selected by the screening committee after interview.
It has also been stated that another list has been prepared by the General Manager, Haryana Roadways, Charkhi Dadri and out of that list petitioners No. 1 to 5 have been sent for appointment in the office of General Manager, Haryana Roadways, Jind, petitioner No. 6 is still on the waiting list.
5.
Mr. RK Malik, learned counsel for the petitioners, argued that the screening committee constituted by the government for interviewing the candidates for the purpose of selection was duty bound to interview the petitioners after giving them a notice about the date, time and of interview and as no intimation about the interview was given to the petitioners, they could not appear in the interview before the screening committee.
Learned counsel further argued that inclusion of the petitioners from the zone of consideration is wholly arbitrary and unreasonable and contrary to the provisions of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
Learned Assistant Advocate General Haryana appearing for the respondents submitted that names of the petitioners have been included in the waiting list and, therefore, no injustice has been done to the petitioners.
6.
A look at the averments made in the writ petition shows that the petitioners have clearly stated that they were not given any notice for the interview to be held by the screening committee.
This statement of the petitioners has been contested by the respondents who have stated in para 5 of the reply that all the candidates including the drivers and conductors were directed to appear before the screening committee headed by the Additional Transport Commissioner for screening.
However, the written statement is totally silent about the date, time and place of interview.
It has not been stated in the written statement that the petitioners were given any notice about the interview to be held by the screening committee.
No document has been placed on the record to show that the petitioners were given intimation in writing or by any other recognised mode about the time, place and date of interview and despite such intimation the petitioners did not appear before the screening committee.
In the absence of any such plea and also in the absence of any document to show that the petitioners were given intimation regarding the proposed interview, the plea raised by the petitioners about their having not been called for interview, deserves to be accepted and the failure of the screening committee to interview the petitioners has the direct effect of discriminating them qua those who were intimated by the screening committee.
Undisputedly, the petitioners belonged to the category of employees who had been appointed during the strike period.
They alongwith others who too, appointed during the strike period constituted one class.
It was not open to the respondents No. 1 to 3 to divide that group into two classes for the purpose of consideration of their cases for regularisation.
There can be no legal or other justification for interviewing some candidates and denying opportunity of interview to the others.
In my considered view, the omission of the respondents to give any intimation to the petitioners about the time, place and date of the interview, has resulted in clear infraction of their fundamental right to equality.
7.
Ordinarily, I would have quashed the entire selection made by the screening committee in view of the fact that the petitioners were denied an opportunity of being considered by the selection committee, but taking into consideration that respondents No. 4 to 20 are also persons who had served the government during the strike period and there is otherwise no illegality in their appointment, I am of the view that quashing of their appointment would cause serious injustice to them.
Instead a direction by the Court to the respondents No. 1 to 3 to reconvene the screening committee and interview the petitioners for the purpose of regular selection would meet the ends of justice.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed.
Omission of the respondents No. 1 to 3 to interview the petitioners in terms of Annexure P-2 is declared illegal.
However, instead of quashing selection and appointments of respondents No. 4 to 20 respondents No. 1 to 3 are directed to convene a meeting of the screening committee within two months from today to consider the cases of the petitioners for regular appointment in accordance with Annexure P-2.
If the petitioners or any one of them are found suitable by the screening committee, they should be given regular appointment against the available vacant posts of the posts which may become available in future.
Costs made easy.
Petition allowed.