VK Jhanji, J. (Oral).
- Petitioner, who is MAB.Ed., B.Lib.Science, and had done MA in Instrumental Music and B.Ed., was working as Librarian in privately managed institution namely Vidya Devi Jindal School, Delhi Road, Hissar.
Pursuant to advertisement issued by Navodaya Vidyalaya Samiti (in short, the Samiti) which is an autonomous body under the Ministry of Human Resource Development, petitioner applied for the post of Librarian.
One of the conditions was that a person already in service can be considered for permanent absorption if he/she can be relieved on deputation for a period of two years.
Petitioner after being interviewed along with others, was selected for the post of Librarian in the pay scale of Rs. 1,400-2,600/- plus allowances, and was posted as such at Navodaya Vidyalaya, Jhajjar.
In her appointment letter dated 181988, it was specifically mentioned that her appointment would be on transfer/deputation for a period of two years in the first instance, with possibility of permanent absorption.
The deputation period of two years expired on 1781990, but petitioner was not absorbed in service and further extension was sought from her parent school.
Vide letter dated 16111990, she was allowed extension upto 3041991.
Her parent school informed the Samiti that no further extension about retention of lien in the parent school shall be granted.
Till the end of April, 1991, Samiti did not communicate either with the petitioner or with her parent school with regard to her absorption as Librarian.
However, vide letter dated 861991, a request was again made for extending the period of deputation, but the parent school vide letter dated 2261991, informed the Samiti that as per the terms of deputation, lien of the petitioner with the school was only upto 30.4.1990 but on request of Samiti, the same was extended upto 3041991.
It was, thus, requested that the school be not pressed for extension of deputation period, meaning thereby that deputation period was not extended.
The school vide letter dated 2461991 addressed to the Deputy Director, Navodaya Vidyalaya Samiti, Jaipur, with copy addressed to the petitioner, informed that vide order dated 3/1861991, petitioner has been ordered to be repatriated to her parent department with immediate effect on completion of deputation period.
Petitioner was further directed to report to her parent department for her posting.
Parent department refused to take back the petitioner and in this respect, letter dated 1671991 was written to the petitioner.
In that letter, reference was also made with regard to communication to the Samiti.
In this petition, petitioner is impugning order dated 3/1861991 whereby he has been ordered to be repatriated, being illegal, arbitrary and non est.
2.
Written statement has been filed by principal, Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalaya, Jhajjar (Rohtak) on behalf of the respondents, in which it has been stated that petitioner has been repatriated to her parent department on the basis of order dated 3061991.
It has also been stated that till the time of writing of letter by the Society, parent school of the petitioner did not inform that it had regularised the services of other Librarian in place of the petitioner.
In regard to her case for permanent absorption with the Society, it has been stated that she was not found suitable as such and lacked initiative and drive and out of 15 performance factors she was found lacking in all factors.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that in this case, the petitioner was sent on deputation for a period of two years and on the request made by the Samiti, it was extended by the parent department upto 3041991 but it was made clear to the Samiti that thereafter, her lien shall stand terminated.
According to the counsel, the petitioner has been ordered to be repatriated vide order dated 3061991, i.e. after her lien had come to an end and her parent department has refused to take her in the department.
He has referred to Annexure R-1 attached to written statement, to contend that the stand taken by the Samiti that she lacked initiative and drive is not borne from the record because in column No.6 `Does not meet requirement of this job', nothing has been mentioned rather in the performance report, in some factors she has been found to have just met the requirement and in some has partly met the requirement.
Counsel has placed on record letters dated 841991, 1691994, 1101994, 10121994 and 16.8.1994, whereby the Samiti has decided to consider the case of the petitioner for regularisation/absorption as Librarian in accordance with prevalent rules and regulations of the Samiti, provided she gives an undertaking to withdraw her writ petition unconditionally.
4.
Having heard the learned counsel, I am of the view that instead of going into the contention raised by counsel for the petitioner, it would be appropriate if the respondent - Samiti is asked to decide the case of the petitioner for regularisation/absorption as has been decided by Samiti in their communication dated 841994, which has been placed on record by counsel for the petitioner at the time of hearing of the petition.
This course is being adopted keeping in view the order dated 681991 passed by the Motion Bench whereby repatriation of the petitioner to her parent department was stayed ad interim.
Accordingly, the respondents are directed to decide the case of the petitioner for regularisation/absorption.
It is expected that while considering the case of the petitioner, Samiti shall also take into consideration that petitioner has put in seven years of service, and has been ordered to be repatriated when her lien in her parent department stood terminated.
Let Samiti decide the matter within a period of three months from the date of communication of order from this Court.
Till the matter is decided, the petitioner shall be allowed to continue and in case she is ordered to be absorbed, she would be given all benefits according to the prevailing rules and regulations.