NC Jain and ML Koul.
JJ.
(Oral) - The petitioner a retired Lieutenant Colonel working at AMC Command Hospital, Western Command, Chandigarh, has approached this Court for a writ of mandamus directing the respondent - authorities to objectively consider his case for promotion to the rank of Colonel and Brigadier etc. from the date his juniors were promoted.
The stand of the Army authorities is that the petitioner was considered thrice and having been found unfit for promotion was not entitled to be considered from promotion thereafter.
Learned Single Judge by his order dated 261989 referred the question of law to the Division Bench for consideration and the precise question is whether a person who has been rejected thrice for promotion would stand debarred from promotion for all times to come and in this manner the action of the respondents not to consider him for promotion in future would be in violation of the provisions of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
The exact question is reproduced as follows :-  ``A question of great importance arises in this case as to whether a person rejected thrice for promotion would be debarred from promotion for all times to come and in this manner action of the authorities not to consider him for promotion is future would be in violation of the provisions of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
Such a question is likely to affect officers of the Army in general and it is considered necessary that there should be authoritative pronouncement on this point.
Papers of this case may be placed before Hon'ble the Chief Justice for constituting a larger Bench for deciding the above question."
2.
At the very outset, Shri SK Pipat, Senior Standing Counsel for the Union of India, has brought to our notice a Division Bench judgment given in Letters Patent Appeal No. 900 of 1990 Union of India and another v. Lt. Col. SK Kapur, decided on 2671991.
In Union of India's case (supra) the precise question involved was whether an Army Officer who has been considered for promotion thrice and not promoted, would stated debarred for promotion for all times to come or despite his rejection three times; he would still be entitled to another chance.
After appraising the relevant instructions, it has been held by the Division Bench that three considerations for promotion in higher echelons in the Army are adequate and equitable and that a person is not entitled to another chance.
The view of the learned Single Judge that the review could not be confined to three chances only was upset by the Letters Patent Bench.
Faced with this situation, the learned counsel for the respondents submitted that the case may be remitted to the learned Single Bench for a decision on merits as he wants to argue the points of mala-fide etc.
The learned counsel was frank enough to admit that the law laid down in Union of India's case (supra) does apply to the facts of the instant case.
Consequently we answer the question of law, referred to us, in the following terms:  ``An Army Officer rejected thrice for promotion would stand debarred from promotion for all times to come and that the action of the authorities in not considering him for promotion in future is not in violation of the provisions of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution."
3.
As a consequence of the afore-mentioned discussion, the present writ petition is remitted to the Single Judge for decision on merits.
The Registry is directed to list the writ petition before the Single Bench on 1431995.