Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The Petitioner, who had appeared in the B.Ed.
Examination held in March-April, 1990 and in the M Phil (Chemistry) examination held in December, 1990, prays for the issue of an appropriate writ or direction to the Guru Nanak Dev University directing it ``not to cancel the B.Ed.
degree.
and to award the degree of M Phil in the subject of Chemistry......''.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner after having qualified the M.Sc.
(Chemistry) examination was admitted to the B.Ed.
Course in March, 1989.
She appeared in the examination held in March-April, 1990.
She passed it.
The B.Ed.
degree was awarded to her on September 7, 1990.
A copy of this degree has been produced as Annexure P. 1 with the writ petition.
While she was still studying for her B.Ed.
degree, the petitioner applied for admission to the M Phil course.
She was admitted in January, 1990.
She took the examination held in December, 1990.
The result of the examination was declared on December 29, 1990.
The petitioner's result was withheld.
In the notification it was indicated that her result shall be declared later on.
The matter remained pending for more than a year.
On January 7, 1992, the University asked the petitioner to opt as to ``which result she wants to get cancelled......''.
Vide letter dated July 1, 1992, the petitioner conveyed to the University that she may be awarded the degree of M Phil (Chemistry) and that she may be allowed to reappear in the B.Ed.
Examination as a late college student.
Since the University did not convey any order, she has approached this Court through the present writ petition on November 3, 1993.
3.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the University by the Registrar.
It has been inter alia averred that a person cannot be a student of two regular courses in the same session and at the same time.
Since the petitioner had done the M Phil and B.Ed.
Courses in the same session, she was entitled to only one degree and not two.
It has been further averred that ``it is immaterial whether the B.Ed.
course was about to end when the M Phil course started.
As per Regulations, a person cannot be a regular student of two courses simultaneously.
Therefore, the action of the answering respondent in cancelling her result of M Phil degree which she joined afterwards is perfectly legal."
On these premises, it is claimed that the writ petition has no merit and may be dismissed.
4.
Mr. Salwan, learned counsel for the petitioner, has contended that the action of the respondent-University in cancelling the result of the M Phil examination was wholly arbitrary and unfair.
The claim has been controverted by Mr. Patwalia, answering for the respondent.
5 The sequence of events, as noticed above, shows that the petitioner had joined the One Year course leading to the degree of B.Ed.
in the session 1989-90.
She had joined the MPhil course in the session commencing in the year 1990.
In para 11 (b) the petitioner has categorically averred that the M Phil course ``in the subject of Chemistry........'' had ``started from 1290.''
This averment has not been specifically denied.
Still further, it is equally clear that the petitioner had attended the requisite percentage of lectures in both the courses separately.
She had also passed the B.Ed.
examination.
As for the M Phil examination, the fact that the respondent on its own showing, has resorted to the cancellation of ``her result of M Phil degree........'' shows that she had passed it.
Moreover, even though it has been pleaded that as per regulations, a person cannot be a regular student of two courses simultaneously.
Learned counsel for the respondent-University has not been able to refer to any provision which may even remotely indicate that a candidate is debarred from appearing in two University examinations held after a sufficient gap in the same year.
If the University on account of any administrative or academic reasons is of the view that a student should not be allowed to join two courses in the same year or appearing in the two examinations in one calendar year, it can make a regualtion to that effect.
However, in the absence of a specific regulation, it could not have resorted to the cancellation of the petitioner's result.
The petitioner has raised a specific plea in this behalf in para 11 (a).
In reply, it has been averred that ``as per University Regulations, a person can only be student of one regular course at a time i.e. in one session.''
In the present case, it is doubtful if the petitioner was enrolled as a regular candidate in two separate courses in one session.
However, even if it is assumed to be so, learned counsel for the respondent has not been able to refer to any specific regulation.
6.
Taking the totality of circumstances into consideration, the action of the respondent-University does not appear to be just and fair.
In the circumstances of this case and without laying down a precedent, it appear to be just to direct the University to declare the petitioner's result of the M Phil examination and in case she had passed it, the degree of M Phil (Chemistry) should be awarded to her.
The respondent shall do the needful within one month from the date of the receipt of a copy of this order.
7.
The writ petition is allowed in the above terms.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.