Jawahar Lal Gupta, J.- The petitioner prays for the issue of a writ of Mandamus directing the respondents viz. the Panjab University including its Vice-Chancellor and the Chairman of the Department of Laws to grant her admission to the 3rd Semester of the LL.B.
Course.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner graduated from the Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar in the year 1989.
She secured 65% marks.
Thereafter, she passed her MA in English Examination from the same University.
She secured 51% marks.
She also passed the B.Ed.
Examination securing approximately 69% marks.
She then appeared in the Entrance Examination for admission to the LL.B.
Course.
She qualified and was admitted to the LL.B.
Course of the Guru Nanak Dev University in the Year 1993-94.
She passed the 1st Year Examination held in May, 1994 securing 6717% marks.
The petitioner avers that she stood first in this examination.
On account of her father's transfer from Amritsar, she applied for permission to migrate to the Panjab University on July 20, 1994.
She was interviewed by the Board of Control, Department of Laws.
Her case was recommended to the Vice-Chancellor.
Vide order dated September 5, 1994, the Vice-Chancellor declined her request for migration.
Consequently, she has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
3.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents by the Registrar of the University.
It has been inter alia averred that the Board of Control of the Department of Laws had considered the request for migration of three candidates, including the petitioner, and decided to recommend that they may be allowed to join the 3rd Semester Course.
The case was duly considered by the Dean of University Instruction, the Registrar and the Vice- Chancellor.
The request of all the three candidates was declined by the Vice-Chancellor on September 2, 1994 as none of them was entitled to be admitted by migration `on merit'.
It has been further averred that the percentage of marks secured by the petitioner in the Master's Degree Examination was compared with the percentage of marks secured by the last candidate with a Master's Degree admitted to the LLB 1st Semester during the session 1993-94.
It was found that "the last candidate with Master's Degree admitted to LLB 1st Semester in 1993-94 had 704% marks (including weightage of 10% of the aggregate marks obtained in the qualifying examination passed from Panjab University)."
The petitioner was not entitled to the said weightage as she had passed the qualifying examination from another University.
As the marks secured by her in the Master's Degree Examination were less than the marks secured by the last candidate with Master's Degree admitted to LLB 1st Semester during the session 1993-94, she was ineligible for migration and her request was accordingly declined by the Vice-Chancellor.
Accordingly, it has been prayed that the writ petition has no merit and may be dismissed with costs.
4.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties.
Relying on the provision contained in Rule 4 of the Panjab University Calendar Volume III (1990 Edition), Mr. Sarwan Singh, learned counsel for the petitioner, has contended that decision of the respondents is not tenable.
The claim has been controverted by the learned counsel for the respondents.
5.
The provision, referred to by the learned counsel for the parties, is contained in the first proviso to Rule 4.
This provision reads as under :  "Provided that in either case a candidate seeking migration should either be having a Master's Degree, or if he does not have a Master's Degree the percentage of marks of such a candidate at the graduate level should not be less than the percentage of marks of the last candidate admitted to the 1st year, i.e. the 1st Semester class in the session in which such a candidate would have applied had he joined the 1st Semester class in the Department of Laws, Panjab University, Chandigarh, in the relevant year."
A perusal of the above provision shows that a candidate having a Master's Degree is per se eligible for migration.
In case the candidate does not have a Master's Degree, it is essential that the percentage of marks secured by him/her at the graduate level should not be less than the percentage of marks of the last candidate admitted to the 1st Year ie the 1st Semester class in which such a candidate would have applied for admission in the Department of Laws of the Panjab University.
Admittedly, the petitioner has a Master's Degree.
Consequently, she was eligible to seek migration and her case had been rightly recommended by the Board of Control for admission.
The view taken by the respondents that the percentage of marks secured by her in the MA Examination should be equal to the marks secured by the last candidate admitted on the basis of a Master's Degree is not in consonance with the rule.
The interpretation placed by the University on the provision is contrary to the plain language of the rule.
Consequently, the view taken by the University cannot be sustained.
6.
It is true that a candidate cannot seek migration as a matter of right.
It is also possible that a candidate may after passing the Master's Examination get admission to a Law Course in any institution and then apply for migration to the Panjab University.
As the rule stands and if the seats as in this case are available, the University may not be able to decline the request.
This may, as apprehended by the University, lead to lowering of academic standards.
If the University wishes to avoid such a situation, it can amend the rule.
However, in view of the plain language of the rule, as at present, we cannot hold that the petitioner was required to secure the same percentage of marks as have been secured by the last candidate admitted to the Course on the basis of a Master's Degree.
7.
Consequently, we allow this petition and direct the University to admit the petitioner to the 3rd Semester of the LL.B.
course forthwith.
In the circumstances of the case, we made no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.