Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - Petitioner in spite of being orthopaedically handicapped has good academic record.
He was a candidate for the post of Junior Clerk/Clerk-cum-Typist.
He was rejected.
Aggrieved by the action of respondents he has approached this Court through this writ petition.
Petitioner prays for issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to appoint him to the post of Junior Clerk.
2.
The respondents contend the petitioner's claim primarily on the ground that he had secured only 22 marks out of total of 75.
A candidate, who did not secure a minimum of 30 marks, was not eligible to be considered for appointment.
A copy of the criterion laid down by the Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Punjab vide letter dated July 8, 1988 has been produced on record as Annexure P-1.
A perusal of this letter shows that the marks have been allocated as under :  i) Academic qualifications 20 marks ii) Diploma in Cooperation 10 marks iii) Experience in banks and cooperative institutions 5 marks iv) Games (10 marks) a) Distt.
level = 3 b) State level = 6 c) National level = 10 v) Personality 10 marks vi) Agricultural & Rural background 15 marks vii) General Knowledge 5 marks Total 75 marks" Petitioner has a two-fold grievance.
Firstly, it has been 10 marks contended on his behalf that allocation of 15 marks for agricultural and rural background is totally arbitrary and has no nexus with the object of selecting the best candidates.
Secondly, it is claimed that the petitioner has in fact an agricultural and rural background and that if the criterion had been disclosed to him, he could have proved to the satisfaction of the authorities that he had studied in rural schools and his entire family was engaged in the development of agriculture in the village.
3.
A perusal of the above criterion shows that 20% marks have been allocated for agricultural and rural background.
Learned counsel appearing on behalf of respondents has not been able to show the relevance of this consideration for the selection of Clerks.
In any event, it appears clearly that allocation of marks is on the higher side.
Still further, neither in the advertisement nor at any time thereafter were the candidates made aware of the fact that agricultural and rural background is going to be a relevant consideration in the process of selection.
If this information had been disclosed, it would have been possible for the candidates to adduce relevant evidence.
Failure of the respondents to do so has apparently prejudiced the interest of petitioner inasmuch as he did not get a chance to produce the certificates etc. before the Selection Committee.
4.
Since the selections and appointments have already been made, it does not appear to be just and fair to disrupt the continuance in service of those who are already working on the advertised posts.
However, in the circumstances of the case, ends of justice would be met by directing the respondent to consider the petitioner's claim for appointment against an existing vacancy or any other vacancy which may become available in the near future after giving him an opportunity of adducing evidence with regard to his agricultural and rural background.
If the petitioner produces certificates which may relate to the criterion adopted by the authorities, even those certificates shall be taken into consideration.
If after consideration of his claim it is found that the petitioner has secured more than 30 marks, his claim for appointment as aforesaid shall be considered.
5.
At this stage, Mr. Sharma, learned counsel for the respondents states that some date may be fixed on which the petitioner may appear for interview.
Mr. MS Khaira, learned counsel for the petitioner, states that petitioner is willing to appear on any date on which the respondents may wish to interview him.
It is, thus, directed that the petitioner shall appear before the Selection Committee on March 15, 1995 in the office of respondent No. 2 at 10 am Writ petition is disposed of with these directions.
No orders as to costs.
Petition disposed of.