HS Bedi, J (Oral) - This letters patent appeal is directed against the judgment of the learned Single Judge dated 3111996.
2.
The facts of the case are as under :-  By Act No. 46 of 1982, Parliament amended the definition of `Industry' given in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 so as to exclude its applicability to Educational Institutions and Hospitals etc. As per the provisions of the Amendment Act, the amended provision was to come into force with effect from a date to be notified by the Central Government.
While hearing Civil Writ Petition No. 6822 of 1992 NK Sodhi, J issued notice of motion to the Union of India to show cause as to why a writ of Mandumas be not issued directing the Central Government to enforce the will of the elected representatives of the people by notifying the date of enforcement of the amended provisions.
3.
Pursuant to the aforesaid notice, a written statement was filed on behalf of the Secretary, Government of India, Ministry of Labour Department, inter alia, pointing out that the notification pursuant to the amendment could not be issued because of the advice of the Ministry of Law to the effect that exclusion of certain specific categories of establishments may not be tenable under Article 14 of the Constitution of India unless appropriate arrangements were to be made for establishing an alternative grievance redressal machinery for resolution of employer/employee disputes in such establishments.
It was further pleaded that the matter was under the active consideration of the Government including further modification of the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act :-  4.
The learned Single Judge in his judgment dated 3111996 observed as under :-  "Counsel for the parties have been heard.
Admittedly, the Parliament had passed the Amendment Bill in the year 1982.
In spite of this, the amended provision has not been enforced for want of a notification by the Central Government.
Do the reasons advanced on behalf of the Central Government provide good grounds ?
We, in this country, boast of 5000 years of rich cultural heritage, a vast inhabitable area and fertile land.
We are not only rich in man-power but also natural resources.
In spite of the natural assets, we are one of the poorest nations in the world.
In 1950, when India was declared a Republic, we had 22% share of the world's exports.
Only 14 countries had higher exports.
According to recent figures, we have only 45% of the world's exports.
We are 43rd in the world.
We are having consistently deficit budgets.
Every year, we go out for aid.
The Units that we set up with these loans or aid soon go sick.
It is not that we lack the potential.
Nor are we bad businessmen.
In fact, it has been said that an Indian can buy from a Scot and sell to a Jew and yet make profit.
We have some of the finest brains in the world.
We have trained craftsman.
Yet, we are the 21st poorest nation.
As against this, we have the example of Japan.
It faced a great earth-quake in 1923.
It is the only country in the world which has experienced the trauma of an atomic holocaust.
The land was charred rubble.
Starving masses inflicted with lice were a common sight after the second World War.
Yet, in less than 40 years the country made a spectacular come-back.
It became the largest creditor nation in the world.
According to the figures compiled about a decade back, Japan had 26% of the World's population living on 1% of its inhabitable area.
Yet, it produced more than 10% of the world's economic value.
It produced more than 24% of the world's cars, 40% of integrated circuits, 50% of the ships and 90% of its videos.
With the only natural resource of its 124 million people, Japan achieved a gross national product of 28200 US dollars per capita per annum.
We have 10 times the inhabitable area.
Our population is seven times that of Japan.
Yet, we were able to achieve a gross national product of 310 US dollars only.
The only reason for our lagging behind in the comity of nations is that we have not developed a work culture.
We have not learnt the lessons of labour and industry.
We have not motivated our masses to channelise their energies to produce more.
In one year alone, we have wasted 275 million work days by restoring to strikes and Bandhs.
We have failed to inculcate discipline, dedication, a respect for values and a sense of patriotism.
Resultantly, we face an erosion of values and poverty.
It is not that we are not capable of doing better.
After all, there are some amongst us who have put this country in the Select Nuclear Club.
Our satellites are there in the space.
If we work, inculcate values, introduce discipline and reward the one who works and punish him who does not, we are capable of doing well.
It is true that good industrial relations between the employer and employee are essential for industrial peace and growth.
It is with this object in view that provisions for speedy solution of disputes have been made in the Industrial Disputes Act.
Various provisions providing protection to the workman have been made.
However, one cannot say with certainty that these gestures have been appreciated or that the workman has given his best to the Industry, for if he had, our production could not have been as low as it is.
The sick mills would not have been there at all and rate of growth would have been at least respectable.
When I entered School, it was a temple of learning.
By the process of judicial interpretation, it is now an industry.
The hospitals which are meant to heal and cure have also been termed as Industry.
Almost every field of human activity has been roped into the all pervasive definition of `industry'.
Resultantly, it is no surprise that even those who do not work call themselves workmen".
5.
A perusal of the above shows that in the course of judgment, the learned Single Judge directed that the necessary notification for enforcement of Section 2(c) of the Amendment Act be issued within three months from the date of receipt of a copy of the judgment dated 3111996.
It is against this judgment that the present letters patent appeal has been filed.
6.
When this appeal came up for motion hearing before the Division Bench on 351996, operation of the judgment of the learned Single Judge was directed to be stayed.
Admittedly, the stay continues to operate as of now.
7.
We have heard the learned counsel representing the Union of India.
8.
The learned counsel for the appellant has argued that it was not open to the Court to issue a mandamus directing the Central Government which was exercising a legislative function to issue an order where a discretion had been conferred on the Central Government.
9.
We find that the issue has been finally determined by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Union of India v. Shree Gajanan Maharaj Sansthan, 2002(2) SCT 1059 SC : (2002)5 Supreme Court Cases 44.
The relevant paragraphs 7 and 8 are reproduced as under :-  "7.
In AK Roy v Union of India a contention was raised despite the provisions of Section 1(2) of the Forty-fourth Constitution (Amendment) Act, 1978, Article 22 of the Constitution stood amended on 30.4.1979 when the Amendment Act received the assent of the President and that there was nothing more that remained to be done by the executive except fixing a date for the commencement of the Act as provided under Section 1(2) thereof.
According to the said contention, Section 1(2), which is misconceived and abortive, must be ignored and severed from the rest of the Amendment Act.
This Court observed that no mandamus could be issued to the executive directing it to commence the operation of the enactment; that such a direction should not be construed as any approval by the Court of the failure on the part of the Central Government for a long period to bring the provisions of the enactment into force; that in leaving it to the judgment of the Central Government to decide as to when the various provisions of the enactment should be brought into force, Parliament could not have intended that the Central Government may exercise a kind of veto over its constituent will by not ever bringing the enactment or some of its provisions into force; that if only Parliament were to lay down an objective standard to guide and control the discretion of the Central Government in the matter of bringing the various provisions of the Act into force, it would have been possible to compel the Central Government by an appropriate writ to discharge the function assigned to it by Parliament.
It was further contended that an amendment can be bad because it vests an uncontrolled power in the executive in bringing an enactment into operation.
This Court, however, noticed that such power cannot be held to give an uncontrolled power to the executive inasmuch as there are practical difficulties in the enforcement of laws and those difficulties cannot be foreseen.
It, therefore, became necessary to leave the judgment to the executive as to when the law should be brought into force.
When enforcement of a provision in a statute is left to the discretion of the Government without laying down any objective standard, no writ of mandamus could be issued directing the Government to consider the question whether the provision should be brought into force and when it can do so.
Delay in impleading the will of the Parliament may draw adverse criticism but on the data placed before us, we cannot say that the Government is not alive to the problem or is desirous of ignoring the will of Parliament.
8.
In the circumstances set out in the affidavit filed on behalf of the Government, it would not be feasible for the Government to set out any definite day as to when they can take action as indicated by the High Court and, therefore, the order made by the High Court cannot be given effect to at all.
Though there has been a sense of urgency on the part of the Government in this regard, it has not been able to take a decision in the circumstances set forth in the affidavit.
Hence, while noticing that appropriate action has to taken by the Government to bring into effect the amending Act as indicated by the High Court, we also take note of the various circumstances which come in the way of the Government to give effect to the amending Act immediately.
That part of the order of the High Court by which writ of mandamus has been issued to the Government to take action and to indicate as to when it would be feasible to appoint a date for bringing into force the amending Act stands deleted.
In other respects, the order made by the High Court is maintained".
10.
We find that the Union of India had replied by way of an affidavit stating as to why it was not feasible at this stage to notify the amended provisions.
It is not open to this Court to sit in appeal over this decision.
We accordingly allow this appeal, set aside the judgment of the learned Single Judge and dismiss the writ petition.
Appeal allowed.