GS Singhvi, J - The short controversy which requires determination in this writ petition relates to the eligibility of the petitioner for admission to Two Years Diploma Course of Electrician in the Industrial Training Institute.
2.
The petitioner has given out that he is a member of Scheduled Caste and has passed matriculation examination in the year 1991.
He applied for admission to the Two Years' Electrician Course and appeared at the common competitive entrance test held by Sant Longowal Institute of Engineering & Technology, Longowal, Punjab.
The petitioner says that he has cleared the written test and was called for interview by the Principal, Industrial Training Institute, Sunam, but he was denied admission on the ground that he had not secured 33% marks in the subjects of Physics and Chemistry, which according to the Principal was a condition precedent for the admission to the Two Years' course.
3.
The petitioner has pleaded that the only condition of eligibility prescribed by the respondent for admission to the Two Years' course was Matric pass and there was no requirement of passing the subjects of Physics and Chemistry with minimum 33% marks and, therefore, it was not justified for the respondents to deny admission to him.
4.
The writ petition has been contested by the respondents.
In their short reply, the respondents have taken the stand that even though the petitioner had passed the Matric examination, he could not have been treated eligible for admission to the course on account of his failure to secure the requisite percentage marks in the subject of Physics and Chemistry.
5.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and perused the record of the case.
A look at the reply filed by the respondents in general and para No. 6 in particular shows that minimum requirement for admission for Electrician Trade was "Should have passed matriculation or its equivalent or 10th pass (under 10+2 system) with Science, Physics and Chemistry."
This requirement nowhere contains a stipulation that the candidate should have passed the subjects of Physics and Chemistry with minimum 30% marks.
Therefore, the respondents were not justified in insisting upon the requirement of passing of the subjects of Physics and Chemistry with minimum 33% marks as condition of eligibility to the admission course.
In my considered view, the respondents have denied admission to the petitioner on the basis of a non-existing factor in the conditions of eligibility and in this manner they have discriminated the petitioner.
6.
It is not in dispute that the petitioner has qualified in the test held by Sant Longowal Institute of Engineering & Technology, Longowal, Punjab and also that on the basis of interim order passed by this Court, the petitioner was given admission to the course.
7.
Since I have reached the conclusion that the respondents have unlawfully denied admission to the petitioner, it is only just and appropriate to direct the respondents to declare the result of the examination of the petitioner.
Consequently, the writ petition is allowed and the action of the respondents in treating the petitioner as ineligible for admission in Two Years' Electrician Diploma Course is declared illegal.
Taking note of the fact that the petitioner has already undertaken the course, the respondents are directed to declare the result of his examination within a period of fifteen days from today.
Costs made easy.
Petition allowed.