RP Sethi & SS Sudhalkar, JJ.- A number of writ petitions has been filed by the employees of the Punjab Government and of various Boards under the control and supervision of the State Government, praying therein that appropriate directions be issued to the Government restraining them from reducing the House Rent Allowance and recovering the alleged excess amount drawn by the petitioners.
It is submitted that impugned order, which has adversely affected the writ petitioners, has been passed without affording them an opportunity of being heard which is apparently against the principles of natural justice.
2.
In reply, it is admitted that the State of Punjab had constituted the Third Pay Commission for making recommendations regarding the revision of pay scales of Punjab Government employees and other allied matters, such as House Rent Allowance, Compensatory Allowance etc.
It is further submitted that on the recommendation of the aforesaid Commission, the Government issued a circular letter No. 10/7/88-FPI/8014 dated 3081988 regarding grant of House Rent Allowance to the employees, wherein cities/towns were classified for the purposes of grant of House Rent Allowance.
3.
According to the petitioners, the directions impugned in the writ petitions have been issued contrary to the order dated 3081988.
4.
Learned counsel appearing in the case submit that identical petitions have been disposed of by this Court, by giving appropriate directions to the respondent - State to consider the matter afresh on the basis of representations already filed or which may be filed, by passing speaking orders thereon.
In some of the cases, directions have been issued to treat the writ petitions as representations on behalf of the writ petitioners.
It is submitted on behalf of the respondents that if such directions are issued in these cases also, the same shall be complied with and punctually followed.
5.
With the agreement of learned counsel for the parties and in order to avoid further litigation, the writ petition stands disposed of with the directions to the respondent - State to consider and decide the representations of the writ petitioners and all other persons likely to be affected on the basis of the instructions already issued and the instructions dated 19.9.1990, by passing speaking orders.
In case no representation has been filed, the petitioners, or the other affected employees, shall be at liberty to file fresh representations within a period of one month.
The respondent - State may also treat the writ petitions as representations if a specific request in that behalf is made.
The representations of the petitioners and all others, who are likely to be affected, shall be disposed of within a period of four months from today, by passing speaking orders.
It would be appreciated if the State Government considers cases of all the affected employees and pass appropriate detailed orders, notwithstanding or insisting on filing of separate representations or writ petitions.
By issuing such directions, unnecessary litigation is intended to be avoided and the number of petitions pending in the Courts to be disposed of.
6.
Till the aforesaid directions are complied with, no recovery of the House Rent Allowance shall be made from the petitioners or other affected persons and reduction of House Rent Allowance shall remain stayed as per notification dated 3081988.
If the representations are decided against the petitioners or the other affected persons, the amounts drawn by them on the basis of this order shall be recoverable by adjustment in future and they shall be at liberty to challenge such orders, if so advised.
The writ petition stands disposed of.
Order accordingly.