GS Singhvi, J (Oral) - Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused record of the case.
2.
The petitioner had questioned the termination of his service brought about vide Annexure P-6 dated 1191993.
He has prayed for quashing of Annexure P-6 and for issue of a direction to the respondents to follow Punjab Government circular Annexure P-2 to P-5.
3.
Facts mentioned in the writ petition show that the petitioner was engaged as a Pump Operator on daily wages in Public Health, RWS, Sub Division Patiala w.e.f.
151993.
It is alleged that he has passed vocational Stream (Electrician) Engineer Group from Punjab School Education Board and after examining his qualification, the Executive Engineer appointed him as Pump Operator.
However, just after three months, the Sub Divisional Engineer, Public Health, RWS Sub Divisional, Patiala wrote to the Junior Engineer that the case of the petitioner had been sent to the higher authorities for advice and till the receipt of advice, the petitioner should not be taken in service.
4.
Claiming that Annexure P-6 amounts to an order of terminating his service, the petitioner filed this petition and challenged the alleged termination of his service on the ground that qualification of Pump Operator has already been settled by the Government vide Annexure P-2 to P-5 and that the respondents were not justified in terminating his service.
5.
The writ petition has been contested by the respondents.
In their reply, the respondents have pleaded that the petitioner was given employment on daily wages as a purely temporary measure and that no right accrued in his favour to continue in service.
The respondents have alleged that the petitioner does not fulfil the minimum conditions of eligibility which could entitle him appointment on the post of Pump Operator.
6.
From the rival pleadings, it is evident that the petitioner was engaged by the Executive Engineer, Patiala Division without considering the claims of other similarly situated persons.
No requisition was sent to the Employment Exchange concerned and no advertisement was issued by the competent authority for making recruitment against the post of Pump Operator.
It cannot be disputed that the post of Pump Operator is a public post and employment on the post against the post of Pump Operator is a public employment.
Therefore, it was imperative for the Executive Engineer to make appointment on that post in consonance with the equality clause contained in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
That was admittedly not done.
Therefore, the very appointment of the petitioner, was contrary to the constitutional provisions.
7.
Learned counsel argued that requirement of sending requisition to the Employment Exchange and/or advertisement of the post need not be followed for making purely temporary appointment.
In my considered opinion, this argument cannot be accepted.
An appointment to a public service may be temporary or permanent.
It may even be adhoc.
However, irrespective of the nature of appointment the competent authority is under an obligation to comply with the equality clause.
Compliance of this clause can be done either by following the statutory rules applicable for recruitment to a particular service or by advertisement of the post.
A simple requisition to the Employment Exchange will also serve the object of equality clause.
All eligible persons who were registered with Employment Exchange and are otherwise qualified, can have their cases considered for appointment if the requisition is sent by the employer to the Employment Exchange.
Similarly, advertisement of a post enables all qualified persons to compete for the post.
Any employment made without following this procedure, will have to be characterised illegal.
8.
As the petitioner's appointment was without compliance of requirement of sending requisition to the Employment Exchange and consideration of the cases of the eligible persons and/or without inviting applications for all eligible persons, no direction can be given to the respondents to continue the petitioner in service for an indefinite period.
However, since the petitioner has continued in service under an interim order of the Court, it would not be in the interest of justice to allow the respondents to dispense with his service immediately.
9.
In the result, the writ petition is disposed of with a direction to the respondents to fill the post of Pump Operator within a period of six months in accordance with the provisions of rules and if no rules have been framed, then by inviting applications from the eligible persons.
The petitioner shall continue in service for this period of six months and shall get the salary by same mode by which he is being paid as on date.
If the petitioner is selected at the regular selection, he shall be continued in service.
If he fails to get selected, then he shall have no right to continue in service.
Order accordingly.