Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner as well as Respondent Nos. 5 and 6 were candidates for admission to the 4 years Degree Course in Engineering.
They appeared in a common entrance test conducted by the Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar.
The petitioner secured 138 marks out of 300 and was placed at Sr. No. 1804 in merit list.
Respondent Nos. 5 and 6 secured 90 and 95 marks respectively.
They were placed at Sr. Nos. 2360 and 2038.
While Respondent Nos. 5 and 6 have been admitted to the Dr. B R Ambedkar Engineering College, Jalandhar, the petitioner was called upon to join at the Regional Engineering College, Allahabad.
Aggrieved by this action, the petitioner has filed this writ petition.
The petitioner alleges that he being higher than the respondents in order of merit had a better right to be admitted at Jalandhar.
2.
The petitioner avers that he is `Lohar' by caste which has been recognised as a backward class in the State of Punjab.
He submits that in the prospectus issued by the University, it had been specifically mentioned that 5% seats are `reserved for candidates belonging to recognised Backward Classes as declared by the Punjab Government/and whose father's/guardian's family income from all sources does not exceed......Rs. 10,000/-....... (Rupees ten thousand only) per annum.''
The petitioner states that in spite of the fact that he belonged to a backward class he did not apply for a seat reserved for that class only on account of the condition imposed in the prospectus.
However, Respondent Nos. 1 to 4 waived off this condition as a result of which Respondent No. 6 who was even though lower than the petitioner in order of merit was admitted against one of the reserved seats at Jalandhar.
Consequently, the petitioner submits that the action of the respondents is violative of Article 14 and suffers from the vice of arbitrariness.
3.
No written statement has been filed on behalf of Respondent Nos. 1, 2, 5 and 6.
4.
In the written statement filed on behalf of Respondent Nos. 3 and 4, it has been averred that at the time of interview, the petitioner opted for a seat at the Regional Engineering College, Allahabad and consequently he was admitted to that Institution.
Otherwise, it has been admitted that Respondent Nos. 5 and 6 had secured lesser marks than the petitioner in the entrance test and were placed below him in order of merit.
The eligibility of the petitioner against a seat reserved for the members of backward classes has also not been disputed.
5.
In the background of the above factual position, the short question that arises for consideration is - Was the petitioner not entitled to preference in the matter of his choice for admission to an Institution in comparison to Respondent Nos. 5 and 6 ?
Admittedly, he was higher in order of merit than them.
Whether the respondents have treated him as the member of general category or of the backward class, it is the admitted position that he would have the first right of choice vis-a-vis them.
Still further, it has been conceded before me that the entrance test had been conducted by the University for admission to the Engineering College, Jalandhar as well as various other Engineering Colleges in Punjab.
The petitioner was admittedly one of the candidates for admission to a seat at Jalandhar.
He being higher than Respondent Nos. 5 and 6 in order of merit had a better right to be considered for admission.
On the basis of the criterion laid down by the College, the petitioner is qualified to be admitted against one of the seats reserved for members of backward classes.
That being so, he ought to have been considered.
The action of the respondents in sending the petitioner to Allahabad while others lower in order of merit were admitted at Jalandhar caused an unfair hardship to the petitioner.
In the writ petition, it has been categorically averred by the petitioner that he had, at the time of interview, opted for admission at Jalandhar.
Even though the respondents have controverted it, it appears that the claim made by the petitioner is correct.
He had approached this Court through the present writ petition on August 9, 1994, even before the classes had commenced.
Even at that stage, the prayer made by him was that the respondents be directed not to send him to Allahabad for the course, which was going to start at Dr. B R Ambedkar Regional Engineering College, Jalandhar on August 16, 1994.
Mr. Gupta appearing for Respondent Nos. 3 and 4 has pointed out that the Course of study for the first semester has already been completed and that the examination is nearing completion.
Mr. Rajput, learned counsel for the petitioner, submits that the syllabi and the course content of the first semester at all the Engineering Colleges are identical.
The petitioner has completed the course of study at Allahabad and has even taken the examination.
He has passed the first semester examination.
As such if he is admitted to the second semester, the course of study will not be interrupted.
6.
Taking the totality of circumstances into consideration, it appears to be just and fair to direct that the petitioner should be admitted to the Engineering College, Jalandhar.
If the respondents can create an additional seat, he may be adjusted against that.
Otherwise, a person lower in order of merit out of respondent Nos. 5 and 6 shall have to vacate a seat and make room for him.
The respondents shall do the needful within two weeks from the date of the receipt of a copy of this order.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.