SS Saron, J - The petitioner-Karnail Singh by way of the present writ petition under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India prays for setting aside the impugned office order dated 352002 (Annexure-P.1) vide which monetary benefits on the promoted post from the deemed date of promotion i.e. 3081995 have been denied but have been granted w.e.f.
932000 i.e. the date when he actually started working on the promoted post.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as a Lower Division Clerk (LDC) in the Punjab State Electricity Board (`Board' for short) (respondent No. 1) on regular basis on 10.1.1962.
He was promoted as Upper Division Clerk (UDC) on 21111978 vide order of the Chief Engineer (Hydel) of the Board, which he joined on 2351980.
Thereafter, the petitioner was promoted as Assistant Revenue Accountant w.e.f.
6.8.1987 and he joined on 12101987.
However, he was given deemed date of promotion w.e.f.
2061986.
It is alleged by the petitioner that his seniority was wrongly fixed w.e.f.
12101987.
Consequently, his next promotion, though it had become due, could not be given because of the wrong fixation of seniority.
As a result of this, persons junior to the petitioner were promoted as Internal Auditors vide office order dated 2171995 issued by the Chief Auditor (respondent No. 2) of the Board.
The petitioner, as he was not considered for promotion, made a representation dated 1451997 to consider him for promotion as Internal Auditor.
After making the representation, the petitioner was promoted as Internal Auditor vide office order dated 12121999.
He joined the said post of Internal Auditor and started working w.e.f.
932000.
It is alleged that had the petitioner been promoted at the right time, that is, when his juniors were promoted on 2171995 he would have got his next promotion as Internal Auditor on time.
In any case, it is submitted that the petitioner is not staking any claim for the said promotion as he has retired from service on attaining the age of superannuation on 3062000.
The petitioner made representations to commute the pension and release the pensionary benefits by taking into account the deemed date of his promotion i.e. 3081995.
He also prayed that consequential benefits accruing to him be given.
In an earlier writ petition i.e. C.W.P.
No. 206 of 2002 filed by the petitioner, this Court had vide order dated 412002 issued directions for consideration and decision on one of his representations.
The petitioner received an office order dated 352002 (Annexure-P.1) in terms of which he has been granted the deemed date of promotion w.e.f.
3081995 i.e. the date when his juniors were promoted.
However, he was held entitled to the benefits of pay fixation only and the arrears on this account, it was held, would be paid to him w.e.f.
932000 i.e. the date when he actually started working as Internal Auditor.
This, it is stated, is in terms of the Punjab Government instructions dated 8.12.1998 which have been adopted by the Board vide memo dated 8102001 and are based on the rule laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Paluru Ramkrishnaiah and others v. Union of India and another, AIR 1990 SC 166.
The petitioner again approached this Court by way of C.W.P.
No. 17895 of 2002 and this Court on 12112002 (Annexure-P.2) directed the consideration of his representation.
There being inaction on the part of the respondents, the petitioner filed contempt petition i.e. C.O.C.P.
No. 534 of 2003 in this Court which after issuance of notice was disposed of on 492003 (Annexure-P.3) as the order dated 12112002 (Annexure-P.2), it was stated, had been complied with and necessary payments had already been made.
The said statement, it is stated, is not supported by any documentary evidence whereas the petitioner had pointed out the error committed by the respondents in the fixation of his pension.
The same is to the effect that he has not been granted the financial benefits from the deemed date of promotion to which he was not promoted due to the negligence of the respondents.
The petitioner accordingly prays for setting aside the office order dated 352002 (Annexure-P.1) to the extent it denies him the financial benefits from the deemed date of promotion i.e. 3081995.
3.
On notice, written statement has been filed by the Chief Auditor (respondent No. 2) of the Board in which it is stated that the petitioner has not worked as Internal Auditor from 2171995 to 8.3.2000 and he has been given deemed date of promotion from 3081995 vide order dated 352002.
Therefore, on the principle of `no work no pay', he is not entitled for the monetary benefits for this period.
It is further stated that all the retiral benefits available to the petitioner regarding fixing his revised pension on the basis of his deemed date of promotion have been granted.
Therefore, the writ petition is liable to be dismissed.
4.
Shri VK Sandhir, Advocate, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner submits that the petitioner is entitled to all the monetary benefits from the date his juniors were promoted i.e. from 3081995 when he was given the deemed date of promotion.
It is also contended that by not granting promotion to the petitioner from the date it was due and his juniors were promoted is an act of negligence on the part of the respondents for which the petitioner is not liable to suffer.
Besides, it is contended that the instructions of the Government dated 8.12.1998 in terms of which the monetary benefits have been denied were adopted by the Board on 8102001 i.e. after the retirement of the petitioner on 3062000 and, therefore, the same cannot be applied with retrospective effect.
5.
In response, Mr. KS Sidhu, Advocate, learned counsel appearing for the respondents has contended that the petitioner is not entitled to any monetary benefits on the promoted post from the deemed date of promotion as he has not worked on the promoted post.
Therefore, he cannot be allowed the monetary benefits for the period he did not perform the duties of the higher post although after consideration of his case he has been given the proper place and all notional benefits have been granted.
6.
We have given our thoughtful consideration to the contentions of the learned counsel appearing for the parties.
The question that is required to be considered is whether the petitioner is entitled for the monetary benefits from the deemed date of his promotion i.e. 3081995 though he has not worked on the higher post of Internal Auditor.
The petitioner admittedly has been granted the benefits from the date he actually joined and start working i.e. 932000.
Besides, he has been given the notional benefits from the deemed date of promotion.
The petitioner, as already noticed, was promoted as Assistant Revenue Accountant w.e.f.
6.8.1987 and he joined as such on 12101987.
Thereafter, vide office order No. 208 dated 1371990 he was given promotion w.e.f.
2061986.
However, his seniority was fixed w.e.f.
12101987 i.e. the date of his joining as Assistant Revenue Accountant.
This consequently affected his next promotion also and persons junior to him were promoted as Internal Auditors on 2171995.
The respondents in their written statement have stated that the petitioner was due for promotion but could not be promoted because he was not having a good service record and he was ultimately promoted on 1371990.
It is appropriate to note that there is no basis or material placed on record to show that he was not having good service record.
The petitioner has filed an application in which he has stated that as per the promotion criteria total 11 points are required from the past five Annual Confidential Reports (ACRs) and that he met the said criteria.
Besides, his service record was in order and he fulfilled the necessary conditions.
It is also stated in the replication that in terms of para-8 of the instructions relating to promotion if there is delay beyond three years in deciding any disciplinary proceedings it does not have any affect on the promotion.
It is stated that the petitioner was charge-sheeted in 1994 in respect of allegations of 1990.
Thereafter, it is on the request of the petitioner that an inquiry was initiated on 4111994.
It is on his repeated asking an Inquiry Officer was appointed on 1431996 i.e. after six years.
The inquiry was started from 23.5.1996 and the petitioner submitted his final reply on 1771997.
Thereafter the report was not submitted till 1281999 and in the inquiry report, the Inquiry Officer recommended the punishment of censure.
Therefore, it is stated that the said punishment has no affect on the promotion after three years of its pendency.
It may also be noticed that the respondents in their written statement have submitted that the petitioner was considered for promotion to the post of Internal Auditor along with his juniors in the year 1995 but his service record was incomplete and for this reason his case was not considered.
Thereafter his case was again considered for promotion in the next batch in the year 1996 but because the departmental proceedings were pending against him and his Annual Confidential Reports were not good so his case for promotion was deferred.
The petitioner admittedly was promoted as Internal Auditor vide office order dated 22.12.1999 and he joined the post of Internal Auditor on 932000 on which he continued to work till his retirement on 3062000.
The reason, therefore, which has been taken by the Board for denying the monetary benefits is that the Annual Confidential Reports of the petitioner were not good in the year 1995 and departmental proceedings were pending against him.
However, the position that has been stated by the petitioner in his replication has not been disputed by the respondents.
The petitioner has placed on record the copy of memo dated 2891983 (Annexure-P.5) issued by the Board with regard to grant of retrospective promotion and consequential benefits.
It is indicated therein that in number of cases employees of the Board are left over for promotion for various reasons like involvement in disciplinary cases, adverse entries in ACRs, incomplete records such as missing ACRs.
In many cases such employees are later promoted because the disciplinary cases are dropped or the punishment awarded is set aside in appeal or the adverse remarks are expunged.
In such cases the affected employees, it is mentioned, come forward with requests for retrospective promotions.
The Board to bring about uniformity in such cases had decided that retrospective promotion may be given by the authorities competent to order promotion in the cases indicated therein which inter alia include whether promotion of an employee has been deferred on account of disciplinary cases, because office record is not complete or is held up on account of adverse entries in the confidential record.
It has been indicated that in all these cases the concerned employee should be given deemed date of promotion and he should be paid full arrears.
The petitioner has also referred to the instructions of the Board dated 1821997 (Annexure- P6) which provides the general criteria to be followed for promotion.
It is provided therein that the instructions issued by the Board for making promotion were silent on certain issues such as disciplinary cases and evaluation of assessment.
After careful review of the earlier guidelines it was felt that method of evaluation of employees has to be quantified for making assessment of the cases of the employees for promotion.
It was decided in terms thereof that uniform criteria is to be followed in making promotions to various posts in the Board.
In respect of censure it has been provided that its effect is that one censure would down grade one ACR i.e., one step below so that it has uniform effect on all employees.
In other words an outstanding ACR of an employee having been awarded punishment of censure in a year is to be downgraded to very good and if he has very good ACR it is to be downgraded to good and so on.
In the case in hand, as has already been noticed, the petitioner was awarded the punishment of censure vide order dated 1281999 in respect of an incident of 1990.
Besides, the charge-sheet itself was issued in 1994 and it is on the request of the petitioner that inquiry was initiated on 4111994 and an Inquiry Officer was appointed on 1431996.
The inquiry started on 23.5.1996 and the petitioner submitted his final reply on 1771997.
It has not been shown by the respondents that the criteria and norms fixed by the Board for promotion of the petitioner had been complied with.
Rather, the respondents have stated in their written statement that the petitioner was considered for promotion to the post of Internal Auditor along with his juniors in the year 1995 but his service record was incomplete and, therefore, his case was not considered.
It has further been submitted that when the petitioner retired on 3062000, departmental proceedings were still pending against him and he was awarded penalty of censure by taking a lenient view as he had already retired.
Therefore, in the circumstances, it is a case where the petitioner was not allowed to perform his duties on the higher post as he was not given promotion on the higher post on the due date.
The promotion has been denied on account of incomplete records and not on account of pendency of the departmental proceedings or any disparaging comments in his ACR.
A Division Bench of this Court in the case of Vidya Parkash Harnal v. State of Haryana, 1995(3) SCT 786, held that the Executive/State Government have to be bound and governed by the rule of law and if an employee is not promoted at his rightful place when he is entitled to and becomes eligible in accordance with the rules at that time, the Court cannot ignore the magnitude of sufferings and pains on account of deprivation of the monetary benefits to him.
The employee as well as his dependents suffer from such arbitrariness of such unguided executive authority.
It was held that once a civil servant is found entitled to promotion with retrospective effect, he cannot be deprived of the benefits of the arrears of salary accruing on account of such promotion from the date assigned for his promotion and the principle of `no work no pay' is not attracted in such cases where the employee is not offered the work to which he was entitled to.
The rule in Vidya Parkash Harnal's case (supra) was reiterated in Ram Pal v. State of Haryana, 2003(2) SCT 984 by a Division Bench of this Court wherein it was held that where a civil servant is not offered the work for which he was legally entitled, he cannot be deprived of the wages for the post to which he is subsequently held entitled to.
The case of Paluru Ramkrishnaiah and others v. Union of India (supra) referred to in the Punjab Government instructions dated 8.12.1998 which have been adopted by the Board vide memo dated 8102001 would not be applicable to the facts of the present case.
In the said case the grievance of the writ petitioners therein was that quite a number of Supervisors Grade-`A' had been promoted to the post of Charge-man Grade-II on completion of two years satisfactory work and they had been discriminated against and had not been so promoted immediately on the expiry of two years in pursuance of the circulars indicated therein.
A learned Single Judge of the Allahabad High Court dismissed their writ petition on the ground of unexplained laches and also on the ground that a previous petition for similar relief had not been pressed.
Against the judgment of the learned Single Judge the petitioners therein preferred an appeal before the Division Bench which went into the merits of the case.
However, it did not find any substance in the submissions made on behalf of the appellants and dismissed the appeal.
It was pointed out that it had been admitted that conditions of service applicable to the appellants therein were governed by the service rules framed under Article 309 of the Constitution and Rule 8 contemplated that the appointment by promotion were to be made on the basis of a selection list prepared for different grades by duly constituted departmental promotion committees provided in the rules.
Rule 12 provided that no appointment to the post to which the rules applied was to be made otherwise than as specified therein.
Against the said judgment, civil appeal was preferred before the Hon'ble Supreme Court.
In view of an order dated 221981 which had been passed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Civil Appeal No. 441 of 1981 titled Virinder Kumar v. Union of India reported in AIR 1981 SC 1775(1), the petitioners before the Hon'ble Supreme Court prayed for the same relief.
The writ petitions came up for hearing before a two Judges Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court on 991987 and it was observed that the judgment dated 221981 in Virinder Kumar's case (supra) may require reconsideration and the petitions were directed to be placed before a three Judges Bench where inter alia the correctness of the judgment would be looked into and the nature of relief available to the petitioners on the facts stated would also be considered.
During the hearing of the case, it was pointed out by the learned counsel for the petitioners therein that the reason which weighed with the Hon'ble Supreme Court in allowing Civil Appeal No. 441 of 1981 i.e. in Virinder Kumar's case (supra) applied to the writ petitions therein also and it was brought to the notice that similarly placed 125 employees had got the benefit of the circular dated 6111962 in pursuance of an order passed by the Hon'ble Madhya Pradesh High Court on 441983 in the writ petitions filed by them.
It was, therefore, urged that if the same relief is not granted to the petitioners they were likely to become junior to the appellants in Civil Appeal No. 441 of 1991 i.e. in Virinder Kumar's case.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court after considering the matter observed that it was difficult to grant the relief prayed for in the aforesaid writ petition simply on the basis of the earlier judgment dated 221981 in Civil Appeal No. 441 of 1991 i.e. in Virinder Kumar's case (supra) and the writ petitions, therefore, deserve to be dismissed.
However, since the judgment dated 221981 in Virinder Kumar's case (supra) had not been challenged and had become final it was considered that the appellants who were granted the benefits in view of the judgment of the Hon'ble Madhya Pradesh High Court dated 441983 against which Special Leave Petition was dismissed, the relief be restricted to the benefits as have been granted by the said High Court which included that a person would not be entitled to any pay and allowances during the period for which he did not perform the duties on the higher post although after due consideration he was given a proper place in the gradation list having deemed to be promoted to the higher post w.e.f.
the date his junior was promoted.
Consequently, it is in the peculiar circumstances of the said case and in view of the directions of the Hon'ble High Court of Madhya Pradesh that the financial benefits on the higher posts were declined as their Lordships did not find it proper to grant the relief only on the basis of an earlier order dated 221981 passed in Virinder Kumar's case.
In the case in hand, as has already been noticed, the petitioner was not allowed to work as his case was not considered for promotion.
In fact, if his service record was improper or departmental inquiry was pending, sealed cover procedure was liable to be followed.
The right of an employee to get pay of the higher post on which he had not worked has been recognized by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Union of India v. KV Jankriraman, 1991(3) SCT 317 : AIR 1991 SC 2010, wherein it was held as follows:-  "The normal rule of "no work no pay" is not applicable to cases such as the present one where the employee although he is willing to work is kept away from work by the authorities for no fault of his.
This is not a case where the employee remains away from work for his own reasons, although the work is offered to him."
7.
Therefore, for the failure of the authorities to consider the case for promotion of the petitioner at the appropriate time and consequently preventing him from working and also not to opt for the sealed cover procedure in case departmental proceedings were pending, the petitioner cannot be denied the monetary benefits of the higher post of Internal Auditor to which promotion has already been granted by way of deemed date of promotion.
8.
For the foregoing reasons, the writ petition is allowed.
The order dated 352002 (Annexure-P.1) is quashed to the extent that the petitioner has been denied the monetary benefits on the promoted post of Internal Auditor from the deemed date of his promotion i.e. 3081995 and has been granted arrears from the date he actually started work i.e. 932000 as Internal Auditor.
The respondents shall grant necessary arrears and financial benefits on the post of Internal Auditor from the date the petitioner was granted the deemed date of promotion i.e. 3081995 and shall also grant the other consequential benefits that accrue to him on account of the grant of financial benefits.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs.
The necessary arrears shall be paid to the petitioner within three months of the receipt of certified copy of this order.
Petition allowed.