Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner and Respondent No. 3 have a dispute regarding seniority.
The petitioner having joined about three months prior to Respondent No. 3 on daily wages claims to be senior to Respondent No. 3 in spite of the fact that both of them had been appointed on regular basis with effect from March 2, 1987. the petitioner's representation against the action of the respondent-Committee having been rejected by the Punjab Mandi Board, he has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
2.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the Board, it has been averred that in view of the provisions of Rule 10 of the Punjab Market Committee (Class III) Service Rules, 1989 (hereinafter referred to as `the Rules'), the period of Service rendered on daily wages or on ad hoc basis cannot be taken into consideration.
It has been further pointed out that since both the officials had been appointed on regular basis and had joined on the same date, Respondent No. 3, who was older in age has been treated as senior.
3.
Mr. Jasbir Singh, learned Counsel for the petitioner, contends that in view of the provisions of Rule 10 of the Rules, the seniority of the members of the Service has to be determined by the length of continuous service.
To this extent he is right.
However, the contention ignores the `note' below the rule wherein it is specifically provided that the ``seniority of the members of the service who have been appointed on purely ad hoc basis or on daily wages before the commencement of these rules shall be determined as and when they are regularly appointed keeping in view the date of such regular appointment.''
In view of this clear provision, the period of service rendered on daily wages or on ad hoc basis cannot be taken into consideration.
Consequently, the plea raised by the learned counsel is rejected.
4.
It has been then contended that the services of the petitioner were regularised by the Market Committee from the date of first appointment.
That being so, Mr. Jasbir Singh submits that the petitioner should be deemed to be regular with effect from the date he had been appointed on daily wages, viz. June 6, 1986.
Even this contention is misconceived.
A perusal of the resolution, dated March 18, 1989, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P. 1 with the writ petition, shows that the Committee was considering the regularisation of the employees appointed on ad hoc basis.
It is the admitted position that the petitioner as well as Respondent No. 3, were appointed on ad hoc basis on February 28, 1987.
They had joined as such on March 2, 1987.
Their services have accordingly been treated as regular with effect from that date.
This is in deed as it should have been.
The Committee was never confronted with the regularisation of the services of the persons working on daily wages.
In this situation, the claim of the petitioner that he should be deemed to be regular with effect from the date of appointment on daily wages cannot be sustained.
5.
Even otherwise, the action of the respondents appears to be just and fair.
Both the petitioner and Respondent No. 3, had been regularly appointed on the same day.
The one who is older in age has been considered as senior to the other.
This is neither arbitrary nor unfair.
In fact, even Rule 10 gives an indication in this behalf.
While dealing with the seniority of the persons appointed by transfer, the rule specifically postulates that in case two persons have been appointed on the same day, the age can be one of the factors for determining seniority.
This is precisely what has been done by the authority.
6.
In this view of the matter, there is no merit in this writ petition.
It is dismissed.
However, in the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.