DS Sinha, J - Heard Sri AK Saxena, holding brief of Sri SK Saxena, learned counsel for the petitioner, Sri PN Saksena, learned counsel representing the respondent No. 1 and Sri Sidharth Singh, special counsel representing the respondent Nos. 2 and 3.
No one is present on behalf of the respondent No. 4.
2.
By means of this petition, under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner beseeches this court to issue a writ of mandamus, order or direction in the nature of mandamus commanding the respondent No. 1 to consider his candidature for promotion to the post of lecturer in Sociology in Sri Gandhi Vidyalaya Intermediate College, Jhinjhak, Kanpur Dehat.
3.
According to the petitioner this is an L.T.
Grade Teacher working in the college since 16th July, 1969.
He holds the degree of MA in Sociology and possesses minimum qualification for being appointed as lecturer in Sociology.
The post against which the petitioner claims to be considered for promotion fell vacant on account of death of Sri Thakur Singh Gaur who was promoted under Clause (2) of Regulation 5 of Chapter II of the Regulations framed under the provisions of the UP Intermediate Education Act, 1921.
According to the petitioner nobody else is eligible for promotion to the post of lecturer in Sociology whereas he was fully qualified and eligible for promotion to the post of lecturer in Sociology.
The respondent No. 1 failed to consider him for the promotion.
He, therefore, filed a representation on Ist November, 1984, a copy whereof is Annexure 2 to the petition.
A reminder was sent by the petitioner on 26th November, 1984 for deciding his representation dated 1st November, 1984.
The petitioner also made a representation to the Deputy Director of Education on 17th December, 1984.
Thereafter, he moved a representation dated 20th December, 1984 before the District Inspector of Schools, Kanpur.
In spite of the representations and reminder the case of the petitioner has not been considered by the respondent No. 1.
Hence this petition.
4.
Sri PN Saxena, learned counsel appearing for the respondent No. 1 submits that the committee of management of the institution has yet to decide whether the post of lecturer in Sociology is to be filled by promotion or direct recruitment, and, in these circumstances, there was no occasion to consider the candidature of the petitioner for the promotion claimed by him.
5.
It cannot be disputed that the respondent No. 1, namely, the committee of management of the College is under statutory obligation to take a decision in the matter of filing up of the vacancy on the post of lecturer in Sociology in accordance with law and in that connection it is also under statutory obligation to consider the candidature of all eligible candidates including the petitioner.
Lack of decision on the pad of the respondent No. 1 with regard to the manner of filling up the vacancy on the post of lecturer in Sociology may be ground for deferring the consideration of the candidature of the candidate for a short while.
However, the respondent No. 1 cannot defer the consideration with regard to the manner of filling up the post in question indefinitely.
It ought to have taken decision within reasonable time.
If such a decision has not already been taken by the committee as alleged by the counsel for the respondent No. 1, it shall be taken now as early as possible but not later than two months from the date of production of a certified copy of this order and judgment before it.
After taking a decision about the manner of filling up the vacancy on the post of lecturer in Sociology the respondent No. 1 shall consider the candidature of all the eligible candidates including the petitioner for filling the post of lecturer in Sociology within a fortnight of the decision.
6.
In the result, the petition succeeds and is allowed in terms of the above observations and directions.
However, there will be no order as to costs.
Writ petition allowed.