Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner prays for the issue of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to give him the benefit of army service rendered by him towards pay, seniority and further promotion etc. A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner joined the Indian Army as a Sepoy on January 3, 1964.
On February 1, 1979, the petitioner retired from the Indian Army.
He was, thereafter, selected for appointment as a Havaldar Instructor in the Haryana Home Guards.
In pursuance to an offer of appointment made to him vide letter dated November 9, 1979, the petitioner actually joined as such on November 19, 1979.
3.
In the Punjab State as it existed prior to November 1, 1966, rules had been framed under Articles 309 of the Constitution of India for the grant of various benefits to the persons, who had served during the operation of national emergency.
These rules es are called 'The Punjab National Emergency Concession Rules, 1965.
Under these rules, the period of service rendered by a person during the operation of emergency viz. from October 26, 1962 to January 10, 1968, was to be counted towards the fixation of seniority and pay etc.
The petitioner claimed these benefits.
Vide order dated May 21, 1986, the respondents decided the petitioner the benefit of the service rendered by him during the period of emergency from January 3, 1964 to January 10, 1968, viz. four years and seven days towards the fixation of his seniority.
However, in spite of the issue of the order, the consequential benefits were not given to him.
The petitioner represented and having failed to get the desired benefits, he has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
4.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents.
It appears that the benefit under the Rules was denied to the petitioner in view of an objection having been raised by the audit.
A copy of this objection has been produced as Annexure R. 4 with the written statement.
It appears that the Audit Party had observed that in view of the instructions issued by the Government vide letter dated August 4, 1986 only those employees who joined Government service before the issue of the Haryana Government notification dated 4.8.76 can be given this benefit............
However, a copy of these instructions has not been produced.
5.
I have heard Mr. Anil Rathee for the petitioner and Mr. Jaswant Singh for the respondents.
6.
The petitioner had admittedly served in the Indian Army for January 3, 1964 to January 10, 1968.
This period clearly falls within the definition of military service as contained in Rule 2.
Under the provisions of Rule 4, this period has to be taken into account for the fixation of pay, seniority and pension etc.
Nothing has been pointed out to show that the petitioner is not entitled to the benefits admissible under Rule 4.
Even otherwise, the respondents having passed the order dated May 21, 1986, could not have denied the benefits thereof to the petitioner.
This is all the more so when the order was never withdrawn even formally much less than by passing a speaking order and after giving a reasonable opportunity to the petitioner.
7.
In view of the totality of circumstances, it is held that the petitioner is entitled to the refixation of his pay and seniority etc. in accordance with the provisions of the 1965 Rules by taking into account the period of service rendered by him in the Indian Army from January 3, 1964 to January 10, 1968.
It is further directed that, in case, on the refixation of the petitioner's seniority, anyone junior to him has been promoted to a higher post, the petitioner's claim shall also be considered with effect from the dates a person junior to him was promoted.
Consequential reliefs which may ensure from retrospective promotion shall also be granted to the petitioner.
The needful shall be done within three months from the date a certified copy, of the order is produced before the competent authority.
The petitioner will also be entitled to his costs, which are assessed at Rs. 2,000/-.
Petition allowed.