AL Bahri, J - Manjit Kaur petitioner having passed Matriculation from Punjab School Education Board, joined two-years JBT (Home Craft) Course in Government Central Crafts Institute for Women, run by Department of Technical Education, Union Territory, Chandigarh.
She successfully completed the course and was awarded Diploma Certificate (Annexure P/1).
Thereafter, she passed six-months Condensed Course from the aforesaid Institute.
Thus, on completion of aforesaid two courses, the same became equivalent to JBT (General), as recognised by the Chandigarh Administration in their letter dated March 10, 1989 (Annexure P/2).
As per policy decision of the Punjab Government dated May 9, 1960 (Annexure P/3), the aforesaid course completed by the petitioner stood recognised as equivalent to a similar course prevalent in Punjab.
Earlier, twice the Punjab Government constituted Departmental Selection Committees for recruitment of JBT teachers in the year 1987 and 1989.
On both these occasions, the petitioner applied for being recruited as JBT teacher.
Her request was declined.
Now again the Punjab Government constituted Departmental Selection Committee, headed by respondent No. 4 for recruitment of 800 posts of JBT teachers in March, 1993.
The petitioner again applied for being recruited.
However, her request has been declined.
Thus, she has approached this Court in this writ petition.
2.
On notice of motion, written statement has been filed by the official respondents, contesting the petition inter alia asserting that the Diploma Course done by the petitioner from the Chandigarh Institute is not recognised by the Punjab State.
3.
After hearing counsel for the parties, we are of the opinion that the stand taken up by the respondents is not in accordance with the policy decision taken by the Punjab Government, as contained in Annexure P/3.
A specific assertion was made in the writ petition that the Diploma Course coupled with completion of six months, Condensed Course was recognised by the State of Punjab vide instructions Annexure P/3.
To this fact, there is no specific denial in the written statement.
Reply in the written statement refers to only non-recognition of simple Diploma Course Certificate issued by the Chandigarh Institute.
Reference to Annexure P/3, the instructions issued by the Punjab State would be necessary to appreciate the point in dispute.
The policy decision is quoted as under :-  "It has been decided in consultation with the State Public Service Commission that the Junior Basic Teachers Training Certificate or similar Diploma granted by any other State Public Government or by any Institution situated within the jurisdiction of that State Government will be equivalent to the Junior Basic Teachers Training Certificate of the Punjab Education Department provided the following conditions are fulfilled.
(i) It has been awarded after two years' training.
(ii) In the event of its being awarded by any institution it is recognised by the State Government within whose jurisdiction the institution is situated.
It is further pointed out that if any such certificate/Diploma has been awarded after the period of training which may be less than two years but has been recognised by the State Government concerned, the holder thereof will be eligible for appointment as Teacher under the Punjab Government if he/she possesses two years Course examination of the Punjab Education Department even though privately."
4.
A bare perusal of the aforesaid instructions indicates that if a two years' training course is recognised by the State within which the Institute is situate, that would automatically be treated equivalent to the Junior Basic Teachers Training Certificate of the Punjab Education Department.
Annexure P/1 is the certificate of two years Course completed by the petitioner.
Annexure P/2 is the certificate of completion of six months condensed Course.
The endorsement made thereon refers to the decision of the Chandigarh Administration recognising JBT (Home Craft) Central Diploma as equivalent to JBT (General), after completion of this Condensed Course.
As per instructions Annexure P/3, after completion of Condensed Course of six-months, coupled with completion of two years Diploma Course, the petitioner becomes eligible to claim appointment as teacher in the State of Punjab, as her qualifications are to be treated as JBT (General) after completion of the Condensed Course.
5.
For the reasons recorded above, this writ petition is allowed with direction to the respondents to treat two years Diploma Course coupled with six months Condensed Course done from the Chandigarh Institute as equivalent to JBT (General) of the Punjab State and thus consider case of the petitioner for recruitment as teacher.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.