GS Singhvi, J - Petitioners had applied for selection on the posts of Supervisors in pursuance of advertisement issued by the Karnal Central Cooperative Bank Limited (for short the bank) for recruitment on the posts of Clerks/Supervisors/Cashiers/Steno-Typists Interviews for the posts of Supervisors were held in August, 1974.
On the basis of their selection, the petitioners were appointed to undergo preliminary training, as would appear from Annexure P-10 dated 1991980.
Subsequently vide order dated 871975 petitioners were appointed as Supervisors.
Order passed in the case of petitioner No. 1 on 871975 has been placed on record as annexure P-4.
In the meantime, the respondent-bank issued orders appointing clerks.
2.
A tentative seniority list of the Clerks, Supervisors and other cadres was issued.
Against the tentative seniority list, the petitioners made representation.
The Additional Registrar (Credit) Cooperative Societies, Haryana, who was directed by the Registrar, Cooperative Societies to look into the controversy between the Supervisors and the Clerks, heard both the sides and then passed order annexure P-12 dated 1131981.
The Additional Registrar directed that the date of appointment of the petitioners (Supervisors) should be treated as the same i.e. at par with Clerks and the seniority be determined after fixing the order of merit.
3.
Petitioners have pleaded that despite the order passed by the Additional Magistrate, no steps have been taken by the departmental authorities for fixing the merit and for determination of seniority.
4.
Respondents have contested the claim made by the petitioners on the ground that although the petitioners have been selected alongwith Clerks, in their case order of appointment was issued on 871975 whereas Clerks were appointed by order dated 19.6.1975.
Respondent's case is that on the basis of their earlier appointment, the Clerks have rightly been ranked senior to the petitioners.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioners invited my attention to annexure P-2 and has submitted that in the first instance order of appointment of the petitioners had been issued on 19.6.1975 and order for appointment of the clerks had also been issued on that date.
Subsequently, date of the order of appointment of the petitioners was changed to 871975 and on that premise, the petitioners have been treated as junior to the Clerks despite the fact that posts of Clerks and Supervisors belong to a common cadre and the same are inter-changeable.
He further submitted that once the Additional Registrar has given direction vide annexure P-12, it is incumbent on the respondent bank to comply with these directions for the purposes of determination of seniority.
6.
No one appeared to argue the case on behalf of the respondents.
The fact that the Additional Registrar (Credit) Cooperative Societies, Haryana, who was directed by the Registrar to hear and decide the dispute regarding seniority had issued order dated 1131981 has remained uncontroverted.
Respondents have not come forward with the case that order annexure P-12 has been nullified by any superior authority or by a Court of law.
Thus it is clear that the order dated 1131991 passed by the Additional Registrar stands.
7.
No justification has been given by the respondents for their failure to carry out the direction given by the Additional Registrar vide Annexure P-12.
In my opinion that order creates a right in favour of the petitioners to be assigned seniority on the basis of common merit and it was incumbent upon the respondent No. 3 to have fixed the merit of the Clerks and Supervisors for the purpose of determination of their inter se seniority.
This right of the petitioners has been infringed by the omission of respondent No. 3 to comply the order passed by the Additional Registrar and, therefore, a writ of mandamus deserves to be issued in favour of the petitioners.
8.
In the result of the writ petition is allowed.
Respondent No. 3 is directed to comply with the order dated 1131981 (Annexure P-12) and fix the seniority of the petitioners in accordance with the directions given by the Additional Registrar (Credit) Cooperative Societies, Haryana.
This must be done within a period of four months of submission of certified copy of this order.
If any promotion has been made in the meantime on the basis of tentative inter se seniority list of Clerks and Supervisors, the same should be revised on the basis of the seniority determined in accordance with the directions of the Additional Registrar.
No Costs.
Petition allowed.