GR Majithia, J - The petitioner has assailed the communication dated July 21,1987, addressed by the Additional Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Haryana, Chandigarh informing him about the recording of adverse remarks in his annual confidential report (the 'ACR' for brevity) for the year 1985-86 and the order of the State Government conveyed by the Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Haryana, Chandigarh vide Memo No.
17/35/87-Admn.
(I), dated July 6, 1990, copy Annexure P-4 (wrongly mentioned in the writ petition as Annexure P-7) informing him that his representation for expunging the adverse remarks had been partly accepted and partly rejected, in this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
2.
The writ petition came up for motion hearing on August 22, 1990 and the following order was passed by the Motion Bench :  "The learned counsel for the petitioner relies on the admission of C.W.P.
No. 1942 of 1990 (Shri Pal Jain v. The Engineer-in-Chief, etc., 1994(1) S.C.T.
794) which has been admitted to DB, and according to the learned counsel involves similar question of law as in the present case.
Admitted DB To be heard with the abovesaid case."
The connection writ petitions bearing CWP Nos. 1942 and 9356 of 1990 have also been enlisted before us.
This writ petition cannot be disposed of with those cases because of dissimilarity of facts and is being disposed of by a separate judgment.
3.
The facts :-  The petitioner was appointed as Inspector, Cooperative Societies, in the Erstwhile State of Punjab on January 15, 1961 after his selection by the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Punjab.
He joined the territorial Army as Commissioned Officer in July, 1966 was released from the Army on March 28, 1985.
He got the benefit of Military Service and was posted as Assistant Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Ferozepur Zirka.
He was given the proforma promotion as Assistant Registrar with effect from September 8, 1972.
He was posted as Managing Director of the Faridabad Central Cooperative Bank Limited, Faridabad (for short, the Bank) on November 19, 1985 and remained posted there uptill December 8, 1986.
The ACR of the petitioner for the period from November 19, 1985 to June 30, 1986 pertaining to the year 1985-86 was initiated by Shri Hem Raj, Chairman of the Bank.
It was reviewed by the Managing Director of the Haryana State Cooperative Apex Bank Ltd, Chandigarh (for short, the Apex Bank) as well as by the Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Haryana.
The remarks in the ACR were approved by the Commissioner and Secretary to Govt., Haryana, Cooperation Department, who is the accepting authority.
The adverse remarks in the ACR were conveyed to the petitioner by the Additional Registrar (Admn.
), Cooperative Societies, Haryana, Chandigarh vide letter dated July 21, 1987.
4.
The petitioner submitted his representation dated August 31, 1987 to the Financial Commissioner and Secretary to Government, Haryana, Cooperation Department, Chandigarh, against the adverse remarks in his ACR for the year 1985-86 The same was partly accepted by the State Government vide order dated June 21, 1990 and this order was conveyed to the petitioner by the Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Haryana vide Memo No.
17/35/87-Admn.
(I), dated July 6, 1990, which reads as under :  With reference to your representation dated 3181987 on the subject cited above, you are informed that after due consideration the Government has decided that the following remarks given in your annual confidential report for the year 1985-86, are deleted :-  'You are an officer of below average ability.
You are inefficient and have no knowledge of banking and department.
You are inefficient and have no control over the staff.'
But your integrity is doubtful and as such the following remarks will remain as such i.e. which cannot be deleted from the annual confidential report :-  'You frequently suspended the employees particularly Secretaries and re-instated them though huge embezzlements were made by them, with ulterior and mala fide intention, as such your honesty is doubtful."
5.
In the body of the petition, the petitioner has challenged the communication dated July 21, 1987 by which he was informed about the adverse remarks in his ACR for the year 1985-86 and DO letter dated November 24, 1986 written by him to the Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Haryana, requesting him that his ACR should not be initiated by Sh. Hem Raj, Chairman of the Bank.
But, on a perusal of the records reveals that the petitioner is aggrieved not against his DO letter dated November 24, 1986 addressed by him to the Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Haryana, but is aggrieved by the order of the State Government dated June 21, 1990, by which his representation against the adverse remarks was partially accepted.
6.
The petitioner says that the adverse remarks were recorded because Shri Hem Raj, the then Chairman of the Bank was ill disposed towards him and that the State Government took more than three years for disposing of his representation.
Nine Directors of the Bank had appreciated his work while others endorsed the report of the Chairman.
7.
Written statement on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2 has been filed by Shri Birbal, Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Haryana.
The plea of the petitioner that Shri Hem Raj, Chairman of the Bank, who initiated his ACR for the year 1985-86, was ill-disposed towards him was denied.
The adverse remarks were recorded by the Chairman on the basis of the record and these were also reviewed and accepted by the reviewing and accepting authorities.
The representation against the adverse remarks was decided by the State Government after proper verification of the records.
The petitioner was also given hearing by the State Government before deciding his representation.
8.
We sent for the confidential reports of the petitioner.
His ACR for the period from March 28, 1985 to June 30, 1985 was initiated by Shri Sis Ram, Deputy Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Gurgaon, and he gave the following remarks :  "He is an officer of below average.
He is inefficient and incompetent.
He has poor knowledge of Coop.
Act and guidelines.
He heard appeals in 14 cases of the awards given by the Inspectors/Sub-Inspectors without being competent.
He allowed payment of bonus to one L/C Secretary in cash against the instructions of the Registrar."
The Deputy Commissioner, Gurgaon recorded a note dated May 5, 1986 in Hindi and English translation of the same reads as under :  "Not done any work relating to Cooperative Department which could come to his notice, whereas lot of work can be done by the Cooperation Department in this backward Sub-Division."
Shri A.C. Aggarwal, Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Haryana, recorded the following note on June 24, 1986, on the work of the petitioner :  "I have closely watched his work.
I am of the view that the officer is of average category."
Shri Kulwant Singh, IAS, Financial Commissioner (Planning) formerly Financial Commissioner (Coop.)
Haryana accepted the reports on September 11, 1986.
9.
A perusal of the ACR reveals that on his reversion of his parent Department after his release from the Army, the work of the petitioner was categorised as of 'Average' category.
He had allowed payments against the instructions of the Department as is observed by the Deputy Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Gurgaon.
10.
For the period from November 19, 1985 to June 30, 1986 when the petitioner was on deputation with the Bank at Faridabad, the Chairman (Sh. Hem Raj) recorded the following remarks in his ACR :  "He is an officer of below average ability.
He is inefficient and has no knowledge of Banking and Deptt.
He is ineffective and has no control over the staff.
He frequently suspended the employees particularly Secretaries and reinstated them though huge embezzlements were made by them with ulterior and mala fide intention.
As such his honesty is doubtful."
The Chairman of the Apex Court recorded the following note on March 7, 1987 :  "I agree with the report of the Chairman."
Shri A.C. Aggarwal, Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Haryana, observed on May 26, 1987, as under :  "I have nothing to contradict the above remarks."
These remarks were approved by Shri MK Miglani, who was Commissioner and Secretary to Government, Haryana, Cooperation Department, on May 29, 1987.
11.
The representation of the petitioner against these adverse remarks was properly processed by the State Government and after proper verification it was disposed of on June 21, 1990.
12.
Proper guidelines have been laid down by the Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Haryana for recording the ACRs of those officers of the Department who had been sent on deputation to the Central Cooperative Banks.
According to these guidelines, the ACR of such an officer has to be initiated by the Chairman of the Central Cooperative Bank.
It is subject to the review of the Managing Director of the Apex Bank and the Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Haryana and has to be accepted by the Commissioner and Secretary to Government, Haryana, Cooperation Department.
We find that the proper safeguards have been laid down for recording the ACRs.
We do not find that the following adverse remarks in the ACR for the period from November 19, 1985 to June 30, 1986, when the petitioner was on deputation with the Bank, recorded by the then Chairman of the Bank and accepted by the State Government are not warranted on the file :  "You frequently suspended the employees particularly Secretaries and re-instated them though huge embezzlements were made by them, with ulterior and mala fide intention, as such your honesty is doubtful."
The State Government recorded this entry after verification of facts from the records.
Insinuations levelled by the petitioner that the initiating authority was prejudiced against him is an afterthought and appears to have been concocted for raising a defence to the adverse entry.
13.
This ACR is the subjective opinion of the reporting officer and it has to be formed on an objective appraisal of material.
The assessment by its very nature would be somewhat subjective.
The confidential remarks are after all an assessment of the work, performance and conduct of an officer by his superiors.
We do not find that the assessment was unjustified.
The appraisal of the material used for recording ACR of the petitioner was made by three authorities, viz., the Chairman of the Bank, Managing Director of the Apex Bank and the Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Haryana, and finally by the State Government.
14.
For the reasons stated above, we find no merit in this writ petition and dismiss the same with costs quantified at Rs. 5,000/-.
Petition dismissed.