VK Jhanji, J. (Oral) - Petitioners, in this writ petition, are seeking a direction to the respondents to admit them to the MBBS Course in Maharshi Dayanand University, Rohtak, (in short, the University) under the Socially- Educationally-Economically-Weaker Sections of the Society (in short, the SEEWS section).
Both the petitioners applied to the university for admission to MBBS course under the SEEWS category, for the year 1993-94.
Petitioner No. 1 secured 582 marks and petitioner No. 2 secured 528 marks in the Combined Entrance Examination held on 1871993.
They were provisionally placed at Sr. Nos. 26 and 43 respectively in the merit-list under SEEWS category against 11 seats to be filled in, subject to fulfilling of the eligibility conditions under this category.
On 1881993, petitioners appeared for an interview, whereafter they were asked to furnish two documents, namely Affidavit of Parents education and Income Certificate from the Tehsildar.
As per allegations made in the petition, petitioners along with the said two documents went to the respondents for admission to the said course, but were told that they could not be admitted to the MBBS course under the SEEWS category.
In the present petition, petitioners have impugned the action of the respondents in not admitting them to the MBBS course on the condition that parents of the petitioners are having qualification above Matric standard.
2.
In response to notice of the petition, written statement has been filed by the Registrar of the university, in which, it has been stated that admission to MBBS/BDS course was made strictly on the basis of provisions laid down in the prospectus.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that Note (ii) printed at page 14 of the Prospectus for the year 1993-94 of the university is illegal, arbitrary, unwarranted, unjust, unreasonable and has no regional basis and, therefore, the same deserves to be quashed.
4.
Having heard the learned counsel, I am of the view that there is no merit in the writ petition.
For the facility of reference, the relevant criteria of the reserved category of S.E.E.W.S.
is reproduced as under :  "The criteria for determining the eligibility of the candidates for reserved seats under the category of Socially-Educationally-Economically Weaker Sections of Society will be as follows :  i) Children whose parents do not own more than 6-1/4 acres of irrigated land or twice this amount unirrigated land provided that such persons do not have any other source of income.
An affidavit (Appendix-H) supported by the copy of the latest jamabandi and certificate from the Tehsildar concerned is to be submitted in this case.
OR  Children of parents whose income from all sources is not more than the total highest emoluments of a Class-IV employee of Haryana Government at the maximum of the pay scale i.e. Rs. 23688/- (Gross) P.A.
Candidates have to produce certificate of pay/income of their parents from the employer in case of employees of Government/autonomous bodies/corporation.
In case of others, an affidavit (Appendix-H supported by a certificate of the Tehsildar concerned should be submitted.
ii) Both parents, i.e. the father and mother, whose children are claiming benefit of the above reservation should not have received education upto matriculation or higher standard.
(An affidavit by them in this regard will be essential in case both the father and mother are not alive an affidavit by the Guardian of the candidate in this behalf will be necessary.)
However, this condition will not be applicable in case the father or mother or both have died, before the education of ward upto Senior Secondary Certificate Examination (12th Class) or its equivalent if the surviving parent is non- matriculate."
To become eligible, a candidate has to fulfil both the aforementioned conditions, which provide that parents of the children seeking admission in this category should not own more than 6-1/4 acres of irrigated land or twice this amount unirrigated land and no other income, and where they do not own agricultural land, irrigated or unirrigated, income of children's parents should not be more than the total highest emoluments of a Class-IV employee of Haryana Government at the maximum of the pay scale, i.e. Rs. 23688/- (Gross) P.A.
and also that, both the father and mother should not have received education upto matriculation or higher standard.
Admittedly, petitioners do not fulfil the condition as given in Note (ii), that is to say, the education received by their parents is more than matriculation standard.
The contention of the counsel that the said criteria is unreasonable or has no nexus to the object to be achieved, cannot be accepted for the reason that reservation has been provided to improve the status of children or parents who fall under the category of socially-educationally-economically weaker sections of the society, other than scheduled caste and backward caste categories.
The criteria is not unjust or unreasonable as contended by the counsel for the petitioners, but is perfectly legal and permissible under the Constitution.
The judgment of this Court reported in 1990(2) Services Law Reporter 276, cited by counsel for the petitioners, is clearly distinguishable on the facts of the present case, because that was a case of single parents who was an illiterate, and in that context, the candidate was found to have fulfilled the qualifications given at Note (ii) However, in the present case, the parents of both the petitioners possess qualification of more than matriculation standard and, thus, the petitioners do not fulfil the conditions as given in Note(ii).
For the reasons recorded above, this writ petition fails and is dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.