Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner, who is working as Field Officer with the Punjab State Co-operative Supply and Marketing Federation Limited, Chandigarh, (in short MARKFED) prays for the issue of a writ in the nature of certiorari quashing the order by which his claim for seniority over respondents 3 to 28 was rejected.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as a Manager Grade 'C' with the Co-operative Marketing Society, Sardulgarh on September 08, 1993.
In pursuance to the provision in Section 84-A of the Punjab Co-operative Societies Act, 1961, the common cadre consisting of certain posts including those of Managers Grade 'C' in respect of the Markfed and various other primary societies, was created.
In pursuance to this decision, the Punjab State Supply and Marketing Co-operative Services (Common Cadre) Rules, 1967 we prepared by the Markfed.
These were a approved by the Registrar in accordance with the provision of Section 84-A(2) of the Act and came into force on October 01, 1968.
Thereafter, cases of various persons who were in the service of the primary societies and were holding posts included in the common cadre were considered.
As a result of the screening conducted in the year 1972, various persons working in the primary societies were appointed to the posts in the common cadre.
The petitioner who had joined as a Manager Grade 'C' on September 08, 1973 was similarly screened on September 22, 1979.
As a result, he was appointed to the common cadre vide order dated December 24, 1979 copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-1 with the writ petition.
The post of Manager Grade 'C' was redesignated as Field Officer in the common cadre.
3.
On 25.1.1988 the Markfed circulated a seniority list of the persons working as Senior Branch Officer, Branch Officers and Field Officers.
In this list, the petitioner's name was placed at Sr.No.
63 and he was assigned seniority on the assumption that he had joined service on December 28, 1979.
Aggrieved by the position assigned to him, the petitioner submitted a representation, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-3 with the writ petition.
In this representation, the petitioner inter alia pointed out that he was entitled to the grant of seniority with effect from the date of initial appointment viz. September 08, 1973 and that the action in fixing his seniority with effect from December 28, 1979 was contrary to the provisions contained in the rules.
The petitioner avers that his representation was rejected.
However, no order was conveyed to him.
Accordingly, he has filed this writ petition, challenging the order of the respondents rejecting his representation regarding the fixation of his seniority.
4.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the Markfed.
However, respondents 3 to 28 over whom the petitioner claims seniority have not appeared before this Court in spite of the fact that they were duly served with the notice of the writ petition.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the Markfed it has been inter alia averred that the petitioner had been appointed in the Markfed on December 24, 1979 and the writ petition having been filed in the year 1992, was highly belated.
It has further been averred that the disputed questions of fact arise which cannot be gone into in a writ petition.
Reference has also been made to a resolution dated 7/10.12.1979 to contend that the petitioner's seniority had to be fixed only with effect from the date he joined service in the MARKFED and that no benefit of the previous service could be given to him.
On these premises, the respondents have claimed that the petition has no merit and deserves to be dismissed.
5.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
Mr. RL Sharma, Advocate, appearing for the petitioner has made a two-fold grievance.
Firstly, he submits that the action of the respondents is contrary to the provisions of Rule 27, according to which the seniority is to be determined on the basis of date of appointment.
He submits that the petitioner having been appointed on September 08, 1973, the seniority should have been determined on that basis.
Secondly, it has been contended that the seniority of various other persons who were appointed to the common cadre as a result of the screening in the years 1972, has been fixed on the basis of the date on which they had actually joined their respective posts prior to these being included in the common cadre.
In order to substantiate the submissions, he has produced a copy of the list prepared by the MARKFED in respect of Managers Grade 'C' who were appointed as a result of the screening in the year 1972, as Annexure P4 with the additional affidavit.
Even though, the appointments had been made in the year 1972, the dates of joining have been shown as from April 19, 1951 to January 15, 1972.
In view of this factual position, learned counsel has contended that the action of the respondents is violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India and suffers from the vide of arbitrariness and discrimination.
6.
On the other hand, Mr. Amar Vivek appearing for respondent No. 2 has submitted that the petitioner suffers from laches and that the petitioner having been informed that his seniority will be determined from the date of his joining, he cannot claim the benefit of service rendered by him prior to his inclusion in the common cadre.
7.
It may be noticed at the outset that the objection of delay is based primarily on the resolution dated 7/10.12.1979.
In para 2 of his resolution it has been inter alia mentioned that the seniority of the persons who has been screened and found suitable should be fixed from the date they joined service in the Markfed.
However, it is the admitted position that this resolution was never communicated to the petitioner.
It remained in the files of the Markfed.
Still further, in pursuance to the resolution a letter of appointment was issued to the petitioner.
A copy of this letter has been produced as Annexure P.1 with the writ petition.
While various other conditions of service have been mentioned it is nowhere stated that the petitioner will not be given the benefit of the past service rendered by him in the Society.
Consequently, neither the resolution nor the order of appointment can be said to have given even a hint to the petitioner that his seniority will be fixed only from the date of his appointment to the common cadre.
8.
Furthermore, it is admitted position that seniority list was issued by the respondent.
Federation for the first time on January 25, 1988.
Copy of the letter by which the seniority was issued has been produced as Annexure P.2 with the writ petition.
A perusal thereof shows that seniority as depicted in the list attached to this letter was 'tentative'.
The petitioner had represented against it.
Admittedly, no decision on this representation was ever conveyed to the petitioner.
Even final seniority list is not shown to have been issued.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondent-Markfed it has only been averred that representation deserved to be ignored and rejected on the simple ground that the petitioner had been given fresh appointment in the year 1979.
The petitioner had no means to know of it.
He was, thus, entitled to wait.
Moreover, learned counsel for the respondent Federation has admitted that the seniority list has not been finalised till date.
That being so, the objection regarding delay is wholly misconceived.
Since the impugned list was tentative and it has not been finalised even till today and no decision had been conveyed to the petitioner, it does not appear to be just and fair to dismiss the writ petition on the ground of delay and laches.
Consequently, the objection raised on behalf of the respondent in this behalf cannot be accepted.
9.
Coming to the merits of the controversy it is established on the record that the petitioner had joined service of the society as Manager Grade 'C' on September 8, 1973.
The short question that arises for consideration is the petitioner's seniority to be fixed on the basis that he had been appointed on September 8, 1973 or on December 24, 1979 when he was absorbed in the common cadre ?
The matter is governed by the provisions contained in Rule 27 Clause-I of this rule relates to the determination of seniority of a person who was in service on the date of enforcement of the rules.
Since neither the petitioner nor any of the respondents were in the service of the Federation or any of the societies prior to the enforcement of the rules, this provision is not attracted.
In other cases, the seniority has to be determined with reference to "the date of appointment."
It is also the admitted position that while fixing the seniority of respondents 3 to 28, the respondent-Federation has taken into consideration the dates of appointment in the societies and not to the post in the common cadre.
Mr. Amar Vivek appearing for respondent No. 2 concedes that respondents 3 to 28 have been given benefit of the service rendered by them in the societies from where they were brought on the common cadre.
In this situation, it would not be just and fair to adopt a different yard stick in case of the petitioner.
If such course of action is permitted the petitioner would be denied the benefit of service rendered by him from September 8, 1973 to December 24, 1979.
Such a course of action would be not only unjust and unfair but even discriminatory and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
10.
There is another aspect of the matter.
The petitioner had actually joined service on September 8, 1973.
He was considered for being brought on the common cadre in September, 1979.
On having been found to be suitable, he was actually appointed vide order dated December 24, 1979.
Could he not have been considered/screened in 1973 ?
Should he lose benefit of six years' service because the Markfed did not consider his claim ?
I think, the respondent caused the delay and it would not be fair to deprive the petitioner of the benefit of service rendered by him.
This is all the more so in view of the fact that those amongst the respondents who had been appointed to the post in the Societies after October, 1968 as a result of screening in 1972, have been given the benefit of their service.
11.
In view of the above, the writ petition is allowed.
The action of the respondents in fixing the petitioner's seniority on the premises that he had joined the service on December 24, 1979 instead of September 8, 1973, is set aside.
It is directed that the petitioner shall be assigned seniority as if he had been appointed on September 8, 1973.
As result, he becomes senior to respondents 3 to 28 or any of them, his claim for further promotion etc. shall be considered with effect from the date the person junior to him was promoted.
Consequential reliefs that may ensure shall be allowed.
Needful shall be done by the respondent-Federation within three months from the date of receipt of a certified copy of this order.
No cost.
Petition allowed.