SR Nayak, J - In this Writ Petition the petitioner calls in question the validity of the order dated 2421989 bearing No. E/923/R&D/03/3160165/ PMX/89 issued by the Manager (Personnel and Administration), Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited, Corporate R & D Division, Hyderabad.
By the said order the name of the petitioner is struck off from the rolls of the company with effect from the forenoon of 1311989 i.e. from the date of the alleged unauthorised absence of the petitioner.
2.
Few facts which are relevant for the disposal of this Writ Petition are the petitioner joined the service of the Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited as EDP Operator Grade III on 14101981 and he was put on probation for a certain period.
It is stated that on 14.10.1982 the petitioner completed the probation and he was subsequently confirmed in the service.
It seems that the petitioner without informing the management availed of leave during the period from 1311989 to 2421989 for the reasons that he was suffering from piles and he was not in a position to attend the work.
The management of the company, placing reliance on the provision of Rule 913 of the BHEL Leave Rules passed the impugned order.
3.
The learned counsel who appeared for the petitioner submitted that the action of the management in striking off the name of the petitioner from the rolls of the company with effect from 1311989 is totally illegal, arbitrary, violative of principles of natural justice and opposed to the well settled position in law.
Dilating the submission the learned counsel submitted that in the first instance Rule 913 of the BHEL Leave Rules do not empower the management to straightway strike off the name of the employee who has gone on un-authorised leave.
In support of his submission he took me through the proviso to Rule 913 of the BHEL Leave Rules.
The combined reading of the main provision in Rule 913 and the proviso thereto make it very clear that even in a case where the employee goes on unauthorised leave the management is required to hold an enquiry and it is open to the delinquent employee to satisfy the management that his unauthorised absence in the facts and circumstances of the case was fully justified.
No counter is filed in this case on behalf of the respondent-management.
Therefore, the Court is proceeding to pass this order in the absence of counter.
4.
In support of the submissions, the learned counsel for the petitioner placed reliance on the decisions in Kamlesh Sharam v. Union of India, 1990(3) SLR 616, Jai Shanker v. State, AIR 1966 SC 492, and Deokinandan Prasad v. State of Bihar, AIR 1971 SC 1409 and submitted that even where the service rules or the regulations empower the management to strike off the name of employee in the event of unauthorised absence, the requirement of law is that even in such fact situation the management is required to hold domestic enquiry after giving an opportunity of being heard in the matter to the delinquent employee.
I have gone through these authorities on which the learned counsel placed reliance and all these authorities are on the point.
5.
For the reasons stated supra the petitioner is entitled to succeed in the Writ Petition.
Accordingly the Writ Petition is allowed.
The impugned order is quashed.
Rule is made absolute.
However, it is made clear that this order does not come in the way of the management taking such steps which are available to it in law and proceed to hold domestic enquiry against the delinquent employee.
No costs.
Petition allowed.