SK Homchaudhuri, J - The petitioner while working as Constable at Naharlagun 'A' Company, a departmental proceeding was initiated against him and he was placed under suspension w.e.f.
21121986.
The charge-sheet was issued on 2331987 by the Superintendent of Police, Ziro containing the following Articles of charges :-  Article I  That constable BS Deka (now under suspension) of 'A' Coy Naharlagun while on duty at Damin had on 18121986 at 2000 hrs.
had left the camp without permission and entered the camp after consuming liquor and quarrelled with his own staff.
Thus constable BS Deka is charged with misconduct and negligence of duty.
Article II  That on 18121986 at 2000 hrs.
constable BS Deka (now under suspension) while being posted at Damin under the influence of liquor taken out his service rifle Bud No. 237 R/No.
339637 and ammunition and threatened to shoot his staff in the camp.
Thus constable BS Deka is charged with gross misconduct and negligence in duty.
2.
The petitioner submitted replies to the charge-sheet denying the allegations contained therein.
Thereafter the disciplinary authority issued a notice on 29.7.1987 with a copy of the finding of the Enquiry Officer and asked the petitioner to show cause against the proposed penalty of dismissal from service.
The petitioner showed causes against the proposed penalty.
However, the Superintendent of Police, Ziro by the impugned order dated 1311988, dismissed the petitioner from service.
The petitioner preferred an appeal against the order of dismissal before the Inspector General of Police, Arunachal Pradesh on 1221988.
But the Appellate Authority by the impugned order dated 841988 rejected the appeal.
The petitioner has, thereafter, approached this Court in this writ petition.
3.
I have heard Mr. KK Mahanta, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. A Roy, learned Govt. Advocate.
4.
Mr. Mahanta submits that, although the petitioner denied the allegations contained the charge-sheet in his reply dated 2831987 no domestic enquiry was held in the presence of the petitioner and the petitioner was denied reasonable opportunity to prove his innocence.
The so-called finding of the Enquiry Officer was submitted on the basis of a domestic enquiry if any held behind the back of the petitioner.
As such the finding of the Enquiry Officer and the impugned order of dismissal passed on the basis thereof have been vitiated by denial of reasonable opportunity of being heard to the petitioner.
The impugned order has, therefore, been passed in violation of Article 311 of the Constitution as well as Rule 14 of the Central Civil Services CCA Rules, 1965 (in short CCS (CCA)) Rules, 1965.
5.
Mr. A Roy, learned Govt. Advocate, on the other hand, submits that although no domestic enquiry was held into the charges after receipt of reply from the petitioner denying the allegations contained the charge-sheet, in fact the enquiry was held on 30121986, on which date the Circle Officer examined the witnesses as well as the petitioner and asked the petitioner to cross-examine the witnesses and the finding of the enquiry after that was given on the basis of the enquiry dated 30121986 held in the presence of the petitioner.
Mr. Roy further submits that although technically the domestic enquiry ought to have been held after receipt of reply to the chargesheet from the petitioner but the principle of natural justice was substantially complied with in the enquiry held on 30121986.
6.
I have considered the submissions made on behalf of the petitioner as well as on behalf of the respondent and have perused the materials on records.
Admittedly the charge-sheet was issued on 2331987 and as such, whatever enquiry was held on 30121986, was a preliminary enquiry to find out whether there was any prima facie case against the petitioner to issue charge- sheet or not.
After receipt of the charge-sheet if the petitioner admitted the charges, holding of domestic enquiry might not have been necessary.
However, when the petitioner denied the allegations contained the charge-sheet it was incumbent on the part of the disciplinary authority to hold domestic enquiry either by himself or by an Enquiry Officer appointed by him with due notice to the petitioner.
The holding of the domestic enquiry is not an empty formality.
It is the forum where as delinquent employee gets the opportunity to defend himself and to prove his innocence by cross-examining the witnesses examined on behalf of the Disciplinary Authority in support of the charges as well as by examining his own witnesses in defence.
Rule 14 of the CCS (CCA) Rule stipulates that if the delinquent employee denies the allegations a domestic enquiry has to be held in the manner provided in the Rules.
The provision of Rule 14 of the CCS Rules is mandatory.
The contention of the learned Govt. Advocate is that the principles of natural justice was substantially complied with in the enquiry held on 30121986 prior to issue of charge-sheet and the finding of the Enquiry Officer based on that enquiry is no defence against non-compliance of provisions of Rule 14 of the CCS (CCA) Rules.
7.
For the reasons stated above, the impugned order dated 31.11.1988 passed by the Superintendent of Police, Ziro dismissing the petitioner from service and the impugned order dated 841988 passed by the respondent No. 2 rejecting the appeal of the petitioner cannot be sustained.
The petition is, therefore, allowed.
The impugned order dated 1311988 and 841988 are set aside.
8.
It will remain open to the respondent No. 4 Superintendent of Police, Ziro to hold domestic enquiry as contemplated under Rule 14 of the CCS Rules into the charge levelled against the petitioner and to pass appropriate orders.
In case the respondent No. 4 decides to continue with the departmental proceedings, then the proceedings shall be concluded within 4 (four) months from the date of receipt of this order and the petitioner shall be deemed to be under suspension during the period from the date of dismissal to the date of passing appropriate order after conclusion of the departmental proceeding and shall be paid his subsistence allowances for that period.
If, however, the respondent No. 4 decides not to continue with the departmental proceeding, the petitioner shall be reinstated in service within one month and he shall be paid full back wages from the date of placing him under suspension to the date of reinstatement.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to all other service benefits which would have accrued to him had he not been placed under suspension and ultimate dismissed from service by the impugned order dated 1311988.
Petition allowed.