AP Chowdhri, J - This appeal is directed against order dated April 23, 1993, passed by the Commissioner under Workmen's Compensation Act, dismissing the appellants petition for compensation.
2.
Brief facts of the case are that one Budh Singh (50), who was employed as a mason, was working alongwith other masons and workers for the replacement of roof of the building of BKE & I Higher Secondary School, Ghee Mandi, Amritsar, in June, 1985.
The school is run by Bal Mukand Khatri Education Trust, Amritsar.
The respondents are various office-bearers of the said Trust as well as functionaries of the school.
The roof fell down as a result of which Budh Singh and others also fell down and received injuries.
Budh Singh succumbed to his injuries the same day at 1 pm in SGT Hospital, Amritsar.
The petitioners are his widow and minor daughter.
They served a notice under Section 10 of the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Act') on Sardari Lal Kapoor, Joint Secretary of the Trust, respondent No. 1.
The respondents having failed to award compensation, the petitioners moved the Commissioner claiming Rs. 30,000/- as compensation, besides interest from the date of accident till the date of payment.
3.
The petition was contested.
4.
On the pleadings of the parties, the following issues were framed :-  1.
Whether respondent No. 2 is Manager of BK Trust and is liable as such OPA (Piara Lal Kapoor, Vice-President of BKE & I Trust C/o Principal, BKE & I Higher Sec. School).
2.
Whether respondent No. 10 is Principal of BK School and is liable for claim in question ?
OPD (OP Dhawan).
3.
Whether the application can be made against Sardari Lal respondent ?
OPA (Jt.
Secy.
of Trust).
4.
Whether respondent No. 13 is a trustee of Society ?
(Mohan Lal Verma, Advocate, Member of Trust).
5.
Whether applicant No. 1 is widow of Budh Singh was applicant No. 2 is her daughter ?
OPA.
6.
Whether the employment of Budh Singh was made by the trustee of the registered society.)
If not, its effect ?
OPA.
7.
Whether Budh Singh was a "workman" under Workmen's Compensation Act ?
OPA.
8.
Whether Budh Singh died because of injuries in accident as alleged ?
OPA.
9.
Whether notice of alleged accident was duly served, if not, its effect ?
OPA.
10.
What was the wages of Budh Singh deceased ?
OPA.
11.
To what amount of compensation applicants are entitled and from whom ?
OPA.
12.
Whether any of the respondents is personally liable for the compensation ?
OPA.
13.
Whether this Commissioner has got jurisdiction to try this suit, OPA.
14.
Relief.
5.
Issue No. 1 to 3 were decided against the petitioners and it was held that the Manager of the Trust, Principal of the School and Sardari Lal Kapoor, Joint Secretary of the Trust, were not liable to pay the compensation in their individual capacity.
Issue No. 4 was rendered infructuous as during the pendency of the proceedings Mr. Mohan Lal Verma, one of the trustees, died.
Under issue No. 5, it was held that the petitioners were the widow and minor daughter of Budh Singh deceased.
Under issue No. 6, it was held that the petitioner failed to prove that Budh Singh was employed by the aforesaid Trust and further that his employment was of casual nature and was thus not covered under the Act.
Issue No. 7 was also decided against the petitioners and it was held that Budh Singh was not a workman under the Act.
Issue No. 8 was, however, decided in favour of the petitioners and it was held that Budh Singh died because of the injuries received in the accident in question.
Under issue No. 9, with regard to service of notice, it was held that the same was not served on the proper person and was thus not valid.
Under issue No. 10 it was held that Budh Singh was being paid wages at the rate of Rs. 40/- per day at the material time.
As a result of the decision under issues 6 and 7 the amount of compensation was not determined and it was further held under issue No. 12 that the petitioners were not entitled to recover compensation from any of the respondents in their individual capacity either jointly or severally.
Under issue No. 13 relating to jurisdiction, it was held that the Commissioner had necessary jurisdiction as the accident took place within its territorial jurisdiction.
As a result of these findings, the petition was dismissed, leaving the parties to beat their own costs.
Aggrieved against the order, the petitioners have preferred this appeal.
6.
I have heard Mr. Premjit Kalia for the petitioner-appellants and Mrs. Surjit Bindra for the respondents.
7.
The findings on certain issues, which have been decided in favour of the petitioner-appellants, have not been assailed.
These findings are even otherwise correct and are, therefore, affirmed.
8.
Only two questions remain.
These are, whether Budh Singh was a 'workman' within the meaning of the Act and the validity of notice served in this case.
9.
Clause (n) of Section 2 of the Act defines 'workman' in the following words :-  "Workman" means any person (other than a person whose employment is of a casual nature and who is employed otherwise than for the purpose of the employer's trade or business) who is :-  (i) xx xx xx xx  (ii) employed in any such capacity as is specified in Schedule-II, whether the contract of employment was made before or after the passing of this Act and whether such contract is expressed or implied, oral or in writing; but does not include any person working in the capacity of a member of the Armed Forces of the Union; and any reference to a workman who has been injured shall, where the workman is dead includes a reference to his dependents or any of them."
The relevant part of Schedule-II in terms of clause (n) (ii) above is as follows :-  "The following persons are workmen within the meaning of Section 2(1)(n) and subject to the provisions of that section, that is to say any person who is -  xx xx xx xx  (viii) employed in the construction, maintenance, repair or demolition of - (a) any building which is designed to be or is or has been more than one storey in height above the ground or twelve feet or more from the ground level to the apex of the roof; or  xx xx xx xx  10.
The contention of Mrs. Surjit Bindra is that it was nowhere pleaded nor proved that the deceased was working on a building which was more than one storey in height or more than 12 feet from the ground level.
In the absence of any such averment, one of the necessary ingredients of being a workman was missing and, therefore, the deceased could not be deemed to be workman so as to attract the applicability of the Act.
Further contention of Mrs. Bindra is that under Section 48 of the Trusts Act, no trustee can act singly and all must join in the execution of the trust except where the instrument of Trust otherwise provides.
It was further contended that the deceased had not been employed in connection with the trade or business which was to carry out the objects of the Trust including imparting of education.
In other words, the deceased was employed for construction work which was distinct from the employer's trade or business which was carrying out the objects of the Trust including the imparting of education by running a Higher Secondary School.
11.
After careful consideration I am unable to accept any of the these contentions.
12.
A perusal of clause (viii) of Schedule-II, reproduced above, shows that the various parts of sub-clause (a) are separated by us of the word or' and not by the use of 'comma'.
This necessarily implies that the various parts of sub-clause (a) have to be read disjunctively and not conjunctively.
Thus construed, the first part of sub-clause (a) would read 'employed in the construction, maintenance, repair or demolition of any building which is designed to be or is, It follows that a person employed in connection with the aforesaid purposes in respect of any building, which is a building properly so called or which is designed to be one such, would satisfy the requirement of the above definition.
It is not disputed that the repair which was being carried out when the accident took place was of the building of the Higher Secondary School.
The other parts of sub-clause (a), namely, a building having more than one storey in height or having a height of 12 feet or more from the ground level are not applicable and the absence of any pleadings on that score is not sufficient to throw out the claim of the petitioner-appellants.
13.
It was admitted on behalf of the respondents that Budh Singh had been employed as a mason by Sardari Lal Kapoor who was a member of the Trust and also its Joint Secretary.
No doubt, under Section 28 of the Trust Act the trustees could not act singly, but the respondent-Trust cannot take advantage of its own default in not passing a resolution regarding the employment of Budh Singh and other workmen to carry out the work of repair to the school building.
It is impossible for a mere mason or labourer to ask the Trust to pass the necessary resolution before he is employed.
It would lead to an impossibility if such a literal construction were placed on the provisions of Section 28 in the facts and circumstances of the case in hand.
14.
When the Trust undertook the work of carrying out extensive repairs or replacement of the roof, that was the employer's trade or business and it was in that connection that Budh Singh deceased was employed.
If the words of the definition appearing in clause (x) are not construed in this manner, it would lead to absurdity.
15.
Coming to the last contention, the word 'casual' occurring in the definition has not been defined under the Act.
It has been observed in more than one decisions that the word is not capable of a precise definition.
The sum and substance of various decisions dealing with this aspect of the matter whether employment is of a casual nature or otherwise, depends on the facts and circumstances of each case.
The onus of proving that the employment was of a casual nature is on the employer and where the employer fails to discharge that onus, it would follow that the workman was covered under the Act.
In Raj Rani v. Firm Narsing Mela Ram and another, AIR 1964 Punjab 315, the facts were that a person was employed on wages for painting the premises of a shop while painting the premises, he touched a live electric wire and died on account of electric shock.
It was held that the deceased was a workman within the meaning of the Act.
Shamsher Bahadur, J (as he then was) observed that in construing what is an employment of a casual nature, it is the nature of the service which has to be looked at and not its duration.
It was further observed that with the progress of times the concept and the circumstances in which a workman is entitled to compensation has considerably widened and a liberal construction has to be put on this pharse.
The learned Judge made reference to several other authorities of various Indian Penal Codes, which included cases whereas person employed for executing repairs to the building fell from the scaffolding while executing repairs and the heirs were held entitled to compensation under the Act.
In a more recent case in Rakha Ram v. Harcharan Dass, 1983 CLJ (C&Cr) 175 the aforesaid decision in Raj Rani's case (supra) was followed and it was held that the employer having failed to establish that the employment of the workman was of a casual nature, the person concerned was covered by the provision of the Act.
The law laid down in Raj Rani as well as Rakha Ram clearly applies to the facts and circumstances of the present case.
It is, therefore, held that Budh Singh was a workman with the meaning of the Act and petitioner-appellant are entitled to succeed.
16.
In The Municipal Commissioner, Baroda v. Patel Engineering Co Ltd, 1976 ACJ 104, their Lordship of the Supreme Court, while considering the provisions of the Section 4-A of the Act laid down as under :  "Sub-section (1) of Section 4-A of the Act provides that compensation under Section 4 shall be paid as soon as it falls due.
Sub-section (3) of Section 4-A of the Act provides that where any employer is in default paying the compensation due under the Act within one month from the date it fell due, the Commissioner may direct that, in addition to the amount due together with, if in the opinion of the Commissioner there is no justification for the delay, a further sum not exceeding fifty per cent of such amount shall be recovered from the employer by way of penalty.
A bare reading of these provisions indicates that the employer is under the obligation to pay the amount of compensation as soon as it falls due on the date on which the incident occurred.
If the employer fails to do so the law cast a duty on him to pay interest at the rate of 6 per cent if the Commissioner so orders.
The employer who does not pay compensation on the date when it falls due can be made liable to pay interest to the amount of compensation because there is a delay in the payment which the statute requires him to pay as soon as it falls due."
17.
With regard to the validity of the notice, all that was pleaded in the written statement on behalf of the respondents was that the notice had been duly replied to.
In other words, no objections was taken as to the person on whom the notice was required to be served or any infirmity in the notice on that account.
Even otherwise, the notice was admittedly served on Sardari Lal Kapoor, who was Joint Secretary of the Trust.
I find no infirmity in the notice.
18.
The only question which remains to be considered is whether the claim of the petitioner-appellants must be confined to a sum of Rs. 30,000/- on the ground that, that was the amount claimed by them.
The contention of Mrs. Bindra, learned counsel for the respondents, is that the petitioner-appellants must be held bound by their pleadings.
Mr. Kalia, on the other hand, submitted that sections 4-A and 5 of the Act lay down the method for calculating compensation and there is no estoppel against the statute.
I find force in the submission of Mr. Kalia.
In fact, this view finds support from the observations appearing in Hastimal v. Arjunan, 1992 ACJ 762.
It was observed in paragraph 12 that a poor workman who committed a mistake in claiming compensation in a sum less than that to which he would be legitimately entitled will not, however debar the Commissioner from awarding compensation in a sum to which he is legitimately entitled under the provisions of the Act.
I am in respectful agreement with the above observations.
19.
For the foregoing reasons, the appeal is allowed and the order of the Commissioner is set aside.
It is directed that the Commissioner shall work out the compensation in accordance with the provisions of the Act and shall also work out the interest at the rate of 6 per cent per annum besides penalty in accordance with the provisions of Section 4-A of the Act, within two months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
The amount so determined shall be payable/recoverable according to law.
The appellants shall be entitled to their costs, which are required as Rs. 2500/-.
Appeal allowed.