Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioners, who are working as Electricians in the Punjab State Electricity Board and have qualified the Certificate Course after attending evening classes, pray for the issue of a writ of mandamus directing the Board to consider them for direct recruitment to the posts of Sub-Station attendants.
They also pray that the circular issued by the Board vide letter dated March 21, 1990, which inter alia, provides that the certificate obtained after attending evening classes will not be considered at par with that obtained after attending regular course for purpose of direct recruitment is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
On January 6, 1994, the respondent-Board issued an advertisement inviting applications for filling up the posts of Sub-Station Attendants by direct recruitment from the technical staff of the Board working on regular/work-charge basis......
The following qualifications were prescribed :-  "1.
The regular work-charged employees working in the Board on regular work-charge basis who have passed Matriculation and III Electrician or equivalent trade or who have three/four years Electrical Engineering Diploma.
Or  The Daily wagers/Contingent staff working in the Board who have passed Matric or its equivalent and have obtained National Apprenticeship Electrician Certificate or Switch Board Attendant Trade Certificate or 3/4 years Electrical Engineering qualification, with a condition that they must have completed 500 days service upto a stipulated cut-off date (311289).
2.
Passing of Punjabi upto Matric standard is necessary."
3.
The petitioners aver that they have passed the Course of Theoretical training from the Department of Technical Education and as such they were eligible for being considered.
They applied for the posts.
While letters of interview were issued to various candidates on March 17, 1994, the petitioners did not receive any such communication.
They made enquiries and learnt that vide letter dated March 21, 1990, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-5 with the writ petition, the Board had circulated instructions that persons, who have qualified the Certificate Course by attending evening classes shall be eligible for promotion, but not be considered as eligible for direct recruitment.
Consequently, the petitioners who had qualified the Course by attending evening classes were not considered as eligible for direct recruitment to the posts of Sub-Station Attendants.
Aggrieved by this action, the petitioners have approached this Court through the present writ petition.
They aver that they are eligible to be considered for direct recruitment to the posts of Sub-Station Attendants as they possess the qualification of Matriculation and ITI Certificate in the trade of Electricians.
They further challenge the instructions issued vide letter dated March 21, 1990 of being violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
4.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondent.
It has been averred by way of a preliminary objection that "the petitioners do not possess the National Apprenticeship/Trade Certificates conducted by the ITI which is the only recognised course for the purpose of direct recruitment to the post of Sub-Station Attendant."
According to the respondent, the petitioners possess a certificate from the State Council for Training & Vocational Trade which is a course conducted for industrial workers and which is not recognised for the purpose of direct recruitment to the Sub-Station Attendant.
"It has also been averred that the petitioners have not deliberately produced a complete copy of the certificate.
It is also mentioned that the conditions of eligibility, the syllabi and the course content of the prescribed qualifications, vis-a-vis those possessed by the petitioners are entirely different.
While candidates, who have passed Matriculation with Science (Physics and Chemistry) are eligible for admission to the regular course conducted by the Industrial Training Institutes, the industrial workers, who are merely literate and are sponsored by the employers, are eligible for admission to the evening classes conducted by these Institutes.
The candidates who attend the regular course of two years duration have to study for 42 hours per week and get theoretical as well as practical training, while those attending evening classes are taught for a total period of six hours per week and get no practical training.
The candidates attending regular course of studies have to appear in an examination carrying a total of 600 marks while those who attend evening classes appear in an examination for a total of 250 marks only.
At the end of the course, the candidates who have attended regular courses are awarded the National Trade Certificate under Craftsman Training Scheme while others are merely awarded a Certificate.
It has been pointed out that on the basis of these facts, the Director Technical Education and Industrial Training Punjab had vide letter dated January 19, 1987 issued a clarification and observed that "those students who obtain certificate in ITI in any trade/Course by attending evening classes, the said certificate is not considered equivalent to National Trade Certificate (II) issued to regular students."
According to the respondent, it was in view of these facts that the Board had issued the impugned instructions vide letter dated March 21, 1990.
It is accordingly maintained that the petitioners are not eligible to be considered for direct recruitment to the post of Sub-Station Attendants.
It has also been averred that Electricians who have a separate channel are not eligible for promotion to the posts of Sub-Station Attendants.
5.
Mr. JS Maanipur, learned counsel for the petitioners, has made a two- fold submission.
Firstly, it has been contended that the Board is bound by the advertisement.
Since the prescribed qualification is Matriculation with ITI Certificate in the trade of Electrician, the Board cannot make a distinction between the persons who have obtained this certificate by attending morning or evening classes.
Secondly, the learned counsel has contended that the qualification of the petitioners having been recognised for purposes of promotion, they cannot be ignored for direct recruitment to the posts of Sub-Station Attendants.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioners has been controverted by the learned counsel for the respondent.
6.
A perusal of the above noted pleading clearly shows that persons who attend regular course at the Industrial Training Institutes undergo a thorough training.
Besides gaining theoretical knowledge, they work in Workshops and are taught even 'engineering drawing'.
They are also imparted practical training.
They attend Classes for 42 hours per week.
As against this, persons, like the petitioners, attend classes for only six hours per week.
They are given no practical training at all.
If in view of these facts and on the basis of the opinion expressed by the Director of Technical Education, Punjab.
The Board has taken a conscious decision and decided that persons, who qualify the course while attending evening classes shall be eligible only for promotion and not for direct recruitment, it cannot be said that it had acted arbitrarily or unfairly.
It is the employer's right to select and appoint competent persons who may be able to discharge their duties efficiently.
If in the discharge of its duties, the Board decided that only such persons as have qualified the ITI course by attending regular classes shall be eligible for direct recruitment, it cannot be said that it had acted unfairly or in violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
Certain categories of employees, like oilers and cleaners, to which none of the petitioners belong, are said to have been made eligible for promotion to the posts of Sub-Station Attendants on their qualifying the course while attending the evening classes.
This, however, does not mean that the two courses have been equated or that the persons who have attended the evening classes only have been discriminated against on being declared as ineligible for direct recruitment.
Consequently, the contention that the instructions issued vide letter dated March 21, 1990 are violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution cannot be sustained.
7.
Learned counsel also contended that the action of the Board amounts to retrospective decrecognition of the qualifications.
Even this contention is misconceived.
No letter has been produced to show that the persons qualifying the evening course were ever declared eligible for direct recruitment to the posts of Sub-Station Attendants.
In the absence of a positive decision recognising this qualification for direct recruitment, it cannot be said that the qualifications have been retrospectively recognised.
Consequently, even this claim of the petitioners wholly lacking in merit.
8.
Coming to the other argument raised by the learned counsel that the Board is bound by the advertisement, it deserves mention that normally the employer is bound by the qualifications advertised by it and every person who fulfils those qualifications hits a right to be considered.
The rights of the parties have to be determined on the basis of the public representation contained in the advertisement.
The short question is.
Do the petitioners possess the qualifications prescribed in the advertisement ?
A perusal of this advertisement shows that to be eligible a candidate must have passed matriculation and the course from the Industrial Training Institute in the Trade of 'Electrician'.
In view of the fact that the Board had already taken a decision as far back as March 21, 1990 to the effect that only such candidates as have attended regular classes shall be eligible for direct recruitment and those who have attended only evening classes shall not be eligible, it is reasonable to assume that the reference to the ITI course in the Trade of Electrician is only to the regular course and not to the part-time or the evening classes.
It also appears reasonable to say that the words of an advertisement have not to be construed like those in a statute.
Still further, no decision, circular or rule has been pointed out to show that persons who have merely attended evening classes are considered as eligible for direct recruitment to the post of Sub-Station Attendants.
Furthermore, the petitioners are working in the Board.
They are aware of the instructions issued vide letter dated March 21, 1990.
They have, in fact, impugned these instructions.
They were, consequently clear about the intention of the Board when it issued the advertisement on January 6, 1994.
Even if it is assumed that there is some slight ambiguity in the advertisement, the position becomes wholly clear when it is read along with the instructions of the Board.
Moreover, one cannot also lose sight of the fact that a categorical averment has been made in the written statement that the petitioners do not possess the National Apprenticeship or Trade Certificate from the Industrial Training Institute.
They possess only a certificate from the State Council for Training in Vocational Trades, which is not recognised for the purpose of direct recruitment to the posts of Sub-Station Attendants.
This has not been controverted by the petitioners by filing any rejoinder.
Mr. Maanipur, however, points out that in paragraph 8 (i) of the written statement, it has been averred that the petitioners possess the ITI conducted by the State Council for Training and Vocational Trade which is not recognised course..." This contention is misconceived.
In the next line, it has been categorically averred that this certificate "is not recognised for the purpose of direct recruitment to the post of Sub-Station Attendants."
9.
Mr. Maanipur then contends that the Board has no jurisdiction to declare that a particular qualification is not equivalent to another qualification.
This contention is wholly misconceived.
Firstly, no such plea has been raised in the writ petition.
Secondly, every employer has the jurisdiction to recognise or not to recognise a particular qualification.
This is precisely what has been done in the present case.
Still further, the action of the Board in not recognising the course attended by the petitioners as equivalent to the regular course is based on good reasons.
It is not arbitrary.
It is just and fair.
Accordingly, the contention cannot be accepted.
10.
The petitioners had moved an application No. 3027 of 1994 after the admission of the writ petition for impleading the Director of Technical Education as a respondent.
This is wholly unnecessary.
The Motion Bench having stayed the declaration of result, issue of notice in this application only delayed the decision of the case.
Even otherwise, the prayer for impleading the Secretary, Technical Education and Industrial Training, Punjab, as a party can serve no useful purpose.
Consequently, this application which was ordered to be heard with the main case is dismissed.
11.
Civil Misc.
Application No. 4492 of 1994 has been filed by the Board for vacation of stay.
In view of the fact that the main case has been decided, even this application has become infructuous and, is, accordingly dismissed.
No other point has been urged.
12.
In view of the above, there is no merit in this petition.
It is dismissed.
However, in the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.