Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner, a retired District & Sessions Judge, claims that in accordance with Rule 4-2(1), he is entitled to special addition to his service qualifying for superannuation pension.
Is he entitled to this benefit ?
2.
The facts lie within a narrow compass.
The petitioner graduated in Law in 1958.
He was appointed to the Punjab Civil Service (Executive Branch) on December 1, 1961.
On October 2, 1964, he was absorbed in the Punjab Civil Service (Judicial Branch).
On September 1, 1977, he was promoted to the Punjab Superior Judicial Service.
He retired as District & Sessions Judge on March 31, 1992.
The petitioner had put in a total service of 39 years and four months.
3.
The members of the Punjab Superior Judicial Service are governed by the provisions of the 'Punjab Superior Judicial Service Rules, 1963'.
Rule 8 inter alia provides that the recruitment to the Service shall be made (1) "by promotion from amongst the members of the Punjab Civil Service (Judicial Branch) who have completed not less than ten years continuous service as such....." and (ii) by direct recruitment.
Rule 9 inter alia provides that no person shall be eligible for direct recruitment unless he - (i) "is not less than 35 years and not more than 45 years of age on the first day of January next following the year in which his appointment is made; (ii) has been for not less than 10 years an Advocate or pleader and is recommended...." The petitioner points out that the provisions of the Rules were amended vide Notification dated February 22, 1990 by which Rule 16 was substituted as under :-  16.
Death-cum-retirement benefits :- In respect of death-cum-retirement benefits the members of the service shall be governed by the Punjab Civil Rules, Volume II as amended from time to time :  Provided that in the case of a direct recruit of this service, the actual period of practice at Bar not exceeding ten years, shall be added to his service qualifying for superannuation pension and other retirement benefits.
Explanatory Note :- For removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that a direct recruit to this service, who immediately before joining the service was a Law Officer or District Attorney shall also be entitled to the benefit of actual number of years not exceeding ten years, put in by way of practice at the Bar, being counted towards his service qualifying for superannuation pension and other retirement benefits."
4.
On the basis of these provisions, the petitioner avers that "all members of the Superior Judicial Service whether they are promotees or direct recruits are entitled to the benefit of Rule 42 (1) of the Punjab Civil Service Rules, Volume-II."
He further avers that since the benefit as due to the petitioner under Rule 42 of the Punjab Civil Service Rules had not been granted to him by the respondents, he had made a representation even prior to his retirement on February 25, 1992.
This was declined vide letter dated April 18, 1992 and the petitioner was informed "that by virtue of his initial recruitment to the Punjab Civil Service (Executive Branch) he is not entitled to the benefit of Rule 42 of Punjab Civil Services Rules, Vol. II.
A copy of this letter has been produced as Annexure P-5.
He made another representation which was declined vide letter dated August 10, 1992.
The petitioner impugns the action of the State Government in not extending to him "the benefit of special addition to the qualifying service for superannuation pension to all members of the Punjab Superior Judicial Service retiring after amendment of Rule 16..."  5.
The claim made by the petitioner has been controverted in the written statement filed by the Registrar of this Court.
It has been inter alia averred that since the petitioner "was not recruited to the Punjab Superior Judicial Service from the Bar he has no claim for the special addition to qualifying service under the provisions of Rule 16 of the Punjab Superior Judicial Service Rules, 1963.
As regards his claim under Rule 42(1) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume II, it is stated that he was initially recruited to the PCS (Executive Branch) for which the basic qualification is simple graduate and no post-graduate qualification is essential....." On this basis, the claim of the petitioner has been controverted.
The petitioner has filed a rejoinder to the written statement and reiterated his claim.
6.
I have heard the petitioner who has argued his case in person and Mr. Randhir Singh, learned counsel for the respondents.
7.
The only contention raised by the petitioner is that a person becomes eligible for appointment to the Punjab Superior Judicial Service either after serving for 10 years in the Punjab Civil Service (Judicial Branch) or after working for 10 years as direct recruit from the Bar, Rule 16 provides for fictional addition to the actual service rendered by a person, no corresponding addition is allowed in the case of a promotee from the Punjab Civil Service (Judicial Branch).
On this basis, the learned counsel contends that the action suffers from the vice discrimination and cannot be sustained.
The claim made by the petitioner has been controverted by Mr. Randhir Singh, learned counsel for the respondents.
8.
A perusal of the factual position as noticed above shows that the petitioner has put in a total service of 30 years and four months.
He had served for about 15 years and 9 months in the Punjab Civil Service and for about 14 years and 6 months in the Superior Judicial Service.
It is also the admitted position that his superannuation pension has not been fixed on the basis of his service rendered by him on a post in Superior Judicial Service only.
In fact, the entire period of more than 30 years has been taken into consideration and pension has been fixed at Rs. 3540/- per month.
Is he still entitled to make a fictional addition to the actual service rendered by him ?
9.
A perusal of Rule 16 (supra) shows that the members of the Superior Judicial Service are governed by the provisions of the Punjab Civil Service Rules, Volume II in respect of death-cum-retirement benefits.
It has been further directed that in case of a direct recruit to the service "the actual period of practice at Bar not exceeding 10 years shall be added to his service qualifying for superannuation pension and other retirement benefits."
This is a clear rationale for this rule.
10.
A perusal of Rule 9 shows that direct recruitment to the service is restricted to the persons in the age group of 35 to 45 years.
Normally, such a person would retire after putting in a comparatively much shorter period of service.
As a result, even the admissible pension would be less than that granted to a promotee.
It was apparently to undo this hardship that Rule 16 was substituted to provide that an addition of actual period of practice at Bar not exceeding 10 years shall be made to the Service qualifying for superannuation pension.
However, it cannot be said that this addition to the qualifying service causes discrimination against a person appointed by promotion.
It is no doubt true that even in case of appointment by promotion, an officer becomes eligible only after he has worked in the Punjab Civil Service (Judicial Branch) for a period of 10 years but he gets the benefit of entire service towards computation of pension.
By the amendment of Rule 16, the hardship to the direct recruitment has been done away with.
The persons appointed by direct recruitment have been brought at par with those appointed by promotion.
A promotee cannot complain of discrimination.
In his case, the entire period of service is taken into consideration for determining the amount of pension due to him.
Rule 16 does not discriminate against a promotee.
Consequently, the complaint of discrimination made by the petitioner cannot be sustained.
11.
Mr. Gupta also relied upon the provisions of Rule 42(1) of the Punjab Civil Service Rules, Volume II to contend that a special addition to the qualifying service is admissible.
The rule provides as under :-  "4-2-(1) A Government employee appointed to a service or post after the twenty-sixth day of October, 1960, shall be eligible to add to his service qualifying for superannuation pension (but not for any other class of pension), the actual period not exceeding one-fourth of the length of his service or the actual-period by which his age at the time of recruitment exceeded twenty-five years, or a period of five years, whichever is less, if the service or post to which the Government employee is appointed is one -  (a) for which post-graduate research or specialist qualification, or experience in scientific, technological or professional fields, is essential; and  (b) to which candidates of more than twenty-five years of age are normally recruited; provided that this concession shall not be admissible to a Government employee unless his actual qualifying service at the time he quits Government service is not less than ten years :  Provided further that this concession shall be admissible only if the recruitment rules in respect of the said service or post contain a specific provision that the service or post is one which carries the benefit of this rule."
In view of the amended provision of Rule 16 (supra) and the above proviso, this rule is certainly applicable to the members of the Superior Judicial Service.
However, the benefit under this rule is available only when a Government employee is appointed to a post for which "(a) post-graduate research or specialist qualification, or experience in scientific, technological or professional fields, is essential; and (b) to which candidates of more than 25 years of age are normally recruited."
It has not been shown that a person appointed to the Punjab Civil Service is required to possess any post graduate specialist qualification or experience in scientific technological or professional fields."
Consequently, the first condition which is essential for invoking the provision of Rule 42(1) is not fulfilled.
As a result, the benefit claimed by the petitioner under this rule is not admissible to him.
12.
There is, thus, no merit in this petition.
It is, accordingly, dismissed.
However, in the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.