Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - The petitioner while working as a Lecturer in History in D.A.V.
Centenary College, Faridabad on part time basis in response to the advertisement issued by respondent No. 2 (for short 'DAV Managing Committee') applied for the post of Lecturer in History at D.A.V.
Centenary College, Faridabad, in June, 1989.
The petitioner had also served the respondent-College on whole time basis from 11.1.1988 to 3131988, 12.8.1988 to 30111988 and 12.1.1989 to 3131989.
In response to the advertisement, thirty-nine candidates were called for interview.
However, only nineteen candidates turned up for interview.
The petitioner was placed at No. 1 in the selection list and S/Sh.
Babu Ram and Gajinder Singh Chauhan were placed on waiting list in order of their merit.
The Principal of the College forwarded the proceedings of the meeting of the Selection Committee to the Vice-Chancellor of the MD University (hereinafter referred to as 'University') vide his letter dated 1271989.
The petitioner was issued appointment letter which contained the terms and conditions of service.
The petitioner on receipt of the appointment letter joined the College with effect from 181989 and submitted the joining report, copy of which is Annexure P-4 to the writ petition.
2.
The Deputy Superintendent (Colleges) for Dean Development Council of the University, wrote to the college to send the comments on the note sent by Dr. S P Shukla, who was nominee of the Vice-Chancellor in the Selection Committee and had given a dissenting note.
The Principal of the College sent a detailed reply, copy of which is Annexure P-7 to the writ petition.
The respondent-College also supplied information to the University.
To petitioner's great dismay, the Vice-Chancellor of the University did not approve the appointment of the petitioner as Lecturer in History.
The Principal of the College had made a request to the University on 2181989 that necessary approval to the selection of the petitioner be granted.
However, the respondent-University vide letter dated 18101989 informed the Principal of the College that the appointment of the petitioner as Lecturer has not been approved.
Thereafter, a meeting between the petitioner and the Vice-Chancellor was also held in which the Principal had explained the whole position.
The petitioner continued to write letters for approval of his appointment but all in vain.
The petitioner was left with no other option but to file the writ petition seeking direction for quashing of the orders Annexures P-9, P-11 and P-15 vide which the respondent-University had declined to accord approval to his appointment as Lecturer.
3.
The challenge to the action of the respondents is that the petitioner was selected by a duly constituted Committee and the nominee of Vice-Chancellor was like the other members of the Selection Committee and he had no veto power to nullify the selection of the petitioner as Lecturer.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner had argued that the petitioner had been selected on merit by a duly constituted Committee and the Vice-Chancellor should have accorded approval to his appointment as Lecturer.
5.
In the written statement, the case of the University is that all appointments of Teachers in Government Colleges are to be made on the basis of merit and on all India basis advertisement.
Learned counsel for the respondents has argued that the recommendations of the Selection Committee were subject to the approval of the Vice-Chancellor.
Since the Vice-Chancellor had not approved the appointment of the petitioner as Lecturer, the petitioner is not entitled to claim appointment as a matter of right.
I have considered the submissions of learned counsel for the parties and perused the paper book.
6.
The Selection Committee consisted of Dr. Yash Pal, Dr. Hari Singh, Mrs. Krishna Popli and Dr. S P Shukla, nominee of the Vice-Chancellor.
As mentioned in the earlier part of the judgment, the Selection Committee had called thirty-nine candidates for interview and only nineteen candidates had turned up.
The Board had decided to award marks on the basis of performance of the candidates in the interview.
Out of the five members of the Selection Committee, four had recommended the name of Ashok Kumar Sharma, petitioner.
S/Sh.
Babu Singh and Gajinder Singh Chauhan were placed at Sr. No. 19 and 20 respectively in the waiting list.
The nominee of the Vice-Chancellor had given dissenting note.
Ashok Kumar Sharma, petitioner, who had done M Phil also was selected for appointment as Lecturer in History by a duly constituted Committee on the basis of his performance in the interview.
It appears that the nominee of the Vice-Chancellor was averse to the selection of the petitioner and was favourably interested in the selection of one Sh. Minishwar Dayal to which the majority of the members of the Selection Committee had not agreed.
It is also apparent from the record that the decision taken by the majority of members of the Committee to give maximum marks to the candidates did not find favour with the nominee of the Vice-Chancellor.
The nominee of the Vice-Chancellor had given adverse remarks not only against the petitioner but also against the Selection Committee.
If only the views of the nominee of the Vice-Chancellor were to be weighed then the constitution of the Committee would have become redundant.
The approval of the Vice-Chancellor to the recommendations of the Selection Committee was formal and technical in nature.
There could be no escape from the conclusion that it was incumbent upon the Vice-Chancellor to have approved the recommendation of the Selection Committee.
The Vice-Chancellor could decline the approval only if the constitution of the Selection Committee was against any rules and regulations.
7.
In Dr. BS Sidhu Agronomist v. The Punjab Agriculture University and others, 1991(1) S.L.R.
689 : 1991(1) SCT 404 (P&H) the petitioner was duly selected for the post of Senior Scientist in Sugarcane in accordance with the statute of the University and the Vice-Chancellor had agreed to the recommendations of the Administrative Committee.
However, the Administrative Committee ordered readvertisement of the post and reconstitution of the Committee.
This Court held that the Administrative Committee is not empowered to do so.
Once the petitioner had fulfilled the qualification for the post, there should be strong reasons for refusing to appoint him.
Otherwise, the whole process of selection for public appointments will become a farce and empty formality.
The refusal to appoint a candidate duly recommended should be on some rational ground.
It cannot be arbitrary, irrational and unreasonable as otherwise inaction on the part of the State would be violative of Article 16 of the Constitution of India.
8.
In the present case, the respondent-University has not disclosed any reason whatsoever to show that the petitioner was neither eligible nor suitable for appointment as Lecturer in History especially when he was recommended for appointment by four members out of five members of the duly constituted Committee.
The nominee of the Vice-Chancellor was like any other member of the Committee and his views or expression cannot override the views of the majority members.
In this view of the matter, the action of the respondent-University in not approving the appointment of the petitioner, is not only arbitrary but also violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
For the foregoing reasons, this writ petition is allowed and orders Annexures P/9, P/11 and P/15 are quashed.
The petitioner will be deemed to have been appointed with all consequential benefits.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.