VK Jhanji, J - Petitioner, who is an Assistant Professor (Surgery) in Medical College, Amritsar, is impugning order, Annexure P-9, passed by respondent No. 1, whereby date of promotion of the petitioner was altered from 27121980 to 7101981.
2.
In brief, the facts are that petitioner did his post-graduation in Surgery on 431977.
Thereafter, he worked as Registrar (Surgery) from 431977 to 31.12.78.
He was promoted as Senior Lecturer (Surgery) which post he joined on 21.2.1979 and worked as such till 18121980.
Vide order dated 19121980, petitioner was promoted as Assistant Professor (Surgery) on ad hoc basis and posted at Medical College, Faridkot.
At the time of promotion as Assistant Professor (Surgery), petitioner possessed almost three years, eight months of teaching experience.
On 19121980, i.e. the date on which order promoting the petitioner was passed, respondent No. 3 possessed experience of less than three years.
It may be noticed at this stage that respondent No. 3 did his post-graduation in surgery in October, 1976.
He worked as Registrar (Surgery) from 20.10.1976 to 31.12.1976.
He was posted as Medical Officer, Post Martum Unit, which is attached to the Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology from 111977 to 2261978.
Thereafter, he was appointed as Senior Lecturer (Surgery) and worked as such from 2361978 to 6101981.
Against the promotion of the petitioner, respondent No. 3 represented to respondent No. 1 that he ought to have been promoted before the petitioner because he was selected as Senior Lecturer by the Punjab Public Service Commission on 2831978 and joined as such on 2361978 and his seniority is at No. 23 in the Surgery Department, as shown in the gradation list of 1st July, 1980.
As against this, petitioner joined as Senior Lecturer (Surgery) on 21.2.1979 and his seniority is at No. 2 in the said list.
This representation of respondent No. 3 was considered by the Government, and vide letter dated 2741982, the same was rejected because it was found that his experience as Medical Officer, Post-Partum, cannot be considered as teaching experience.
Subsequently, vide order dated 131984, petitioner as well as respondent No. 3 were appointed as Assistant Professor (Surgery) against promotional post on provisional basis subject to the approval of the Punjab Public Service Commission w.e.f.
27121980 and 7101981 respectively.
Respondent No. 3 being aggrieved of this order, represented to the Government, asking to restore his seniority over the petitioner.
Notice of this representation was given to the petitioner.
Petitioner vide his reply dated 541985 submitted that for be coming eligible, under the rules, for the post of Assistant Professor (Surgery) one must possess three years' teaching experience in the speciality after post-graduation in a Medical College as Senior Lecturer/Lecturer/Registrar/Research Officer.
Since he alone was possessed of the required experience, he was promoted vide order dated 19121980, whereas respondent No. 3 was not having the requisite experience as per rules and, therefore, he was not eligible for promotion at that time, and his representation, after consideration, was rejected by the Government.
Respondent No. 1 vide order dated 20121985, accepted the representation of respondent No. 3 and altered the date of promotion of the petition from 27121980 to 7101981 and consequently, petitioner was placed below respondent No. 3.
Petitioner is impugning this order in the present writ petition on the ground that the order is not only against the rules, but also against the instruction of the State Government, and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
3.
In reply to the writ petition, written statement has been filed only on behalf of respondent No. 1 and 2.
Respondent No. 3 has chosen not to file any written statement.
Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 in their written statement have admitted that though respondent No. 3 was senior at the time when the petitioner was promoted as Assistant Professor (Surgery) on ad hoc basis, yet he was not promoted because he did not fulfil the requisite teaching experience of three years after post-graduation in Surgery which as required under the rules for promotion as Assistant Professor (Surgery).
Further, according to respondent Nos. 1 and 2, the representation of respondent No. 3 was accepted in view of government instructions dated 1131982 and also in view of decision of this Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 392 of 1982.
His experience as Medical Officer, Post-Martum programme, from 111977 to 2261978 was taken as teaching experience.
4.
Mr. Ashok Aggarwal, counsel for the petitioner, contended that order, Annexure P-9, cannot be sustained for the reason that at the time when petitioner was promoted, he was the senior-most person eligible for promotion.
Mr. Aggarwal next urged that letter No. 15/81-PP/16047 quoted in Annexure P-9 does not apply to the case of the petitioner.
According to him, it applies only in those cases where promotion was made on the basis of past ad hoc service, whereas the petitioner was working as regular Registrar and Senior Lecturer.
Lastly, Mr. Aggarwal urged that Civil Writ Petition No. 392 of 1982, reference of which has been made in Annexure P-9, is not at all related or similar to the case of the petitioner.
The qualification and experience rule in both cases is absolutely different.
In answer to these contentions, learned counsel for the respondents contended that initially the petitioner was promoted on ad hoc basis, and when his services were regularised by the Government, it was open to the Government to fix a date for the purposes of promotion of the petitioner.
Counsel also justified the impugned order on the basis of ground so mentioned in the impugned order.
5.
In order to appreciate the respective contentions of learned counsel for the parties, it is necessary to notice the relevant rule which governs the service conditions of an Assistant Professor.
The qualification and teaching experience required for being appointed to the post of Assistant Professor (Surgery) are laid down in Rule 7 and appendix 'C' of the Punjab Medical Education Service (Class-I) Rules, 1978, (hereinafter referred to as 1978 Rules).
The relevant part of Rule 7 and Appendix 'C' of the 1978 Rules is as under :-  "Rule-7 :  "7 Age and qualifications - (1) No person shall be recruited to the Service by direct appointment unless he is less than 40 years of age in the case of Assistant Professor, Additional Professor or Professor; provided that the Government may in special circumstances to be recorded in writing, relax the upper age limit.
For the purpose of this rule, the age will be on the last date of receipt of applications by the Commission.
(2) No person shall be recruit to the service by direct appointment, promotion or by transfer unless he possesses the qualifications and teaching experience as is specified in Appendix 'C'.
(3) A member of the service recruited by direct appointment shall not be retained in service unless he acquires knowledge of Punjabi language of matriculation standard within a period of 6 months from the date of appointment to the service."
Appendix 'C' :  Assistant Professor (Clinical) viz., Medicine, Surgery, Obstetrics and Gynecology, Paediatrics, T.B., Psychiatry, Skin and V.I.D., Cardiology, Neurology, Gastro-Entrology, Orthopaedics, Anaesthesia, Radiology, Ear, Nose and Throat (Qte-Rhino Laryn Gology), Ophthalmology, Thoracis Surgery, Neuro Surgery, Plastic Surgery, Genite Urinary Surgery, Paediatric Surgery.
Post-graduate degree in the Speciality concerned, MD, MS, PhD, MSc, FRCS, MR CP etc., Must possess 3 years, teaching experience in the speciality after post-graduation in a medical college as Senior Lecturer, Lecturer Registrar, Research Officer.
Out of this 3 years' experience, however, 2 years' experience in main speciality is essential, remaining 1 year may be in a subject allied to general medicine/surgery.
A Persual of sub-rule (2) of Rule 7 and Appendix 'C' the 1978 Rules, would reveal that for appointment to the post of Assistant Professor (Surgery), the required qualification is, post-graduate degree in the speciality concerned i.e.
Surgery with 3 years' teaching experience in the speciality after post-graduation in a medical college as Senior Lecturer, Lecturer Registrar, Research Officer.
Out of this three years' teaching experience two years' experience in the main speciality is essential and the remaining one year may be in a subject allied to general Medicine/Surgery.
As per the rules, at the time when the petitioner was promoted, though on ad hoc basis, he was having the requisite teaching experience of three years, after post-graduation, for being appointed as Assistance Registrar (Surgery).
This factual position has not been denied by respondent Nos. 1 and 2 in their written statement, rather it stands admitted in para-3 of the written statement.
It further finds mention in the written statement that there were six doctors who were senior to the petitioner as Senior Lecturer (Surgery), including respondent No. 3, but they did not fulfil the requisite teaching experience of three years at the time when the case for promotion was considered.
Respondent No. 3, at the time when the petitioner was promoted, made a grievance that he was entitled to be promoted as he had the requisite experience - His representation was considered by the Government and rejected because his experience as Medical Officer (Post-Partum) was not considered as teaching experience.
In my considered view, his representation was rightly rejected by the Government.
The experience which respondent No. 3 had acquired while he was working as Medical Officer (Post-Partum) cannot be considered as teaching experience because Appendix 'C' to the 1978 Rules specifically provides that teaching experience must have been obtained in a medical college as Senior Lecturer, Lecturer/Registrar, Research Officer.
Respondent No. 3 never worked as Senior Lecturer, Lecturer, Registrar or Research Officer and that too in the speciality concerned.
The experience gained by him as Medical Officer (Post-Partum) would not clothe him with teaching experience required under the Rules.
6.
The contention of counsel for the respondent that at the time of regularisation of service, it was open to the Government to fix a date for promotion cannot but accepted as far as facts of the present case are concerned.
As revealed in the pleadings, the petitioner was regularly appointed as Assistant Professor (Surgery against promotional quota posts, subject to the approval of the Punjab Public Service Commission, Patiala, w.e.f.
27121980, i.e. the date when he was promoted on ad hoc basis.
Similarly, respondent No. 3 was appointed against promotional posts, with effect from 7101981, after having obtained the requisite teaching experience.
The question, thus arises is as to whether the date of promotion of the petitioner can be altered to 7101981 for the reason that respondent No. 3 was senior to the petitioner as Senior Lecturer/Surgery.
The answer has to be in the negative.
The date on which the petitioner was promoted respondent No. 3 was not eligible.
He acquired eligibility later than the petitioner.
The matter would have been different if at the time of regularisation the senior had acquired eligibility.
In that situation the senior was to be appointed to the promotional post.
As already, he was the only one eligible and the other five doctors including respondent No. 3, though senior, were not eligible because they did not have the requisite teaching experience of three years after doing post-graduation which was required under the rules for promotion as Assistant Professor (Surgery).
Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 in para 5 of their written statement, have admitted that case of all Senior Lecturers (Surgery) including that of respondent No. 3, was considered at the time of ordering promotion of the petitioner.
This promotion later on was approved vide order dated 131984 when the petitioner was adjusted as Assistant Professor (Surgery) w.e.f.
27121980 i.e. the date on which he was appointed on ad hoc basis.
7.
It was next urged by the learned counsel for the respondents that when the petitioner was promoted, it was only a stop-gap arrangement and officiating in such promotional post cannot be taken for considering the seniority.
I am afraid to accept this contention for the reason that when the petitioner was promoted, all persons senior to him were considered.
Petitioner alone was promoted because he was found the only candidate eligible for promotion to the post of Assistant Professor (Surgery) and he continued in that post uninterruptedly till regularisation of his service in accordance with the Rules.
His ad hoc promotion was on the basis of selection, followed by regular appointment.
The case of the petitioner is squarely covered by conclusion(B) of para 44 of the judgment reported as The Direct Recruit Class-II 'Engineering Officers' Association and others v. State of Maharashtra and others, AIR 1990 SC 1607, and also of paras 24 and 25 of the judgment reported as State of West Bengal and others v. Aghore Nath Dey and others, 1993(2) SCT 734 (SC) : JT 1993(2) SC 598 wherein conclusion (B) was explained :  44(B) - If the initial appointment is not made by following the procedure laid down by the rules but the appointee continues in the post uninterruptedly till the regularisation of his service in accordance with the rules, the period of officiating service will be counted."
"Conclusion (B) as explained in paras 24 and 25 of judgment in JT 1993(2) SC 598 :  "24.
The question, therefore, is of the category which would be covered by conclusion (B) excluding therefrom the cases covered by the corollary in conclusion (A).
25.
In our opinion, the conclusion (B) was added to cover a different kind of situation, wherein the appointments are otherwise regular, except for the deficiency of certain procedural requirements laid down by the rules.
This is clear from the opening words of the conclusion (B), namely, 'if the initial appointment is not made by following the procedure laid down by the rules and the later expression 'till the regularisation of his service in accordance with the rules'.
We read conclusion (B), and it must be so read to reconciled with conclusion (A), to cover the cases where the initial appointment is made against an existing vacancy, not limited to a fixed period of time or purpose by the appointment order itself, and is made subject to the deficiency in the procedural requirements prescribed by the rules for adjudging suitability of the appointee for the post being cured at the time of regularisation, the appointee being eligible and qualified in every manner for a regular appointment on the date of initial appointment in such cases.
Decision about the nature of the appointment, for determining whether it falls in this category, has to be made on the basis of the terms of initial appointment itself and the provisions in the rules.
In such cases, the deficiency in the procedural requirements laid down by the rules has to be cured at the first available opportunity, without any default of the employee, and the appointee must continue in the post uninterruptedly till the reqlarisation of his service, in accordance with the rules.
In such cases, the appointee is not to blame for the deficiency in the procedural requirements under the rules at the time of his initial appointment, and the appointment not being limited to a fixed period of time is intended to be a regular appointment, subject to the remaining procedural requirements of the rules being fulfilled at the earliest."
I am in agreement with the contention of Mr. Aggarwal that instructions contained in letter No. 15/81-PP/16047, referred to in Annexure P-9, do not apply to the case of the petitioner.
The instructions are to the following effect :-  "3.
In the event of any junior person becoming eligible for promotion to a higher post by virtue of his past experience on ad hoc service, superseding a senior, the promotion of such junior person should be done on ad hoc basis till such time his senior attains the prescribed years of experience to avoid any supersession.
Where, however, the Department Service Rules provide that the experience on a regular post only shall be counted, the service rules should be amended as indicated above."
A persual of the aforementioned instructions would show that it apply in those cases where a junior person has become eligible for promotion to a higher post by virtue of his past experience on ad hoc service.
In the present case, petitioner never superseded respondent No. 3 because of past experience gained by him while working on ad hoc basis as Assistant Registrar (Surgery) and Registrar (Surgery).
Petitioner gained three years' experience after post-graduation, while working as Registrar (Surgery) and Senior Lecturer (Surgery).
Thus, the aforesaid instructions cannot be made applicable to the case of the petitioner and for that reason order, Annexure P-9 cannot be sustained.
Mr. Aggarwal is also correct in urging that the judgment in Civil Writ Petition No. 392 of 1982, referred to in Annexure P-9, could not be made the basis for altering the date of promotion of the petitioner.
The case of the petitioner relates to Clinical Department, whereas in Civil Writ Petition No. 392 of 1982, the dispute was regarding appointment to the post of Assistant Professor (Anatomy) in non-clinical department.
In that case, as envisaged by the Rules (Appendix 'C'), teaching experience was not required in any particular capacity.
Further, the said Rule did not require experience after post graduation, rather in that case, the rule was "Post-graduate degree in the speciality concerned; MD, MS, PhD, MSc, FRCP, MRCP etc. Three years' teaching experience whether it is prior to post-graduation or subsequent thereto."
Thus, order, Annexure P-9, cannot be sustained on this ground too.
For the reasons recorded above, this writ petition is allowed with no order as to costs.
Order, Annexure P-9, vide which date of promotion of the petitioner was altered from 27121980 to 7101981 shall stand quashed.
In consequence of quashing of Annexure P-9, if the petitioner is found entitled to any benefits, including pecuniary, the same shall be granted to the petitioner within three months from today.
Petition