Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - The petitioner while posted as Kanungo has filed the present writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India or issuance of a writ of certiorari for quashing the orders Annexure P-8 whereby the private respondent No. 3 selected as Kanungo P-11 whereby the representation of the petitioner was rejected by Deputy Commissioner, Bhiwani, P-18 whereby the final seniority list of the Kanungo of District Bhiwani was issued and P-19 whereby the Kanungos were confirmed in district Bhiwani.
2.
The case came up for hearing on 311994, when it was brought to the notice of the Court that the petitioner had superannuated on 31101989 on attaining the age of 58 years and similarly the respondents except No. 8 and 13 have also retired from service.
3.
In order to sort out the matter, it will be worthwhile to appreciate the facts as brought out by the petitioner, shorn of unnecessary details, the relevant facts of the case are that the petitioner having been selected was appointed as Patwari on June 22, 1953 in Hissar District.
He was confirmed as such on December 22, 1962.
The petitioner, on the basis of good satisfactory service record as also his seniority, was further promoted along with 15 other Patwaris as Kanungo vide order dated June 18, 1976 copy of which is Annexure P-1 to the writ petition.
The officials mentioned at Sr. Nos. 1, 3, 4, 6 to 8 and 10 to 16, who were promoted in pursuance of order, Annexure P-1, were reverted to their original post of Patwari on different dates, whereas the petitioner continued to work as Kanungo till filing of the present writ petition.
In February, 1980, regular posts of Kanungo became available in the Department.
As a result, the petitioner was appointed by the Collector, Bhiwani District, Bhiwani, respondent No. 3, against one of the regular posts.
Copy of the order whereby the petitioner was appointed against one of the regular posts i.e. Annexure P-2 to the writ petition, meaning thereby he was made regular.
All these facts have not been controverted by the respondents in any manner.
4.
The conditions of service governing the Kanungos are laid down in the Rules called the Punjab Kanungos Service Rules, 1945 (for short the 'Rules').
For determining the controversy, the provisions of Rules 5, 6, 7 and 12 are relevant, Rule 5 envisages educational and other qualifications for persons to be appointed to the Service.
Rule 6 prescribes the method of appointment for filling up the posts in the Service.
Rule 7 determines the number and character of posts, and Rule 12 deals with the seniority.
In 1972, District Hissar was bifurcated.
On December 22, 1972 Bhiwani was formed a separate District.
The petitioner, who at the time of bifurcation, was working in Bhiwani was allowed to continue in that District.
Various other officials who were working in the area which fell in District Bhiwani though earlier belonged to District Hissar were transferred/allocated to District Hissar.
5.
Consequent upon the bifurcation of District Hissar and allocation of Patwaris to different districts, respondent Nos. 5, 7, 8 and 12 who belonged to Hissar District were allocated to that District.
The remaining respondents belonged to Bhiwani District.
Respondent Nos. 5 to 13, except respondent Nos. 10 and 11, were recruited and confirmed as Patwaris after the petitioner and as such were junior to him.
In the final seniority list as on 111979 which was issued in the month of September/October, 1979 (Annexure P-3) the petitioner's name figures at Sr. No. 21 while that of the respondents at Sr. No. 22, 110, 53, 60, 77, 3, 20, 52 and 138 respectively.
Respondent Nos. 6, 9 and 13 were confirmed as Patwari w.e.f.
111979 vide order dated October 9, 1979, whereas the petitioner was confirmed as such in the year 1962 (Annexure P-4 referred).
6.
The Counsel for the petitioner has contended that the action of the respondents in promoting the respondents as Kanungos w.e.f.
the dates earlier than the petitioner, accepting them as Kanungo candidates, declaring them senior to him, confirming them as Kanungos, not reviewing the promotions after the finalisation of the seniority of Patwaris and in rejecting the representations submitted by the petitioner, is wholly illegal, unjust, unfair and against the principles of natural justice being violative of Articles 16 of the Constitution of India.
7.
The Counsel further contended that the petitioner being senior to the respondents as Patwari had a right to be considered or promoted when the persons junior to him were promoted.
8.
The star argument of the learned Counsel for the petitioner was that Ranbir Singh, respondent No. 8 was wrongly permitted to take the examination prescribed for the post of Kanungo.
Since he was working as Patwari, he was not eligible to appear in the examination in the year 1974 as per Government instructions.
Respondent Nos. 6, 9 and 13 were confirmed as Patwaris w.e.f.
111979.
As such they could not be promoted before their confirmation as Patwari.
The action of the official respondents for promoting them before their confirmation as Patwari is totally arbitrary and against the principles of natural justice being not in conformity with the Government instructions.
9.
The petitioner in para 9 of the petition has averred that the Enquiry Officer who had submitted his report in the year 1979 held that the claim of Sajjan Singh, petitioner, had been illegally ignored and S/Shri Dharam Chand, Sadar Kanungo, Surinder Kumar Sadar Kanungo, Mohan Singh, Sadar Kanungo, Purshotam Dass, Bill Clerk and Suraj Bhan, Assistant Superintendent Revenue were responsible for maneuvering the order against the petitioner.
In reply to this para, respondent No. 3, who is not less than the rank of Deputy Commissioner admitted that the Enquiry Officer had submitted his report in the year 1979, but the report of the Enquiry Officer was not a final order.
It is further stated that after going through this report, final orders were to be passed by the competent authority i.e. respondent No. 3.
As a result of order passed by the competent authority, the seniority list of Kanungos of Bhiwani district was given final shape.
Since there is no specific denial to the contents of para 9 of the writ petition, it is, assumed that the aforesaid Sadar Kanungos had manoeuvered the order against the petitioner.
10.
The plea taken by the official respondents in sub-para (v) of para 15 of the written statement is, that according to Govt. instructions some of the private respondents could not have been promoted as Kanungo unless they had been confirmed as Patwari and respondent Nos. 6, 9 and 13 were confirmed as Patwari w.e.f.
111979 but at the time of taking final decision on the seniority of Kanungos and on reviewing the promotions, the aforesaid respondents being permanent patwari and other being eligible for promotion as Kanungo, were declared senior to the petitioner as Kanungo.
This plea of the official respondents is far from convincing.
Once it has been admitted by the official respondents, that the private respondents could not have been promoted as Kanungo unless they had been confirmed as Patwari, there was no occasion for the official respondents to have made the private respondents senior to the petitioner.
11.
It is an admitted case of the official respondents that before 2851975 only officiating Kanungos were eligible to appear in the Kanungo examination and respondent Nos. 8 and 9 who were officiating as Kanungos were allowed to appear in the examination in the year 1974.
These respondents were confirmed as Patwari on 111979 whereas the petitioner was confirmed as such in the year 1962.
Though the petitioner having been confirmed as Patwari prior to the said respondents, was eligible to appear in the Kanungo examination, but he was not permitted to appear in the examination as a departmental inquiry was pending against him.
Though in para 5 of the written statement, the official respondents have admitted that respondent Nos. 5 to 13 except respondent Nos. 10 and 11, were recruited and confirmed as Patwari after the petitioner but since they had qualified the Kanungo examination prior to the petitioner, they were promoted Kanungo prior to the petitioner and as such are senior to him.
The only explanation furnished by the official respondents that the petitioner cleared the examination after the private respondents and was rightly assigned seniority below them, is neither convincing nor based on any rationals and is against the principles of natural justice.
Once the petitioner having not been permitted to appear in the examination for the alleged inquiry which was pending in the year 1974 and having qualified the examination subsequently after having been exonerated in the enquiry, the petitioner should have been deemed to have qualified the examination from the date his juniors had qualified.
In this view of the matter, the petitioner should have been treated as senior to all the private respondents for all intents and purposes as he was appointed and confirmed as Patwari prior to them.
For the foregoing reasons, the writ petition is allowed and the orders dated 2781976 and 29.7.1980 and Seniority List dated 3051980, copies of which are Annexures P.8, P19 and P.18, respectively, to the writ petition, are hereby quashed to the extent these adversely affect the petitioner.
The respondents are directed to consider the case of the petitioner for promotion as Kanungo with effect from the date the private respondents were promoted as such.
Since the petitioner and some of the private respondents have already retired, it is, therefore, directed that after reviewing the promotion case of the petitioner from the date the pay scales were granted to the respondents, his pay be re-fixed and his pension be revised accordingly.
It is further directed that the petitioner would not be entitled to claim any arrears.
There would be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.