VK Bali, J - This order will dispose of two writ petitions bearing Nos. 10461 of 1992, 'Jai Pal Singh v. State of Haryana and others, 10462 of 1992, 'Dharma Pal v. State of Haryana and other, 'as common question of law and facts are involved in both these petitions.
The facts have, however, been extracted from Civil Writ Petition No. 10461 of 1992, 'Jai Pal Singh v. State of Haryana and others.'
2.
Petitioner, Jai Pal Singh seeks writ in the nature of certiorari so as to quash order dated May 4, 1992 (Annexure P-7) vide which the annual increments earlier granted to him were withdrawn by holding that the benefit of ad hoc service from February 19, 1980 to February 18, 1982 towards regular service was given wrongly to him.
In wake of the aforesaid finding, it was further ordered that the amount paid to him be recovered.
3.
Brief facts of the case reveal that petitioner was initially appointed on the post of Vaidya (Ayurvedic Medical Officer) on temporary basis on the recommendation of the Employment Exchange by the Director, Ayurveda Haryana Chandigarh.
He joined the post aforesaid on 12th/13th February, 1980.
Thereafter the posts were advertised by the Haryana Subordinate Services Selection Board for making regular appointments.
Petitioner applied alongwith others and was duly selected by the said Board.
His name was, thus, sponsored by the Board for regular appointment.
He joined on regular basis on April 26, 1982 in the pay scale of Rs. 700-30-850-900-40-1100-EB-50-1400/- plus two advance increments and 25% non-practising allowance.
He made a representation to the respondents for grant of annual increments in lieu of his service rendered by him on the post as provided under Rule 44(b) of the Punjab Civil Service Rules, Volume 1, Part 1.
His claim was considered and accepted by the respondents and he was given the benefit of temporary service towards increments only.
This was done vide orders dated April 12, 1984 (Annexure P- 3).
However, in April, 1989, he received communication from the District Ayurvedic Officer, Gurgaon to the effect that he should intimate as to how much arrears have been drawn by him on ad hoc basis and on what basis the said benefit was granted to him as the Government desired to make recovery of the said benefits.
On the receipt of letter aforesaid, petitioner sent a detailed reply by specifically adverting the attention of respondents to the provisions contained in Rule 44(b) of the PSCR, Volume I Part I as also the instructions dated June 11, 1974 which, inter-alia, provide that on adhoc appointee shall be treated as temporary appointee for the purposes of Rule 44(b) of the Rules aforesaid.
Irrespective of the reply aforesaid order dated March 31, 1990 was passed and conveyed to petitioner whereby the benefit of annual increments was withdrawn.
His pay, thus, stood reduced considerably apart from the recovery that was to be made from him.
This order was challenged in this Court and the following order was passed :-  "Vide Annexure P-5 the department came to a tentative conclusion that the pay of the petitioner was refixed wrongly by giving him benefit of ad hoc service.
On the basis of this tentative conclusion according to para 7 of the written statement filed by the respondents, a show cause notice will be issued to the petitioner and if the department is satisfied with the reply to the show cause notice that the petitioner's pay was not wrongly refixed, no recovery will be effected from the petitioner and in case it is found that it was wrongly refixed, then the recovery will be made.
This decision be taken in the presence of the petitioner on the receipt of reply to the show cause notice.
With this order and direction, the writ petition stands disposed of."
Thereafter, show cause notice was issued to the petitioner on July 18, 1991.
A detailed reply was submitted by him to the show cause aforesaid.
Thereafter, respondents vide order dated May 4, 1992 directed the benefit of ad hoc service to be withdrawn and the amount paid to be recovered from the petitioner.
It is this order, as referred to above, which has been challenged in the present petition with the prayer as already indicated in the earlier part of this judgment.
4.
Mr. Arun Jain, learned counsel for petitioner contends that order, Annexure P-7, is against the provisions contained in Rule 44(b) of the CSR, Volume I, Part I, as also the instructions governing the field.
Rule 44(b) aforesaid, reads thus :-  "If the conditions prescribed in clause (a) are not fulfilled, he will draw as initial pay the minimum of the time scale : Provided both in cases covered by clause (a) and in cases, other than cases of re-employment after resignation or removal or dismissal from the public service, covered by clause (b) that if he either (1) has previously held substantively or officiated in -  (i) the same post, or (ii) a permanent or temporary post on the same time scale, or (iii) a permanent post other than a tenure post or a temporary post (including a post in a body, incorporated or not, which is wholly or substantively owned or controlled by the Government) on an identical time scale, or (2) is appointed substantively to a tenure post on a time scale identical with that of another tenure post which he has previously held substantively or in which he has previously officiated, than the initial pay shall not except in cases of reversion to parent cadre governed by proviso 1(iii) be less than the pay, other than special pay, personal pay or emoluments classed by pay by the competent authority under Rule 2.44(a)(iii) which he drew on the last such occasion and he shall count for increments the period during which he drew that pay on such last and any previous occasions for increments in the stage of the time scale equivalent to that pay.
If, however, the pay last drawn by the government employee in a temporary post has been inflated by the grant of premature increments, the pay which he would have drawn but for the grant of these increments, shall, unless otherwise ordered by the authority competent to create the new post, be taken for the purpose of this proviso to be the pay which he last drew in the temporary post.
The service rendered in a post referred to in proviso 1(iii) shall, on reversion to the present cadre, count towards initial fixation of pay, to the extent and subject to the conditions indicated below :-  (i) The Government employee should have been approved for appointment to the particular grade/post in which the previous service is to be counted; (ii) all his seniors, except those regarded as unfit for such appointment, were serving in the posts carrying the scale of pay in which benefit is to be allowed or in higher posts, whether in the department itself or elsewhere, and at least are junior was holding a post in the department carrying scale of pay in which the benefit is to be allowed; and  (iii) the service will count from the date his junior is promoted and the benefit will be limited to the period the government employee would have held the post in the parent cadre had be not been appointed to the ex- cadre post."
The instructions relied upon are dated June 11, 1974, copy whereof has been annexed with this petition as Annexure P-8.
The relevant portion of the said instructions reads thus :-  "On regular absorption of such employees in a Govt. department, the pay is to be fixed in accordance with the provisions of Rules in Punjab Civil Service Rules, Volume I, Part I as has already been clarified in the letter under reference.
In case where an ad hoc employee has resigned his post to take up regular appointment in some other departments under the Haryana Government and the application was submitted through proper channel, such resignation would not entail forfeiture of past service within the meaning of Rule 44(b) of Punjab CSR Volume I, Part I and benefit of past service will be allowed for the purposes of fixation of pay and increments, subject to the Rules, Benefit will also be admissible to those ad hoc employees who submitted their application direct for employment while they were not in government service."
While earlier granting the benefit of past service on ad hoc basis to the petitioner, the instructions of the year 1974 were relied upon in the order dated April 12, 1984 (Annexure P-3) which reads thus :-  "The pay of Shri Jai Pal Singh, Ayurvedic Chikitsa Adhikari, Incharge, GAD, Gharrot, District Faridabad, in the scale of pay of Rs. 700-30-850-900-40-1100-BB-50-1400 with next date of increment falling on 141983 FM raising his pay to Rs. 980/- PM in accordance with the Haryana Government letter No. 2179-PFR-74/20589 dated 1161974 under Rule 44(b) of C.S.R.
Volume I, Part.
I" 5.
However, while passing the impugned order, Annexure P-7, all that has been mentioned is that petitioner was not in government service from February 19, 1982 to April 25, 1982 and due to break in service, no benefit of ad hoc service towards increments becomes due to him.
It is clear from the reading of the order aforesaid that after noticing the facts as also break in service which as to two months only, it was concluded that the benefit of ad hoc service from February 19, 1980 to February 18, 1982 was wrongly given to him and the same should be withdrawn.
There was no mention of any rule or instructions, whatsoever.
6.
The case of petitioner has, however, been opposed and by way of preliminary objections, it has been pleaded that petitioner was wrongly given the benefit of ad hoc service towards increment in contravention of rules/instructions by the Chief Medical Officer, Faridabad by way of pay fixation as there was break in his ad hoc service and regular service.
The pay of petitioner has now been refixed according to rules/instructions.
The petitioner had been given necessary show cause notice and personal hearing by respondent No. 1 to recover the excess payment made to him due to wrong fixation of pay by the Chief Medical Officer Faridabad and, therefore, no legal right of his has been infringed.
The reply on merits is also on the same ground and by specifically pleading the break in service.
7.
Petitioner filed additional affidavit as directed by the Motion Bench specifically pleading that the Government had given benefit of ad hoc service to Dr. Hari Singh Yadav, Dr. Subodh Kumar, Dr. Likhi Ram and Dr. Mangal Ram even though all of them had break in their service, that is, there was some gap between the date when they were in ad hoc service and the date when they were given regular appointment.
The detail of break in each case has been separately given.
There was a break in service of Dr. Hari Singh Yadav from October 23, 1977 to August 15, 1978 ie nine months and 24 days.
Break in the service of Dr. Subodh Kumar was for a period of about ten months whereas break in service of Dr. Likhi Ram was for a period of two months and that of Dr. Mangal Ram was for a period of nearly two years.
No rejoinder controverting the facts contained in the additional affidavit has been filed by the respondents.
8.
The only contention raised by Mr. Monga, learned Deputy Advocate General, Haryana, is that the instructions, Annexure P-8, talk of absorption of an employee in government department, thus, pre-supposing that there is no break in service whereas admittedly, there was break in service of petitioner even though for a period of nearly two months.
Even though, prima facie, the contention raised by Mr. Monga does not sound plausible as it is wholly un- understandable as to how a person who might have continued in service by getting an order of regularisation without proper selection could be better placed than a person who occupied regular post following proper selection by the competent authority, yet I do not wish to go into this matter and determine it conclusively as the relief can be granted to petitioner on the sole ground that persons similarly situate have been given better treatment and the petitioner has been discriminated.
Petitioner on affidavit has pleaded that Government has granted benefit of ad hoc service towards fixation of pay despite break in service with regard to Dr. Hari Singh Yadav, Dr. Subodh Kumar, Dr. Likhi Ram and Dr. Mangal Ram.
The break in the case of Dr. Mangal Ram was for a period of nearly two years.
If the benefit of Rule 44(b) of PCSR, Volume I, Part I was given to the persons aforesaid even though there was break in their service far more in point of time than that of petitioner, the same benefit has to be granted to petitioner as well.
The Government cannot discriminate between the persons equally situate and order Annexure P-7 treating petitioner differently than that of his counterparts would be violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India and for that reason alone the impugned order, Annexure P-7, deserves to be set aside and is hereby quashed.
9.
For the reasons mentioned above, these petitions are allowed.
However, parties are left to hear their own costs.
Petition allowed.