B R Arora, J - The petitioner, by this writ petition, has challenged the order dated 13.11.92 (Annexure P4), by which the petitioner, who was working as Lower Division Clerk in the Office of the Assistant Engineer, REC, Tiwri, was transferred and posted in the Office of the Executive Engineer (O&M), RSEB, Jaisalmer.
2.
The order of transfer Annexure P4 has been challenged by the petitioner on the ground that during last six months, the petitioner has been subjected to transfers four times without any sufficient reason and, therefore, these frequent transfers of the petitioner are mala fide and the transfer order Annexure 4 dated 13111992, deserves to be quashed and setaside.
In support of his case, the learned counsel for the petitioner has placed reliance over Sheshrao Nagara Umap v. The State of Maharashtra and others, 1984(2) SLR 328.
The order of transfer has also been challenged on the ground that the petitioner is the Secretary of the Rastriya Bijli Karamchari Sangh, REC, Jodhpur, and the transfer of the petitioner has been made in order to curtail his union activities and he has been posted out of Jodhpur District.
It was also contended by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the petitioner was transferred on his own request on 1891992 from Jaisalmer to Tiwri and no TA, DA, was paid to him and it is only after two months of his joining duties at Tiwri that he has again been transferred from Tiwri to Jaisalmer, which is highly arbitrary and unreasonable.
In support of this contention, the learned counsel for the petitioner has placed reliance over a decision of this Court rendered in Bhinya Ram v. The State of Rajasthan and others SB Civil Writ Petition No. 4635 of 1991 - decided on 19.5.1992.
Learned counsel for the respondents, on the other hand, has supported the order of transfer and has submitted that the petitioner, since the date of his appointment, has remained posted at Tiwri only.
His further submission is that so far as the first transfer of the petitioner on 1851992 is concerned, when the petitioner was transferred from Tiwri to Osia, it was made on account of bifurcation of the Sub-Division and so far as the third transfer order is concerned, that was made on his own request.
So far as second transfer order is concerned, by which the petitioner was transferred from Osia to Jaisalmer, though the petitioner was transferred and relieved from Osia but he never joined his duties at Jaisalmer and that transfer order, so far as the petitioner is concerned, was never executed.
This transfer vide Annexure P4 has been made in the administrative exigency and there were various complaints against the petitioner.
3.
I have considered the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties.
4.
The petitioner has been posted at Tiwri since the date of his joining the service.
He was appointed as the Charged-Helper on 10170, and twenty-three years have elapsed and he is still working and posted at Tiwri.
Looking to the long stay of the petitioner at Tiwri if he has been transferred from Tiwri to Jaisalmer than no illegality appears to have been committed by the respondents.
The order of transfer has been passed in the administrative exigency taking to into consideration the longer stay of the petitioner at Tiwri and the complaints received against him.
Though at the time when he was transferred from Jaisalmer to Tiwri on his own request vide order dated 1891992, this point should have been considered by the respondents but it appears that this aspect of the case was over-looked and the request of the petitioner was acceded to and he was transferred from Jaisalmer to Tiwri.
The petitioner was deprived to TA and DA when he was transferred from Jaisalmer to Tiwri but in fact, the petitioner, by that time, had not joined his duties at Jaisalmer in pursuance to the order dated 20.7.92 and when he had not joined the duties at Jaisalmer then otherwise, also, he was not entitled for any TA and DA and, therefore, the case of Bhinya Ram, on which reliance has been placed by the learned counsel for the petitioner, is not applicable qua the petitioner's case.
It is, also, not a case of frequent transfers as alleged by the petitioner.
Out of four transfers, first transfer was made on account of bifurcation of the Sub-Division; the second transfer was made on 20.7.92, but the petitioner never joined the duties at Jaisalmer though relieved from Osia; the third transfer was made on his own request and thus, in the facts and circumstances of the case, it is only the second transfer of the petitioner and that too on account of administrative exigency.
The judgment in Sheshrao Nagara Umap, on which reliance has been placed by the learned counsel for the petitioner is, therefore, not applicable to the present case.
5.
No person has a right to remain posted at a particular place and whether a person is to be transferred or not in the exigency of administration, the concerned authority is the best person to decide on consideration of the necessities of the circumstances.
No mala fide has been proved against the respondents in transferring the petitioner.
As the transfer has been made in the public interest and in the exigency of the administration and has not been made in violation of any statutory Rules or on account of mala fide, therefore, the transfer order Annexure P4 dated 13.11.92 does not require any interference.
The order of transfer Annexure P4 does not violate any of the legal rights of the petitioner and the Courts are not expected to ordinarily interfere in such matters of transfers.
6.
In this view of the matter, I do not find any merit in this writ petition and the same is hereby dismissed.
Petition dismissed.