V K Bali, J(Oral) - Kamaljot Kaur through present petition filed by her under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India seeks writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to give her admission in B.Sc.
(Agriculture) either at College of Agriculture.
Ludhiana by way of her first preference or at College of Agriculture at Faridkot.
2.
The facts of the case reveal that petitioner passed her Matriculation examination in the year 1991 by securing 69% marks and then passed her plus 2 examination from Government Senior Secondary School, Ludhiana in the year 1993 securing 55% marks in Science group.
Since she was interested in doing B.Sc.
(Agriculture), she appeared in the Combined Entrance Test held at Ludhiana on 2971993.
Her name appeared in the list of successful candidates at Sr. No. 132.
Inasmuch as there were less seats, she was placed in the waiting list at Sr. No. 14.
It is pleaded that there were 90 seats for B.Sc.
(Agriculture) at the College of Agriculture, Ludhiana and 40 seats at the College of Agriculture, Faridkot.
Both the Colleges aforesaid are affiliated to the Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana and the manner of admission in both the Colleges is same.
On October 4, 1993 petitioner received a letter from the office of the Registrar, Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana asking her to appear before the Dean, College of Agriculture, Faridkot on October 6, 1993, as a few seats in B.Sc.
(Agri.)
were lying vacant there.
It is pleaded that similar letters were issued to 14 other candidates according to their serial numbers in the waiting list.
Out of 15 candidates, to whom the letters were issued, only seven appeared before the Dean, College of Agriculture, Faridkot on October 6, 1993.
The candidates, who were at serial Nos. 1, 4, 5, 6, 10, 12 and 14 were medically examined.
However only one candidate out of aforesaid seven was allowed to deposit fee etc. and remaining candidates including petitioner were denied admission verbally.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner, on the facts stated above, urges that inasmuch as there were eleven seats vacant in B.Sc.
(Agri.)
at College of Agriculture, Ludhiana and petitioner, who fulfils all qualifications and has cleared the Entrance Test, could not be denied admission.
4.
The cause of petitioner has been opposed and in the written statement that has been filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 2 to 4, it has been pleaded that according to the decision of Academic Council dated September 27, 1993, the last date of admission at Ludhiana and Faridkot expired on September 30, 1993 and October 8, 1993 respectively.
The course commenced from September 2, 1993 and the mid-term semester examination was held from November 24, 1993 to December 1, 1993.
Petitioner filed this writ on November 18, 1993 much after the admission was closed.
Petition, thus, being belated, deserves to be dismissed.
On merits, the case of respondents is that as per Rule 2(3) of Admission Rules, if adequate number of candidates are not available to fill up the seats reserved for members of Scheduled Caste/Tribes, unfilled seats in the said category have to be offered to the candidates competing on open merit basis.
Similarly, unfilled seats in any other reserved category had to be offered to the candidates competing on open merit basis.
Admissions were made at both the Colleges on the basis of common entrance test/Interview and joint merit list was prepared.
At the time of interview options from the candidates were obtained whether they were willing to join at College of Agriculture, Ludhiana or Faridkot.
Only one candidate opted for College of Agriculture, Faridkot.
Accordingly, top candidates on merit, except nine seats meant for ICAR/Government of India, under open category were admitted at the College of Agriculture, Ludhiana.
The last candidate admitted at College of Agriculture Ludhiana under open category was at Sr. No. 69 whereas the name of petitioner was at Sr. No. 132 of the joint merit list of open category.
After the admissions at College of Agriculture, Ludhiana, were over, the seats meant for College of Agriculture, Faridkot were filled up merit-wise from Sr. No. 70 onwards from the remaining joint merit list in view of their second preference.
At the time of initial admission at College of Agriculture, Faridkot, 35 candidates were asked to deposit their fees, out of whom only 23 candidates did so leaving four seats for ICAR/Central Govt. quota and one seat for District Faridkot.
In view of the poor turn out, next 25 candidates from the waiting list were called for admission on September 10, 1993 against the remaining seats.
Only eleven candidates deposited their fee etc. Further, two candidates were admitted upto September 17, 1993.
As the seats meant for ICAR/Central Govt. quota were not likely to be filed up, two candidates from the next merit list were admitted at the College of Agriculture, Faridkot on September 28, 29, 1993.
A few seats at the College of Agriculture, Faridkot were also expected to fall vacant at the time of finalisation of Admissions on October 6, 1993.
15 candidates were called from the waiting list vide letters dated September 30, 1993 out of which only 8 candidates reported.
In the meantime, an ICAR nominee joined against reserved seat on October 4, 1993 thereby leaving only one seat vacant on October 6, 1993.
Admission notice for Faridkot was issued to the candidate at Sr. No. 1 of the available candidates.
The letters to 15 candidates were issued in order to fill up the vacant seats which were available or might become available till the date of admission at College of Agriculture, Faridkot.
It is further the case of respondents that even though 13 seats are vacant at Ludhiana, petitioner cannot be admitted as she as per her merit cannot be accommodated some students higher in merit being still available.
It is further the case of respondents that petitioner cannot be accommodated at Ludhiana for another reason i.e. those who have been admitted at Faridkot and are higher in merit than petitioner and had given option for Ludhiana, have preferential right over petitioner.
5.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and going through the records of the case, this Court is of the considered view that inasmuch as 13 seats at Ludhiana are still vacant, petitioner deserves to be accommodated as vacant seats cannot be allowed to go a-begging.
The contention of Mr. Kang, learned counsel for the respondents is to be accepted but to a limited extent.
The candidates who are higher in merit than petitioner and had given option to be accommodated at Ludhiana and are presently studying at Faridkot would have definitely preferential right to be accommodated at Ludhiana.
Options to this effect be asked by the respondent-authorities from such candidates who might be above in merit than that of petitioner and had opted to be accommodated at Ludhiana and if 13 such persons opt for Ludhiana, petitioner shall be accommodated at Faridkot but if the students giving such options fall below 13, then obviously there being still seat (s) petitioner shall be accommodated at Ludhiana as she belongs to that place having her residence at Ludhiana.
It shall, however, be open to the respondent-authorities to accommodate, if they so like, those candidates who had appeared along with petitioner in consequence of interview letters issued to them and who had got themselves medically examined.
This petition is, thus, allowed with the direction to accommodate the petitioner in the manner indicated above.
Mr. Kang at this stage submits that this process of asking for options etc. would take some time and, therefore, 15 days time be granted to the respondent-authorities to do the needful.
The request is genuine and is allowed.
Let the direction aforesaid be complied within a period of fifteen days from today.
Parties are, however, left to bear their own costs.