Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner seeks writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to admit him to the course leading to the degree of M.Sc (Horticulture).
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner passed his B.Sc (Horticulture) Examination from Dr. Yashwant Singh Parmar, University of Horticulture and Forestry, College of Horticulture, Nauni, Solan (Himachal Pradesh).
In pursuance to a notice issued by the Haryana Agricultural University, Hissar, the petitioner applied for admission to the course of M.Sc (Horticulture).
Since he was not selected for admission, he made an enquiry and claims to have been told that "only those students who have passed B.Sc (Honours) in Agriculture, are being admitted".
The petitioner has further averred that he has not been admitted in spite of the fact that five seats are reserved in the subject of Horticulture.
Aggrieved by the action of the respondents in not admitting him to the course, he has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been inter alia averred that qualification for admission to M.Sc (Agriculture) is B.Sc (Honours) Agriculture.
The petitioner is not eligible for admission to the course as he does not possess the qualification of B.Sc (Honours) Agriculture.
It has been further averred that Horticulture is one of the disciplines of M.Sc (Agriculture) and there is no separate qualification for this discipline.
It has been also stated that no seats have been reserved for persons possessing the qualifications of Horticulture.
In fact, "seats are created in various disciplines as per demand in Government/Public/Private Sector.
These seats are created by the Academic Council on the recommendations of Board of Studies/RIC Accordingly, the seats were created in the subjects as mentioned in the prospectus for the year 1993-94".
On these premises, the respondents contest the claim of the petitioner.
4.
I have heard Sh. R P Dahiya, for the petitioner and Mr. Girish Agnihotri, for the respondent-University.
Rule 39 as mentioned in the prospectus, is reproduced below :-  "MASTER'S PROGRAMME : The minimum qualifications for admission of fresh as well as in service candidates shall be 50% marks (where OGPA is not given or a grade point average of 200 (400 basis) at the Bachelor's Degree level from recognised University.
In service candidates should apply through proper channel.
M.Sc.Ag :BSc (Hons) Ag.
For ICAR nominees : B.Sc.Ag.
M.Sc.
(Agro Forestry) : B.Sc.
(Forestry/V.Sc.
(Hons).
Ag.
M.V.Sc : B.V.Sc and AH/B.Sc.
Dairying/B.Sc (Hons).
An.Science/B.Sc.
(Hons) Ag./B.Sc (Home Sc.)
for APT only.
However, they have to clear/complete deficiency courses of An.Sc.
which will be at par with the stream of BSc (Hons) Ag.
students admitted to APT".
5.
A perusal of the above shows that for admission to M.Sc.
Agriculture, minimum qualification is B.Sc (Honours) Agriculture.
No separate provision for admission to different disciplines has been made.
It is not doubt correct that students have option for specialisation in different disciplines of Agriculture which include Horticulture.
However, no separate qualifications for different specialities have been prescribed.
Persons seeking admission to the course of Post-Graduate course of M.Sc have to possess the basic qualification of B.Sc (Honours) Agriculture.
Dr. Dahiya, however, submits that a person who has done specialisation at the level of graduate should be necessarily preferred for admission to a course in the same subject at the post-graduate level.
There is nothing to support this contention.
It is for the competent authority to lay down qualifications for admission to various courses.
That having been done, it is only those who possess the prescribed qualifications, that can be considered for admission.
It is the admitted position that the petitioner does not possess the qualification of B.Sc (Honours) Agriculture.
That being so, he is not entitled to admission.
6.
A half-hearted submission has been made that the criteria is arbitrary.
The contention is misconceived.
It is the admitted position that B.Sc (Honours) Agriculture is a course in which students are imparted training in all branches of agricultural sciences.
It is, thereafter, that at the time of admission to post-graduate course, the option for specialisation in one of the many disciplines is available.
It is like the medical course.
At the graduate level, a student is imparted training in all the branches of medicine.
Thereafter, a candidate has the chance to opt for a particular subject at the time of admission to the post-graduate course.
Having gained basic knowledge, he can opt for a speciality like Cardiology or Gyneacology etc.
Similar is the position here.
Thus, the provisions in the prospectus are neither arbitrary nor unfair.
The rule has a clear rationale.
The challenge is wholly misconceived.
It is, consequently, rejected.
7.
No other point has been urged.
8.
This petition is wholly lacking in merit.
It is, accordingly, dismissed.
In the circumstances of the case, I make no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.