RS Mongia, J - The petitioners who are 57 in number, were appointed as Clerks in the Haryana Civil Secretariat, purely on ad hoc basis between the period August 1978 to March 1979.
The names of all the petitioners having been registered with different Employment Exchanges in the State of Haryana, were sponsored by the said Exchanges.
It was after the written test was held that the Chief Secretary Haryana who is the Appointing Authority of the Clerks under the Punjab Civil Secretariat (State Services Class III) Rules, 1952, issued the appointment letters.
It may be observed here that when these appointments were made the posts of Clerks, i.e. Class III posts were within the purview of the Subordinate Services Selection Board (hereinafter called the 'Board') Vide Notification dated 311983 issued by the Haryana Government in exercise of the powers conferred by proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India and other enabling provisions the Governor of Haryana excluded from the purview of the 'Board' such Class III posts of Clerks as had been held, for a minimum period of two years on 15th September 1982 by ad hoc clerks who were to be regularised if they fulfilled certain other conditions under the Notification.
In this Notification, clause (vi) reads as under :-  vi) the seniority of the ad hoc clerks so regularised may, vis-a- vis the clerks appointed on regular basis be determined w.e.f.
1591982.
The inter-se seniority of such ad hoc clerks shall be determined in accordance with the date of their joining on the post on ad hoc basis if the date of joining the posts on ad hoc basis by such Clerks was the same, then an older member shall rank senior."
2.
In pursuance of the above Notification, an order was issued on 1411983, Annexure P/7 regularising the services of the petitioners as Clerks w.e.f.
1591982.
Respondents No. 3 to 9 were appointed/promoted as Clerks on regular basis after the petitioners had been appointed on ad hoc basis, but before 1591982 i.e. the date from which the petitioners.
Services were regularised as Clerks.
The said respondents were confirmed vide order dated 2011987, Annexure P/5 w.e.f.
various dates given in the orders.
In the Gradation List issued in the year 1987, the petitioners were shown junior to the respondents.
This writ petition was filed asking for following reliefs :-  (1) The ad hoc service of the petitioners should be counted for the purpose of seniority and they should be regularised from the date of their initial ad hoc appointment.
(2) The Gradation List dated 23111987 in which the petitioners have been shown junior to the respondents, should be quashed.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that the petitioners had joined service though on ad hoc basis, much earlier to the respondents therefore, they were entitled to rank senior by counting their ad hoc service and were also entitled to be regularised/confirmed earlier than the respondents.
In support of his contention, learned counsel cited judgments rendered in different cases titled : Vishan Dass Bhutani v. The Haryana State Electricity Board, through its Chairman and others, 1993(1) SCT 86 (P&H) : 1993 RSJ 526, Malook Singh and others v. The State of Punjab and others, 1992(2) SCT 133 (P&H) : 1991(7) 367; Delhi Water Supply and Sewage Disposal Committee and others v. Shri RK Kashyap and others, 1988(6) SLR 33.
4.
It was also submitted by the learned counsel that Class IV employees i.e. peons etc. were given promotion as Clerks in the Haryana Civil Secretariat and their services had been regularised from the date of their ad hoc promotion and consequently it was urged that the petitioners who were initially appointed on ad hoc basis should have also been regularised from the date of their initial ad hoc appointment.
5.
In reply, learned counsel for the respondents submitted that the petitioners who were appointed purely on ad hoc basis till regular appointees from the Board were made available, had no right to be regularised.
Since for various reasons, the recommendees of the Board could not come it was as a measure of compassion and concession that the State Government decided to take out of the purview of the Board such posts of Class III Clerks who had put in more than two years of ad hoc service upto 1591982.
It was under the Notification dated 311983 whereby the posts of Clerks had been taken out of the purview of the Board.
In this Notification Clause (vi) clearly mentions that the regularisation would be w.e.f 1591982.
Consequently learned counsel for the respondents submitted that the petitioners had no right to get regularisation from any anterior date to 1591982.
Further it was submitted that the private respondents were appointed/promoted as Clerks on regular basis before 1591982 and, therefore, the petitioners having been regularised after 1591982 had to rank junior to the respondents and would be entitled to confirmation later than the respondents.
As far as Class IV employees are concerned learned counsel submitted that under Rule 5(a) of the 1952 Rules read with Notification dated 17.3.1978 it is provided that Class IV employees who are Matriculation with 5 years' experience would be considered for promotion to the post of Clerks.
If they are promoted against regular posts, naturally they will be regularised from the date the regular post is vacant, even though initial appointment against the regular post may be on ad hoc basis.
Moreover, the petitioners and the promotees from Class IV from distinct classes.
Learned counsel for the respondents cited judgments rendered in cases titled Sohan Lal v. State of Haryana and another, 1992(3) SCT 424 (P&H) (DB) : 1992(4) SLR 701 and Union of India through Chandigarh Administration (U.T.)
Chandigarh and another v. Sh. SK Sharma, Professor of Civil Engineering, Punjab Engineering College, Chandigarh, 1992(2) SLR 373 to contend that service rendered on ad hoc basis is not to be counted for the purpose of seniority.
6.
After hearing counsel for the parties, I find no force in the contentions of learned counsel for petitioners.
The petitioners having been appointed on ad hoc basis had not right to claim regularisation in service under any laws and they could only be regularly appointed after being selected through the Board.
It was as a measure of concession shown to the ad hoc employees like the petitioners that the Government thought of taking out of the purview of the Board such Class III posts of Clerks, where the incumbents had put in more than two years ad hoc service upto 1591982.
It was under the Notification dated 311983, to which reference has been made above, that the petitioners acquired the right for regularisation.
It was under Clause (vi) of the Notification (reproduced above) that the date of regularisation had to be fixed.
This Notification is not under challenge.
The petitioners would get only benefit under this Notification.
The authorities cited by the learned counsel for the petitioners have no application to the facts of the present case.
As held by the Division Bench of this Court in Sohan Lal's case (supra) cited by respondents ad hoc service under the circumstances, cannot be counted for the purpose of seniority.
7.
The respondents as per their averments were appointed on regular basis prior to the regularisation of the services of the petitioners though after their ad hoc appointment.
Having been appointed earlier on regular basis than the petitioners, the respondents would rank senior to them and would be entitled to confirmation earlier as compared to the petitioners.
Class IV employees who were promoted against regular posts, though initially on ad hoc basis, would be entitled to regularisation from the date, a regular post is vacant.
There can be no comparison between the petitioners' case with such promotees.
8.
For the reasons recorded above, I find no merit in this petition, which is hereby dismissed.
I make no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.