Harjit Singh Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner, on being sponsored by the Indo-Soviet Medical Education, Care and Research Foundation, which is a registered body recognised by the Medical Council of India (hereinafter referred to as 'the MCI') obtained admission in the Vinnitsa Medical Institution (in the Ukraine then a part of the USSR) a Medical College recognised by the MCI for the MBBS Course.
The course in question was of seven years including one year of the language course and six of medical studies.
It is the conceded case of the parties that the petitioner has completed 2-1/2 years of the six years required to complete the course of study.
It has been averred by the petitioner that on the break of the Soviet Union, the Government of Ukraine, increased the fee for medical studies to an amount which could not be paid by her, with the result that she came to India and approached respondent No. 4 that is the MCI and respondent No. 3-the Principal, Medical College, Rohtak, for migration to the Medical College, Rohtak.
The MCI informed the petitioner vide Annexure P-5 dated September 8, 1992 that her case for migration could be considered provided she produced a 'No objection certificate' from the Medical Institute in the USSR as well as one from the Principal of the Medical College where she proposed to take admission.
The petitioner, accordingly, produced Annexure P-4 dated December 25, 1992, a 'No Objection Certificate' from the Vinnitsa, Medical Institute, and once again applied to the MCI and to the Principal of the Medical College, Rohtak.
Her case for migration was, however, considered and rejected by the respondents vide Annexure P-6 dated June 23, 1993 and support for this action has been sought from a decision taken by the Executive Committee of the MCI in its meeting held on December 29, 1992 to disallow migration to candidates who had been sponsored by agencies other than the MCI as the marks of these candidates were determined after holding competitive tests and interview.
It has also been asserted in the reply that this decision of the MCI had been circulated amongst the Medical Colleges in India vide circular dated August 2, 1993.
The stand of the Medical College-respondent No. 3 is that if the MCI had no objection to the grant of admission to the petitioner, the College too would not have any objection.
2.
Mr. Mahesh Grover, learned counsel for the petitioner, has urged that as the case of the petitioner had been sponsored by the Indio-Soviet Medical Education Care and Research Foundation, which was recognised by the MCI and this fact had not been denied in the reply filed by the respondents, the further directive based on the decision of the Executive Committee of the MCI dated December 29, 1992 that migration would be allowed only to MCI-sponsored candidates was, not called for and was wholly arbitrary.
It was also urged that sub-clause (a) in paragraph (V) of the Medical Council of India Recommendation on Graduate Medical Education Regulation (hereinafter referred to as the Regulation) do not envisage the newly imposed condition and as such it did not have the sanction of law.
It has also been asserted that as the petitioner has sought admission way back in 1989, any instruction issued in August 1993, would not be binding on the petitioner.
3.
In reply, the stand of the respondents is that a mandamus could not issue to them as the petitioner had no right in her favour to claim migration as it was a mere concession and as such there was no corresponding duty on the respondents to grant her migration.
It has also been asserted that a concession could validly be circumscribed by any rule which might be framed.
4.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I find that this petition deserves to succeed.
Paragraph V of the regulation is reproduced below :-  "(a) A student studying in a recognised medical college may be allowed to migrate/transfer to another recognised medical college under another/same university.
(b) The migration/transfer can be allowed by the University concerned within three months after passing the Ist professional examination, as a rule.
(c) Migration/transfer of students during the course of their training for the clinical subjects should be avoided.
(d) The number of students migrating/transferring from one medical college to another medical college during one year will be kept to the minimum so that the training of the regular students of that college is not adversely affected.
The number of students migrating/transferred to/from any one medical college should not exceed the limit of 5% of its intake in any one medical college in one year.
(e) Cases not covered under the above regulations are to be referred to the Council for consideration on individual merits.
(f) An intimation about the admission of migrated/transferred students into any medical college should be sent to the Council forthwith."
It will be seen from a reading of Clause (a) that a student studying in a recognised medical college may be allowed to migrate/transfer to another recognised medical college under another/same University subject to the conditions laid down therein.
It is, therefore, apparent that the further addition made by the Executive Committee of the MCI in its meeting held on December 29, 1992 and circulated in August, 1993 adding another condition was not a decision of the MCI so as to give it the statues of a Regulation.
Moreover (as already stated above) it has not been denied by the respondents that the Indo-Soviet Medical Education, Care and Research, Foundation and the Vinnitsa Medical College were duly recognised by the MCI and as such it would be wholly arbitrary for the MCI to turn around and say that they would not accept a student from the latter Institution, merely because he had not been sponsored by it.
In other words, a student sponsored by the MCI and another by the Foundation though admitted to the Vinnitsa Medical Institute would be differently treated as far as the Regulation for migration was concerned.
I am not unmindful of the fact that in rendering this judgment, some inconvenience might be caused to the MCI and the interpretation sought to be put by me on the matter in issue may lean somewhat in favour of the petitioners, but keeping in view the human problem involved and the disturbance in study in the case of some students who have already undergone some parts of the course, I am of the decided view that the intervention of the Court is called for.
Mr. Chatrath's argument that no mandamus can issue in such a situation would not arise on the facts and the relief that I intend to give to the petitioners.
5.
This writ petition is accordingly allowed and a direction is issued to the respondents that the case of the petitioner for migration to a medical Ccllege be considered by the respondents and decision thereon taken within two months ignoring the fact that she had not been sponsored by the MCI.
In case the petitioner is found entitled to migration, she will be adjusted in accordance with her qualifications in the course of study in the session which is to commence in 1994.
There will be no order as to costs.
Copy of this order be given dasti.
Petition allowed.