GR Majithia, J - The petitioner has sought a mandate to the respondents to sanction/release retiral benefits to him in this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as Junior Engineer by the erstwhile Government of Punjab, Irrigation Department and was posted at Bhakra Beas Management Board at Nangal Workshop.
On re-organisation of the erstwhile State of Punjab on November 1, 1966, he was allocated as Junior Engineer to the State of Haryana.
In due course he was promoted as Assistant Foreman Special and thereafter as Foreman Special Regular in the Bhakra Dam Project, Nangal Township.
The employees of the successor State on their retirement are granted retirement benefits according to the terms and conditions of their own State Government's Civil Services Rules.
The petitioner was allocated to the State of Haryana and the pensionary benefits as admissible to him were determined under Rule 619-C(iv) of the Punjab Civil Services Rues, Vol.II (as applicable to the State of Haryana).
The same reads thus :-  "In the case of employees on deputation to any other State Government or the Central Government, the emoluments which he would have drawn had he not proceeded on deputation, will alone be taken into account."
The State of Haryana treated the petitioner as on deputation with the Bhakra Beas Management Board (for short, the Board) and the emoluments which he would have drawn had he not proceeded on deputation were taken into account for fixation of pension.
3.
The only question with arises for determination is whether the petitioner could be treated as being on deputation during the period he served with the Board.
The Commissioner & Secretary to Government, Haryana, Finance Department, vide his communication No. 2528-5FR(1)-76/14020, dated May 11, 1977, addressed to all the Heads of Departments Commissioners, Ambala and Hissar Divisions, all Deputy Commissioners and Sub Divisional Officers (Civil) in Haryana, the Registrar of this Court and all District & Sessions Judges in Haryana clarified that the employees of Haryana Government transferred from one Department to another Department under the Haryana Government, Bhakra Nangal Project, Beas Project and Soil Conservation Board, etc. would not be considered as on deputation and no deputation allowance would be admissible to them.
The petitioner was not granted any deputation allowance.
Under the aforesaid policy decision of the Haryana Government, the petitioner was not treated to be on deputation with the Board.
He was for all intents and purposes treated as an employee of the Haryana Government by transfer from one Department to another Department Rule 619-C(iv) of the Punjab Civil Services Rule Vol. II, under which the pension has been fixed by treating the petitioner as on deputation was inapplicable.
The State of Haryana fixed the pension of the petitioner by applying a rule which was inapplicable.
The petitioner's pension and other retiral benefits have to be fixed treating him to be an employee of the Haryana Government in terms of Rule 6.19-C(i) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Vol II (as applicable to the State of Haryana) read with Rule 244(a) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Vol.
I Part I (as applicable to the State of Haryana) and not under Rule 619-C(iv) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Vol. II as applicable to the State of Haryana.
4.
For the reasons stated above, the writ petition succeeds and respondent No. 4 is directed to redetermine the petitioner's pension in the light of the above observations within three months from date of receipt of a copy of this order.
The arrears, if any, will be released to the petitioner within three months of the re-determination of his pensionary benefits.