BA Khan, J - The petitioner is a Class-IV employee and was working as an orderly in the office of the Divisional Youth Services and Sports Office in Jammu.
He graduated while in service and then worked his way for being deputed to undergo BP Ed course at the Physical Education College, Gandergal.
His case was first recommended by the Divisional Sports Officer to the Director of Youth Services and Sports vide communication dated 30.1.1993 and then to the Commissioner/Secretary, Education Deptt., by his letter dated 3031993.
This recommendation seems to have been accepted culminating in Govt. Order No. 1184-Edu of 1993 dated 3041993 under which study leave was granted to him for undergoing BPEd.
Course.
He joined at the college pursuant thereto, paid the fee and was granted provisional admission.
While he was still trying to find his feet, his study leave was cancelled by Govt Order No. 1338-Edu of 1993 dated 3151991, consequently cancelling his deputation to the course also.
He feels aggrieved and has challenged this order primarily on the ground that it has been passed at his back without any notice to him and in violation of the principles of natural justice.
It is submitted that he is eligible to undergo the course and there is no provision in the rules to cancel the study leave once it is granted.
2.
Objections have been filed by the respondents supported by an affidavit sworn by the Principal of the training college.
No affidavit has been filled by any functionary of the Govt. to justify the order impugned.
The stand taken is that since the petitioner is a Class-IV employee, he was neither entitled to grant of study leave nor eligible to undergo the course.
He was also not selected by the Director of Youth Services, who alone was competent to select and depute inservice candidates for training course.
It is submitted that the study leave could be granted to him only by the General Deptt.
(Ari) on the recommendation of the administrative department and with the sanction of the Finance Deptt.
in terms of Rule 73 of the Study Leave Rules of 1979.
It is also pointed out that the candidates for BP Ed. training course are selected by the direct selection for which notification was issued on 24.12.1992 inviting applications from the candidates.
In addition, in service candidates are selected by the Director, Youth Services and Sports and deputed for the course keeping in view their qualifications and length of service.
The select list of these candidates is prepared on the recommendation of the respective Distt/Divisional Youth Services and Sports Officers.
Since the petitioner does not figure in the select list of Director wherein only physical teachers have been deputed for training course, he has no right to be admitted to the course on the basis of Govt. Order No. 1185 of 1993.
3.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties.
Admittedly, there are no rules prescribing any procedure/guidelines/criteria and eligibility for selection of inservice candidates.
In case of candidates applying for direct selection the eligibility prescribed is that they should be graduates and should have minimum sports career of having represented the University/State in Junior/Senior nationals in any recognised sports discipline and should also be under 32 years of age and so on.
Therefore, it is not possible to hold that the petitioner is not eligible for the course being an orderly when no rule, or notification requires that the inservice candidate for the BPEd.
course must be a physical education teacher first.
It is not denied that he is a graduate.
He has also participated in some national sports events.
That way he fits the bill as an inservice candidate unless respondents show some rule or order under which he was required to be a physical education teacher first.
Since they have not shown anything on this court, petitioner's eligibility cannot be questioned.
4.
Whether an orderly is not entitled to study leave, may not be of such relevance but all the same perusal of the 1979 rules shows that he is not disentitled to seek the study leave.
Rule 61 makes the position clear in this regard and provides that the study leave may be granted to a Govt. servant, which must be interpreted to include an orderly also.
Similarly, sub-rule (4) of this rule does not insist on a service of 5 years having been rendered by an employee in all events.
It only says that the study leave shall not ordinarily be granted to an employee if he has not completed 5 years service.
As regards the authority who is competent to sanction study leave, rule 73 does lay down that the General Department (Training Branch) may grant leave under these rules for the purposes of study in India, but, they by itself does not authorise the respondents to challenge their own order.
Admittedly, there is no provision for cancellation of the study leave once granted under these rules.
5.
All this has been brought out only to meet the contentions raised by Mr. Chauhan that the petitioner was not entitled to grant of study leave which has been granted to him by an incompetent authority and was not thus liable to be admitted to the course.
The matter, however, does not rest at that.
The moot question that falls for consideration is : whether the Govt. Order No. 1185 of 1993 sanctioning the study leave to the petitioner for undergoing BPEd.
course could be rescinded at his back and whether the by-passing of the Director would disentitle him from pursuing the course.
6.
There can be no denial to the fact that right accrued to the petitioner to proceed on study leave for undergoing BPEd.
course on passing of Govt. Order No. 1185 of 1993.
It is also a matter of record that he joined at the college and was granted provisional admission pursuant thereto.
He could be divested of his right to pursue the course only in accordance with the procedure established by law and in conformity with the principles of natural justice.
It is not the case of the respondents that there are any rules or regulations in force on the basis of which he was ineligible to pursue the course or which envisaged that he could be deputed for the course only by the particular authority and in accordance with some kind of selection procedure.
All that is made out is that the inservice candidates are picked up by the Director, Youth Services and Sports and since the petitioner has not been selected by him.
He was not entitled to be granted admission.
It is not known what authorised the Director to select the inservice candidates and from whom and what mode of selection he was required to follow in the matter.
That being so, the petitioner cannot be faulted for not having routed his case through the Director.
It would indeed be a different matter if inservice candidates had to go through the selection procedure and the petitioner was found to have by-passed that procedure.
That is not the case here.
The petitioner has undoubtedly been cleared for study leave by the Government and the Director being a subordinate authority to the Govt. could not prevent him from pursuing the course as the same would tantamount to superseding the orders of the Govt.
Similarly the impugned order (Govt. Order No. 1338 of 1993) could not be passed at the back of the petitioner and without a notice of show cause to him.
As already noticed, a right, had accrued to the petitioner to pursue the course and he could be deprived of the same only by adhering to the principles of natural justice.
7.
It is immaterial if the order passed against him is an administrative order so long as it causes prejudice to his interest.
The complainance with the rules of natural justice becomes necessary to prevent miscarriage of justice and to secure fair and impartial order besides to check arbitrariness.
Respondents have nowhere indicated that show cause notice was issued to him or he was heard in the matter at any stage.
The impugned order is consequently vitiated and requires to be quashed.
Mr. Chauhan, learned counsel for the respondents has cited 19 AIR SCW 2695 which is distinguishable and not relevant on the point.
For the reasons stated above I allow this petition and quash Govt. Order No. 1338 of 1993 dated 31.5.1993 and command the respondents to allow the petitioner to pursue the BPEd.
Course at the Physical Education College, Ganderbal.
CMP No. 389 of 1993 shall stand disposed of accordingly.
Petition allowed.