VK Bali, J - Mrs Harjit Kaur and another through present petition filed by them under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, seek a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to regularise their service and allow them to continue to work on the post of Panjabi Lecturer (full time) for such time till the posts continue to receive sanction, by the Director Public Instructions (Colleges), Punjab.
Brief facts of the case need to be noticed first.
2.
The Managing Committee of the Hindu Kanya Mahavidyalaya, Dhariwal advertised two posts of full time lecturers in Panjabi alongwith other posts of lecturers vide advertisement dated May 29, 1988.
The last date to apply was July 1, 1988.
It is stated that both the petitioners were fully qualified and eligible to apply for the same and they did apply for the posts of full time lecturer in Panjabi.
The Selection Committee was constituted by the President of Governing Body of the College, a nominee of the Vice-Chancellor, the Principal of the College and two representatives of the Director Public Instructions, Punjab (hereinafter referred to as the DPI).
Petitioners were duly interviewed for the posts under contention and were selected.
In the advertisement, Annexure P-1, it has been mentioned that there was a need of full time lecturers each in English, Mathematics, Sanskrit and two in Panjabi.
It is also mentioned that part time lecturers in Hindi, Panjabi, Sanskrit, Pol.
Science and History were required.
Annexure P-2 are the proceedings of the Selection Committee and these show that petitioner No. 1 was selected whereas petitioner No. 2 was kept in the waiting list and it is positive case of petitioners that since one Paramjit Kaur did not join, petitioner No. 2 came to be appointed on the post of lecturer in Panjabi.
It is also made out from the proceedings of the Selection Committee that the selections were subject to the approval of the DPI as also the Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar.
The note mentioned in the proceedings also clarifies that the posts were temporary but likely to continue if the same were sanctioned by the DPI Petitioners were appointed on August 1, 1988 and August 12, 1988 respectively on temporary basis for one session.
However, the DPI extended the sanction of the posts and it is for that reason that petitioner, Harjit Kaur was told by letter dated March 21, 1989 that her services were extended up to March 31, 1990.
However, before the extended period could expire, the petitioners were asked to quit vide order Annexure R-2 dated March 16, 1990 on the ground that their services were no more required as the students had been relieved for preparation of their examinations.
It is in wake of the circumstances aforesaid that petitioners came to this Court asking for the relief indicated in the earlier part of the judgment.
3.
The case of petitioners so pleaded and argued by learned counsel is that as long as the posts held by petitioners were sanctioned and continued by the orders passed by the DPI, petitioners could not be relieved more particularly on the ground that the students had been relieved for preparation of their examinations.
4.
This matter has been contested and whereas in the written statement filed by Deputy Director on behalf of the DPI it is stated that petitioners were asked to quit during the currency of sanction of the posts, in the written statement filed on behalf of respondent-Managing Committee of the College, it has been pleaded that the two posts of lecturers in Panjabi were non-plan posts and so far no permanent sanction had been granted to these posts.
Still these posts are temporary in nature.
Petitioners, too, were appointed on temporary basis.
In view of the facts aforesaid, it is pleaded, that writ of mandamus cannot be issued against the respondents to regularise the services of petitioners.
A number of other objections have also been raised but I do not wish to go into the details of those objections as the matter can be decided effectually on a short point presently canvassed.
5.
The array of facts mentioned above, would manifest that the petitioners were admittedly appointed on temporary basis and their posts were to continue from year to year basis if the sanction to the posts was granted by the DPI It is admitted position that the petitioners were asked to quit during the currency of the extended period so ordered by the DPI The impugned order relieving them was passed on the ground that the students had been relieved for preparation of their examinations.
This could not be a ground for termination of the services of petitioners and the same has to be quashed.
Mr. Jain, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the contesting respondents, however, has urged that the work and conduct of petitioners even during the period that they served prior to the termination of their services and thereafter as well, was not worthy of retaining them in service and in view of the provisions contained in Punjab Affiliated Colleges (Security of Services of Employees) Act, 1974, the Managing Committee of the College had every right to terminate the services of petitioners even if they were regularly employed, assuming that they were so.
I do not wish to go into these matters at this stage as the impugned order has been passed on a ground as has been detailed above and that has nothing to do with the contention raised by Mr. Jain.
However, it is made clear that the Managing Committee of the College would have authority to initiate the proceedings against petitioners as provided under the law.
In view of what has been stated above, the impugned order, Annexure R-2 is quashed.
However, there shall be no order as to costs.