VK Bali, J - Petitioner, Dina Nath Mehta, a Senior Assistant of the office of Commissioner, Patiala Division, Patiala, through present petition filed by him under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, seeks a writ in the nature of certiorari so as to quash the order dated December 4, 1990 (Annexure P-1) issued by the respondent No. 2 as also the order issued by the Financial Commissioner-respondent No. 1, dated July 15, 1991 (Annexure P-2) as also the order dated June 15, 1992 (Annexure P-3).
In the wake of setting aside of the orders aforesaid, his further prayer is to consider him for promotion to the post of Superintendent Grade-II.
2.
Brief facts reveal that petitioner was appointed as Clerk in the DC office, Kapurthala on March 25, 1958.
He was confirmed on the post aforesaid with effect from March 1, 1962 vide orders dated March 1, 1965.
Respondent No. 3, Gurmail Singh, with whom the petitioner has dispute with regard to promotion to the post of Superintendent Grade-II, was appointed as Peon in November, 1974.
At the time of his appointment, he was shown to have been belonging to general category and his promotion was not against any reserved seat.
Petitioner was, however, promoted to the post of Assistant with effect from June 15, 1981 whereas respondent No. 3 came to occupy the said post i.e. of Assistant w.e.f.
January 1, 1983.
The promotional post from Assistant is that of Superintendent Grade-II and it is not disputed that one such post fell vacant on August 1, 1988.
Respondent No. 3 staked his claim to the said post against reserved vacancy of a Backward Class candidate.
His representation was, however, rejected vide order dated August 29, 1988.
Being aggrieved, he filed an appeal before the Financial Commissioner-respondent No. 1 but during the pendency of the appeal, the desired relief was granted to respondent No. 3 and he was promoted to the post of Superintendent Grade-II.
However, on successful result of his appeal, he was given the said promotion w.e.f.
August 1, 1988 ie the date from which the post fell vacant.
Since respondent No. 3 had secured promotion in the manner aforesaid, petitioner, who claims that he was senior and was actually senior to respondent No. 3, carried an appeal against the orders vide which respondent No. 3 was given promotion.
This matter came up for decision before the Financial Commissioner and vide order (Annexure P-3) the appeal preferred by petitioner was dismissed.
While rejecting the appeal of petitioner, the Financial Commissioner observed that it was evident from the record that point No. 15 of the Running Roster was reserved to be filled up by promoting a person belonging to Backward Class.
The petitioner had failed to prove that being a general category candidate, he had superior claim for promotion against roster No. 15 which was reserved for Backward Class.
It was further observed that petitioner had failed to prove that Gurmail Singh-respondent No. 3 did not belong to Backward Class.
On the other hand the perusal of his service book evidenced that he belonged to the Backward Class and was recorded as such.
The Financial Commissioner further observed that in view of the fact that appeal filed by Gurmail Singh had been allowed by his predecessor, the appeal preferred by petitioner had to be dismissed.
3.
Mr. Tewari, learned counsel appearing for petitioner, has raised only two points that need determination by this Court.
His first point is that simply because the appeal filed by respondent No. 3 was allowed, it would not mean that the appeal of petitioner carried no weight and as such had to be dismissed.
His second contention is that under the service Rules, five rosters had to be maintained and by maintaining only one roster which indicates the promotion only on regular basis, the case of petitioner was prejudiced.
With a view to further strengthen his contention, as mentioned above, it has been pleaded and so argued by learned counsel that four persons in the seniority list out of first fourteen were given only short term-ad hoc promotions and if these four persons were not to have been counted as promoted on regular basis, only ten persons would have been regularly promoted and therefore, the 11th point for promotion would have become available to the petitioner.
4.
This petition has been opposed and separate written statements have been filed, both, by respondent Nos1 and 2 and respondent No. 3.
In the written statement filed by official respondents, it has been pleaded that the seniority list re-produced at page 8 of the writ petition, a reference of which has been given above, does not contain the nature of promotions and, therefore, the remarks against the names of Sohan Singh, Hans Raj Aggarwal and Jaswant Singh Walia as having been promoted on short term basis, have been made out by petitioner himself and in fact, there were no basis whatsoever to make such remarks which are not correct and are against the records.
With a view to further clarify the situation, it is pleaded, that insofar as Mohinder Singh Pannu is concerned, he has been wrongly shown as Assistant Superintendent (R&J) in the DC office and there was no such post in the DC office.
DC Office has the post of Assistant Superintendent (R&R) who could be promoted as Assistant Superintendent R&J) in the Commissioner's office.
It is pleaded that the petitioner has shown Mohinder Singh Pannu as Assistant Superintendent (R&J), DC office, in order to fortify his contention that he had been appointed as Assistant Superintendent (R&J) by transfer whereas it was a promotion because appointment to the post of Assistant Superintendent (R&J) is made from amongst the Assistant Superintendents (R&R).
It is further stated that appointment of Mohinder Singh Pannu was made from a lower rank to a higher rank and that the year of his promotion had also been wrongly mentioned.
It is again the positive case of respondent that Jaswant Singh was appointed as Superintendent (R&J) against a substantive vacancy on the retirement of Shri Hans Raj Aggarwal.
Jaswant Singh retired as Superintendent Grade II on October 31, 1990.
He had a continuous service of ten years in the Commissioner's office as Superintendent.
On the basis of these facts, it is further pleaded that it cannot be said that his appointment was short term.
Insofar as Hans Raj Aggarwal is concerned, it is stated, that he was promoted on September 11, 1975 against a substantive vacancy.
He was reverted and Mohinder Singh Pannu from DC office was promoted.
Hans Raj Aggarwal was again promoted on August 20, 1989 and, therefore, he had been occupying a substantive vacancy by availing promotion twice.
Insofar as Sohan Singh is concerned, it is pleaded that he had availed promotions twice against substantive post in his own right and his reversion too, did not affect his promotion in 1973.
That apart, it is further pleaded that even if the position as explained by the petitioner is conceded to be correct, yet the 11th point in the roster goes to a Scheduled Caste candidate and since no such candidate was appointed, the 11th roster point had again, on account of interchangeability formula contained in Chapter VIII of the Manual of Instructions of Reservation, had to go to respondent No. 3, who alone could be promoted to the post of Superintendent Grade II and not the petitioner.
5.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and perusal of the records of the case, I am of the considered view that none of the points raised by Mr. Tewari, have any merit and, therefore, the present petition deserves to be dismissed.
It is true that the appeal filed by petitioner could not be dismissed on the ground that since the appeal preferred by respondent No. 3 had been accepted, the same would virtually amount to rendering the appeal preferred by petitioner to be infructuous.
Petitioner had an independent right to prove his point and if he was successful in showing his claim over and above respondent No. 3, the acceptance of appeal preferred by respondent No. 3, could not have come in his way but that does not help the petitioner as the Financial Commissioner had gone into the merits of the case and held that since roster point 15 was reserved for Backward Class candidates, to which respondent No. 3 belonged, the same has been rightly given to him.
6.
In sofar as the second point raised by Mr. Tewari that four or five persons, who had obtained short-time ad hoc promotion and non-framing of five rosters is concerned, suffice to say that the crucial point entitling the petitioner to the relief claimed is that at the time when respondent No. 3 was promoted, fourteen promotional posts were not filled.
However, the facts given in the written statement, as have been re-produced above, could depict that even though the initial promotions of the persons mentioned in sub para (v) of para 8, might have been ordered on ad hoc or temporary basis but by the time the post of Superintendent Grade II fell vacant for promotion on August 1, 1988, they were all occupying their respective promotional posts.
That apart, the petitioner can not stake his claim to the promotional post for another reason that even if four persons are excluded and it is the 11th point, which is to be filled, that would go to a Scheduled Caste candidate and due to interchangeability formula, as no Scheduled Caste candidate was available, respondent No. 3 has rightly been promoted.
Finding no merit in this petition, I dismiss the same leaving the parties, however, to bear their own costs.