ML Koul, J - Petitioner Ghulam Nabi, working as Junior Asstt.
in the office of Tehsildar Agrarian Reforms Doda, and holding a District Cadre Post, has been transferred by the Divisional Commissioner Jammu vide order No. 101/362/111/1855-58 dated 15121992 from Doda to Udhampur District and the Deputy Commissioner Udhampur has been directed to adjust the transferee in the District against the available vacancy.
Aggrieved of such transfer order, the petitioner has moved this writ petition on the ground that the Divisional Commissioner has no competency to transfer him from Doda to Udhampur District and in this regard refuge has been taken within the purview of Section 17 of the J&K Subordinate Service Recruitment Rules, 1992 which is reproduced hereunder :-  "17(2).
A member of Divisional Cadre shall be transferred to another Divisional cadre or to any District cadre under orders of the Head of the Department."
As the impugned order has not been passed within the purview of the aforesaid rule, hence the writ petition is filed by the petitioner challenging therein the competency of the Divisional Commissioner to issue such an order for he is not the Head of the Department.
2.
While the notice was given to other side, the interim direction was given by one of the learned Benches of this Court on 2011993, whereby the impugned order was placed under suspension and the other side was asked to file objections.
Objections were filed by the respondents.
Heard learned counsel for the parties and also bestowed my thoughtful consideration over the record on the file.
3.
Rule 17 quoted above clearly envisages that a member of the Divisional Cadre in the State service shall be transferred to another Divisional cadre or to any other District cadre under the orders of the Head of the Deptt.
4.
In the present case the Divisional Commissioner, Jammu, is not the Head of the Department for the Agrarian Reforms Department and thus not a competent authority to transfer the petitioner from Doda to Udhampur.
5.
Mr. Anand, representing the State, argued vehemently that the order impugned was passed by the Divisional Commissioner under the orders of the Govt. in the interest of administration.
6.
I have perused the record and there is no authentication or proof available on the record of the file to show that such an order of transfer was passed under the orders of the goverment or any Head of the Department.
7.
The impugned order being violative of Rule 17 of the aforesaid rules, is therefore set aside, without the writ petition being admitted to hearing.
8.
However, the respondent shall be at liberty to pass a fresh order under the authority of the government or concerned Head of the Department if they so desire in the interest of administration.
With the aforesaid observation the writ petition is disposed of at this stage, along with its connected CMPs.