RS Mongia, J - This judgment will dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 12920 of 1992, 13072 of 1992 and 13826 of 1992 as common questions of law and facts arise in these cases.
For facility of reference, facts of Civil Writ Petition No. 12920 of 1992 titled Gurmeet Kaur and others v. State of Punjab and another, 1994(2) S.C.T.
199 are being adverted to.
2.
The petitioners obtained diploma in General Nursing and Mid-wifery from Ancillary Medical Training School (Medical College Complex) Bakshinagar, Jammu.
They are all registered as Nurses Midwives with the Jammu and Kashmir Nurses Midwives and Health Visitors Registration Council.
The said council has been established under the Act known as the Jammu and Kashmir Nurses, Midwives & Health Visitors Registration Act, 1956.
3.
In the State of Punjab, there is an Act known as Punjab Nurses Registration Act, 1932 under which Punjab Nursing Council has been established which has been authorised to register Nurses/Midwives who satisfy the conditions under Section 14 of the Act.
On all India basis, there is another Act known as Indian Nursing Council Act, 1947.
The Central Act was enacted with the object to constitute an Indian Nursing Council in order to establish an institution for nurses, midwives and health visitors.
The recruitment and conditions of services of staff nurses and some other posts are governed by the statutory rules known as the "Punjab Medical and Health Department Nursing Superintendents, Matrons, Sister, Tutors, Public Health Nurses (Teaching) & Nursing Sisters, Public Health Nurses, Staff Nurses and Male Nurses (State Service Class III) Rules, 1964".
The qualifications for appointment as Staff Nurse under rule 6 are as follows :  "should be registered as 'A' or 'B' Division Nurse with the Punjab Nurses Registration Council, or B.Sc.
Hons (Nursing).
The Director, Research and Medical Education, Punjab and Chairman, Departmental Selection Committee issued an advertisement in July, 1992 inviting application for 40 posts of Staff Nurses and the necessary qualifications advertised were :- 1.
Matriculation or its equivalent qualification  2.
'A' Division Nurse be registered with Punjab Nursing Council or B.Sc.
(Hons.)
Nursing.
4.
The petitioners applied for the post and they were issued letter asking them to appear for interview on 19th August, 1992.
In the letter calling the petitioners for interview, it was mentioned that they should bring along with then all the testimonials regarding education, technical experience and certificate of Punjab Nursing Council Registration (Nurse/Midwifery).
According to the averments, the petitioners at the time of interview were asked to produce the registration certificate with the Punjab Nursing Council and they were told that unless the same was produced they would not be given appointment if selected.
The petitioners have challenged the vires of rule 6 of the rules, wherein for appointment as a Staff Nurse, registration with Punjab Nursing Council has been made as an essential qualification.
5.
The stand of the respondent is that the petitioners are not registered with the Punjab Nursing Council and under Section 14 of the Punjab Act, a person who has obtained Diploma from Jammu and Kashmir is not entitled to be registered under the Punjab Act.
Further, the Indian Nursing Council Act, 1947, is applicable to whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
State Medical Faculty are not eligible for registration with any other State and/or Nursing Council of India.
In fact, the Indian Nursing Council vide its letter dated September 13, 1991 had clarified that the candidate registered as Nurse/Midwife with the Jammu and Kashmir State Nursing Council cannot be appointed as Staff Nurse outside the Jammu and Kashmir State under the Central and autonomous bodies aided by the Central Government.
6.
The learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that India is one and it is arbitrary and discriminatory to restrict the appointment as Staff Nurse only to such persons who are registered as 'A' Division Nurses with the Punjab Nursing Council.
He further submitted that the registration of the petitioners with the Jammu and Kashmir State Nursing Council should be considered at par with the registration with any other State Nursing Council and as such the petitioners, who are registered with the Jammu & Kashmir State Nursing Council, cannot be deprived registration with the Punjab State Nursing Council.
Consequently, according to the learned counsel for the petitioners Rule 6 of the Rules which make registration with the Punjab Nursing Council an essential qualification for appointment as a Staff Nurse is wholly arbitrary and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of Constitution of India.
In support of his contention he relied upon a judgment of a Division Bench of this court in Civil Writ Petition No. 13029 of 1991 title Kamaljeet Kaur and another v. Post Graduate Institute and another, decided on November 1, 1991.
7.
As a last resort the learned counsel for the petitioners submitted the respondent should consider the case of the petitioners for appointment by invoking the provisions of Rule 27 of the Rules which empowers the State Government that in case operation of any of the Rules causes undue hardship in any particular case, then the requirement of that rule can be relaxed.
8.
In reply the learned counsel for the respondents submitted that it is upto the State Government to lay down a particular qualification that a person for appointment under the Rules should be registered with the Punjab State Nursing Council as at the time of registration the qualification which the person may be possess are scrutinised and it is only after that is done that the council registers the name.
According to him the judgment relied upon by learned counsel for the petitioners has no application to the facts of the present case.
It was also submitted that a candidate who has qualified from Jammu & Kashmir was not entitled to registration by the Punjab State Nursing Council as those qualifications were not recognised under the Indian Nursing Council nor under the Punjab Act.
9.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I do not find that there is any merit in the submissions of learned counsel for the petitioners that rule 6 of the Rules laying down the qualification which were incorporated in the advertisement are in any way violative of Articles 14 and 16 of Constitution of India.
It is permissible for the State Government to lay down that for employment under the Rules a person should be registered with the Punjab State Nursing Council as while registering the person, the qualifications of the person concerned are seen as to whether or not those make the person eligible for registration under the Punjab Act.
The State Government, therefore, cannot be compelled that if a particular person is registered with some other Council it is a good qualification for appointment under the Rules.
The learned counsel for the petitioners stated that the petitioners had applied for registration with the Punjab State Nursing Council.
In this case I am not opining as to whether the petitioners are eligible or not for registration with the Punjab State Nursing Council.
It will be open to the petitioners to pursue their applications in that regard, if so advised.
10.
So far as the judgment of the Division Bench (supra) is concerned, the same is not applicable to the facts of the present case.
In that case, the qualifications which were adversed for being appointed in the Post Graduate Institute, Chandigarh as Staff Nurses were :-  "1.
Matriculation or its equivalent from recognised University/Board.
2.
Certificate in General Nursing & Midwifery from a recognised institution or equivalent qualifications for male Nurse.
3.
Should be registered 'A' grade Nurse and Midwife with a State Nursing Council or equivalent qualification for male nurse."
The petitioners in that case had also obtained diploma from Jammu and Kashmir as the petitioners in the present case have.
There was no dispute regarding the petitioners having qualifications No. 1 and 3 referred to above inasmuch as all the petitioners were matriculate or possessed equivalent qualification and were registered with the Jammu and Kashmir State Nursing Council.
The requirement in that case was not that the candidate should be registered with the Punjab State Nursing Council but the only requirement was that the person should be registered with a State Nursing Council.
The dispute was regarding qualification at serial No. 2 referred to above.
It was held by the Division Bench that the fact that the petitioners had been called for interview and were in fact selected showed that the institution from which the petitioners had obtained diploma was a recognised institution by the Post Graduate Institute.
In these circumstances, the authority cited by the learned counsel for the petitioners has no application on the facts of the present case.
However, it may be observed that during the course of delivering judgment, the Division Bench had observed as under :  "On a perusal of the provisions of the Act, we find that the Nursing Council has been saddled with the responsibility or recognising the qualifications.
This must depend on an examination of the Courses of Study, the training and the standard of examination conduct by a particular institution.
Further the counsel has been authorised to "enter into negotiations with any authority to which this Act does not extend ....... for the settling of a scheme of reciprocity for the recognition of qualifications....." Even though the Act was passed more than four decades back, no action in this regard appears to have been taken.
As a result, the candidates who have obtained the certificate etc. from the State of Jammu and Kashmir are sought to be kept out of the registration/employment.
It is in the fitness of things that the Indian Nursing Council should consider the matter in exercise of its powers under Section 10(3) of the Act".
I am told that nothing had been done in this regard so far by the Indian Nursing Council.
11.
On the facts of the present case, and especially in view of the observations of the Division Bench, which have been quoted above, I am of the view that Indian Nursing Council should consider the matter in exercise of its powers under Section 10(3) of the Central Act.
Further I am of the view that it is a fit case in which the respondents should have considered the case of the petitioners under rule 17 of the Rules regarding relaxing of the rigor of a particular rule.
The respondents should have examined the case sympathetically and should not have mechanically rejected the case of the petitioners.
It is not the case of the respondents that the qualification which the petitioners have or the curriculum which they under went is in any way inferior to the one prevalent in Punjab.
For the foregoing reasons, I dispose of the writ petition by directing the respondents to consider the case of the petitioners under rule 17 of the rules and to decide whether the petitioners are entitled to be appointed by relaxation of the rigor of the rule regarding registration with the Punjab State Nursing Council.
Let these directions be carried out within three months of the receipt of copy of this order.
A copy of this judgment be also sent to the President of the Indian Nursing Council, 572, Vasudevpur Road, Calcutta so that it may give effect to the directions given in Civil Writ Petition No. 13029 of 1991 which has already been reproduced above.
I make no order as to costs.