Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - In the present writ petition, Dr. Himmat Singh Aneja, Director Health Services (Social Insurance) has prayed for quashing of order dated 2851993, a copy of which is Annexure P-11 to the writ petition, vide which respondent No. 2 Dr. Dalbir Singh Bakshi, has been promoted and appointed as Director, Health and Family Welfare, Punjab.
The petitioner has further prayed for issuance of direction to respondent No. 1 to consider and appoint him as Director, Health and Family Welfare, Punjab in accordance with the PCMS (Class-I) Rules, 1979.
2.
In this writ petition, the twin questions which have cropped up for consideration are whether the petitioner is entitled to be considered for appointment as Director, Health and Family Welfare and whether respondent No. 2 was eligible for promotion as Director Health and Family Welfare by giving preference over and above the petitioner.
3.
The case of the petitioner as set up in the writ petition is that he was initially appointed as Registrar in PCMS (Class-II) service w.e.f.
8.2.1964 and on the basis of direct recruitment, through Punjab Public Service Commission, he was appointed as PCMS (Class-I) Officer.
It is also the case of the petitioner that at the time of selection, he was placed at serial No. 3 on the merit list whereas respondent No. 2 was recommended at serial No. 6 vide order dated 771972, copy of which is Annexure P-1 to the writ petition.
In pursuance of the selection, the petitioner was appointed vide appointment letter dated 131973, copy of which is Annexure P-2 to the writ petition.
It is also the case of the petitioner that a per first Gradation List of PCMS Class-I, as on 171975, the petitioner was shown at serial No. 65 and respondent No. 2 Dr. Dalbir Singh Bakshi at serial No. 67.
Similarly, in Gradation List of PCMS Class-I as on 111979, the petitioner was shown at serial No. 62 while respondent No. 2 at serial No. 64.
It is also the case of the petitioner that he along with respondent No. 2 was further promoted to the post of Deputy Director vide order dated 1851987 copy of which is Annexure P-4 to the writ petition.
However, the petitioner was placed over respondent No. 2 in the Gradation List dated 171987 as the name of the petitioner was shown at serial No. 7 while that of respondent No. 2 was shown at serial No9.
4.
It is further case of the petitioner that petitioner along with respondent No. 2 was further promoted as Joint Director vide order dated 27.9.1989 a copy of which is Annexure P-5 to the writ petition and respondent No. 2 was again shown below the petitioner.
It is also the case of the petitioner that the petitioner was further promoted to the post of Additional Director vide order dated 21.11.1990 copy of which is Annexure P-6 whereas respondent No. 2 was promoted a Additional Director on 31.10.1991.
Copy of the promotion order of respondent No. 2 is Annexure P-7 to the writ petition.
It is also averred by the petitioner that while working as Joint Director, respondent No. 2 was sent on deputation to Union Territory, Chandigarh, as Director, Health Services, Union Territory, Chandigarh which post is equivalent to the post of Deputy Director, Health and Family Welfare, Punjab.
Though respondent No. 2 was given promotion as Additional Director vide order dated 31.10.1991 but he continued to work against the post equivalent to Deputy Director and as such lacked actual working experience on the post of Additional Director.
The petitioner avers that he was given current duty charge of the post of Director, Health Services (SI) on 1631992, vide order copy Annexure P-8 to the writ petition and even in the seniority list of PCMS Class-I, as on 111992, copy Annexure P-9, the petitioner was shown at Sr. No. 2 and respondent No. 2 at serial No. 3.
Similarly, the petitioner was promoted as Director, Health Services (SI) on regular basis vide order dated 3031993, copy Annexure P-10 to the writ petition.
5.
The post of Director, Health and Family Welfare, Punjab, which was manned by Dr. Ram Lal became vacant on 151993 and the petitioner being the seniormost PCMS Class-I Officer was entitled to be considered and appointed as such in terms of PCMS (Class-I) Rules, 1972, read with 1st Amendment Rules, 1979.
The relevant rule for appointment to the post of Director reads as under :-  "9.
Method of recruitment : (1) Recruitment to any post in Service excepting the posts of Director, Health Services, Joint Director, Health Services and Deputy Director, Health Services shall be made in the following manner :-  (i) twenty-five per cent of the vacancies by direct appointment; and  (ii) seventy-five per cent of the vacancies by promotion from amongst the members of the Punjab Civil Medical Class-II Service, who have an experience of working on that Service for a minimum period of ten years :  Provided that the Government may fill any vacancy by transfer or deputation of any official already in the service of Government of India or of a State Government, if a suitable candidate is not available by direct appointment or by promotion.
(2) Recruitment to the post of Director, Health Services, Joint Director, Health Services and Deputy Director, Health Services shall be made by selection from amongst the members of the service.
(3) All promotions whether from one grade to another or from one Class of Services to another shall be made by selection on the basis of merit-cum-seniority and seniority alone shall not give any right of appointment.
"9(A)Appointment to senior posts : No person shall be appointed :  (a) to the post of Director, Health Services, unless he has an experience of working on the post of Joint Director, Health Services for a minimum period of one year;  (b) to the post of Joint Director, Health Services, unless he has been a member of the service for a minimum period of twelve years including two years as Deputy Director Health Services; and  (c) to the post of Deputy Director, Health Services, unless he has been a member of the Service for a minimum period of ten years."
The aforementioned Rules show that there is only one post of Director, Health and Family Welfare which is selection and is to be filled up from the members of Service provided he has experience on the post of Joint Director for minimum period of one year and the post of Director, Health Services (SI) is Ex-cadre post.
6.
It is also the case of the petitioner that the rival claim of respondent No. 2 was duly considered by the department at the time of promotion to the post of Additional Director, Health Services in the year 1990 and again at the time of promotion as Director, Health Services (SI) in March, 1993.
It is also the case of the petitioner that with the approval of Department of Personnel, Finance Department and Punjab Public Service Commission, though the post of Additional Director was not in the Service Rules, it was to be filled up from amongst the Joint Directors, Health Services having experience of one year.
Similarly, it was decided to fill up the post of Director, Health and Family Welfare from amongst the Additional Directors having experience of one year as such and that the action was initiated to further amend the Service Rules 1972 as amended in 1979 and in view there respondent No. 2 having not completed actual experience of one year as Additional Director, could not be considered for promotion to the post of Director, Health and Family Welfare which had been available w.e.f.
151993.
However, after ignoring the rightful claim of the petitioner, respondent No. 2 has been promoted and appointed as Director Health and Family Welfare, Punjab vide impugned order dated 2851993 (Annexure P-11) in an arbitrary and discriminatory manner, though the service record of the petitioner remained over and above that of respondent No. 2 and he had been preferred at all occasions.
The petitioner has also challenged the promotion and appointment of respondent No. 2 as Director, Health and Family Welfare on the basis of past precedent and on the plea that the post of Director, Health Services (SI) was not equivalent to the post of Director, Health and Family Welfare, Punjab in status and responsibilities.
7.
The claim of the petitioner has been resisted by the respondents.
It is relevant to add that the official respondent has filed the written statement through Shri M. M. Oberoi, Additional Secretary, Health and no written statement has been filed by respondent No. 2.
In the written statement filed by the State, the factual position as contained in the writ petition and narrated in the foregoing paragraphs, has, by and large been admitted.
However, a stand has been taken that since the post of Director, Health Services (SI) has also been declared as Head of Department and is equal in status, so the petitioner was not required to be considered at the time of filing in the post of Director, Health and Family Welfare, which is sought to be justified that respondent No. 2 was found meritorious and was approved for appointment as Director, Health and Family Welfare vide impugned order dated 2851993 (Annexure P-11)  8.
It is the case of the official respondent that though at all the earlier occasions, even at the last occasion, when the post of DHS (SI) was filled on 3031993, the petitioner was found to be having a preferential right over and above respondent No. 2 for the said post, he had no right to seek his posting as Director, Health and Family Welfare which was the prerogative of the Government and there is no violation of any constitutional provision or the provision of Rules governing the post and the action of the State Government was justified.
9.
I have considered the rival contention of the parties and perused the pleadings on the record minutely and to come to just conclusion, departmental files were also called for which have also been minutely examined.
10.
Before examining the rival contentions of the parties, it would be appropriate to narrate the factual position with regard to post of Director, Health and Family Welfare, Punjab and Director, Health Services (Social Insurance), Punjab.
Undisputedly under the Punjab Civil Medical Services (Class-I) Service Rules, 1972 read with 1st amendment of 1979, there is only one sanctioned post of Director, Health and Family Welfare, Punjab which has been given the status of Head of Department.
The post of Director, Health Services (SI) Punjab was upgraded from the post of Joint Director (E.SI) on 1691983 in the pay scale of Director, Health and Family Welfare.
But this post had been given the status of Head of Department only on December 14, 1990 and this post has been retained as Ex-cadre post because its expenditure is being shared by the Punjab Government and E.SI Corporation in the ratio of 1 :7.
It is also not in dispute that from 1691983 to December, 1990 the Doctors who were posted as Director, Health Services (SI) used to be promoted as Director, Health and Family Welfare, Punjab.
This was the practice prior to declaring the post of Director, Health Services (SI) as Head of Department and after December, 1990 some of the work/duties attached to the post of Director, Health and Family Welfare were ordered to be transferred to the post of Director, Health Services (SI).
Not only this, even after December, 1990, after declaration of the post of Director, Health Services (SI) as Head of Department, incumbent of the said post was transferred and posted as Director, Health and Family Welfare after the death of Dr. Bachhittar Singh, the then Director, Health and Family Welfare, Punjab on 26101991.
It is also clear that the Director Health and Family Welfare enjoys higher status, powers and privileges than the Director, Health Services (SI) as is apparent from the following :  (i) No. of Institutions under Control  There are over 5,000 Hospitals, PHCs/Dispensaries/Sub Centres under the administrative control of Director, Health and Family Welfare whereas only 77 Hospitals and Dispensaries are there under the control of Director, Health Services (SI).
(ii) Staff  The exact details given by the Finance Department for the year 1993-94 of the posts and pay there scales in the Health Department are that are 24,130 officers/employees under the control of Director Health and Family Welfare.
There are only 2273 officers/employees under the control of Director Health Services (SI).
(iii) Budget : (for the year 1993-94)  For Director, Health and Family Welfare : Over Rs. 180 crores.
For Director, Health Services (SI) : Below Rs. 10 crores.
(Only 1/8th share out of the this to be borne by State Govt.)  (iv) Vehicles :  There are about 1,000 vehicles attached to the Department of Health and Family Welfare.
Only 9 vehicles are with the Director, Health Services (SI) consisting of one staff car and 8 ambulances.
(v) The promotion to the posts of Deputy Director and above are made by the Departmental Promotion Committee.
The said Committee consists of the following members  The said Committee consists of the following members :-  a) Secretary, Health and Family Welfare.
b) Secretary, Personnel.
c) Secretary, Welfare Department.
d) Director, Health and Family Welfare.
e) Director, Research and Medical Education (DRME).
However, Director, Health Services (SI) is even not a member of the Promotion Committee within the E.SI  (vi) That even in the matters of protocol the Director Health and Family Welfare is placed higher than Director (SI).
This fact is evident from the official publication of Punjab Government Diary by the Public Relations Department and the directory of important telephone numbers published by the State Government.
Only the name of Director, Health and Family Welfare shown and Director Health Services (SI) finds no mention.
Even in the general telephone numbers directory published by the Punjab Government, the name of Director, Health and Family Welfare finds mention above the name of Director (SI).
More so, it is not only the pay scale or nomenclature of the post which determines the equivalence of the two posts.
It is the nature of duties and responsibilities, power and privilege of the post which are really the determining factors for declaring the equivalence of the post.
Though the post of Director, Health Services (SI) was declared as Head of Department yet there is no material on record to show that both the posts were ever declared equivalent from the angle of duties and responsibilities.
Thus by comparing the staff employed, function and objects thereof, budget allocation under the Director Health and Family Welfare, Punjab vis-a-vis Director, Health Services (Social Insurance), I entertain no doubt whatsoever that the post of Director, Health and Family Welfare, Punjab is higher in status and responsibilities as compared to the post of Director, Health Services (SI) and this finding of mine also finds support from the fact that even the Recruitment and promotion of Class-III officials posted under DHS (SI) continues to be made by the Director, Health and Family Welfare irrespective of the fact that in the departmental promotion committee, the Director, Health Services (SI) is also included as one of the members, but the said committee is usually headed by Director, Health and Family Welfare.
11.
Now coming to the inter se claim of the petitioner and respondent No. 2 for the post of Director, Health and Family Welfare, Punjab, undisputedly the petitioner remained senior to respondent No. 2 throughout and at the time of last consideration of their inter se merit at the time of promotion to the post of Director, Health Services (SI) in the year 1993 (30.3.93) both were found to have possessed equal merit but the petitioner was promoted keeping in view his seniority over and above respondent No. 2.
The petitioner joined PCMS Class-II on 8.2.1964 who was appointed as PCMS Class-I by direct recruitment on 771972.
The petitioner was promoted as Deputy Director, Health Services on 1851987 then promoted as Joint Director on 27th Sept 1989 and then Additional Director on 21.11.1990, who was given the current duty charge of the post of Director, Health Services (SI) 1631992 and was regularised as such w.e.f 3031993 whereas respondent No. 2, Dr. Dalbir Singh Bakshi was though appointed as P.C.M Class-I by direct recruitment along with petitioner, but his merit was at Sr. No. 6 vis-a-vis whose merit was at Sr. No. 3.
Similarly in the order of promotion as Deputy Director, Health Services, the petitioner was shown senior to respondent No. 2 in the order dated 1851987 i.e. petitioner was at Sr. No. 7 and respondent No. 2 at Sr. No. 9.
The petitioner was promoted as Additional Director vide order dated 21.11.1990 whereas respondent No. 2 was promoted as such on 31.10.1991.
It is also added that respondent No. 2 had been working as Director, Health Services, UT Chandigarh on deputation since 1990 which post is stated to be equivalent to the post Deputy Director and respondent No. 2 held the said post till he was promoted and appointed as Director, Health and Family Welfare, Punjab vide impugned order dated 2851993.
12.
It is undisputed fact that while promoting respondent No. 2 to the post of Director, Health and Family Welfare, Punjab, the case of the petitioner for posting as such was never considered and the plea taken by the official respondent in para 8 of the written statement is that the petitioner already stood promoted and posted as Director, Health Services (SI), Punjab in the pay scale of Rs. 5900-200-6700 and the post already having been declared as Head of Department vide order dated 14.12.1990.
However, a stand has been taken that the name of the petitioner was considered for posting him as Director Health and Family Welfare, Punjab.
13.
It will also be worthwhile to mention here that though the Recruitment Rules of 1972 as amended in 1979 have not yet been further amended, but for promotion to the post of Director, Health and Family Welfare, the respondent-Department has laid down a criteria that an Additional Director having one year's experience as such would be eligible for promotion to the post of Director, Health and Family Welfare (para 8 of the written statement of respondent No. 1 refers) by way of selection on merit.
14.
The petitioner was appointed/promoted to the post of Additional Director, and Director, Health Services (SI) in preference to respondent No. 2, both the posts being selection posts.
The petitioner has also claimed the preferential right over and above respondent No. 2 on the plea that the petitioner was appointed as Additional Director an year earlier to the promotion of respondent No. 2 as such at the time of giving current duty charge of the post of Director (SI) on 1631992 and even at the time of regular promotion as Director, Health Services (SI) on 3031993 and that there is no deterioration in the record of the petitioner after his regular promotion as Director, Health Services (SI) The petitioner has also staked his claim to the coveted post of Director, Health and Family Welfare, Punjab on the ground that he is seniormost PCMS Officer, he was never superseded till date, he has been shouldering higher responsibilities of the post of Director, Health Services (SI) on which he has been regularly promoted.
15.
As regards respondent No. 2, the petitioner has urged that he does not have actual experience on the post of Additional Director, for a period of one year before his promotion as Director, Health and Family Welfare as is required under the Policy Guidelines of State of Punjab.
Hence respondent No. 2 was not eligible for such promotion.
Keeping in view the facts that the post of Director, Health and Family Welfare, Punjab is a post of higher status and responsibility as compared to the post of Director, Health Services (SI), he had every right to be considered for being appointed as Director, Health and Family Welfare, Punjab.
16.
Keeping in view my findings in the foregoing paragraphs to the effect that the post of Director, Health Services (SI) is not a post equivalent in status and responsibilities to the post of Director, Health and Family Welfare, Punjab in view of the comparison of Staff employed under the Director, Health and Family Welfare Budget allocation and other allied material and the petitioner being the Seniormost in PCMS-I cadre, he had a right to be considered for appointment as such keeping in view the past practice and precedent not only with effect from 1691983 but even after 14.12.1990 when the post of Director, Health Services (SI) was declared as Head of Department when Dr. Ram Lal was posted as Director, Health and Family Welfare from the post of Director, Health Services (SI) and the Punjab Government had prepared a panel for promotion to the post of Director, Health Services (SI).
17.
It is also proved on the record that the petitioner is not having any adverse record and his record was compared with that of respondent No. 2 from time to time and even at the time of last promotion of the petitioner as Director, Health Services (SI) on 1631992 and 3031993 he was found to be better placed and the respondent-department has not placed any material on the record showing that there was any deterioration in the service career of the petitioner after his promotion.
The petitioner is also better placed from another angle that he had actually been working as Additional Director, Health Services w.e.f.
21.11.1990 and respondent No. 2 though was given proforma promotion w.e.f.
31.10.1991 i.e. after almost one year of the promotion of the petitioner, never actually worked as Additional Director.
Hence the requirement of experience of one year as Additional Director as required for promotion to the post of Director, Health and Family Welfare is missing in the case of respondent No. 2.
18.
The perusal of the relevant departmental files shows that the department has been applying the different yardstick while filling in the post of Director, Health & Family Welfare and I am satisfied that the cadre post of Director, Health and Family Welfare, Punjab being higher in status and responsibility, the petitioner had a legitimate right to be considered for the same, but was not considered as such on the basis of irrelevant consideration.
Even there is nothing on the record showing the equivalence of the two posts.
Rather Annexure P-12 which is an official document, though produced by the petitioner, clinches the matter that the post of Director, Health Services, SI is lower in status and responsibilities than the post of Director, Health Family Welfare, Punjab.
The respondent/department has not brought out anything on the record as to how respondent No. 2 has been preferred over and above the petitioner for the post of Director, Health and Family Welfare particularly when he could not compete with the petitioner either in March, 1992 when the current duty charge of the post of Director, Health Services (SI) was given to the petitioner and then at the time when he was promoted on regular post on 3031993.
Hence it is not understood as to what extraordinary event has crept in between March, 1992 & March, 1993 and May, 1993, so as to show respondent No. 2 as more meritorious than the petitioner, nor anything against the petitioner has been brought on the record pertaining to the aforesaid period.
The favourtism done to respondent No. 2 is also apparent from the fact that had respondent No. 2 been more meritorious than the petitioner, the former would have been preferred at the time of promotion as Director, Health Services (SI).
19.
The sequence of the events shows that it was a clever move simply to favour respondent No. 2 by ousting the petitioner outside the cadre against the ex-cadre post, which is not equivalent to the cadre post of Director, Health & Family Welfare.
I am aware of the settled law that it is the sphere of the Administrative authorities to make selection to a particular post and the courts are normally restrained from interfering therein.
However, it is a case of glaring violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution and pricked the conscience of the Court when examined in the totality of the circumstances keeping in view the past precedent, departmental files and the inter-se-merit of the petitioner vis-a-vis respondent No. 2 and the equality and fairness being the guiding principle in the matter of appointments to public service.
Thus as a result of foregoing discussions, I am of the considered view that the post of Director, Health & Family, Welfare, Punjab is of higher status and responsibilities than the post of Director, Health Services (SI) and the petitioner had got a preferential right to be considered for the posting against the said post over and above respondent No. 2 who had not actually rendered one year's service as Additional Director for becoming eligible for his promotion as Director, Health and Family Welfare, Punjab.
20.
Consequently, the impugned order dated 2851993 (Annexure P-11) is hereby quashed and the respondent-department is hereby directed to reconsider the case of petitioner in accordance with existing rules, past practice and treating the post of Director, Health and Family Welfare as a post having the higher status and responsibilities than the post of Director, Health Services (SI), Punjab within a period of two months and in the meantime the charge of the post of Director, Health and Family Welfare may be given to the senior most incumbent of the cadre of PCMS Class-I in accordance with the post practice.
On the facts and circumstances of the case, parties are left to bear their own costs.