VK Bali, J (Oral) - This order will dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 2946 and 2945 of 1984 as common questions of fact and law are involved in the same.
2.
The claim of petitioners in both the writ petitions is to quash Annexure P5, P6 and P8 and to direct the respondents to treat them promoted as per their seniority and as per the date when they passed Carrier Wave Course.
3.
This precise relief asked for on identical facts came up for adjudication before me in Civil Writ Petition No. 4351 of 1983 "Ashwani Kumar v. State of Haryana, 1991(2) SCT 670 (P&H)."
The writ petition was dismissed on 151991.
Whereas Mr. Monga, learned Deputy Advocate General, Haryana contends that the matter is squarely covered against the petitioners by my judgment referred to above.
Mr. Sharma, learned counsel appearing for the petitioners wishes to distinguish the same on the following grounds :-  i) In the present case, the petitioners we were promoted to the posts of Assistant Sub Inspectors whereas in the case mentioned above, the petitioners were asking for their promotion on the basis of their having passed Carrier Wave Course.
ii) That these very petitioners on account of their reversion in the year 1989 filed Civil Writ Petition No. 7897 of 1989 "Bhim Singh v. State of Haryana etc." 1991(1) SCT 621 (P&H) and after issuance of notice of motion to the respondents, the order of their reversion was withdrawn,  iii) That in judgment recorded in Civil Writ Petition No. 4351 of 1983 "Ashwani Kumar v. State of Haryana" cases, reported as Shri Harjit Singh, Sub Inspector of Police v. Inspector General of Police, Haryana."
1969 Services Law Report 845 and "State of Haryana v. Shamsher Jang Bahadur," 1972 Services Law Reporter 441 were not considered by me while deciding the case aforesaid.
4.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that there is no merit in the additional points raised by Mr. Sharma and, therefore, these petitions deserve to be dismissed.
In so far as the question of petitioners being promoted to the posts of Assistant Sub Inspectors is concerned, the very promotion order Annexure P3 would manifest that they were promoted provisionally as officiating Assistant Sub Inspectors subject to their qualifying in the subjects noted against each within a period of three months from the date of promotion.
Mr. Monga on the basis of pleadings made in the written statement rightly contends that this provisional promotion as officiating Assistant Sub Inspectors with specific condition mentioned in their promotion order would not clothe the petitioners with any indefeasible right.
The petitioners did not qualify the test and, therefore, strictly in accordance with the condition of their promotion, they could be reverted.
5.
In so far as filing of Civil Writ Petition No. 7897 of 1989 is concerned, suffice it to say that there was no final decision in the matter and the respondents withdrew the order of reversion of their own.
That, however, cannot be cited as a precedent to contend that the cause pleaded by the petitioners in Civil Writ Petition No. 7897 of 1989 was meritorious and if the order of reversion was not withdrawn, the writ petition ought to have been allowed.
6.
The cases cited as Shri Harjit Singh, Sub Inspector of Police and Shamsher Jang Bhadur (supra) will also not come to the rescue of the petitioners.
The facts of case Shri Harjit Singh, Sub Inspector of Police (supra) reveal that when the petitioner was promoting as Inspector of Police no condition was prescribed to qualify the test.
It is only after his promotion that the said test was prescribed for future entrants and on account of his not passing the same, he was sought to be reverted.
It is in the context of fact aforesaid that it was held thus :  "As U I have pointed out above, the service rules do not prescribe this qualification and even when the department was reorganised in 1966, no qualifications for the incumbents of the posts who were enlisted under Section 2 of the Police Act were prescribed.
The qualifications were prescribed only for the new entrants are therefore, it could not be said on the basis of that order that the petitioner was required to qualify himself as a Grade I Technician."
The Apex Court in "Shamsher Jang Bahadur and others", (supra), held that in the presence of Rules, instructions cannot be issued to supplement the same.
7.
In so far as the facts of the present case are concerned, it is clear that it is Rule 13.1(1) which talks of promotion from one rank to another by selection tempered by seniority.
This Rule was interpreted by me while deciding Civil Writ Petition No. 4351 of 1983.
8.
For the reasons recorded above, both the petitions fail and are consequently dismissed.
However, there shall be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.