SS Sodhi, J - The matter here concerns the promotion of a Sub Divisional Engineer, to the post of Executive Engineer.
2.
Major Singh Gill, the writ petitioner, was appointed Sub Divisional Engineer, in the Punjab Service of Engineers, Public Works Department, B & R Branch, Class II Service, in August, 1972.
He was confirmed as such on September 6, 1974 and later crossed his efficiency bar w.e.f.
February 1, 1982.
3.
Promotion from the post of Sub Divisional Engineer, is to the post of Executive Engineer, which is a Class I post in the Punjab Service of Engineers.
This promotion is governed by the Punjab Service of Engineers, Class I, PWD (B&R) Rules, 1960, and, in terms thereof 8 years service and passing of the departmental examination are essential pre-requisites for such promotion.
These rules further provide that a Committee shall meet at intervals, ordinarily not exceeding one year, to consider the cases of all eligible officers for promotion as on the first day of January that year.
The list, that is so prepared, has then to be forwarded to the Punjab Public Service Commission and it is only thereafter that after considering the views of the Commission that the promotions are to be made by the Government.
4.
In the present case, the writ petitioner, Major Singh Gill, became eligible for consideration for promotion to Class I w.e.f.
January 1, 1981, as by that date, he had completed 8 years service.
As it happened, however, the screening committee, which was required to meet every year, to consider cases for promotion to Class I, did not meet from 1979 till 1989.
During this period, to meet the requirements of work, however, the eligible Class II Engineers were promoted to Class I, on ad hoc basis.
In this manner, the writ petitioner, too was promoted as Executive Engineer w.e.f.
March 3, 1986.
5.
Major Singh Gill, belongs to a backward class and according to the roster, a vacancy for this class became available w.e.f.
January 1, 1985.
When the screening committee for promotion, eventually met towards the end of 1989, it considered the case of Major Singh Gill, for promotion to the post of Executive Engineer, w.e.f.
January 1, 1985, but did not find him suitable and observed -  "There is no adverse report of the relevant period.
There arc two enquiries one of which pertains to the later period i.e. 1988 and the 2nd enquiry relates to the period 1973 for which charge-sheet was served upon him in 1975.
The enquiry has been completed and it is at the final stage of decision.
It has been tentatively decided to punish him."
It appears, however, that when the matter went up to the Punjab Public Service Commission, the name of Major Singh Gill, was also included in the list of approved candidates, but, while many persons mentioned in the list were thereafter given appointment by Government, no such appointment was given to Major Singh Gill, on the ground that he was not suitable for such promotion.
This is what eventually led him to move this Court, in its writ jurisdiction.
6.
A reference to the record shows that what weighed with the screening committee in observing against Major Singh Gill, was that there was an enquiry pending against him.
This enquiry related to the period 1973, in respect of which, a charge-sheet had been served upon him in 1975.
It was over ten years thereafter, in 1986, that this enquiry was eventually completed, but the significant point to note, with regard to it, is that even todate, no punishment has been awarded despite the punishment of stoppage of one increment with cumulative effect, having been proposed.
7.
The position, that thus emerges, is that the only material adverse to Major Singh Gill, in his service record, is this incomplete enquiry, which, even if it were to conclude now, with the awarding of the proposed punishment of the stoppage of one increment, it would relate back to the year 1973 or at any rate 1975, when the charge-sheet was served upon him.
In this behalf, it would be pertinent to note, that while dealing with other cases, the screening committee had ignored punishments awarded to them, more than five years prior to the date of their promotion.
Applying the same yardstick to the case of the writ petitioner, such punishment, even if awarded to him, could not stand in the way of his promotion.
8.
Such being the circumstances, no exception can indeed be taken to the impugned judgment of the learned Single Judge holding the writ petitioner suitable for promotion to the rank of Executive Engineer w.e.f.
January 1, 1985.
9.
The judgment of the learned Single Judge, is, consequently, hereby upheld and affirmed and this appeal is dismissed with costs.
Counsel's fee Rs. 500/-.
Appeal dismissed.