VK Bali, J (Oral) - Paramjit Singh Mal and five others through present petition filed by them under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India seek writ in the nature of certiorari declaring the action of respondents in passing of Annexure P-1, as illegal, arbitrary and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
2.
Brief facts of the case reveal that petitioners after having qualified the Common Entrance Test in the year 1990 were admitted in the Thapar Institute of Engineering and Technology, Patiala in the first year of Bachelor of Engineering Course (hereinafter referred to as BE Course).
The duration of the said course is four academic years and each academic semester is of 15-16 weeks duration.
The respondent-Institute has framed Academic Regulations and Regulation 17, which is relevant for the purpose of deciding the controversy involved in this petition, is as under :  "17(a) A student will be required to repeat first year if (i) he fails to earn 40% of the credits offered in the approved scheme of courses for the first year and/or  (ii) he secures (sic) CGPA less than 40 at the end of first year.
However, while repeating first year, he will be exempted from repeating courses in which the grade earned is A, B or C in the earlier attempt.
If the student, after repeating first year under 17(a) is unable to secure a CGPA of 4, 5 he will be required to leave the Institute.
(b) A student (who has not repeated first year under 17(a) will be required to leave their if, at any stage his CGPA is less than 45 in three consecutive semesters."
3.
Inasmuch as Regulation 17(a) requires petitioners to secure Cumulative Grade Point Average (hereinafter referred as CGPA) of 45 but they have not been able to do so, they were directed to leave the Institute.
Aggrieved, they filed writ (CWP No. 12466 of 1992) in this Court, which, after notice of motion, was allowed and it was ordered that petitioners should be allowed to continue their studies.
The order aforesaid came to be passed on the statement made by learned counsel for the respondent-Institute in that case that one mercy chance shall be given to petitioners to improve their CGPA.
It is admitted position that even though they availed of this mercy chance but could not improve their CGPA and, therefore, respondent-Institute took the action which has been challenged in the present petition.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioners contends that inasmuch as petitioners have been given a chance now to appear in Summer Term Examination, the impugned action of the respondent-Institute is rather pre-mature and the result of said examination should have been awaited.
He further contends that one Ranbir Singh who was admitted in BE Course in the year 1989, had not improved his CGPA to the extent of 45, he was being permitted to continue his studies and no action was taken against him.
5.
The cause of petitioners has been opposed and in the written statement that has been filed on behalf of respondent-Institute, it has been pleaded that insofar as Summer Term Examination is concerned, the same is offered to those students of final year out going class who are left with maximum of three back log course so that they are able to utilise summer to complete the requirement of award of BE degree without washing another academic year.
It is further pleaded that the course offered to outgoing final year class could also be availed of by the students of other classes to reduce their accumulated backlog provided that there is no clash with other academic requirements to be completed by those students.
Petitioner Nos. 1 to 4 availed the chance of backlog course in summer term because those courses were offered to outgoing final year students and petitioner Nos. 5 and 6 could not avail of that chance because no student of outgoing class requested for those courses in the said term.
Petitioners could get benefit of summer term if they had done minimum CGPA of 45 at the end of mercy chance and as referred to above, even after availing of mercy chance, they were not able to improve their CPGA.
With regard to Ranbir Singh, it is pleaded that his case escaped notice of respondents and now action has been taken against him as well.
6.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and going through the records of the case, I am of the considered view that there is no merit in this petition and, therefore, the same deserves to be dismissed.
Regulation 17(a) clearly stipulates that if a student after repeating first year is unable to secure CPGA of 45, he will be required to leave the Institute.
The respondent-Institute took compassionate view in the matter and when the first petition was filed by petitioners, statement was made by the counsel for the Institute that a mercy chance shall be given to them.
Petitioners, could not improve their CGPA of 45 even after availing of mercy chance given to them.
In accordance with Regulation 17(a) there was no choice with the respondent-Institute but for to ask them to leave the Institute.
Insofar as permitting the petitioners to take summer term examination is concerned, suffice it to say that it is meant for final year students only.
Insofar as case of Ranbir Singh is concerned, action has already been taken against him and the mere fact that it escaped notice of respondent-Institute and no action was earlier taken against him, cannot be made a ground to plead discrimination.
7.
Finding no merit, I dismiss this petition.
However, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.