SD Agarwala, CJ.
- These are two Letters Patent Appeals arising out of the decision of the learned Single Judge dated 18th of November, 1986 in Civil Writ Petition No. 3964 of 1979 where Arjan Singh Vaid was the petitioner.
Against this decision, two Appeals have been filed in this court, one appeal by Arjan Singh Vaid, which is numbered as Letters Patent Appeal No. 125 of 1987 and the other by the State of Punjab and the Director of Public Instructions (Schools), numbered as Letters Patent Appeal No. 28 of 1987.
Since both the appeals arise out of the same judgment in one writ petition and common questions of law are involved, we are deciding both the Appeals by a common judgment.
2.
Arjan Singh Vaid was appointed as untrained Master in the year 1954 against the post of J.B.T.
teacher in the Education Department, Punjab.
While he was serving as untrained Master, he passed his B.Ed.
examination on 7th July, 1960.
After declaration of National Emergency in the country, he joined the Armed Forces as Emergency Commissioned Officer on 19th July, 1963.
When he joined the Armed Forces, he was working as untrained/unadjusted Master in the Education Department.
3.
Arjan Singh Vaid, the petitioner was released from the Army on 31st of August, 1968.
He, consequently, put 5 years, one month and 14 days service in the Army as an Emergency Commissioned Officer.
4.
The petitioner after his release from the Army joined the Education Department as unadjusted Master on 1st of September, 1968.
On 9th June, 1960, the Director of Public Instructions (Schools), Punjab, passed an order by which the petitioner was given the benefit of his improved higher educational qualification, i.e. B.Ed.
and appointed him as Master in the grade of Rs. 110/250 with effect from 22nd May, 1964.
This order has been attached to the petition as P-2.
5.
Subsequently, on the recommendation of the Punjab Public Service Commission, the petitioner was appointed as Head Master in the grade of Rs. 300/600 by the Director of Public Instructions (Schools), Punjab by order dated 8th April, 1974 and he joined as Head Master on 11th April, 1974.
The petitioner was appointed as Head Master against one of the reserved posts of Head Master under Rule 3 of the Demobolised Armed Forces Personnel (Reservation of Vacancies in the State of Punjab - Non-Technical) Rules, 1968 (hereinafter referred to as 1968 Rules).
After the petitioner was appointed as Head Master, he made a representation praying for grant of benefit of approved army service of 5 years, one month and 14 days in accordance with Rule 5 of the 1968 rules, mentioned above.
This representation of the petitioner was rejected by an order dated 16th June, 1976, which is P-3 to the writ petition.
It is this order which has been challenged in the writ petition, seeking a writ of mandamus directing the State of Punjab and the Director of Public Instructions (Schools), Punjab to grant the petitioner seniority, increments and consequential benefits of military service and further prayer was in the nature of certiorari quashing the impugned order dated 16th June, 1976.
6.
This writ petition came up for hearing before the learned Single Judge.
The petition was allowed and the petitioner was granted the benefit of 5 years, one month and 14 days military service, as prayed by him.
7.
In the Letters Patent Appeal No. 125 of 1987 filed by the petitioner it has been contended that the full benefit has not been granted to the petitioner and he should have been granted benefit in accordance with Rule 5 of the 1968 Rules.
8.
In so far as the appeal filed by the State of Punjab is concerned, the Letters Patent Appeal No. 28 of 1987, learned Additional Advocate General for the State of Punjab has urged that once the benefit of military service had already been granted to the petitioner vide order dated 9th June, 1969, he was not entitled to any further benefit.
9.
We have heard learned counsel for both the parties in both the Appeals.
In so far as the contention raised on behalf of the petitioner is concerned, it is relevant to quote Rule 5 of the 1968 Rules on which reliance has been placed by the petitioner-appellant.
Rule 5 of the 1968 Rules is quoted below :-  "5.
(1) Seniority and pay of the candidates who are appointed against the vacancies reserved under rule 3 and who, -  (i) in the case of Emergency Commissioned Officers, are released according to a phased programme; or  (ii) in the case of Short Service Commissioned Officers, are released on the expiry of the tenure of their service; or  (iii) are invalidated owing to a disability attributable to or aggravated by military service;  shall be determined on the assumption that they joined the service or the post, as the case may be, under the State Government at the first opportunity they had after they joined the military service or training prior to the Commission.
(2) Seniority inter se of candidates who are appointed against the vacancies reserved under Rule 3 and allotted to a particular year shall be determined on the basis of their dates of birth; the candidate older in age to be placed senior to the one younger in age :  Provided that in the case of candidates having the same date of birth, seniority shall be determined according to the merit list prepared by the recruiting authority on the basis of the result of the test or examination.
(3) All candidates appointed against the reserved vacancies under rule 3 shall rank below the candidates appointed by direct recruitment in the year to which the former candidates are allotted."
The above Rule provides that the seniority and pay of the candidates, who are appointed against the vacancies reserved under Rule 3 and who, in the case of Emergency Commissioned Officers, are released according to a phased programme, shall be determined on the assumption that they joined the service or the post, as the case may be, under the State Government at the first opportunity they had after they joined the military service or training prior to the Commission.
The effect of this Rule is that the seniority has to be determined on an assumption from a date from which the State Government would get the first opportunity of appointing a person on a post held by a person who is released from military service after the said person has joined the military service.
It was, consequently, incumbent on the petitioner to plead in the writ petition as to the exact date from when seniority should be assumed in favour of the petitioner as contemplated by Rule 5 of the 1968 Rules.
There is no such averment in the writ petition and consequently, it is not possible to grant relief under Rule 5 of the 1968 Rules.
The submission made by the petitioner-appellant is consequently not accepted.
10.
The petitioner in the petition had in the alternative sought a relief of grant of benefit of military service of 5 years, one month and 14 days which the learned Single Judge had already granted.
11.
In the circumstances, we do not find any merit in so far as the contention of the petitioner is concerned.
12.
In regard to the contention raised by the learned Additional Advocate General, Punjab in the State's appeal, we find that the benefit granted by Annexure P-2 was the benefit which the petitioner was entitled in his own right as persons junior to him had been regularised in view of the fact that they had also passed the B.Ed.
examination.
The order, Annexure P-2, was not passed giving any benefit of military service to the petitioner.
In the circumstances, it cannot be accepted that the petitioner was not entitled to the benefit of military service.
The contention raised by the Additional Advocate General, Punjab, also in our opinion does not have any force.
In the result both the appeals are dismissed.
13.
The order of the learned Single Judge dated 18th November, 1986 is clarified to the extent that the petitioner will be deemed to have been appointed with effect from 1st September, 1963 as a Master and he is entitled to the resultant benefits of pay fixation, increments, seniority etc. accordingly.
We further direct that the State Government and the Director of Public Instructions (Schools), Punjab, Chandigarh shall give effect to the orders passed by the learned Single Judge within six months from the date a certified copy of the order is produced before the Director of Public Instructions (Schools), Punjab, if the same have already not been implemented.
There shall be no order as to costs in both the appeals.