NK Sodhi, J - This petition under Article 226 of the Constitution has been filed by one Miss Kamla Khanna claiming seniority as a clerk in the office of the Engineer-in-Chief, P.W.D.
(B&R Branch), Haryana, challenge herein is in fact made to the seniority list of clerks as it stood on April 1, 1984 on the ground that the petitioner is entitled to her seniority from the date when her name was recommended for appointment by the Subordinate Services Selection Board (for short, 'the Board').
She also claims other consequential benefits including promotion.
2.
Petitioner was appointed as a clerk on ad hoc basis on September 24, 1971 in the office of the Engineer-in-Chief, PWD (B&R Branch), Haryana, Chandigarh (hereinafter called 'the Head Office').
Thereafter, the Board advertised some posts of Clerks in different office including the Head Office.
Petitioner applied for one of the posts and after interview she was selected and recommended for appointment as per letter of the Board dated August 9, 1973 addressed to the Chief Engineer in the Head Office.
In terms of the recommendation of the Board the petitioner was appointed as a regular clerk in the office of the Superintending Engineer, Construction Circle, PWD (B&R Branch), Haryana, Chandigarh (referred to hereinafter as 'the Sub-office') as per letter dated October 5, 1973.
As she was earlier working on ad hoc basis in the Head Office, the Additional Chief Engineer in that office relieved her w.e.f.
October 5, 1973 (F.N.)
so as to enable her to join in the sub-office.
After joining the sub office on 5.10.1973 she continued working there till February, 1976.
While working in the sub office she had some time in the year 1974 requested the Chief Engineer to accommodate her as a Clerk in the Head Office.
She was thereafter transferred to the Head Office as per order dated 1.12.1975 but she actually joined her duty on February 13, 1976.
This order reads as under :-  "The Chief Engineer, Haryana, PWD B&R Branch, is pleased to transfer Miss Kamla Khanna, clerk from the office of Superintending Engineer, Survey & Project Circle, PWD B&R Branch, Chandigarh to this office with immediate effect.
2.
The above transfer is subject to the approval of SSS Board, Haryana;  3.
No T.A./D.A.
and joining time will be allowed to the official.
4.
The seniority of Miss Kamla Khanna, Clerk in this office will be reckoned from the date she joins this office.
It is relevant to observe here that the seniority of clerks in the Head Office as also in the sub-office is maintained separately.
The Head Office is designated as Class 'A' office and as per the instructions of the State Government appointments to Class 'A' office are made by the following three methods :  (i) by direct appointment;  (ii) by transfer of persons working in other offices of the State Government; and  (iii) by promotion.
Persons selected by the Board are directly appointed as clerks in the Head Office or in a Class 'A' office only if they are Matric 1st Division/Higher Secondary IInd Division/Intermediate IInd Division/BA As the petitioner possessed the qualification of Higher Secondary IIIrd Division she was appointed in the sub-office.
The instructions (Annexure R2 with the written statement) further provide that persons who do not possess the basic qualifications for being appointed in Class 'A' office and have put in atleast 2 years of service in any sub-office become entitled to be appointed by transfer to Class 'A' office.
On appointment by way of transfer the seniority of the transferee would be determined from the date of appointment by transfer and even though the incumbent is transferred with the approval of the Board the date of such approval is not material.
It was in view of these instructions that the Chief Engineer while transferring the petitioner to the Head Office stated in the order that her seniority would be reckoned from the date she joins the office.
It is not disputed that in August, 1973 when the petitioner was recommended by the Board for appointment as a clerk eight other persons whose names have been mentioned in para 4 of the writ petition were recommended for appointment as clerks and the petitioner was at No. 9 as per the merit list the other eight being above her in the said list.
3.
The department circulated a gradation list on April 26, 1984 of the ministerial staff of the Head Office as it stood on April 1, 1984 (Annexure P4 with the writ petition).
In this seniority list, persons who had been recommended by the Board along with the petitioner stood at whereas one Baljit Singh respondent No. 4 was shown at Sr. No. 44.
Sr. No. 40 to 43.
Petitioner was, however, shown at Sr. No. 52.
Petitioner claimed that she too was entitled to get seniority from the date when the Board had recommended her for appointment as a clerk as was done in the case of persons at Sr. No. 40 to 43 of the seniority list who had been recommended alongwith with her.
She also challenged the seniority of Baljit Singh-respondent No. 4 and filed CWP No. 44 of 1987 in this Court which was dismissed in limine on the ground that she had not represented to the department.
Thereafter she filed a detailed representation on January 14, 1987 which was rejected by the order of the Chief Engineer dated May 15, 1987 (Annexure P-8 with the writ petition).
Petitioner then filed the present writ petition challenging the order rejecting her representation as also the seniority list in which she was placed below Baljit Singh, respondent No. 4.
4.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it is stated that the petitioner has been rightly assigned seniority in the impugned seniority list and that she could not be placed senior to Baljit Singh, respondent No. 4.
It is further stated that Baljit Singh like the petitioner had also been appointed as a clerk in the Head Office by way of transfer on September 17, 1973 whereas the petitioner was appointed much later by way of transfer on February 13, 1976.
As regards persons who were recommended by the Board along with the petitioner it is submitted that they had been adjusted in the Head Office initially and, therefore, they had to rank senior to both the petitioners and Baljit Singh.
5.
After hearing counsel for the parties and having gone through the pleadings, I am of the opinion that there is no merit in the writ petition.
It is the firm stand of the respondents that seniority in the Head Office as also in the sub-office is maintained separately and the petitioner could not controvert this fact.
No doubt, the petitioner was recommended by the Board for appointment as a clerk in August, 1973 but she had obtained a third division in her Higher Secondary Examination and was therefore posted in the sub-office.
The other persons who had been recommended along with her were, however, adjusted in the Head Office.
Later when the petitioner was transferred to the Head Office on her request, she joined the said office on February 13, 1976 and her seniority had to be reckoned from this date.
The grievance of the petitioner is that most of the persons recommended along with her also did not possess the requisite qualifications for being appointed in the Head Office but they were so adjusted for reasons best known to the department and, therefore, like them her seniority too should be reckoned from the date of recommendation.
May be some of the co-recommendees were not entitled to be appointed in the Head Office but that happened in the year 1973 and it is too late for the petitioner now to challenge their appointment more so when they are not even parties to this writ petition.
The mere fact that they were adjusted in the Head office (assuming wrong) does not give a right to the petitioner to claim seniority in the Head Office from the date when she was recommended for appointment by the Board.
In October, 1973 she joined the sub-office and her seniority must have been determined there.
It was only in February, 1976 that she was transferred to the Head Office on her own request.
Even in the order transferring her to the Head Office, the Engineer-in-Chief made it clear that her seniority would be reckoned from the date she joined the Head Office.
It cannot now be said that she has not been assigned her proper seniority.
6.
As regards Baljit Singh, respondent, it is not disputed that he joined the Head Office earlier by way of transfer on September 17, 1973 whereas the petitioner joined on 1321976.
Sine qua non for determining seniority of clerks in the Head Office had to be the date of joining the Head Office and in this view of the matter Baljit Singh had to be placed senior to the petitioner.
7.
In the result, there is no merit in the writ petition which stands dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.