Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner an ad hoc employee, is aggrieved by the order of termination of his services.
He was appointed vide order dated January 14, 1991 as Office Superintendent in the Jind Co-operative Sugar Mill, Jind on "trial/ad hoc basis" and his services could be terminated "without assigning any reason and without any notice---".
Within less than six months, the respondent passed an order terminating his services on the twin ground that he did not fulfil the requisite qualification and experience and that his "work has not been found satisfactory...".
Aggrieved by this order, the petitioner has filed the present writ petition.
The impugned order has been challenged on the ground that the petitioner fulfils the requisite qualifications which were in force at the time of his appointment and that there was nothing on the basis of which it could be said that his work was not satisfactory.
2.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondent, it has been inter alia pointed out that the Mill had advertised the post.
The petitioner was not one of the applicants.
The petitioner had "sought the recommendation of the then Minister of Co-operation, Haryana for appointment.
No other candidate eligible as per the Rules was considered at the time of offering appointment to the petitioner."
The appointment being on purely temporary ad hoc basis, the petitioner's services have been terminated in strict conformity with the terms of appointment.
On these premises, the impugned action is sought to be justified.
3.
I have heard Mr. RK Malik, learned counsel for the petitioner.
He contends that the petitioner possessed the qualifications which had been prescribed at the time of his appointment and that his services could not have been terminated on the basis of some qualifications which may have been prescribed at a later stage.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondent, it has been inter alia mentioned that the qualification for the post of Office Superintendent is a Degree in Arts/Commerce/Science with at least 10 years experience in general and office administration.
This qualification, admittedly, the petitioner did not fulfil.
Even a replication has not been filed controverting the stand taken on behalf of the respondent.
Consequently, there is nothing on the record on the basis of which it may be said that the petitioner was fully qualified for the post.
4.
Mr. Malik points out that in the advertisement, the prescribed experience was only three years and not 10 years.
This is of no consequence.
The petitioner had not applied in response to the advertisement.
He was not one of the candidates who may have applied in response to the advertisement issued by the respondent.
On the contrary, his application was only recommended by 'Minister of Co-operation'.
The appointment was made without considering the claims of any other eligible persons.
In such a situation, the qualifications mentioned in the advertisement are of no relevance.
It may be that the qualifications had been amended after May 19, 1990 when the advertisement had been issued, but prior to January 14, 1991 when the petitioner was appointed.
5.
Even if it is assumed that the petitioner fulfilled the qualifications, I find no reason to interfere with the order of termination.
Admittedly, the petitioner had been appointed on trial.
This appointment was purely ad hoc.
His services were terminable at any time without assigning any reason.
If during this period of trial, the authority found that the petitioner's work was not satisfactory, the action was in strict conformity with the terms of appointment.
It cannot be dubbed as arbitrary on unfair.
It calls for no interference in the exercise of extraordinary jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution.
6.
Mr. Malik submits that during his stay of about six months in the service of the respondent, no defect in his work or conduct was ever pointed out.
It may be so.
The petitioner had been appointed only in January 1991.
He had not served even for a period of one year.
No annual confidential report regarding his performance could have been recorded.
In such a situation, the occasion for conveying any adverse remarks etc. could not have arisen.
Mr. Malik has placed reliance on the decision of the Supreme Court in Dr. Mrs. Sumati P Shere v. Union of India, 1989 SCC (Labour and Service) 471.
This case is clearly distinguishable on facts.
Herein, the petitioner had worked for almost three years before her services were terminated.
In such a situation, their Lordships were pleased to observe that "if she is to be discontinued, it is proper and necessary that she should be told in advance that her work and conduct are not upto the mark."
In the present case, the occasion for such a communication had not arisen as the petitioner had worked for merely five months.
No other point was urged.
7.
There is no merit in this writ petition.
It is, accordingly, dismissed.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.