AL Bahri, J (Oral) - Justice requires that we should command the respondents to consider case of the petitioner for being appointed with the Haryana State Electricity Board on compassionate grounds, as his father died in harness while in service of the Electricity Board.
2.
Balbir Singh, father of Rampat-petitioner who was employed with the Haryana State Electricity Board, died on September 12, 1985.
At that time Rampat-petitioner was about 14 years of age, his date of birth being February 15, 1971.
Widow of Balbir Singh moved an application to the Electricity Board for providing job to her son (Rampat).
This application was moved on December 1, 1985 and was rejected on January 23, 1986.
Rampat matriculated in June, 1989, and thereafter he made several applications to the Board for providing him job, which were rejected one after the other.
Finally such an application was rejected on January 29, 1993.
Thus the petitioner has approached this Court in this writ petition.
3.
On notice of motion having been issued, the respondents have filed the written statement, contesting the claim of the petitioner, inter alia on the ground that when earlier application of mother of the petitioner was rejected, it was in accordance with the instructions then prevalent.
4.
The petitioner wanted to rely upon the instructions issued by the State Government in the matter of allowing jobs to the family members of Government employees died during service.
Particularly reference was made to Annexure P-2, the instructions issued on March 27, 1991, that a minor attaining the age of 17 years could be considered for appointment on compassionate grounds if an application has been submitted on his behalf by his guardian within a period of three years from the death of the employee.
These instructions as such have not been adopted.
The contention of counsel for the Board is that these instructions were not prevalent when initially application was filed by mother of the petitioner for providing job to the petitioner.
Respondents have placed reliance on the instructions Annexure R1, dated September 26, 1985.
Relevant portion prescribing limitation for filing such application is quoted as under :  "It has been further decided by the Board as under :  (i) That time limit within which the dependent of the deceased employee is to be provided employement be fixed as one year.
(ii) That request for employment be entertained only in cases in which the widows submit application for employment immediately after death of their husbands."
5.
The question as to whether the instructions providing such like limits were valid, was under consideration in Santosh Kumar v. The Haryana State Electricity Board and another, 1993(1) RSJ 563 : 1993(1) SCT 158 (P&H) and the same were held to be ultra vires violating the provisions of Article 14 of the Constitution.
The relevant passage from the Judgment, with which we fully agree, is reproduced below :  "It is no doubt correct that the appointment on compassionate grounds is in the nature of a concession.
It may also be true that the instructions issued by the Govt. or the Board are only intended to provide immediate relief to the family of the deceased employee, so that it has some means to survive after the death of the bread-earner.
However, in the case of a person, who leaves behind minor children, the condition of the widow is far worse than in a case where the children are grown up.
While grown up and educated children can seek employment forthwith, the widow has to bear the burden in a case where the children are still minor.
To deny relief to such a widow only on the ground that the application has not been submitted within a period of three years causes acute hardship to the entire family.
It will even result in discrimination, against the members of such a family inasmuch their right to be considered for employment on compassionate grounds would be completely defeated by a reason entirely beyond their control.
The instructions contained in Govt. letter dated May 19, 1989 and the decision of the Board not to entertain an application after the expiry of three years as contained in its letter dated November 9, 1989 would cause acute hardship in a case where the deceased employee leaves behind minor children.
The instructions in so far as the minor children are concerned, would suffer from the vice of arbitration, can be thus violative of Article 14 of the Constitution".
Since in the present case application had already been filed as back as in December, 1985, by mother of the petitioner, seeking job for the petitioner, though it was rejected at that time, the matter was with the Board and on attaining the age of 18 years, the petitioner again approached the Board for consideration of the matter for the job.
The Board was thus duty bound to reconsider the matter of providing job to the petitioner on his attaining majority, more so when application on his behalf had already been filed within the specified period, as contemplated under the instructions then prevalent, Annexure P-2.
Merely because it was rejected at that time i.e. in 1986, is no ground to debar the relief to the petitioner, who was a minor at that stage.
6.
For the reasons recorded above, while allowing the writ petition, we direct the respondents to consider case of the petitioner for grant of a job in consonance with the educational qualifications possessed by him.
Let this be done within three months from the communication of this order.
Petition allowed.