VK Bali, J - Dalbir Singh and others have approached this Court by way of this petition filed by them under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India praying for a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents that they be paid at par with Junior Engineers or Inspectors of other Departments and be also placed in Selection Grade after counting their length of service.
2.
The facts, in so far as the same are relevant need a necessary mention.
All the petitioners are working as Junior Industrial Promotion Officers in the Department of Industries, Punjab.
Prior to 1962 there were three categories of posts in the Industries Department i.e. Senior Inspector of Industries, Junior Inspector Industries and Sub Inspector of Industries.
Vide office memo dated 1891962, the Director of Industries, Punjab converted the posts of Sub Inspectors into Junior Inspectors and revised the allocation of Inspectorate Staff.
Vide another letter dated 1371960, it was made clear that the posts of Junior Inspectors of Industries involve the assumption of duties and responsibilities of greater degree that of the posts of Sub Inspectors of Industries.
It is pleaded that even though the post of Junior Inspector was down-graded to keep the posts of Junior Inspectors of Industries at par with the Inspectors of other Departments of Punjab Government and Sub Inspectors of Industries who fulfill the qualifications for the posts of Junior Inspectors, were absorbed as Junior Inspectors of Industries.
The services of rest of Sub Inspectors who were not having the prescribed qualifications were terminated.
It is, thus, pleaded that all the junior Inspectors were having the qualifications of Graduation with diploma of three years in Electrical/Mechanical/Chemical Engineering.
3.
In the year 1962, while converting the post of Sub Inspector into Junior Inspector of Industries the grade of Sub Inspectors was enhanced from Rs. 60- 120 to Rs. 80-150 and the grade of Junior Inspector of Industries was reduced from Rs. 90-175 to Rs. 80-150 to keep at par with the Inspectors of other departments and Sub Inspectors fulfilling the qualifications prescribed for Junior Inspectors were converted as such.
It is also pleaded that the scale of petitioners was higher than the Inspectors of Food & Supplies Department/Excise & Taxation Inspector/Labour Inspector and amongst the Inspectors of different Departments of Punjab Government.
A statement showing the comparison prior to First Pay Commission has been annexed with the petition as Annexure P3.
The pay scale of the Petitioners was revised by the First Pay Commission and they were granted two advance increments in lieu of the loss suffered by them while down-grading them.
In the revised pay scale, the scale of the petitioners became higher than that of the Inspectors of Food & Supplies Department whereas it became lower than the Inspectors of other Departments of Punjab Government.
The qualifications for the post of Junior Inspector of Industries is Graduation and diploma of three years in Electrical/Mechanical/Chemical/Textile with atleast three years experience in the field whereas the qualifications for the posts of other Inspectors of Punjab Government were only Graduation.
The pay scales of the petitioners were also revised after the report of Second Pay Commission.
The pay scale of the petitioners was reduced in comparison with other Inspectors and they were paid less than that of Junior Engineers although they had the same qualifications and the qualifications of junior Engineers.
After the report of Third Pay Commission, the petitioners were treated discriminately with other similarly situate employees of the Punjab Government.
Whereas the pay scale of the petitioners was revised to Rs. 1350-2400, the pay scale of their counter-parts i.e. Food & Supply Inspectors and Labour Inspectors was revised to Rs. 1500-2640 which was further revised to Rs. 1640-2925 on 4.1.1991 with effect from 111991.
The pay scale of Taxation Inspectors and Junior Engineers was revised to Rs. 1640-2925.
It is this action of the respondents in not giving commensurate increase in their pay which is styled to be discriminatory and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
4.
In so far as claim of petitioners for equal pay being paid to their counter-parts i.e.
Inspectors in other departments is concerned, no further pleadings are required to be referred to as admittedly the said relief has been granted to the petitioners vide orders dated October 29, 1992, Annexure P-18 during the pendency of the writ petition.
However, a persual of said order would reveal that the petitioner have been allowed pay scale of Rs. 1640-2925 from the date when the orders have been passed.
The surviving claim of petitioners, thus, is that it should be from a date when Inspectors of other Departments were granted the same pay scale as also in view of letter dated March 3, 1980 issued by the Finance Department of the Punjab Government to all the heads of the Departments, they should also be given Selection Grade if they fulfil the criteria and qualifications referred to in the aforesaid letter which has been placed on the records as Annexure P-21.
5.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and going through the records of the case, I am of the considered view that the petitioners deserve the twin reliefs asked for by them as indicated above.
A perusal of Annexure P-18 would manifest that the Government sanctioned merger of the posts of Junior Industrial Promotion Officers in the pay scale of Rs. 1350-2400 with the posts of Senior Industrial Promotion Officers in the scale of Rs. 1640- 2925 of the Department of Industries, Punjab and making both the cadres as one of Senior Industrial Promotion Officers from the date of publication of notification.
It is not disputed that the aforesaid order came into being on account of repeated recommendations made by the Department where the petitioners are working.
One such recommendation has been placed on the records of the case as Annexure P-11.
The same is from the Director of Industries, Punjab, Chandigarh to the Secretary to Government, Industries Department.
It was made on June 28, 1989.
The relevant portion mentioned under the column of Comments and Recommendations of the Department is reproduced as follows :-  "It is a matter of fact that there is a stagnation as there are bleak chances of promotion of Senior Industrial Promotion Officers to next higher post.
It has been observed that Senior Industrial Promotion Officers many a time continue, as such, for a sufficient long time and get promotions near their retirement.
It is also correct that qualification for the post of Senior Industrial Promotion Officer is much higher in comparison with the qualifications for the post of Food & Supplies Inspectors, Excise and Taxation Inspectors and Labour Inspectors.
In the circumstances, it is recommended that Senior Industrial Promotion Officers may be given revised pay scale of Rs. 1640-2925 instead of Rs. 1500-2640".
Again at page 58 of the paper book, under the column of Comments and Recommendations, this matter has been proceeded further as under :-  "It is a matter of fact that there is a stagnation in their class as there are bleak chances of promotion of Junior Industrial Promotion Officers to next higher post.
It has been observed that in most of the cases, Junior Industrial Promotion Officers retire as such, without having any promotion to next higher post.
It is also correct that qualifications for the post of Junior Industrial Promotion Officer is much higher in comparison with qualification for the post of Food and Supplies Inspectors, Excise & Taxation Inspectors, Co-operative Inspectors etc.
It has been stated by the Association that the qualification of Junior Industrial Promotion Officers is at par with that of junior Engineers.
In the circumstances, it is recommended that Junior Industrial Promotion Officers may be given pay scale of Rs. 1500- 2640 instead of Rs. 1350-2400.
It is also recommended that next higher grades after completion of service of 8 years and 18 years may be given to Junior Industrial Promotion Officers as they have bleak chances of promotion."
The history of the case also shows that the posts of petitioner had better pay scale than that of other Inspectors employed in various departments of the State of Punjab.
There was, thus, certainly anomaly as inasmuch as persons with higher qualifications were placed at lower pay scale than that of those who were having less qualifications and experience.
The Department did well in always recommending the case of petitioners so that they atleast get the pay equivalent to the Inspectors of other departments.
Ultimately, the petitioners were allowed higher pay scale from a date when the order was passed.
All through the case of the petitioners was being considered favourably.
It was incumbent upon the Government to have granted the same pay scales to the petitioners from a date when the Inspectors posted in other departments were given hike in their pay.
6.
Mr. Masih, the learned Assistant Advocate General appearing for the State of Punjab, however, contends that the merger of two posts came about vide orders dated October 29, 1991, Annexure P-18 during the pendency of writ petition and it is from this date that it shall be considered that the two posts have been equated.
I am unable to accept the contention of Mr. Masih as the department always found merit in the contention of the petitioners and the delay that was caused cannot work to their disadvantage.
7.
In so far as the prayer of the petitioners for grant of selection Grade is concerned the only contention raised by Mr. Masih is that the petitioners are covered under instructions contained in Annexure P 21 dated March 3, 1980.
Mr. Nijjar, learned Senior Advocate appearing for the petitioners, however, contends otherwise.
I need not go into this question and determine the same.
Suffice it to say that the department would consider the case of each petitioner individually and see at its own level as to whether all of them of any of them is covered under the instructions, Annexure P21 or not.
If it comes to the conclusion that some of the petitioners deserve the relief of Selection Grade, they would be granted the same.
For the reasons stated above, the petitioners will be entitled to revised pay scale, which has actually been given to them vide orders Annexure P-18, but it will be with effect from 111986 when the Inspectors of other departments were given higher pay scale.
The arrears shall be paid to the petitioners within a period of three months from today.
In so far as the grant of Selection Grade is concerned, nothing more is required to be said and the directions given above would be complied with by the respondents.
This petition is, thus, allowed in the manner indicated above.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs.