SS Sodhi, J - The matter here concerns the claim for disability pension put forth by the Sepoy of the Indian Army, who had been discharged from service on the ground of medical disability.
2.
The entitlement of disability pension is governed by the provision of Pension Regulation 173, which read as under :  "Unless otherwise, specifically provided a disability pension may be granted to an individual who is invalidated from service on account of a disability which is attributable to or aggravated by military service and is assessed at 20 per cent or over."
3.
As regards the manner of determination of medical disability, reference must be made to clause (c) of paragraph 423, which is reproduced herein under :  c) the cause of disability or death resulting from a disease as attributable to service when it is established that the disease arose during service on the condition and circumstances of the disease.
Cases in which it is established that service condition did not determine or contribute to the on/set of the disease but influenced the subsequent course of the disease will be regarded as aggravated by service.
A disease which led to an individual's discharge or death will ordinarily be deemed to have arisen in service if no note of it was made at the time of the individual's acceptance for service in the Armed Forces.
However, if medical opinion holds, for the reasons to be stated that the deceases could not have been detected on medical examination prior to acceptance for service, the disease will not be deemed to have arisen during service."
A plain reading of this provision would show that the cause of disability which led to the person concerned being discharged from service will be deemed to have arisen in service, if, no note of it was made at the time of his entry in the armed forces that he was suffering from such disability or unless a note is recorded at a subsequent date that the disease in question was such as could not have been detected by medical examination before he had joined service.
4.
A reference to the record shows that in the present case, admittedly, neither of such notes exists, namely, either at the time when the writ petitioner Bodan Lal Yadav joined service, that he was suffering from such disability or that after his medical examination preceding his discharge from the service on the ground of medical disability, that it was such as could not have been detected during his medical examination at time of entry into service.
The opinion recorded by the Medical Board being :  "This is a case of personality disorder.
This variant of personality shows a blending of aggression and inadequacy.
He is ambitious, competitive, demands special attention and has grandise fantasies, On the other hand he gets easily frustrated and has a proclivity towards depression.
He has failed in emotional, social and occupational adjustment.
He is mentally sick soldier and has lost adequate military value.
Recommended Category 'EEE'."
5.
Further, admittedly, the disability of the writ petitioner was assessed at 20 per cent.
This being so, the requirements of Regulation 173 clearly stood fulfilled.
6.
Faced with this situation, Mr. Ashok Jindal appearing for the respondent-Union of India sought to press in aid the judgment of this Court in Darshan Singh v. Union of India, 1991(1) SLR 35 : 1992(2) SCT 196 (P&H) where the claim for the medical disability was disallowed.
Darshan Singh's case (supra) is clearly distinguishable from the present case as in that case a specific finding had been recorded, unlike here, that the petitioner had been suffering from the disease even prior to his joining the army and this had been so established by the Medical Authority while discharging the petitioner for service.
Here, as mentioned earlier, there is no material on record to show that the writ petitioner was found to have been suffering from any disease at the time of his entry into service nor is there any note in his medical examination at the time of discharge, that he was suffering from this ailment at the time of his entry into service or that it could not be detected at that time.
Such being the circumstances, no exception can, indeed, be taken to the judgment of the learned single Judge which is accordingly hereby upheld and affirmed.
This appeal is consequently dismissed with costs.
Counsel's fee Rs. 500/-.