SK Jain, J - Sukhwant Singh, respondent, was recruited as a Constable on 10.4.1975.
He passed his lower course examination on 3131980 and he was promoted as Head Constable in April, 1981.
He was served with a show cause notice proposing to dismiss him from service and after obtaining his reply he was reverted to the post of Constable on 30.3.1987.
His appeal to the D.I.G., Railway Police, Patiala was dismissed.
His further appeal to IG Punjab also failed.
He, therefore, instituted civil suit No. 139 on 1241988 for a decree of declaration to the effect that the order initiating departmental enquiry, charge-sheet, show cause notice, order of reversion and all other subsequent orders were illegal, null, void, unconstitutional and against the principles of natural justice and mandatory provisions of Punjab Police Rules and Punjab Civil Service Rules.
After contest the suit was decreed by the Addl.
Senior Sub Judge, Patiala, vide his judgment and decree dated 17.1.1990.
The State then filed civil appeal No. 344 on 12.4.1990 which was heard and dismissed by the Additional District Judge, Patiala vide his judgment and decree dated 561991.
It is that judgment and decree which has been challenged for my examination of its sustainability.
2.
I have seen the pleadings in the suit, evidence adduced by the parties in the suit and the judgments of both the Courts below.
3.
Mr. Boparai, Assistant Advocate General, Punjab has vehemently argued that the plaintiff was duly charge-sheeted and in a regular Departmental enquiry held against him, charges levelled against him had been established.
The report of the Inquiring Officer was considered by the Disciplinary Authority and after full application of mind, he came to the conclusion that punishment of reduction in rank should be awarded to the plaintiff and, therefore, a show cause notice along with the reasons for his having come to the said conclusion were supplied to the plaintiff.
His representation was considered and declined and then he was punished.
Therefore, the order of punishment and other steps taken during the course of enquiry were perfectly legal and valid.
4.
In reply, Mr. Vij, learned counsel for the respondent, has taken me through the enquiry file.
It is evident on the face of the record that Department had examined as many as seven witnesses but no opportunity to cross-examine any one of them was afforded to the plaintiff.
There is nothing on record to show that along with show cause notice, the report of the Inquiring Officer was supplied to the plaintiff by the Disciplinary Authority.
It is not disputed that Punjab Civil Services Rules (Punishment and Appeal ) Rules 1970 are applicable to the case in hand.
Rule 8.14 of the Rules, which is relevant here reads as under :  "On the date fixed for the inquiry, the oral and documentary evidence by which the articles of charge are proposed to be proved shall be produced by or on behalf of the punishing authority.
The witnesses shall be examined by or on behalf of the Presenting Officer and may be cross-examined by or on behalf of the Government employee.
The Presenting Officer shall be entitled to re-examine the witnesses on any points on which they have been cross-examined, but not on any new matter, without the leave of the inquiring authority.
The inquiring authority may also put such questions to the witnesses if thinks fit."
On analytical examination of the abovesaid provisions, it is evident that the words "may be cross-examined by or on behalf of the Government Employee".
Occurring in the above sub-Rule are not for nothing and cannot be brushed aside.
Under this Rule the evidence of the witness will be complete only if the delinquent employee is allowed to cross examine him.
Therefore, it can be held unhesitatingly that the abovesaid provisions were not complied with by the Inquiring Officer and, therefore, the conclusion drawn by him from the statement of abovesaid seven witnesses, none of whom was allowed to be cross- examined by the delinquent employee, cannot be held to be correct.
Resultantly, his enquiry report stands vitiated.
5.
My attention has been drawn by Mr. Boparai towards Rule 16.24 (IX) of the Punjab Police Rules which is reproduced below for ready reference :  "Before an order of dismissal or reduction in rank is passed, the officer to be punished shall be produced before the officer employed to punish and shall be informed of the charges proved against him and called upon to show cause why an order of dismissal or reduction in rank should not be passed.
Any representation that he may make shall be recorded shall form part of the record and shall be taken into consideration by the officer empowered to punish before the final order is passed".
Perusal of the abovesaid Rule would show that the officer empowered to punish has to inform the delinquent official of the charges proved against him.
The words, "charges proved" include that the charges have to be proved against the delinquent officials on the basis of the evidence led by the Department before the Inquiring Officer.
The evidence comprised of the testimony of the witnesses would certainly mean that the delinquent official was afforded an opportunity to cross-examine those witnesses.
This was not done in the case in hand.
6.
Seen from any angle, if no oportunity was afforded to the delinquent official to cross-examine the witnesses examined by the Department during the course of proceedings, the only result will be that it will vitiate the enquiry the report based thereupon and the order of punishment passed on the basis of such an enquiry report.
This Court in Hans Raj Gupta, District Food and Supplies Officer v. State of Punjab and others, 1992(1) S.L.R.
455 : 1992(1) SCT 258 (P&H), has held the above view.
7.
In the present case this is what has actually happened.
No opportunity was afforded to the delinquent employee to cross-examine any of the seven witnesses examined by the department against him.
In the result, I do not find any ground to interfere with the concurrent findings recorded by the two Courts below.
Consequently, this appeal fails and is here by dismissed.
However, there will be no order as to costs.