GC Garg, J - Petitioner has impugned in this writ petition order dated February 22, 1988, Annexure P-2 whereby his services have been terminated with immediate effect, being no longer required.
2.
Petitioner was appointed as Barbar with effect from June 16, 1987 in the pay scale of Rs. 300-5-400 vide appointment letter, Annexure P-1, on probation for a period of two years which could be extended upto three years on the wishes of the recruiting officer.
Services of the petitioner were terminated on February 22, 1988 being no longer required by order Annexure P-2.
Appeal preferred by the petitioner before the Deputy Inspector General, Haryana Armed Police, met with no success.
Feeling aggrieved, the petitioner filed this writ petition for quashing the order of termination, Annexure P-2 and the order dismissing his appeal, Annexure P-6 and directing the respondents to re-instate him with continuity of service along with other consequential benefits.
3.
The case of the petitioner as set up in the writ petition is that the action of the respondents suffers from the vice of malice and based on extraneous consideration and his services had been terminated in order to accommodate another person in his place.
The petitioner was always adjudged exceptionally good by his superiors since the time he joined service and he was awarded commendation certificate on two occasions.
One of the commendation certificates was given to him only a few days before termination by which he was awarded a sum of Rs. 25/-.
On these facts, it was submitted that the order of termination was not a simple order of termination but has been passed by way of punishment and on extraneous consideration.
4.
Allegations as made by the petitioner were denied by the respondents by filing written statement.
It was submitted that the order of termination was a simple order of termination.
The petitioner had been appointed only on probation for a period of two years and his services had been terminated within that period as the work of the petitioner was not found satisfactory.
5.
Service record of the petitioner was produced at the hearing and it was pointed out by the learned counsel for the respondents that petitioner's services had been terminated on account of unsatisfactory work and a report had been received from Shri Balbir Singh, Line Officer, Police Lines, Ambala that the petitioner did not know the job of barbar.
It was further requested in the said report that another competent barbar be appointed in place of the petitioner.
Learned counsel for the respondents relied upon Chokha Ram v. Deputy Commissioner, Sonepat, Haryana, 1991(5) SLR 112.
6.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and going through the record of the case, I find that there is no merit in the writ petition and the same deserves to be dismissed.
The petitioner was appointed as a Barbar by order Annexure P-1, with effect from June 16, 1987, and he was kept on probation for a period of two years which could be extended to three years on the wishes of the recruiting officer.
His services had been terminated by order dated February 22, 1988, Annexure P-2 i.e. during the period of probation, his work having been found not satisfactory.
The Line Officer, Incharge of the Polices Lines, where the petitioner was working, reported that the petitioner did not know the work of barbar and, therefore, his services be terminated and another person be appointed in his place who knows the job of barbar.
Thus, the services of the petitioner were not terminated on account of extraneous consideration but on account of his unsatisfactory work during the period of probation in terms of his appointment letter.
Consequently, the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner that the order of termination was not innocuous but was by way of punishment, cannot be accepted.
In Chokha Ram's case (supra), relied upon by the counsel for the respondents, the petitioner therein was kept or probation for a period of two years and his performance during the said period having not been found satisfactory, his services had been terminated.
In the above circumstances, it was held as under :-  "A person on probation is actually on trial.
Unless he proves his merit to the satisfaction of the authority concerned, he cannot claim to be entitled to continue to hold the post."
Like is the situation in the instant case.
Thus, it can conveniently be held that the order of termination was a simple order of termination passed in terms of the appointment letter.
7.
No doubt the petitioner at one time was given an incentive of Rs. 25/- but that does not mean that his work was found satisfactory.
The other commendation certificate stated to have been awarded to the petitioner does not bear any date and is not available on the service record of the petitioner maintained by the department.
It seems that such certificate was obtained by the petitioner from the earlier officer who had been transferred a few days before termination of his services.
These certificates, therefore, do not help the petitioner in any way.
The service record of the petitioner does not show that services of the petitioner were terminated on account of some other reasons i.e. misconduct or otherwise.
Even otherwise, when an order of termination assailed by the employee is couched in innocuous terms as is the situation in the instant case, it is always open to the Court to lift the veil and see whether the order was made on the ground the efficiency/misconduct or not.
In the circumstances as noticed above there is nothing available on the record of the petitioner to show even remotely that services of the petitioner were terminated on extraneous considerations, such as misconduct or by way of punishment.
Rather the record shows that petitioner's services were terminated by passing a simple order of termination on account of his unsatisfactory work.
For the reasons stated above, the writ petition is dismissed.
No costs.