Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - In all these five cases viz Civil Writ Petition Nos. 10216, 10807, 13123, 13425 and 13446 of 1992, the petitioners pray for the issue of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to appoint them on the posts of JBT teachers.
These petitions can, therefore, be disposed of by one order.
The facts as given in C.W.P.
No. 10216 of 1992 may be briefly noticed.
2.
The petitioners possess the qualification of BA B.Ed.
They aver that the respondents sent a requisition to the Employment Exchange, Ropar for sponsoring the names of candidates for filling up the posts of JBT teachers.
The names of the petitioners were forwarded and they were interviewed by the Departmental Selection Committee.
The petitioners aver that they were selected.
As copy of the list of succussful candidates has been produced as Annexure P-1 with the writ petition.
In spite of the fact that a number of posts of JBT teachers were lying vacant in different schools in Ropar District, the petitioners were not appointed.
Out of 184 teachers who were selected, appointment letters were issued to only 54 persons.
The petitioners aver that they had made representations and met the officers concered.
Having failed to achieve the desired result, they have approached this Court through the present writ petition.
It has been further averred that 400 posts of JBT teachers had been advertised in the Tribune on July 13, 1992.
In spite of the fact that selected candidates are available, no appointment orders are being issued while the available vacancies are being advertised.
On these premises, a prayer for the issue of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to appoint the petitioners on the posts of JBT teachers has been made.
3.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents.
It has been inter alia averred that the District Education Officer, Ropar had sent a requisition of 40 posts of JBT teachers which were lying vacant at that time.
In response to this requisition, respondent No. 3 prepared two separate lists.
This first was a selected list consisting of 54 candidates.
The other was a waiting list consisting of 130 candidates.
This waiting list was sent in spite of the fact that no request therefore had been made.
So far as 54 candidates on select list were concerned, they were appointed.
However, in view of the ban which had been imposed by the State Government due to the election to the State Legislative Assembly and Parliament, no further appointments were made.
It has been further averred that according to the decision of the Punjab Government contained in letter dated July 27, 1990 BA/BSc/BEd.
teachers can be appointed against the posts of JBT teachers only if persons possessing the qualification of JBT are not available.
The names of the petitioners were considered.
They were not included in the select list of 54 persons but their names were placed in the waiting list.
It has been admitted that the petitioners possess the qualification of BA/BSc/BEd.
However, it has been pointed out that the prescribed qualification for the appointment of JBT teacher is Matric with two years JBT Course.
It has now been changed to 10+2 with two years' ETT Course.
It is only if the candidates having qualification of JBT were not available, that others with BA/BSc/BEd were to be considered.
It has been further averred that 400 posts of JBT teachers have been advertised for the entire State of Punjab and not for the Ropar District only.
Now JBT/ETT teachers are available.
Consequently, the State Government has constituted a new Departmental Selection Committee for filling the posts of JBT teachers with trained JBT/ETT teachers who are now available.
On these premises, the respondents have sought to justify the action.
4.
The petitioners have filed a replication reiterating the position stated in the writ petition.
5.
Indisputably, the District Education Officer had placed a requisition for 40 posts with the Employment Exchange.
The names of persons possessing the qualification of B.A/BSc/BEd.
were sponsored.
These persons were considered by the Departmental Selection Committee.
Two lists were prepared.
The first was a list of 54 persons who were duly selected.
Thereafter, vide memo dated January 31, 1992, the Chairman of the Departmental Selection Committee had forwarded " a waiting list of selected candidates ..... ".
It is also not disputed that so far as the 54 persons were concerned, appointment letters were duly issued to them.
The petitioners claim a right to be appointed only on account of the fact that their names were included in the waiting list prepared by the Selection Committee.
6.
It is well settled that a selected person does not have an indefeasible right to be appointed.
Primarily, it is a matter for consideration by the competent authority.
In the present case, against 40 available posts, the selection committee had forwarded the names of 54 candidates.
These were duly appointed.
Once that had happened, those on the waiting list did not have any legally enforceable right to be appointed.
Still further, it is the admitted position that the petitioners possess the qualification of BA/B.Ed.
while the Department wanted to fill up the posts of JBT teachers only.
It is common knowledge that BA/B.Ed.
teachers appointed against the posts of JBT teachers have been claiming salary sanctioned for the posts of Masters.
If the Government or the appropriate authority decided to appoint only such persons as possessing the qualifications of JBT or ETT are not to appoint those whose names are included in the waiting list, the authority cannot be said to have acted arbitrarily or in violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
It is the admitted position that 400 posts had been advertised.
All eligible candidates who may have applied, shall be considered.
Merely because the names of the petitioners are borne on the waiting list, they cannot claim a right to the issue of a writ of mandamus and to exclude from consideration all those whose names may not have been sponsored by the Employment Exchange or who may not have been eligible intially.
In view of the above, there is no merit in these petitions.
These are dismissed.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.