MR Agnihotri & JS Brar, JJ.
- After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, we find that the petitioner was appointed as Registrar of the Regional Engineering College, Kurukshetra by order dated 25th December, 1990 (Annexure P2) in pursuance of the advertisement of June, 1990 (Annexure P.1).
Though according to the advertisement, the retirement age of the incumbent of the post of Registrar was 60 years, yet in the order of appointment, Annexure P2, it was provided as "re-employment for two years which can be extended further".
It was further provided that the service was liable to be terminated by giving one month's notice or one month's pay in lieu thereof.
Thereafter, the petitioner was released from the Army by order dated 22nd February, 1991, and, thereafter, joined his duties on 25th March, 1991.
2.
Before the expiry of the initial term of appointment of two years, the petitioner approached this Court by way of this petition on 22nd March, 1993, with the prayer that since he has not yet attained the age of 60 years, the respondents be restrained from retiring him from service.
3.
While issuing notice of motion on 24th March, 1993, we allowed the petitioner to continue in service and, as such, he is at present continuing on his post.
4.
In the written statement filed by the respondents the position has been admitted and the learned counsel for the respondents has further stated that as the initial appointment of the petitioner was only for two years, which term was to expire on 25th March, 1993, the respondents were of the view that a fresh selection be made, but no such selection has been made so far.
5.
Accordingly, we dispose of this petition by directing the respondents that even though they were competent to make fresh selection to the post of Registrar, yet the petitioner had a right to continue in service till fresh selection was made.
It is clarified that if and when the post is advertised afresh for making new selection the petitioner shall also be permitted to compete for the same.