RK Nehru, J - The petitioner has moved this Court for issuance of writ of certiorari for quashing the order dated March 21, 1970 with regard to the fixation of his pay as Clerk Grade-II and a direction to the respondents to refix his pay as Clerk Grade-II in accordance with the provisions of Reserve Bank of India (Staff) Regulations, 1948 (hereinafter called the 'Regulations').
2.
The petitioner has pleaded that he was appointed by the respondents as Coin/Note Examiner, Grade-II vide office order dated March 3, 1969.
He wished to be appointed to the post of Clerk Grade-II, for which he appeared in the General Recruitment Test conducted by the respondents and was declared successful.
He was, thereafter, called for interview by the Selection Committee.
The Selection Committee selected the petitioner and he was appointed as Clerk Grade-II vide memo dated March 11, 1970.
He assumed the charge of his posting as Clerk Grade-II on March 24, 1970.
At that time, he was drawing basic pay of Rs. 200/- as Coin/Note Examiner in the pay sale of Rs. 192-8-200-10-230-15-290-FB-15-425-20-465-EB-25-540.
The pay scale of Clerk Grade-II at the time of the appointment of the petitioner as Clerk Grade-II was Rs. 192-8-200-10-230-15-290--EB-15-425-20-465-EB-25-540.
The Service conditions of the petitioner are governed by the Reserve Bank of India (Staff) Regulations, 1948.
Regulation 70 of the Regulations deals with re-fixation of pay and transfer from one scale of pay to another.
It reads as under :-  Regulation 70 :  "Refixation of pay on transfer from one scale of pay to another;  "When an employee is transferred from one scale of pay to another and such transfer does not involve the assumption of duties or responsibilities of greater importance, his initial pay on the new scale shall be at a stage which is equal to his substantive pay in the old scale, or if there is no such stage in the new scale, the stage next below that pay plus personal pay equal to the difference, such personal pay to be drawn until such time as it is absorbed by subsequent increments in the new scale."
3.
It is stated in the petition that on transfer of the petitioner from the post of Coin/Note Examiner to that of Clerk Grade-II on March 24, 1970, he was allowed to continue at the basic pay of Rs. 200/- which he was drawing at the time of his transfer.
The first increment accrued to the petitioner as Clerk Grade-II on March 24, 1970.
His basic pay having been protected and he having been allowed to draw basic pay of Rs. 200/- as Clerk Grade-II, he was entitled to the annual increment of Rs. 10/- on March 24, 1971 as per the then prevalent pay scale but he was not allowed any increment on the said date and it was only on March 24, 1972 that an increment of Rs. 10/- which was in fact due to the petitioner on March 24, 1971, was allowed to him.
As such, he was deprived of one year's increment and this loss he has been suffering till date.
It is further pleaded in the petition that similar situation had arisen earlier in the case of employees transform non-clerical cadre to the clerical cadre and the same was resolved by the respondents vide office circular dated November 1, 1973 (Annexure P-4) and the same reads as under :-  "On a representation received from some of the employees, Central Office has examined the question of refixation of pay of those employees who had initially joined the Bank's service in the non-clerical cadres but had subsequently become Clerks on selection in a general recruitment test and it has been decided that, subject to the following terms and conditions, their pay and seniority may be refixed as indicated below :-  (a) Their pay should be refixed as on 7th May, 1972 as if they had commenced their service in the clerical grade on the dates on which they actually commenced their service in the non-clerical grade.
(b) Their seniority should be simulateously refixed on the basis of one-third of their total service in Class III in the Bank from the date of their appointment in the non-clerical cadre, upto the 7th May, 1972.
(c) They had graduated or had acquired the CAIIB qualification on or before the 7th May, 1972.
Employees falling in the above category, who wish to have their pay refixed, may submit an application as in the enclosed form before 15th November, 1973."
4.
According to the petitioner, he had made numerous representations to the respondents to refix his pay scale but the same were rejected by the later without assigning any reason.
5.
In their reply, the respondents challenged the petition on various grounds.
The sum and substance of the challenge made by the respondents is that the petitioner was appointed as Coin/Note Examiner Grade-II with effect from March 3, 1969.
The Bank has got different cadres of workmen-employees who are broadly divided into clerical cadre and non-clerical cadre.
The petitioner as Coin/Note Examiner belonged to non-clerical cadre, the avenues of promotion of which are different and are not transferable from one cadre to another, in view of sub-regulation (4) of Regulation 13 of the Regulations, which are contractual in nature.
Relevant sub-regulation (4) to Regulation 13 reads as under :-  Sub-Regulation (4) :  "No employee may be transferred from one class to another or from the Cash Department to the General Department without the specific approval in each case of the Chief Manager."
6.
According to the respondents, the chances of promotion in the general department are more bright than in the cash department.
As such, with a view to go over to the clerical cadre, the petitioner appeared in the recruitment test so held for the post of Clerk Grade-II and after having been declared successful in the recruitment test, he was issued letter dated March 11, 1970 (Annexure P-2) whereby he was advised to be transferred from the cadre of Coin/Note Examiner to that of the clerical cadre, subject to the terms and conditions mentioned therein.
According to the terms and conditions No. 2, 3 and 4 of the said letter (Annexure P2), the petitioner to be deemed to have joined the services of he respondents as a temporary Clerk Grade-II only from the date he would be posted as such and his pay was to be refixed in the clerical cadre in terms of those conditions.
The petitioner was also advised that difference in his pay as Coin/Note Examiner Grade-II and the pay so refixed as Clerk Grade-II would be resolved by drawal of future increment.
The petitioner accepted the terms and conditions of letter dated March 13, 1970 (Annexure R1) and so he was transferred and posted as Clerk Grade-II in the clerical cadre with effect from March 24, 1970 by office order dated March 21, 1970 (Annexure P3).
In terms of condition No. 3 of respondents' letter dated March 11, 1970 (Annexure P2) the pay of the petitioner as Clerk Grade-II was to be fixed on the basis that he entered the services of the respondents as Clerk Grade-II as a fresh appointee on March 24, 1970 and the pay scale of Clerk Grade-II then was Rs. 192-8-208-10-230-15-290-EB-15-325-20-465-EB-25- 540.
The petitioner had, therefore, to be given initial pay of Rs. 192 (plus special pay of Rs. 13/- for being a graduate) as Coin/Note Examiner Grade-II.
The petitioner was drawing Rs. 200/- in the scale of pay of Coin/Note Examiner Grade-II.
In the meantime, in pursuance of settlement dated October 7, 1970, with class III Employees Association, the pay scales were revised and by refixation sheet (Annexure R2) the pay of the petitioner was refixed.
Consequent upon the revision in the pay scale, prior to the appointment of the petitioner, as Clerk Grade-II on March 24, 1970, he, in his cadre as Coin/Note Examiner, Grade-II was drawing Rs. 240/- (which included two increments of Rs. 10/- for graduation and one increment of Rs. 10/- earned by him on completion of one year's service as on March 3, 1970 in that cadre) plus Rs. 10/- as personal pay, according to the terms of settlement dated October 7, 1970 (Annexure R-2).
On the appointment of the petitioner as Clerk Grade-II, his initial pay was refixed at Rs. 230/-.
This included two increments of Rs. 10/- each for graduation plus Rs. 10/- as personal pay and Rs. 10/- being difference between his pay of Rs. 240/- as Coin/Note Examiner and his pay of Rs. 230/- as Clerk Grade-II.
Thus, the petitioner was allowed increment which he had earned as Coin/Note Examiner Grade-II as his special personal pay which, as a fresh appointee in the clerical cadre he was not entitled to.
On completion of one year service in the clerical cadre the petitioner was granted annual increment but his special personal pay of Rs. 10/- was absorbed in the said increment and he ceased to draw special personal pay of Rs. 10/- in terms and conditions accepted by the petitioner, by his letter dated March, 13, 1970 (Annexure R1).
As such, the petitioner having accepted the terms and conditions at the time of his appointment as Clerk Grade-II, cannot be allowed to come out with any grievance in that regard at this stage and that too after a lapse of nearly thirteen years.
7.
After carefully examining the pleadings of both sides and the relevant rules an regulations and various Annexures, so relied upon by them.
I am of the considered view that the petitioner has no cause to agitate the matter of his pay fixation which has been fixed by the respondents in the grade, according to the rules and regulations.
8.
Indisputedly, the cadre of Coin/Note Examiner and that the Clerk Grade-II are two different categories.
The petitioner has not disputed the plea of the respondents that there is a good scope to arise in the clerical cadre than in the accounts cadre under which the post of Coin/Note Examiner falls.
It is also not disputed by the petitioner that there are no rules or regulations under which an employee can be transferred from the cadre of Coin/Note Examiner to that of the clerical cadre except through competitive examination.
9.
Admittedly, the petitioner having taken the competitive examination for the appointment of Clerk Grade-II and having been declared successful was given the appointment as Clerk Grade-II in terms of letter of appointment dated March 11, 1970 (Annexure P2).
The contents of Annexure P2 are as under :  "With reference to his application dated the 3rd March, 1969 for enlistment in the waiting list for the post of Clerk Grade-II and subsequent test and interview, Shri Bal Mukand Aggarwal is advised that the Bank is prepared to transfer his services to clerical cadre on the following conditions :-  (1) He will be allowed to continue to draw his present pay and allowances; he will also be allowed to retain all other benefits which have accrued to him by reason of his present employment subject to what is stated below :  (2) He will be deemed to have joined service as a temporary clerk Grade-II on the date he is posted as a Clerk Grade-II.
(3) His pay will be refixed in the clerical grade on the basis that he entered service as a Clerk Grade-II on the date as determined in terms of condition (2) above.
(4) The difference if any between the refixed pay as a Clerk Grade-II and his present pay as Coin/Note Examiner Grade-II will be absorbed by drawal of future increments.
2.
He should advise immediately whether he is agreeable for his transfer on the conditions enumerated above."
10.
It appears that because in the letter (Annexure P2), it is mentioned that the respondents are prepared to transfer the services of the petitioner to the clerical cadre, the petitioner wants an inference to be drawn that it was by way of transfer from the Coin/Note Examiner that he joined as Clerk Grade-II and so his appointment as Clerk Grade-II is not a fresh appointment but is just a transfer from Coin/Note Examiner cadre to that of Clerk Grade- II.
This inference, in my view, is not based on sound reasoning.
For all intent and purposes, the appointment of the petitioner as Clerk Grade-II is a fresh appointment of the petitioner as Clerk Grade-II is a fresh appointment and the term 'transfer' used by the respondents in their letter (Annexure P2) is in fact a misnomer.
Had the intention of the respondents been to transfer the petitioner from the cadre of Coin/Note Examiner to that of Clerk Grade-II cadre, then the consent as envisaged by Regulation 13(4) of Regulations were required to be obtained from the Chief Manager.
However, this is neither the case of the petitioner nor it is so borne out from any material on record that the services of the petitioner were transferred from the cadre of Coin/Note Examiner to that of the general cadre of Clerk Grade-II with approval of the Chief Manager much less in terms of Regulation 13(4) of the Regulations.
The case of the petitioner as pleaded by him rather synchronises with the defence taken by the respondents that the petitioner was appointed as Clerk Grade-II as a result of competitive examination consisting of recruitment test and viva-voce.
The appointment of the petitioner as Clerk Grade-II flows from the terms and conditions incorporated in the appointment letter (Annexure P2) and it is bilateral contract.
Once the petitioner has accepted the terms and conditions of his being transferred/appointed as Clerk Grade-II, as incorporated in Annexure P2, he cannot now agitate to have been discriminated in any manner in the fixation of his pay as Clerk Grade-II by the respondents.
In fact, there is no discrimination made by respondents against the petitioner who is bound by the bilateral contract in terms of memo (Annexure P2).
Viewing the terms and conditions incorporated in Annexure P2 from any angle, it is clearly a case of fresh appointment of the petitioner in the clerical cadre and his service conditions are to be governed by Regulation 13(4) of the regulations.
11.
Consequently, there is no merit in this writ petition and the same is hereby dismissed, with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.