RS Mongia, J (Oral) - It is not disputed that petitioner is an ex- serviceman.
The petitioner after discharge from the Air Force had joined Punjab Police Department as a temporary Assistant Sub Inspector of Police vide appointment letter dated 221990.
It is the case of the petitioner that he was appointed as Assistant Sub Inspector against the reserved vacancy for ex-serviceman.
2.
On 1381990, an advertisement was issued by the respondents for direct recruitment to the posts of Inspectors/Assistant Sub Inspectors in the Punjab Police Department.
14% of the posts were reserved for ex-servicemen and their children.
It is stated in the petition that petitioner applied for the post of Inspector in response to the abovesaid advertisement against one of the posts reserved for ex-servicemen.
It has further been mentioned that he was allotted Roll Number 8762 to undergo physical test on 31.8.1990, which he successfully qualified.
However, when he was to appear before the Selection Committee for interview, he was informed that since he had already taken the benefit of reservation meant for the Ex-servicemen at the time of recruitment as Assistant Sub-Inspector, the same benefit cannot be extended to him second time, for recruitment as Inspector.
It has further been stated that the petitioner made representation and also brought to the notice of the respondents certain previous instances where they had given benefit for recruitment as an Ex-serviceman to the same person more than once.
Out of the many instances given, the respondents are admitted having given double benefit to one Kashmir Singh.
It may be observed here that respondents have denied the receipt of any representation of the petitioner.
3.
Learned counsel for the petition has relied upon a letter dated 821988, Annexure P-2 from the Directorate of Sainik Welfare, Punjab to the Secretary, Punjab State Electricity Board, Patiala with a copy of the Chairman, Punjab Public Service Commission, Patiala that the ex-servicemen of Punjab State who have already availed of the benefit of reservation in the first instance in any Department/Board/Corporation/Bank of Punjab Government can avail of the benefit of reservation against Ex-servicemen category for the direct recruitment second time.
State Government has not given any reply regarding this Annexure.
Anyway I am not taking this letter to be executive instructions of the State Government as it emanates from the Directorate of Sainik Welfare, Punjab.
However, a Division Bench of this Court in Raj Kumar Verma, H.C.S.
v. State of Haryana, 1981 (3) S.L.R.
436 struck down Rule 4-A of the Punjab Government, National Emergency(Concession) Haryana Amendment Rules, 1979 which limited war service benefit only to first appointment under the Government.
I do not consider that the State Government is justified in not giving benefit of reservation to an ex-serviceman, who might have availed the benefit of reservation at any earlier time.
Take for example that after a person is discharged from military service, no post is advertised for which he may be qualified to apply against the reserved post for Ex-serviceman.
A post which is lower in status than for what that particular ex-serviceman is qualified is advertised and the person taken the benefit of reservation and after sometime some posts for which he is really qualified are advertised, wherein certain posts are reserved for Ex- servicemen.
Can it be said that since earlier a person has already taken the benefit of reservations of post for ex-serviceman, he is to be denied the same benefit for the post for which he is really qualified ?
To my mind, the answer has to be in the negative.
To make both ends meet, a person may apply for a post which is lower than the one for which he is really qualified.
But that would not mean that for the post for which he holds the qualifications, he cannot take the benefit of reservation on the ground that such benefit of reservation had already been taken by him.
4.
From what has been observed above, it is obvious that the petitioner was entitled to be consider against the post of Inspector of Police against the reserved post for Ex-serviceman.
The respondents could not deny him the benefit of reservation simply because he had already taken that benefit of reservation, which being appointed as an Assistant Sub Inspector.
5.
For the foregoing reasons, thus writ petition is allowed and the respondents are directed of consider the petitioner for appointment as Inspector of Police against the reserved post meant for ex-serviceman which were advertised in the year 1990 vide advertisement dated 1381990.
In case the petitioner is found more meritorious than the persons appointed against the reserved posts for the ex-servicemen, then petitioner would be given appointment as Inspector from the same day as the person, who was less meritorious had been appointed.
In that eventuality, he would get all bonafide of appointment for the post of Inspector, but would not be paid any arrears of pay for the post of Inspector.
Let these directions be carried out by the respondents within a period of three months from the date of receipt of copy of this order.
I make no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.