RS Mongia, J (Oral) - The Haryana Subordinate Services Selection Board (hereinafter called the `Board') issued an advertisement on 7101987 for 73 posts of Home Science Mistress, out of which 38 posts were meant for general category candidates.
The petitioner was one of the candidates for the said post.
The Board had recommended names of 78 candidates on 981989 in the general category for the post of Home Science mistress, though advertisement was only for 38 posts in the General category.
As per the reply to the writ petition, the petitioner was placed at serial No. 57 in the merit list of the general category.The petitioner was intimated by the Board on 2581989 (Annexure P/1) that she had been selected for the post of Home Science Mistress and her name was being recommended to the Director, School Education, Haryana for appointment.
In spite of this letter, the petitioner was not given appointment, which led her to file the present writ petition on 1631992.
2.
The claim of the petitioner is that she is entitled to appointment on having been selected and recommended for the appointment by the Board.
3.
In the reply filed on behalf of the respondent-State, it has been averred that the name of the petitioner did not come within the number of advertised posts.
Moreover, the Board could not recommend more candidates than the posts advertised.The recommendation of the Board beyond the number of posts advertised was in violation of the law laid down by the Division Bench of this court in Prem Chand, Naib Tehsildar v. State of Haryana, 1989(2) SLR 556 : AIR 1989 937 (SC).
Further it has been averred that mere selection did not give any right to the petitioner to claim appointment and in any case since her name in the merit list was beyond the 38 posts advertised, she has no claim for seeking appointment.
The further averment on behalf of the respondent in the written statement is that the validity of the selection list expires after one year according to the Government Instructions dated 20.1.1988, copy Annexure T-1 with the written statement.
It has also been argued by the learned counsel for the respondents that the writ is highly belated inasmuch as the selection was filed in March, 1992.
4.
After hearing counsel for the parties I am of the view that there is no merit in this writ petition.
The Division Bench in Prem Chand's case (supra) had held that the Commission/Board should not make more recommendations than the number of vacancies advertised.
Of course,they are to keep in view that waiting list has to be prepared so that in the event a selected candidate does not join, a candidate on the waiting list can be offered appointment.
5.
In view of the Division Bench judgment, it cannot be disputed that the recommendations beyond the advertised posts were not in accordance with Law.
Consequently, the mere selection and the recommendations by the Board did not give any right of appointment to the petitioner.
6.
It is not suggested in the writ petition that any candidate lower in merit than the petitioner was offered appointment.
I am also impressed with the argument of the learned counsel for the respondents that this writ petition should not be entertained at this belated stage in as much as the selection was made in August, 1989, whereas the present writ petition was filed in March, 1992.
7.
For the foregoing reasons, I find no merit in this petition, which is hereby dismissed.
However, I make no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.