S Ravindra Bhat, J - The petitioner in these proceedings under Article 226 of the Constitution of India seeks a direction that he stands confirmed in the services of the respondent No. 2, Medical Council of India (hereafter "MCI").
The petitioner has also sought for restraining the respondent from contemplating any action against him on the basis of minutes of the Executive Committee Meeting.
2.
The petitioner was appointed to the post of Deputy Secretary by the MCI, on probation; the relevant clause regarding probation in the appointment letter dated 25.4.2001 reads as follows :  "You will be on probation for a minimum period of two years.
Confirmation to the post will be only after successful completion of the probation."
The petitioner continued to work uninterruptedly with the MCI as a probationer.
On 292002 he submitted a note, on the issue of completion of probation period and confirmation of his services.
The relevant extracts of that note are as follows :  "As the matter of my completion of probation period and confirmation of services was discussed with the Administrator by undersigned and the Administrator after seeing the relevant documents and the said recruitment rules which were approved by the general body, was convinced that there is apparently a typing mistake of "two years" in the appointment letter issued to me by the officer whereas it should be only one year.
It is further stated that since the probation period for the post of Deputy Secretary is one year and I have already successfully completed the probation period of one year on 2542002.
As informed, my annual confidential report is good and satisfactory because I have served in MCI with full dedication and devotion towards my duties and moreover there is no adverse remark against me.
As per practice in the Council Office, if annual confidential report and performance of a person is good and satisfactory then it is treated as deemed confirmed from the date of completion of probation period.
Therefore, keeping in view all above I may be considered and confirmed to the post of Deputy Secretary from the date of the completion of the probation period i.e.
2542002."
3.
The Secretary, MCI was on leave.
The note was dealt with by the Joint Secretary; he referred to a discussion, between the petitioner and the Administrator, and put it up for consideration/approval.
The Administrator approved the note.
The Joint Secretary thereafter recorded as follows :  "Discussed with Administrator who has instructed that Establishment Section may issue a letter to the effect that probation period is one year and not two years.
In the meanwhile, a copy of the noting, if permissible, may be given to the concerned officer".
It is averred that as per the recruitment rules framed in the year 2000, the period of probation was only one year; in fact the petitioner completed his probation on expiry of that period, on 2542002.
Nevertheless, the MCI issued a letter on 2682003 stating that the petitioner's period of probation had been extended by one year, w.e.f.
2542003.
The petitioner felt aggrieved and represented against this letter.
It is also averred that the petitioner has enjoyed the benefits of annual increments on three different occasions, namely, 142002, 142003 and 142004.
4.
The petitioner relies upon the recruitment rules of the year 2000 to say that since it provides only one year as the period of probation, his services are deemed to have been confirmed.
He also relies upon a certificate issued on 18102004, by the Assistant Secretary of MCI, which indicates, inter alia that he is a permanent employee of the Council and was granted annual increments in the pay scale held by him.
5.
It is alleged that while dealing with the registration of Doctors the petitioner noticed several irregularities in as much as persons who had not passed or appeared in science subjects in their 12 standard examinations were enrolled as Doctors by the MCI.
He alleges that in spite of the clarificatory order by the Supreme Court with regard to ineligibility of certain category of students who had pursued their studies in Russian Medical Colleges, the MCI proceeded to enroll them.
The petitioner further alleges that there were two sets of minutes of meeting in which his services had been extended; he alleges that MCI has practiced fraud and that the minutes indicating extension of his probation was for only period of six months.
He relies upon the decision of one Dr. KK Arora to say that in somewhat similar circumstances the minutes by which probation had been extended were quashed.
6.
The petitioner also alleged that the functioning of MCI came under close scrutiny of this Court in LPA No. 299/2001, Union of India v. Harish Bhalla where the Division Bench had expressed serious concern about the discharge of functions and directed appointment of an independent Administrator.
7.
The MCI in its return had denied that the petitioner is entitled to a declaration of his having been confirmed to the post.
It avers that rule contemplates and provides for an employee being placed on probation; they do not provide any maximum period beyond which probation cannot be extended.
It also disputes that by virtue of rules there can be any deemed confirmation either on completion of initial period of probation or the extended period of probation.
The MCI avers that for being confirmed, there has to be a decision or order by the competent authority in this regard.
8.
The MCI states that upon assessment of the petitioner it was felt that his services did not warrant or justify confirmation.
Accordingly his period of probation was extended by Executive Committee Resolutions dated 2872003 and 272004.
Subsequently by resolution dated 14.6.2005, the Executive Committee extended the period of probation for the period that he was on leave and performed no duty.
It is also averred that the petitioner's case was to be reviewed in September 2005; however, in view of interim orders of this Court dated 11.7.2005 directing status quo, the MCI was awaiting further directions of the Court.
9.
The MCI had relied upon a telecast by a news channel on 14102005 and on later dates, when allegedly the petitioner and another person were involved in questionable practices.
It states that the petitioner's suitability for the post is therefore not well founded.
By a decision, dated 17.10.2005, the MCI was of the view that the petitioner ought to be placed under suspension.
10.
The MCI has also relied upon some documents noticed by the Administrator indicating irregularities which had been put up by the Secretary, to the Executive Committee.
11.
Mr. Man Mohan, learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner stated that the challenge in these proceedings is confined to seeking a direction that the petitioner's services stood automatically confirmed upon expiry of one year.
He made two-fold submissions.
One, that as per the appointment letter, the period of probation was two years; this was opposed to the recruitment rules that existed at the relevant time.
As per the recruitment rules, the maximum probation period for the post of Deputy Secretary was one year.
Those regulations, it was submitted, have statutory force, being framed under the Indian Medical Council Act, 1933.
Learned Counsel submitted that although the appointment letter indicated two years, in view of the recruitment rules which were binding on the MCI, that condition had to be read as one year.
12.
Learned Counsel relied on the note submitted for consideration by the Administrator on 292002 to say that as per the decision of the Administrator who was admittedly in-charge of the Council pursuant to the directions of this Court, the petitioner stood confirmed.
Therefore, the Executive Committee or Council of the MCI on its own could not unilaterally reverse that determination and hold that the petitioner continued on probation.
He disputed the genuineness and legality of the minute by which the probation in question was extended by one year.
13.
Learned Counsel relied on the decision of the Supreme Court reported as Om Parkash Maurya v. UP Co-operative Sugar Factories Federation, 1986 (Supp) SCC 95 to say that where an appointment is made on probation for a specific period and the employee is permitted to continue after expiry of that period, without any specific order of confirmation, he would stand confirmed by implication after expiry that specified period.
He also relied upon the judgment reported as Wasim Beg v. State of UP and Ors, 1998(2) SCT 241 (SC) : III(1998) SLT 702 : (1998)3 SCC 321 to say that if there is a maximum period of probation which cannot be extended, then, at the end of that period, there would be a deemed confirmation unless the rule provides to the contrary.
He lastly relied upon the decision in Karnataka State Road Transport Corporation & Ors v. S Manjunath, 2000(2) SCT 810 (SC) : V (2000) SLT 410 : AIR 2000 SC 2070 in support of his submission that the petitioner had been confirmed to the post.
14.
Learned Counsel also relied upon the certificate issued by the Assistant Secretary, MCI and also the fact that the petitioner had been permitted to draw increment in the regular course.
15.
The second submission of the learned Counsel was that the Medical Council victimized him since he was responsible for unearthing irregularities in regard to the grant of registration to ineligible students or candidates.
He relied upon the averments made in the petition and submitted that a large number of students who had not offered science subjects were nevertheless registered.
Similarly, candidates who had studied in the unrecognized Russian Universities were permitted registration with obviously ulterior or oblique motives.
He submitted that the irregularities were pointed out by him were similar to the ones that went to the root of the functioning of the MCI itself that had led to the supersession of its various authorities and appointment of an Administrator.
He relied upon observations made by the Division Bench in the course of one of the proceedings to contend that the functioning of the MCI itself was entirely vitiated.
Therefore, the question of continuing the petitioner on probation by the executive council was illegal and based upon mala fide considerations.
16.
Mr. JL Gupta, learned Senior Counsel for the respondent firstly submitted that as per the appointment letter issued to the petitioner the period of probation was a minimum of two years.
He could be confirmed by a positive decision or order of the MCI.
He relied upon the judgment of the Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court in Sukhbans Singh v. The State of Punjab, AIR 1962 SC 1711 to say that the mere prescription of a period of probation did not lead to an inference that upon the end of such period the incumbent would stand automatically confirmed.
He also relied upon another Constitution Bench judgment in State of Punjab v. Dharam Singh, AIR 1968 SC 1210 to contend that there has to be a positive order of confirmation and that for an inference of deemed confirmation there has to be a specific rule prohibiting continuation of services of an employee on probation beyond the particular period.
17.
The learned Senior Counsel submitted that having accepted the condition of two years, as per the letter of appointment, the petitioner was estopped from contending to the contrary.
His services were regulated by those stipulations and he could not claim the benefit of deemed or automatic confirmation.
It was also submitted that there is no rule prohibiting continuation a person not found fit, on probation beyond a particular time.
In view of these, the Executive Committee was justified in reviewing his case and passing the orders to continue him as a probationer.
18.
Learned Senior Counsel disputed that the petitioner's services were confirmed on 292002.
He submitted that as per the regulations the competent authority empowered to take a decision was the Executive Committee.
Although an Administrator was appointed by the Court, the functioning of the Committee had not been displaced.
It continued in position; indeed the Supreme Court constituted an Executive Committee.
Furthermore, he submitted that the note was drawn up by the petitioner himself; it was not backed by any objective consideration of merit or performance.
Being a self-serving document, the satisfaction recorded that there were no adverse remarks or that the petitioner had worked satisfactorily could not be accepted.
It was also submitted that the Joint Secretary who recommended the note is himself under a cloud and in any event as per the final recording in the documents, what was decided, was to indicate that the period of probation would be one year and the issuance of a letter in that regard.
No letter was however issued and the note as well as the approval remained as such without being put up before the Executive Committee.
Those notes or proposals were not of any assistance, and did not confer any right upon the petitioner.
It was further submitted that in fact the documents on record of the MCI did not warrant continuation of the petitioner to the post.
Learned Senior Counsel also submitted that the Annual Confidential Reports (ACRs) were not available and on an overall assessment of the petitioner's performance, it was decided not to confirm him to the post but to continuing him as a probationer.
The allegation of mala fides and irregularities in the documents were refuted.
Learned Counsel submitted that the action taken report produced by the petitioner, in support of his submission that two sets of minutes of meeting of the Executive Committee for 2872003 existed is not correct.
19.
Learned Senior Counsel relied upon the counter affidavit in this regard, to say that the action taken report produced by the petitioner is a draft, and not a final one.
He submitted that the decision of the Committee was to extend the period of probation of the petitioner by one year.
That period was again extended and in view these decisions and the judgments cited the petitioner cannot be granted the declaration sought for.
20.
The pleadings and contentions in this case, give rise to the following points requiring decision :  (1) Whether the petitioner was confirmed to the post on 292002; (2) Whether the petitioner stood automatically confirmed to the post, after expiry of a particular period of time; (3) Whether the decisions of the Executive Committee were actuated by mala fides.
Point No. 1  21.
The petitioner has placed reliance on the note given by him on 292002 to say that a positive decision was taken to confirm him to the post.
The note records that as per regulations, the maximum period of probation was one year; nevertheless, he was placed on probation for two years.
The petitioner submitted that the one year period had expired, his records were satisfactory, and that he was suitable for confirmation.
The note was approved, on the same day, by the Joint Secretary of MCI, and by the Administrator.
The Joint Secretary, after final approval, stated that the period of probation would be one year.
22.
The competent authority in respect of the post of Dy.
Secretary is the Executive Committee.
There is no material on record to show that the document/approval by the Administrator was endorsed by the Executive Committee.
Apart from this basic infirmity, the important aspect, which undermines the petitioner's contention, is that the document does not anywhere indicate independent application of mind by the Administrator, Facially, it is a self-appraisal by the petitioner without indication that relevant documents appraising his performance were enclosed merely approved, by the Administrator.
It cannot be construed as an informed decision binding the MCI.
Moreover, no formal letter or document confirming the petitioner was issued.
It is well settled that an administrative noting or proposal, in order to be construed as a binding decision, requires acceptance by the competent authority, and communication in the manner prescribed (Ref : State of Bihar v. Kripalu Shankar, 1988(1) R.C.R.
(Criminal) 453 : (1987)3 SCC 34).
In the decision, it was held that :  "Notings in a notes file, not only of officers but even that of a Minister will not constitute an order to affect others unless it is done in accordance with Articles 166(1) and (2) and communicated to the person concerned."
23.
The above reasoning has been followed and applied in other decisions, namely Laxminarayan R Bhattad v. State of Maharashtra, IV(2003) SLT 80 : (2003)5 SCC 413, at page 431; Bahadursinh Lakhubhai Gohil v. Jagdishbhai M Kamalia, I(2004) SLT 933 : (2004)2 SCC 65, at page 74; and by this Court in CJ International Hotels Ltd v. New Delhi Municipal Committee, 92 (2001) DLT 621 : AIR 2001 Del 435.
I am of the opinion that the noting of 292002 was merely a proposal, approved by the administrator.
In the absence of its acceptance by the competent authority its status as a note remained unaltered; it did not transform into a decision, binding the MCI.
Point No. 2  24.
The law on the subject, regarding confirmation, rather deemed confirmation of a probationer was noticed in the judgment relied upon by the petitioner, viz., Karnataka State Road Transport Corporation v. S Manjunath, AIR 2000 SC 2070 (supra), where it was held as follows :  "This Court had an occasion, to review, analyse critically and clarify the principles on an exhaustive consideration of the entire case law in two recent decisions reported in Dayaram Dayal's case (supra) and Wasim Beg's case (supra).
One line of cases has held that if in the Rule or Order of appointment, a period of probation is specified and a power to extend probation is also conferred and the officer is allowed to continue beyond the prescribed period of probation, he cannot be deemed to be confirmed and there is no bar on the power of termination of the officer after the expiry of the initial or extended period of probation.
This is because, at the end of probation he becomes merely qualified or eligible for substantive permanent appointment.
The other line of cases are those where even though there is a provision in the rules for initial probation and extension thereof, a maximum period for such extension is also provided beyond which it is not permissible to extend probation.
The Constitution Bench which dealt with the case reported in State of Punjab v. Dharam Singh, AIR 1968 SC 1210 (supra), while distinguishing the other line of cases held that the presumption about continuation, beyond the period of probation, as a probationer stood negatived by the fixation of a maximum time limit for the extension of probation.
Consequently, in such cases the termination after expiry of the maximum period upto which probation could be extended was held to be invalid, inasmuch as the officer concerned must be deemed to have been confirmed.
11.
The principles laid down in Dharam Singh's case (supra) though were accepted in another Constitution Bench of a larger composition in the case reported in Samsher Singh etc. v. State of Punjab & Anr, AIR 1974 SC 2192 the special provisions contained in the relevant rules taken up for consideration therein were held to indicate an intention not to treat the officer as deemed to have been confirmed, in the light of the specific stipulation that the period of probation shall be deemed to be extended if the officer concerned was not confirmed on the expiry of his period of probation.
Despite the indication of a maximum period of probation, the implied extension was held to render the maximum period of probation a directory one and not mandatory.
Hence, it was held that a probationer in such class of cases is not to be considered confirmed, till an order of confirmation is actually made.
The further question for consideration in such category of cases where the maximum period of probation has been fixed would be, as to whether there is anything else in the rules which had the effect of whittling down the right to deemed confirmation on account of the prescription of a maximum period of probation beyond which there is an embargo upon further extension being made, and such stipulation was found wanting in Dayaram Dayal's case (supra).
12.
The decision in Wasim Beg's case (supra) also purported to classify these type of cases into three categories, on a review of the entire gamut of law.
It was observed therein as follows : "15.
Whether an employee at the end of the probationary period automatically gets confirmation in the post or whether an order of confirmation or any specific act on the part of the employer confirming the employee is necessary, will depend upon the provisions in the relevant Service Rules relating to probation and confirmation.
There are broadly two sets of authorities of this Court dealing with this question.
In those cases where the Rules provide for a maximum period of probation beyond which probation cannot be extended, this Court has held that at the end of the maximum probationary period there will be a deemed confirmation of the employee unless Rules provide to the contrary.
This is the line of cases starting with State of Punjab v. Dharam Singh, AIR 1968 SC 1210 (supra); MK Agarwal v. Gurgaon Gramin Bank, AIR 1988 SC 286; Om Parkash Maurya v. UP Coop.
Sugar Factories Federation, 1986 Supp SCC 95; State of Gujarat v. Akhilesh C Bhargav, 1987(4) SCC 482."
16.
However, even when the Rules prescribe a maximum period of probation, if there is a further provision in the Rules for continuation of such probation, beyond the maximum period, the Courts have made an exception and said that there will be no deemed confirmation in such cases and the probation period will be deemed to be extended.
In this category of cases we can place Samsher Singh v. State of Punjab which was the decision of a Bench of seven Judges where the principle of probation not going beyond the maximum period fixed was reiterated but on the basis of the Rules which were before the Court, this Court said that the probation was deemed to have been extended.
A similar view was taken in the case of Municipal Corpn.
v. Ashok Kumar Mishra, 1991(2) S.C.T.
452 : 1991(3) SCC 325.
In Satya Narayan Athya v. High Court of MP, 1996(2) SCT 162 (SC) : 1996(1) SCC 560 although the Rules prescribed that the probationary period should not exceed two years, and an order of confirmation was also necessary, the termination order was issued within the extended period of probation.
Hence the termination was upheld.
17.
The other line of cases deals with Rules where there is no maximum period prescribed for probation and either there is a Rule providing for extension of probation or there is a Rule which requires a specific act on the part of the employer (either by issuing an order of confirmation or any similar act) which would result in confirmation of the employee.
In these cases unless there is such an order of confirmation, the period of probation would continue and there would be no deemed confirmation at the end of the prescribed probationary period.
In this line of cases, one can put Sukhbans Singh v. State of Punjab, AIR 1962 SC 1711 (supra); State of UP v. Akbar Ali Khan, AIR 1966 SC 1842; Kedar Nath Bahi v. State of Punjab, 1974(3) SCC 21; Dhanjibhai Ramjibhai v. State of Gujarat, 1985(2) SCC 5 and Tarsem Lal Verma v. Union of India, 1997(9) SCC 243; Municipal Corpn.
v. Ashok Kumar Misra, 1991(3) SCC 325 (supra) and State of Punjab v. Baldev Singh Khosla, 1996(3) SCT 337 (SC) : 1996(9) SCC 190.
In the recent case of Dayaram Dayal v. State of MP, 1997(4) SCT 304 (SC) : 1997(7) SCC 443 (to which one of us was a party) all these cases have been analysed and it has been held that where the Rules provide that the period of probation cannot be extended beyond the maximum period there will be a deemed confirmation at the end of the maximum probationary period unless there is anything to the contrary in the Rules."
25.
In a later judgment, the Supreme Court held as follows, in High Court MP through Registrar and Ors v. Satya Narayan Jhavar, 2001(3) SCT 1114 (SC) : V(2001) SLT 9 : (2001)7 SCC 161 :  "11.
The question of deemed confirmation in service jurisprudence, which is dependent upon the language of the relevant service rules, has been the subject-matter of consideration before this Court, times without number in various decisions and there are three lines of cases on this point.
One line of cases is where in the service rules or in the letter of appointment a period of probation is specified and power to extend the same is also conferred upon the authority without prescribing any maximum period of probation and if the officer is continued beyond the prescribed or extended period, he cannot be deemed to be confirmed.
In such cases there is no bar against termination at any point of time after expiry of the period of probation.
The other line of cases is that where while there is a provision in the rules for initial probation and extension thereof, a maximum period for such extension is also provided beyond which it is not permissible to extend probation.
The inference in such cases is that the officer concerned is deemed to have been confirmed upon expiry of the maximum period of probation in case before its expiry the order of termination has not been passed.
The last line of cases is where, though under the rules maximum period of probation is prescribed, but the same requires a specific act on the part of the employer by issuing an order of confirmation and of passing a test for the purposes of confirmation.
In such cases, even if the maximum period of probation has expired and neither any order of confirmation has been passed nor has the person concerned passed the requisite test, he cannot be deemed to have been confirmed merely because the said period has expired."
This decision was followed in Commr.
of Police v. RS More, I(2003) SLT 508 : (2003)2 SCC 408.
In Smt. Archana Dayal v Union of India and Ors, 2005(4) SCT 834 (Delhi) : 120(2005) DLT 100, this Court held as follows :  "The Constitution Bench has opined in S. Sukhbans Singh v. The State of Punjab, AIR 1962 SC 1711 that a probationer cannot, after the expiry of probationary period, automatically acquire the status of a permanent member of a service unless the rules under which he is appointed expressly provide for such a result.
In State of Punjab v. Dharam Singh, 1968(3) SCR 1 the Constitution Bench has enunciated that, "where on the completion of the specified period of probation an employee is allowed to continue in the post without an order of confirmation, in the absence of anything to the contrary in the original order of appointment or promotion or the Service Rules, the initial period of probation is deemed to be extended by necessary implication".
In Partap Singh v. Union Territory of Chandigarh and Another, AIR 1980 SC 57 it has been held that the concerned officer cannot be deemed to have been confirmed in the absence of an order of confirmation even at the end of the probation of three years.
Similar views have been expressed in Chandra Prakash Shahi v. State of UP and Ors, 2000(2) SCT 946 (SC) : AIR 2000 SC 1706 where Regulation 541 of the UP Police Regulations had come up for consideration.
The Court observed that the period of probation was for two years and the Regulation was silent as to the maximum period beyond which it could not be extended.
The Apex Court held that in the absence of any such prohibition, even if the appellant had completed two years of probationary period successfully and without any blemish, his period of probation must be treated as having been extended, as a permanent status can be acquired only by means of a specific order of confirmation.
The same conclusion has been arrived at in High Court of MP through Registrar and Ors v. Satya Narayan Jhavar, (2001)7 SCC 161 (supra)."
26.
In the present case, the rules relied upon by the petitioner, framed in 2001, and brought into effect in 2002, state that the period of probation shall be one year.
The respondent has averred that the period of probation under the Rules of 1996, which governed the petitioner's employment, provided for two years' probation.
The appointment order indicates a minimum period of two years' probation, and a subsequent order of confirmation and/or declaration that the petitioner had satisfactorily completed the period of probation.
A conspectus of these facts, show that :  (1) The period of probation is prescribed, both under the rules, and also the appointment order; the latter describes the two yearsa period as the minimum period of probation; (2) There is nothing to show that the period of probation under the regulation (either the original one, or the amended regulations, i.e. either one or two years) was the maximum period, beyond which probation could not be extended; (3) There is no regulation, nor was one brought to the notice of the Court, that at the end of any period, the employee stood automatically (deemed) confirmed.
27.
In the light of the above facts, I am of the opinion that the contention of the petitioner that he was automatically, (or deemed to have been) confirmed, is without any basis.
The facts of this case fall in line with the decisions in Sukbhans Singh, Satya Narayan Jhavar and RS More, as also the decision of this Court, in Smt. Archana Dayal's case (supra).
In the absence of any rule to the contrary, or a positive action, ending the period of probation, the petitioner could not claim to have satisfactorily completed probation.
His status continued to be that of a probationer.
28.
As regards the reliance on the certificate issued by an Assistant Secretary, the conclusion does not get altered in any manner, since that certificate is contrary to the other materials; it was also issued by an official subordinate to the petitioner.
Point No. 3  29.
As far as the issue of mala fides is concerned, the petitioner has not impleaded anyone as a party, and made specific allegations in hat regard.
It is a well established principle, that he who alleges mala fide or improper motives against another must make specific allegations, and implead the party concerned (Ref : Pratap Singh v. State of Punjab, AIR 1964 SC 72; Rowjee v. State of AP, AIR 1964 SC 962).
30.
The allegations levelled against MCI even of construed as malice in law, are at best generic and obscure.
This species of mala fide is concerned with the improper use of power, or its abuse, than with the motive of the person exercising it.
In its broadest sense, it encompasses use of discretion for purposes unauthorised by law, and use of the power entrusted, for collateral purposes, or extraneous reasons, not germane to the considerations spelt out by the statute or controlling norm.
Allegations about enrolment or registration of ineligible candidates apart, there is nothing suggestive of the Board's decisions regarding extension of probation being for such unauthorized or collateral purposes.
31.
Another reason for conducting concluding that the petitioner cannot complain of the decision of the Committee to keep him under probation, is that he was aware of the minutes of 2003 as well as 2004, which extended the period of probation.
The Committee, which decided to continue his period of probation is the ad hoc committee, put in place under orders of Supreme Court - as evident from the minutes of meeting; it deliberated twice, on 2872003 and 272004, and continued the probation.
No materials were shown during the course of hearing that the petitioner ever expressed that the Executive Committee lacked power to continue his probation, or that he was being harassed.
In view of this factual background, allegations of mala fide and oblique motives, have not been substantiated.
32.
As recorded in the preceding part of the judgment, the first relief claimed, viz. enjoining the MCI from initiating action, was not pressed.
The petitioner had moved an application, being CM 13820/2005 seeking stay of his suspension order.
However, that cannot be the subject matter of these proceedings.
Therefore, nothing said in the course of the judgment is a reflection on the legality or otherwise of orders passed by MCI, pertaining to disciplinary action.
All rights and contentions of parties in that regard, are reserved.
The writ petition and all pending applications are accordingly dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.