Amarjeet Chaudhary, J (Oral) - The petitioner, who had passed the JBT course from Rajasthan, in response to advertisement which appeared in the Punjabi Tribune dated 6121990, applied for the job of Teacher being eligible for the same.
The petitioner appeared in the interview and was selected as JBT Teacher by the respondents vide Resolution No. 146 dated 8.12.1990.
She joined her duty on 111991.
The petitioner was granted a pay scale equivalent to the Govt. Teachers and continued to get the same till January, 1992.
Thereafter the petitioner's salary was withheld on the plea that approval in the matter has not been accorded by respondents No. 1 and 2.
The reason for not releasing the salary was that respondents No. 1 and 2 have not recognised the two years JBT course of Rajasthan.
2.
Aggrieved against the action of the respondents, the petitioner has filed the present writ petition challenging the respondents' action with a submission that her professional qualification be recognised by the State of Punjab.
3.
At the outset of hearing, Mr. R Chopra, the learned counsel for the petitioner contends that a Full Bench of this Court in Neelam Kumari v. State of Punjab, 1993(1) RSJ 307, held that once particular professional courses were recognised the de-recognition would not effect those persons who had obtained such qualifications prior to the date of derecognition, meaning thereby that all such petitioners, who had obtained these qualifications prior to the date of recognition from the State of Haryana would be deemed to be qualified for the purpose of appointment to the various posts in the State of Punjab and the derecognition would be effective only qua those person who might have obtained or may obtain basic professional qualifications after the date of de-recognition.
4.
In view of the decision in Neelam Kumari's case (supra) the learned State counsel states that he is not in a position to oppose the writ petition.
5.
In view of the forgoing reasons, the writ petition is allowed and it is held that the petitioner, who is holding professional qualification i.e. two years JBT Course from the State of Rajasthan which was obtained by her prior to the date of derecognition as mentioned in the earlier part of the order, would not be considered as unqualified.
Accordingly, the respondents are directed to consider the petitioner's case for approval/regularisation by treating her as duly qualified.
However, it is made clear that on the approval being granted or on regularisation of the services, the petitioner shall be entitled to all consequential benefits flowing therefrom.
No order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.