SK Jain, J - Senior Superintendent of Police, Gurdaspur vide his order dated 15.1.1985 dismissed Jagir Singh Police Constable from Police force under Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution of India.
2.
Deputy Inspector General of Police, Jalandhar Range, dismissed his departmental appeal against the said order of dismissal on 191987.
He challenged the said order vide Civil Suit No. 7 of 6.1.1988 in the Court of Sub Judge 1st Class, Gurdaspur which was decreed vide judgment and decree dated 8111989.
The matter did not rest here.
The State of Punjab challenged the said decree and judgment in Civil Appeal No. 24 of 1990 which was dismissed with costs by Additional District Judge, Gurdaspur, vide his judgment and decree dated 2811991.
3.
Being dissatisfied the state has brought this Regular Second Appeal.
4.
Sole argument advanced by Shri Boparari, learned, Assistant Advocate General, Punjab, appearing for the State, is that in view of the anti-national activities of the respondent, his retention in Police force any longer was considered as highly undesirable and in the interest of the security of the State; it was thought necessary to remove him from service forthwith and that since it was not reasonably practicable to hold an enquiry against him.
He was dismissed from service with immediate effect under Article 311(2)(b) of the Constitution of India.
With a view to appreciate this argument, I have perused the record.
From the order of dismissal dated 15.1.1985, it is evident that his services were terminated on the following grounds :-  1.
That on 3081984, he gathered 15/20 young members of a particular community of village Babri and instigated them to destroy the Government property and to kill the members of another community.
On this allegation, FIR No. 220 dated 2081984 under Section 153-A, I.P.C. and Section 13 of Unlawful Activities Prevention Act, 1961 was registered against him in Police Station Sadar Gurdaspur.
2.
That on 2581984 while in custody of the Military Officials, the plaintiff tried to snatch the rifle from the escort guard a to get him released.
On the said accusation FIR No. 253 dated 2581984 under Section 224/293 IPC was registered against him at PS Gurdaspur.
3.
He indulged in anti-social activities.
He was mixed up with terrorists.
4.
The reason for not holding a departmental enquiry against him is given was under -  "Keeping in view the anti-national activities of Jagir Singh Constable, his retention in Police force any longer is considered highly undesirable and in the interest of security of the State, it is necessary to remove him from service forthwith.
Since he was mixed up with the terrorists and their supporters, there is every likelihood that in case of initiating departmental proceedings against him, the terrorists and their supporters may in make the enquiry officer and the prosecution witnesses their targets in sympathy with him and cause bodily harm to them."
5.
Perusal of the record show that the above mentioned two cases were withdrawn under Section 321 of Criminal Procedure Code which tantamounts to acquittal for all intents and purposes.
In this situation the very foundation of the impugned order is knocked out.
6.
It is also clear that no departmental enquiry whatsoever was held against the respondent on the allegations mentioned in the impugned order.
There was no material before the competent authority to arrive at a conclusion that it was not reasonably practicable to hold an enquiry in the case.
7.
Article 311(1)(b) of the Constitution of India provides for dispensing with of an enquiry where an authority empowered to dismiss or remove a person or to reduce him in rank should be satisfied that for some reasons, to be recorded by that authority in writing, it was not reasonably practicable to hold such an enquiry.
In view of the fact that the above mentioned two FIRs had been dropped and the respondent was discharged, there remained no ground on which the conduct of departmental enquiry was dispensed with.
8.
Besides what has been stated above, Rule 1638 of the Punjab Police Rules provides that whenever Superintendent of Police receives information regarding commission of an offence by a police officer, he shall report the matter to the District Magistrate who would order a preliminary enquiry to be held and, thereafter, he would decide whether departmental enquiry should be held or a criminal prosecution should be launched.
In view of these provisions it was obligatory on the Superintendent of Police to refer the matter to the District Magistrate.
It was for the District Magistrate to decide as to whether a departmental enquiry should be held or not.
This provision regulates the stage prior to the holding of departmental enquiry against a police official.
The dispensing with the departmental enquiry under Article 311(1)(b) does not automatically empower the Punishing Authority not to follow the statutory provisions of Rule 1638 of the Punjab Police Rules.
Proviso to Article 311 is limited to dispensing with of the enquiry without giving reasonable opportunity to the delinquent official to defend himself during enquiry.
If a law provides for a safeguard prior to the holding of departmental enquiry, that has to be observed.
Admittedly, in the present case, the case of the respondent was not placed before the District Magistrate and he has been dismissed from service without complying with the provisions of Rule 1638 ibid rules.
It is thus clear that the provisions of Rule 1638 have to be followed and failure to do so renders the order of punishment null and void.
In the present case, it was necessary for the Superintendent of Police to have complied with the provision of Rule 1638 of the ibid Rules.
In holding the above view, I am fortified by the ratio laid down in the following judgments :-  (i) Ashok Kumar, Sub Inspector of Police v. State of Punjab, 1990(3) SLR 127;  (ii) Union of India v. Ram Krishan, 1972(2) SLR 11; and  (iii) Delhi Administration v. Chanan Shah, 1969 SLR 217.
As a sequel to the above discussion, no fault can be found with the concurrent findings returned by the two Courts below.
Resultantly, this appeal fails and is hereby dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.