Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner who joined as a Lecturer at the Medical College, Rohtak was redesignated as a Reader with effect from March 12, 1990.
She claims that she was entitled to be redesignated as a Reader with effect from December 8, 1988 and as Associate Professor with effect from June 1989.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner graduated in Medicine and Surgery in December 1972.
On July 5, 1975 she was appointed as a Registrar at the Medical College, Rohtak.
While working as such, she acquired the qualification of Diploma in Anaesthesia in July 1976.
In April 1979 she passed the MD (Anaesthesia) examination.
It is averred that the Govt. of Libya had advertised posts in various Universities and hospitals.
The petitioner applied for one of those posts and was interviewed at Delhi.
She was selected for appointment as Specialist Anaesthetist in Al-Fateh University, Libya at General Hospital, Misurata which is a teaching institution.
She worked there from May 17, 1979 to February 20, 1985.
She has produced a certificate dated March 3, 1990 alongwith this petition to the following effect :-  "To whom it may concern"  The Secretariat of Health in Misurata hereby certifies that Dr. Sarla, Kumari Rathi, Indian worked with Misurata Hospital as Anaesthetist on contract.
This is a post equivalent to Assistant Professor in the University.
Misurate Hospital is a teaching hospital under the Al-Fateh University in Socialist Peoples Libyan Arab Jamnuriya.
She worked from 17.5.79 and her services ended on her resignation on 20285.
During the period of her work in the hospital her conduct and work have been satisfactory.
This certificate has been given to her to be used for legally permissible purposes."
3.
In the year 1984 when the petitioner was still working in Libya, a post of Lecturer in Anaesthesiology was advertised by the State Govt.
The petitioner sent her application.
She was selected for appointment as Lecturer in Anaesthesiology and an offer was made to her vide letter dated September 11, 1984.
A copy of this letter has been produced with the writ petition as Annexure P-5.
The petitioner was called upon to join the post within one month.
However, on account of her commitment in Libya she had to seek extension of joining time which was granted.
Ultimately, she joined as Lecturer at Medical College, Rohtak on March 12, 1985.
4.
It is averred that the Maharani Dayanand University Rohtak has laid down the qualifications and experience for a post-graduate teacher.
It is as under :-  "Teacher in a medical college/medical institution having at least 7 years undergraduate and/or post graduate teaching experience of which not less than four years should be after obtaining the requisite recognised post graduate qualification shall be recognised as post graduate teacher."
The petitioner avers that vide order dated August 26, 1986 (Annexure P-6 with the writ petition), the Vice Chancellor recognised the petitioner as Post Graduate Teacher in the subject of Anaesthesiology.
5.
Initially, the Govt. had framed rules under Article 309 of the Constitution of India which were called the Haryana Medical Education Service Rules, 1975.
These rules were in force at the time of the petitioner's appointment as Lecturer (Anaesthesia).
Besides the academic qualifications, it was laid down that a candidate must possess the following experience :-  "As Registrar or an equivalent post in Anaesthesiology for three years in a recognised Medical College of which one year should be after post-graduate qualification."
The State of Haryana promulgated the Medical College Rohtak (Conditions or Service of Teachers) Act, 1986.
In exercise of the powers conferred by Section 3 of this Act, and all other powers enabling him in this behalf, the Governor of Haryana promulgated the rules called the Haryana Medical Education Service Rules, 1988.
A few provisions of the 1988 - Rules deserve notice.
Rules 2(m) defines "teacher" as under :-  "(m) Teacher means a Lecturer, Reader and Associate Professor including those when appointed as Floating Professors under Rule 10."
Rule 7 relates to the qualification which a person must possess for being appointment to any post in the service.
It reads as under :-  "7.
Qualification.
No person shall be appointed to any post in the Service unless he is in possession of the qualification and experience specified in column 3 of Appendix B to these rules in the case of direct recruitment or appointment by transfer or deputation and those specified in column 4 in the case of appointment by promotion.
The qualification and experience in the case of Reader/Associate Professor for their redesignation as such shall be as specified in column 5 of the said Appendix B"  Rule 9 lays down the method of recruitment to different posts in the service.
The provision contained in rule 9(1)(g) is relevant.
It may be noticed.
It reads as under :-  "(g) in the case of Teachers (Medical/Non-Medical) and Teachers (Dental) :  (i) appointment shall be made on the post of Lecturer only by direct recruitment, and if no suitable person in available for appointment as Lecturer then by transfer or deputation from any State Government or Government of India or any institution;  (ii) a lecturer shall be re-designated as Reader if he has been allowed to cross 1st efficiency bar and fulfils the qualifications and experience for the post of Reader as laid down in column 5 of Appendix B;  (iii) A Reader shall be re-designated as Associate Professor if he has been allowed to cross the 2nd efficiency bar and fulfils the qualifications and experience for the post of Associate Professor as laid down in column 5 of Appendix B :  Provided that the persons holding the posts of Lecturer or Reader on the commencement of these rules shall be redesignated as Reader or Associate Professor as the case may be if he fulfil the qualifications and experience as laid down in column 5 of Appendix B and is otherwise suitable for re-designation on the basis of record irrespective of the fact whether he has crossed the 1st or the 2nd efficiency bar, as the case may be."
It is also apt to notice the relevant provisions in respect of qualifications etc. laid down in Appendix 'B' in so far as the posts of Associate Professor and Reader are concerned :-  Designation of Posts Academic qualifications and experience on redesignation as Reader/Associate Professor Associate Professor (Medical) (1) A basic University qualification included in the schedule to Indian Medical Council Act  (2) MD/M.S.
or equivalent qualification in the subject concerned.
Experience : Five years teaching experience in the speciality concerned as a Reader or an equivalent post and must have crossed 2nd efficiency bar.
Reader (Medical) (1) A basic University qualification included in the schedule to Indian Medical Council Act  (2) MD/M.S.
or equivalent qualification in the subject concerned.
Experience : Five years teaching experience in the speciality concerned as a Lecturer or an equivalent post and must have crossed 1st efficiency bar."
6.
The petitioner avers that in accordance with the provisions of these rules, she represented for being re-designated as a Reader and, thereafter, as an Associate Professor.
Her representation was decided by the competent authority vide order dated August 10, 1990, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-8 with the writ petition.
By this order, the petitioner was re-designated as a Reader with effect from March 12, 1990.
Apparently, her request for being re-designated as an Associate Professor was not accepted.
Aggrieved by this action, the petitioner has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
The action of the respondents has been challenged inter alia on the grounds that it suffers from the vice of arbitration and discrimination.
7.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents it has been inter alia averred that the petitioner had joined as a Lecturer on March 12, 1985 and that she has been rightly re-designated as Reader on completion of five years with effect from March 12, 1990.
It has been further averred that in accordance with the norms past practice and precedent, the service rendered by a person outside the Medical College, Rohtak cannot be counted for the purpose of re-designation as Reader or Associate Professor.
Accordingly, the service rendered by the petitioner in Libya before joining in the Medical College, Rohtak cannot be taken into consideration for determining her eligibility for re-designation.
It has been further averred that there is no proof that the petitioner had worked as a Teacher in Libya from May 17, 1979 to February 20, 1985.
However, the issue of the certificate to the effect that the post of Anaesthetist was equivalent to the post of Assistant Professor in a teaching hospital under the Al-Fateh University in Libya has been admitted.
The respondents also aver that "at the time of initial appointment as Lecturer she was not given benefit of post service rendered by her in Libya at Al-Fateh.
Now she is legally estopped from claiming the benefit or past service rendered in Libya."
It has also been mentioned that on receipt of the petitioner's representation the Medical Council of India was requested to intimate "whether the experience gained by her in Libya can be counted for re-designation.
The matter is still under correspondence."
The petitioner's averment in the petition that others who were similarly situate have been given the benefit has been vaguely denied.
On these premises, the petitioner's claim has been controverted.
8.
The petitioner has filed a replication to this written statement reiterating the factual position as averred in the writ petition.
Further, the petitioner has referred to the cases of various other members of the medical faculty of the college to show that the benefit claimed by the petitioner has been given to various persons who were similarly placed.
9.
I have heard Mr. IS Balhara for the petitioner and Mr. Jaswant Singh for the respondents.
10.
The first question that arises for consideration is as to whether or not the petitioner's experience in Libya was considered the time of her initial appointment as Lecturer.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents it has been categorically averred that she was not given the benefit of her past service rendered by her in Libya.
Is it so ?
11.
The qualifications for appointment to the post of Lecturers were initially laid down in the 1975-Rules.
A perusal of the provision as reproduced above would show that a person had to have an experience of working as Registrar or on an equivalent post in Anaesthesiology for three years in a recognised medical college of which one year should be after post-graduate qualification.
The petitioner had admittedly passed her MD examination in April 1979.
She adjoined her post in Libya on May 17, 1979.
She was still working there when she was selected for appointment as Lecturer at Medical College, Rohtak.
Obviously, the only experience gained by her after passing the MD examination was in Libya.
The respondents could not have considered the petitioner as eligible for appointment to the post of Lecturer unless this experience was taken into consideration.
The fact that she was actually selected and appointed shows that this experience had been taken into consideration.
Still further, it is also the admitted position that vide order dated July 10, 1986 (Annexure P-6), the petitioner was recognised as a Post-Graduate teacher in the subject of Anaesthesiology.
The qualification for such recognition was atleast 7 years under graduate and/or post graduate teaching experience of which not less than 4 years should be after obtaining the requisite recognised post graduate qualification...." The declaration by the University that the petitioner was a post-graduate teacher on August 26, 1986 shows that by that date, she had completed 7 years teaching experience of which not less than 4 years was after obtaining the post graduate degree.
The petitioner had joined her job in Libya on May 17, 1979.
In August 1986 she could be eligible for being declared as a post graduate teacher only if her experience in Libya was taken into consideration.
Otherwise, she had an experience of only 1 year, 5 months and 14 days in Medical College, Rohtak when she was declared a post graduate teacher.
Neither of the respondents had raised any objections to the recognition of the petitioner as a post graduate teacher at Medical College, Rohtak.
In fact, a copy of the order issued by the University was duly forwarded by the Director of Medical College to the petitioner.
12.
Added to the above two facts is the certificate issued by the authorities in Libya.
It clearly shows that the petitioner had worked on a post which was equivalent to that of Assistant Profess in a teaching hospital under the Al-Fateh University.
The issue and correctness of this certificate has not been disputed.
In fact the respondents have recognised this experience.
The petitioner was appointed as Lecturer in 1984 and she could not have been treated as eligible except after taking her experience in Libya info consideration.
The respondents having done so cannot now exclude it from consideration.
13.
In view of the above, the claim made on behalf of the respondents that the petitioners experience in Libya could not taken into consideration cannot be sustained.
14.
There is another aspect of the matter.
The qualifications for re- designation have been laid down in 1988-Rules.
These have been reproduced above.
The only requirement of the rule is that a person must have "5 years teaching experience in the speciality concerned as it Lecturer or (on an equivalent post) and must have crossed 1st efficiency bar...." This teaching experience is not required to be in Medical College, Rohtak.
The words of the Rule are clear.
There is no ambiguity, if the rule-making authority had intended that only the experience gained by it person in Medical College, Rohtak shall be taken into consideration, it could have so provided.
Similarly, for re-designation as an Associate Professor, the requirement is "5 years teaching experience in the speciality concerned as a Reader or an equivalent post...." For both the posts the teaching experience in the speciality concerned is the only requirement.
We cannot add to this qualification prescribed under the statutory rules.
The respondents erred in taking the view that only the teaching experience gained in the Medical College, Rohtak has to be taken into consideration.
15.
It is no doubt true that entries in Appendix `B' the relating to qualifications etc. provide that candidate should have crossed the 1st or the 2nd efficiency bar.
However, this condition is not applicable to the petitioner in view of the proviso to rule 9(1)(g) wherein it is clearly laid down that "the persons holding the posts of Lecturer or Reader on the commencement of these rules shall be re-designated as Reader or Associate Professor as the case may be if he fulfils the qualifications and experience as laid down in column 5 of Appendix B and is otherwise suitable for re- designation on the basis of record irrespective of the fact whether he has crossed the 1st or the 2nd efficiency bar, as the case may be."
It is apparent that the petitioner was working as a Lecturer at the time of promulgation of 1988 Rules.
Consequently, in her case, her suitability for re-designation had to be determined on the basis of record irrespective of the fact whether or not she had crossed the first or the second efficiency bar.
16.
It is thus held that the experience gained by the petitioner while working in Libya has to be taken into consideration while considering her case for re-designation as Reader or an Associate Professor.
The claim of the respondents that only the experience at the Medical College, Rohtak has to be taken into consideration, cannot be sustained.
In view of this petition, the action of the respondents in declining the petitioner's claim for re- designation as Reader and as Associate Professor after taking into consideration her entire experience cannot be sustained.
17.
The writ petition is accordingly allowed and the respondents are directed to redecide the matter in accordance with the above observations.
The respondents shall do so expeditiously preferably within three months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
In the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.