Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - The petitioner joined the Punjab Government service before the re-ogranisation of the State of Punjab.
The petitioner has worked in Chandigarh since 1965 and had joined the State Library, Sector 17, Chandigarh, on 31st May, 1969.
In the year 1969, the petitioner was transferred to Government College of Education, Sector 20, Chandigarh, as Librarian in which she continued till attaining the age of superannuation, i.e. 58 years and retired on 31st March, 1988.
2.
The case of the petitioner is that she was borne on the cadre of Librarian in Education Department, Punjab Government and was serving at Chandigarh before the formation of UT Chandigarh.
On retirement, she was entitled to full retiral benefits.
She was paid gratuity only and the pension was released to her after a considerable delay.
However, no payment of the leave encashment amounting to Rs. 37,640/- was made to her despite representations.
3.
The plea taken by respondents 1 and 2 in the written statement is that Chandigarh Administration is to discharge its liability to make payment of leave encashment to the petitioner with whom she was on deputation.
The Chandigarh Administration on the other hand in the written statement had taken the plea that as per-amended instructions of the Government of India, it is obligatory on the part of the parent State to make payment of leave encashment and accordingly a reference for releasing the payment of the leave encashment has been made to the Punjab Government.
4.
I have considered the submissions of the learned counsel for the parties and perused the paper book.
5.
For all intents and purposes, the petitioner was a regular employee of the Punjab Government and was only on deputation with the Union Territory, Chandigarh.
Before joining the Chandigarh Administration, the petitioner had rendered service with the State of Punjab.
As such, it cannot be said that the petitioner had rendered entire service with UT Chandigarh.
6.
In the case in hand, the State of Punjab has admitted that the pension, Gratuity and General Provident Fund have been released to the petitioner.
The payment of leave encashment was denied to her in view of the Punjab Government Notification No. 2/9/86-2 FCD/1798 dated 26th February, 1990, according to which the liability for leave salary had to be borne in full by the UT Chandigarh, from where the petitioner retired from service.
I am not inclined to accept this argument of the learned counsel for the respondents 1 and 2 simply because the petitioner has retired from service w.e.f.
31st March, 1988 whereas the aforesaid notification was issued on 26th February, 1990.
Thus, it is clear that the petitioner retired from service prior to the issuance of the said notification.
As such this notification cannot be applied retrospectively.
The Punjab Government should have released the payment of the leave encashment to the petitioner in accordance with the amended instructions issued by the Government of India in which it was specifically made clear that it is the duty of the parent department to make payment of leave encashment.
A reference in this regard has been rightly made by the UT Administration.
In para No. 11 of the written statement it was admitted by the Punjab Government that earlier Smt. Balram Kaur, Ex-Librarian, TS Central State Library, Chandigarh, who retired on 31st October, 1986, was paid leave encashment by the Punjab Government.
The stand taken by the Punjab Government is that the payment of leave encashment to the aforesaid retiree was made through an oversight thereby committing a mistake.
But there is nothing on record to suggest that the so-called mistake was rectified at any stage.
Therefore, I find no substance in the contention of the learned counsel for the Punjab State that the payment of leave encashment is to be released by the UT Administration, rather it is the duty of the Punjab Government to discharge its liability for releasing the benefit of leave encashment to the petitioner in pursuance of the instructions of the Government of India issued on the subject.
Leave encashment is a part of retiral benefit.
A Government employee becomes entitled to leave encashment on superannuation.
Once the Punjab Government accepts its liability to payment of pension and gratuity, it should have discharged its liability for releasing the benefit of leave encashment to the petitioner.
It is rather the obligation of the Punjab Government to discharge its liability of which it cannot be absolved.
7.
In the case in hand, the petitioner retired from service in March, 1988 and was entitled to leave encashment equal to 240 days on the basis of last pay drawn.
The proportion of law is well settled that pension and gratuity are valuable rights in the hands of a Govt. employee and considerable delay in settlement and disbursement thereof must be visited with penalty of interest from the date it becomes due till its actual payment.
The amount of leave encashment should have been paid to the petitioner within two months from the date of her superannuation and she is entitled to interest for the delay beyond that period.
8.
In view of the foregoing discussion, this writ petition is allowed and the State of Punjab is directed to pay leave encashment to the petitioner on the basis of last pay drawn by her with 12% interest which shall be allowed w.e.f.
1.6.1988 till its actual payment to the petitioner.
The judgment of this Court shall implemented within two months from the receipt of its copy.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.