RS Mongia, J (Oral) - The Haryana Subordinate Services Selection Board (hereinafter called "the Board"), had advertised 134 posts of Supervisors (Female) for Social Welfare Department, Haryana, in "The Daily Tribune" dated September 22, 1991.
It was provided in the said advertisement that "the dependent wife, sons and daughters of Ex-servicemen and dependents of Freedom Fighters (as per Government instructions) who fulfil all the conditions of qualifications and age etc., prescribed for the various posts will be considered on merits for the posts reserved for Ex-serviceman to the extent of non-availability of suitable Ex-serviceman."
The petitioner applied in the category of dependent daughter of a Freedom Fighter.
According to the petitioner, though her name was in the merit list, yet, the respondent had not given appointment to her in the category of dependent of Freedom Fighters.
It has been specifically averred in the writ petition that out of posts reserved for Ex-servicemen 14 posts are lying vacant and remain unfilled.
This fact has been admitted by the respondent in the written statement.
2.
The case of the petitioner is that in accordance with the Haryana Government instructions dated November 25, 1985, Annexure P-3, if out of the posts reserved for the category of Ex-serviceman or their dependents, same posts remain unfilled for any reason, then the same are to be offered to the dependent wife, sons and daughters of Freedom Fighters.
The relevant portion of the instructions Annexure P-3 is reproduced below :  "After careful consideration it has been decided to extend further the reservation in services in direct recruitment in class I, II, III and IV to the extent of 2% for the freedom fighters and their children/grand children subject to the condition that this 2% reservation will be available only if the quota reserved for Ex-servicemen or Backward Classes remains unfilled to that extent due to non-availability of suitable Ex-servicemen or their dependents or non-availability of suitable candidates from Backward Classes."
3.
The case of the respondent is that in accordance with the clarification issued by the Government on July 14, 1992, the posts which are to be offered to the reserved category of dependents of Freedom Fighters is 2% of the unfilled vacancies of Ex-servicemen/Backward Classes and in accordance with the said clarification only one fell to the share of the dependents of Freedom Fighters.
A candidate higher in merit than the petitioner had been appointed against that post.
4.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that this petition deserves to succeed.
The Government instructions dated November 25, 1985 are clear and if the posts reserved for Ex-servicemen and Backward Classes remain unfilled then 2% of the posts for the category of dependents of Freedom Fighters would be filled in from the available vacancies of the reserved category of Ex-servicemen/Backward classes which have remained unfilled.
The 2% reservation of the posts for the dependents of' Freedom Fighters is to be calculated out of the total available vacancies.
However these are to be filled in only if the posts reserved for the Ex-servicemen/Backward classes remain unfilled and the only to the extent the posts remain unfilled upto a maximum of 2% of total posts.
Admittedly, in the present case, 14 posts of the category for the Ex-servicemen are lying vacant.
Consequently, in accordance with the instructions Annexure P-3 dated November 25, 1985 these vacancies had to be offered to the extent of 2% of the total vacancies to the dependents of the Freedom Fighters.
In the present case, 2% of the posts for the dependents of Freedom Fighter would be at least two.
Admittedly, only one from this category has been appointed.
The next person, who is the petitioner, in this category, should have been appointed against the available vacant posts of Ex-servicemen quota.
5.
For the reasons recorded above, this writ petition is allowed and the respondents are directed to appoint the petitioner against the available unfilled posts of Ex-servicemen category with affect from the date when the posts of the Ex-Servicemen quota became available.
The petitioner's seniority would be reckoned from that date but she will not be entitled to any pay for such period.
These directions be carried out within one month from the date of receipt of copy of this order from this court or when certified copy is made available by the petitioner.
I make no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.