Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - Are the Sub-Divisional Engineers/Assistant Engineers working in the Haryana State Minor Irrigation Tubewells Corporation (Hereinafter to be referred to as the Corporation) entitled to parity of treatment in the matter of pay scales with the persons working on deputation with them as also those employed in the Public Works Department of the State Govt. ?
This is the short question that arises for consideration in this case.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioners are working as Sub-Divisional Officers/Sub-Divisional Engineers/Assistant Engineers in the Corporation.
It is averred that these categories of posts are equal in rank and status.
These are interchangeable.
These are filled up by the Corporation either by direct recruitment or by promotion, or by taking personnel on deputation from the departments of the Govt.
It is further averred that there are 27 officers working in this cadre who are on deputation from the Irrigation Department of the State of Haryana.
According to the petitioners, they possess the same qualifications, discharge the same duties and perform the same functions as those possessed or performed by the persons taken on deputation.
They further aver that there is no qualitative difference between the duties and responsibilities of the persons employed in the Corporation vis-a-vis those employed in the Public Works Department of the State of Haryana in its three branches known as Buildings and Roads, Public Health and Irrigation Branch.
They also aver that their duties arc identical to those holding identical posts in the Haryana Electricity Board or the Haryana Urban Development Authority.
3.
It is the case of the petitioners that the Corporation is wholly owned and controlled by the State Govt.
It was carved out of the Irrigation wing of the Public Works Department and since its inception in the year 1970, a number of officers have been appointed to different posts by way of deputation.
This Corporation has framed bye-laws which inter alia provide for the various conditions of service.
Bye-law 51 (Part 5) inter alia provides that the grant of "the pay scale is subject to revision by the Board, which will, however, generally follow the partner adopted by the Govt. of Haryana from time to time."
The petitioners have also referred to the Articles of Association to show that the Board of Directors of the Corporation has the exclusive power to "appoint at their discretion, remove or suspend such manager, secretaries, officers, clerks, agents and servants for permanent, temporary or special services, as they may from time to time think fit, and to determine their powers and duties and fix their salaries or emoluments and to require security of such amount as they think fit in such instances.
In the first instance, officers and other staff shall be taken on deputation from the Irrigation Department, Haryana, subject to availability."
The petitioners further were to Article 95 which authorises the Chairman to reserve matters raising important issues for the decision of the Govt.
This Article, however, clearly provides that "in respect of matters reserved by the Chairman for decision of the Govt., if the Govt.'s views are not received within a period of two months, the Directors shall be entitled to Act in accordance with the proposal or decision without further reference to the Government".
4.
The Corporation as well as the Govt. have been sanctioning scales of pay for their respective employees from time to time.
The last revision of pay scales was made with effect from January 1, 1986.
The petitioners were placed in the pay scale of Rs. 2000-3500 which was at par with the scale granted to those working in the departments of the Govt. On June 2, 1989 the Govt. of Haryana issued an order removing the anomalies in the pay scales of various categories of officers including the Engineers.
It was inter alia provided that the initial pay scale shall be Rs. 2200-4000 which shall be raised to Rs. 3000-4500 after 5 years of regular service.
It was further provided that after 12 years of regular service, the pay scale shall be raised to Rs. 4100-5300.
This decision was effective from May 1, 1989.
The matter came up for consideration before the Board of Directors of the Corporation.
In the meeting held on August 18, 1989, the Corporation decided, to revise the pay scales of various categories of Engineers so as to bring them at par with those in the Govt.
In this order it was categorically observed that "the Board decided that in view of the parity that had been maintained in the past in the matter of scales of pay of the Corporation's employees and their counter-parts in the Haryana Govt., the adoption of the following scales of pay approved vide Financial Commissioner and Secretary to Govt., Haryana, Finance Department letters Nos. - ---- dated 16.51989 and No. --- dated 2689, may be recommended to the Public Enterprises and Investment Cell of the Finance Department, Haryana, through the Administrative Department for concurrence."
Subsequently, the Govt. has decided that the pay scale of Rs. 4100-5300 shall be limited to 20% of the cadre posts.
This decision of the Govt. was adopted by the Corporation in its meeting held on June 25, 1990.
In spite of the fact that the petitioners have made numerous representations and the Corporation has reiterated its decision at various subsequent meetings, the petitioners have not been granted the revised scale of pay with effect from May 1, 1989.
Aggrieved by this action of the respondent, the petitioners have approached this Court through the present petition.
5.
Separate written statement have been filed on behalf of the Corporation and the State of Haryana.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the Corporation, it has been pointed out that number of Sub-Divisional Officers working on deputation is actually 24 and not 27 as alleged by the petitioners.
It has been further averred that "the nature of work and, therefore, responsibilities in each Deptt/Board/Corporation are different."
Regarding the averment in the petition that the Board of Directors is the final authority regarding the fixation of scales of pay it has been averred that the Govt. is the final authority.
It has also been averred that the State Govt. has constituted a committee for examining such matters.
It has also been mentioned that the committee appointed by the Govt. is examining the case "for allowing Govt. grade to its employees as the financial position of H.S.M.I.T.C is not sound.
Rather it is a sick organization having cumulative losses of over Rs. 40 crore."
6.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the Govt. it has been inter alia averred that the proposal of the Corporation was placed for consideration of the Standing Committee on November 15, 1991.
It was decided to constitute a Sub Committee to review the entire staffing pattern along with pay scales.
The meeting of the Sub-Committee were held on January 16, 1992 and February 6, 1992.
The recommendations of this Sub-Committee were placed before the Standing Committee on May 28, 1992 when "the revision of pay scales of the posts on AEE/AE/DSO/SDE was postponed and it was decided that the matter will be examined separately by the Finance Department."
On this premises, it has been averred that since the matter is under the consideration of the Govt., the writ petition is premature and deserves to be dismissed on that ground.
On merits, it has been averred that "it is yet to be decided by the answering respondents that how much qualitative difference in the duties and responsibilities is between the engineers of P.W.D.
and H.S.M.I.T.C.
It is admitted that there are only 24 (instead of 27) S.D.Os.
presently working on deputation with H.S.M.I.T.C.
from Irrigation Department which is a temporary stop-gap arrangement.
The salary and allowances of the deputationists of the Corporation are governed by the terms and conditions as decided by the Govt. from time to time.
The deputations are bound to function (perform) the same duties as required by the Corporation till they are on deputation with the Corporation."
In reply to the averment of the petitioners that they perform the same work as the other officers with whom they claim parity of treatment, it has been averred that "although the technical qualifications of incumbents on the posts of SDOs/SDEs/AEs in various Govt. departments, Boards and Corporations may be identical, yet the nature of duties and responsibilities, quantum of work load, level of technical expertise involved etc. varies from organisation to organisation depending upon the nature of activities undertaken by the respective organisations.
"It has been stated that the Govt. issued explicit instructions whereby the organisations are required to refer their cases pertaining to revision of pay scales, removal of anomalies, creation of posts etc. to the State Govt. for approval.
Reference in this behalf has been made to the Notification dated November 20, 1989 by which a Standing Committee was constituted by the Govt. On these premises, the respondents aver that this writ petition has no merit and may be dismissed.
7.
I have heard Mr. Vivek Bhandari, for the petitioners, Mr. Nipun Mittal for the Corporation and Mr. Jaswant Singh for the State of Haryana.
8.
Learned counsel for the petitioners has raised a two-fold contention.
He submits that there is no valid basis for any classification between petitioners and those working on deputation with the Corporation in the matter of grant of scales of pay.
He submits that the action of the respondents is violative of Article 14 of the Constitution and cannot thus be sustained.
He further submits that in accordance with the By-laws and the Articles of Association of the Corporation, the.
Board of Directors is the competent authority and that the action of the State Govt. in asserting that the matter has to be finally decided by the Finance Department is actually without jurisdiction.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioners has been controverted by the learned counsel for the respondents.
9.
It may be noticed at the outset that Mr. Jaswant Singh has produced a copy of a letter dated February 8, 1993 addressed by the Financial Commissioner & Secretary to Govt. Haryana, Finance Department to the Financial Commissioner & Secretary to Govt. Haryana, Irrigation & Power Department.
It has been mentioned that after examining the matter in detail the proposal for revision of pay scales has been declined on account of two reasons, viz. the Finance Department has restricted operation of revised pay scales only to the Engineers of the three wings of PWD, and "the financial position of HSMITC is not sound and this Corporation is not in a position to pay salary etc. to its employees without assistance from the State Govt. HSMITC is a sick unit ......".
10.
In the background of the above factual position the short question that arises for consideration is - Is the action of the respondents in treating the petitioners differently from those working on deputation discriminatory and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
It is well-settled that the State can make reasonable classification if it has a relation with the object sought to be achieved.
It is the admitted position that posts of Sub-Divisional Officers etc. can be filled up by any one of the three known methods; namely, direct recruitment, or promotion or by transfer/deputation.
Once a person is appointed to a post in a particular cadre, the source of his recruitment or the method of his appointment becomes irrelevant.
He becomes a part of that cadre.
A deputationist holds the post in a particular cadre office for the duration he remains on deputation and is a part of that cadre.
No material has been placed on record to show that the deputationits are appointed against only certain particular posts or that they cannot be posted or transferred to the posts held by the petitioners.
In fact, it is the admitted position that the posts area mutually inter changeable.
Mr. Jaswant Singh appearing for the State of Haryana concedes that no post has been earmarked for deputationists and a person appointed by way of deputation can hold any one of the posts of Sub-Divisional Officers, etc.
In this situation, it is reasonable to infer that a deputationist performs the same duties as those performed by other persons working in the cadre.
It is also the admitted position that the qualifications laid down for recruitment in the Corporation are identical to those prescribed in the departments of the Govt.
In this situation, there is absolutely no basis for treating the petitioners differently from those working on deputation.
Consequently, it is held that there is no valid classification between the petitioners and such S.D.Os who are appointed by way of deputation.
11.
From the record as well as the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties it is further clear that the petitioners have continued to work in the pay scale of Rs. 2000-3500 with effect from January 1, 1986.
As against this, their counter-parts in, the Govt. and also the persons who are posted in the Corporation by way of deputation got the scale of Rs. 3000-4500 on completion of 5 years of service and are placed in the scale of Rs. 4100-5300 (to the extent of 20% of the posts) on completion of 12 years of service, the petitioners were obviously placed at a disadvantageous position.
There being no basis for an classification, the action of the respondents suffers from the vice of invidious discrimination and cannot be sustained.
12.
Learned counsel for the respondents points out that the Corporation is running in losses and it cannot meet the financial burden on account of revision of scales of pay.
Learned counsel for the petitioners states that the reasons for these losses are the political bounties given at the time of Election.
The Corporation digs tubewell and undertakes lining of water-courses/channels for improving irrigation facilities in the rural areas.
The cost of these works has to be paid by the landowners.
However, at the time of Election, the amount of money due from the farmers are waived off as a result of which the Corporation is unable even to recover its actual cost.
13.
Whatever may be the factual position, there appears to be no basis for the action of the respondents.
The Govt. deputes its officers to the Corporation which is compelled to pay them higher wages than those that are permitted in case of the petitioners.
If the Govt. feels that the Corporation is running in losses, measures of economy, reduction of posts or recall of deputationists may provide the possible solution to the problem.
However, so long as the posts exist and are manned, there appears to be no justification for granting the petitioners a scale of pay lower than that sanctioned for those appointed by way of deputation.
Furthermore, nothing has been produced on record or shown to me at the time of hearing from the Official files, which may indicate that there is any difference between the petitioners and those employed in the Govt. offices or sent to the Corporation by way of deputation.
In fact, the sequence of events clearly shown that the employees of the Corporation have been treated at par with those in Govt. at the time of revision of scales of pay on every occasion.
It is the admitted position that the endorse of pay were initially revised with effect from April 1, 1979 and, thereafter, on January 1, 1986.
On both these occasions, the pay scales of the employees of the Corporation were at par with those in Govt.
It is thus an established fact that both were similarly situated.
Thereafter, nothing appears to have happened which may justify the differential treatment.
14.
In view of the above, it is held that the action of the respondents in not greeting the revised scale of pay to the petitioners with effect from May 1, 1989 suffers from the view of discrimination and is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
The next contention raised by the learned counsel for the petitioners related to the jurisdiction of the Govt. to interfere in the affairs of the Corporation.
The contention is not wholly without merit.
However, in view of my decision on the first question, it does not appear to be necessary to examine this matter in detail.
15.
Accordingly, this writ petition is allowed.
It is held that the petitioners will be entitled to the revised scales of pay with effect from May 1, 1989 as has been granted to the persons working in the Corporation by way of deputation or in the Public Works Department of the Govt.
The needful shall be done within 4 months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
They will be entitled to all consequential benefits.
In case, the needful is not done within the aforesaid time, the petitioners shall be entitled to the payment of the arrears etc. along with interest @ 12% per annum from the date of accrual to the date of actual payment.
However, in the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.