BL Yadav, J - Whether the principles of natural justice would apply even though not specifically provided under Section 18 of the UP Secondary Education Services Commission and Selection Board Act, 1982 (Compendiously the Act) and under the provisions of Paragraph 7 of the UP Secondary Education Services Commission (Removal of Difficulties) Order, 1981 (Compendiously the first Removal of Difficulties) Order, as amended by the provision of Paragraph 3 of the UP Secondary Education (Removal of Difficulties) (Fourth) Order, 1976, is, a short question for determination.
2.
The present petition, under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, has been filed by the petitioner No. 1, a LT Grade teacher, who has been promoted as Lecturer in History on ad hoc basic in Suhawal Intermediate College, Ghazipur, to a vacancy which arose on account of one Shri Ram Harsh Rai, a Lecturer in History, having attained age of superannuation on 30th of June, 1989.
He was appointed an ad hoc lecturer under Section 11 of the Act, and in the vacancy caused by the appointment of the petitioner No. 1 was appointed in LT Grade.
The relief sought in the petition is that the impugned order dated 11th of April, 1990, (Annexure `6') holding respondent No. 4, Ram Jatan Singh to be entitled for promotion in place of petitioner, be quashed by issuing a writ of certiorari.
3.
The factual matrix of the case is that on the post of Lecturer vacancy arose on account of one Sri Ram Harsh Rai, Lecturer in History, having attained the age of superannuation on 3061989.
There was no regularly selected candidate.
Consequently, the management notified the vacancy to the Commission in view of the provision of the Act, but the appointment could not be made.
Consequently, in view of the provisions of Section 18 of the Act.
Petitioner No. 1, who was MA in History, was promoted as Lecturer in History on ad hoc basis from amongst the Teachers in LT Grade possessing qualification prescribed under the Intermediate Education Act, 1921.
The respondent No. 4, who was in LT Grade and was teaching Biology etc. made a representation which was referred to the Deputy Director of Education, under paragraph 7 of the first Removal of Difficulties Order, has been decided by the impugned order on the basis of Seniority as the respondent No. 4, who was teaching Science subject, has obtained MA, decree in History, but without any information or notice to the petitioner.
4.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner Sri GK Singh, urged that the petitioner was not afforded any opportunity of hearing not he was given any notice about the representation of respondent No. 4, nor he was heard before passing the impugned order.
Consequently, the principles of natural justice have been violated.
5.
Learned Counsel for the respondent No. 4, refuted the submission made by the learned Counsel for the petitioner and urged that under the circumstances of the case principles of natural justice was just a technical point the petitioner suffered no loss on account of the fact at he was not served with any notice nor he was heard.
Counter-affidavit has been filed by the respondent No. 4.
The paras 20 to 23 of the petition stating that before passing the impugned order, the petitioner was not served with any notice nor he was heard has been replied in para 5 of the counter-affidavit.
It is to the effect that the order passed by the Regional Deputy Director of Education, was not against the principles of natural justice as the order was passed after inviting comments from the District Inspector of Schools.
The petitioner was not entitled to be promoted as Lecturer since he is junior to respondent No. 4.
It was also urged that the petitioner has an alternative remedy inasmuch as against the order of Deputy Director of Education, the petitioner must have filed an appeal before the Director of Education in view of the provision of the amended provision of Para 7 of the UP Secondary Education Services Commission (Removal of Difficulties) Order, 1981.
6.
Having scrutinized submissions of learned counsel the points for determinations are as to whether before deciding representation of respondent No. 4, against an order promoting the petitioner as ad hoc Lecturer in History, the principle of natural justice would apply even though not specifically provided and whether the petition deserves to be dismissed on the ground of alternative remedy.
7.
As regards the first point, suffice it to say, that the Maxim "'audi alteram partem" connotes that no one be condemned unheard.
This principle has been extended even though there is no specific mention about it in relevant provision of the statute.
Where the legal rights of the persons are affected by any order before passing it the person concerned must be served with a notice and afforded a reasonable opportunity of hearing.
8.
In Cleveland Board of Education v. James Louder Mill, 470 US 532; 84 L Ed 2nd 494 (p. 503), it was held :  "As essential principle of due process is that a deprivation of life, liberty of property be receded by notice and opportunity of hearing appropriate to the nature of case (See Mullane v. Central Hanover Batik & Trust, 339 US 306; 94 L Ed. 865), we have described that the root requirement of the due process clause as being hat an individual be given an opportunity for hearing before he is deprived of any significant property interest (See Boddie v. Connecticut, 401 US 371; 28 L Ed. 2nd 113).
9.
In Sita Ram v. District Inspector of Schools, 1985 UPLBEC 783, relying on Yogendra Tewari's case, 1984(10) ALR 285 (SC), it was observed :  "Along course of decision, beginning with Dr. Bentley's case (1723) Str.
557 and ending with some very recent cases, establish that although there are no positive words in the statute requiring that the party shall be heard, yet justice of common law will supply omision of the legislature.
The principle of audio alteram partem which mandates that no one shall be condemned unheard is part of rules of natural justice."
Natural justice is a great harmonising principle intended to invest law with fairness and to secure justice and over the years it has grown into a widely pervasive rule affecting large areas of administrative actions.
10.
In Harbhajan Singh Dhalla v. Union of India, (1986)4 SCC 678 (688), it was observed by the Apex Court that :-  "If the administrative authorities are enjoined to decide the rights of the parties, it is essential that such administrative authority should accord fair and proper hearing to the person affected by the order and give sufficiently clear and explicit reasons.
Such reasons must be on relevant material factors objectively considered".
11.
In Union of India v. Amrik Singh, AIR 1991 SC 564 : 1991(2) S.C.T.
190, it was observed : "Although there are no positive words in the statute requiring that the party shall be heard, yet the justice of common law will supply the omission of the legislature."
12.
In my opinion not only legal rights, but fundamental rights of the petitioner under Article 19(1)(g) and under Article 21 of the Constitution were involved.
13.
There is a significant rather constitutional aspect of the matter.
In my opinion under Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution the petitioner, and also respondent No. 4, has got a fundamental right to practice any profession or to carry on any occupation.
Teaching profession is covered by expression any occupation.
Article 19(1)(g) may be conjointly read with Article 21 of the Constitution Article 21 is couched in the language having very wide sweep.
It may be emphasised that the right to life conferred by Article 21 includes right to livelihood.
Article 39(9) of the Constitution provides that State shall direct its policy towards securing its citizens to have the right to an adequate means of' livelihood Article 41 provides that the State with its economic capacity shall make effective provisions for securing the right to work.
To deprive a citizen from promotion due to him is to deprive him from right to livelihood.
14.
In case judicial or quasi judicial tribunal or authority was enjoined to decide the rights of the parties, rather their fundamental rights pertaining to occupation and livelihood (included in the expression life) the authority must observe sacred and celebrated principles of natural justice by serving a notice and affording reasonable opportunity of hearing to the affected person and pass a reasoned order, even if the principles of natural justice was not specifically mentioned in the relevant provisions of the Statute.
This sacred and celebrated rule must be read into the Statute as in built provision.
This rule must be taken to be a necessary postulate in all cases wherein a decision is to be taken affecting a person's rights, rather a fundamental right unless such rule is specifically excluded by Statue Act and Para 7 of the First Removal of Difficulties Order, 1981, and other relevant provisions do not exclude the principle of natural justice have been violated in deciding the representation of respondent No. 4, without affording an opportunity of hearing to the petitioner.
15.
The second point is about the petition being barred by alternative remedy, suffice it to say that the petition has been admitted, interim stay was also granted on 2nd of May, 1990, and the operation of the impugned order was stayed.
Plea of alternative remedy shall apply to be a bar upon the facts and circumstances of the case (See Hirday Narain v. Income Tax Officer, AIR 1971 SC 33).
16.
It is well settled that the plea of alternative remedy does not create absolute bar against the petition being entertained.
In the present case petition need be dismissed on the ground of alternative remedy.
17.
In view of the premises aforesaid petition succeeds and is allowed.
The impugned order dated 11th of April, 1990 (Annexure `6') is quashed.
Under the circumstances the case need not be dragged on for too long and what is required is expedition.
18.
The Deputy Director of Education is directed to decide the representation of respondent No. 4, Ram Singh, afresh after serving the petitioners with the copy of the representation, obtaining their comments, and after affording opportunity of hearing to them, within a period of 120 days from the date a certified copy of this judgment and order is furnished before him.
Till the disposal of representation, however, the status quo shall continue.
There shalt, however, be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.