RS Mongia, J (Oral) - In 1982, the petitioner joined Diploma in Homoeopathic Medicine and Surgery Course (in short D.H.M.S), at Homoepathic Medical College, Chandigarh.
The course is of four years duration.
The examination Authority is the Council of Homoeopathic System of Medicine, Punjab, which awards Diploma to the successful candidates.
After passing the Ist year and 2nd years' examination and completing the third year's course, the petitioner appeared in the 3rd year annual examination in the year 1987.
He got reappear in two subjects.
He sat in the supplementary examination in the year 1987 to clear the two subjects in which he got reappear, but was not successful in clearing any of the reappear papers.
He again appeared in the annual examination of 1988 to clear two subjects of 3rd year, but could only clear one of the two papers.
However, in the supplementary examination held in the year 1988, he cleared that paper also.
When the petitioner had appeared in the annual examination of 3rd year in the year 1987 and got reappear in two subjects, he was allowed to continue his studies in the 4th year and even when he failed to clear those two subjects in the supplementary examination held in 1987, his candidature in the 4th year was not cancelled and the College Authorities allowed him to complete the course of 4th year.
2.
When the petitioner wanted to sit in the 4th year (i.e.
Final year) annual examination, which was to be held in January, 1990, the Council did not permit him to sit in the examination on the ground that after the petitioner had failed to clear the reappear papers of 3rd year in the supplementary examination held in 1987, he could not have been allowed by the College Authorities to continue his studies in the 4th year.
This, according to the learned counsel for the respondent, is in accordance with Regulation 6 of the Punjab Homoeopathic Practitioners (Second Amendment) Regulations, 1983.
According to this Regulation, the candidature of a student in the higher class has to be cancelled if he fails to clear all the papers of the lower class in the first supplementary examination.
Such a candidate has to undergo the entire course of the higher class after clearing all the papers of the lower class.
3.
As after clearing all the reappear papers of the lower class, the petitioner was not permitted to sit in the annual examination of 4th year in January, 1990, he filed the present writ petition.
The Motion Bench while issuing notice of motion on 11th January, 1990, permitted the petitioner to take the 4th year (final year) examination.
Ultimately, the writ petition was admitted on 5th June, 1990, and the Motion Bench directed that the result of the petitioner be declared.
4.
The petitioner got reappear in three subjects and the Council permitted the petitioner to sit in the supplementary examination held in July 1990 in the said three subjects.
When the result was declared in February, 1991, the petitioner still could not clear one of the three papers and he sat in the examination held in March, 1991 to clear the third reappear paper.
That result has not been declared so far.
5.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that in the present case, the fact remains that the petitioner was permitted to complete the 4th year course though without passing in all the papers of 3rd year, though according to Regulation 6 of the Regulations, his continuation in the 4th year class after supplementary examination of 1987 should have been disallowed by the College Authorities as he had failed to clear all the papers of 3rd year.
6.
On the other hand, Mr. Jindal, learned counsel for Respondent No. 1, submitted that the continuation of the petitioner in 4th year class after the supplementary examination of 1987, was against Regulation 6 and the College Authorities should have cancelled his admission of 4th year after he had failed to clear all the subjects upto the supplementary examination held in 1987.
According to him the petitioner cannot derive any benefit of completing the 4th year course in the above manner.
7.
Though no fault can be found with the interpretation of Regulation 6 as put by the learned counsel for Respondent No. 1, but on peculiar facts of this case, I am of the view that the petitioner had completed the 4th year course, though not strictly under the Regulation.
However, the fact remains that the petitioner underwent the entire 4th year course.
Further, by now the petitioner has appeared in the 4th year examination in all the papers and only result of one paper remains to be declared.
This examination of the 4th year reappear paper was also taken by the petitioner as far back as March, 1991.
Considering all these circumstances, I am of the view that the petitioner's attendance of course of 4th year may be considered as regular on facts and circumstances of this case and his result of 4th year should be declared.
For the foregoing reasons, this writ petition is allowed and the respondents are directed to declare the result of the petitioner of the 4th year examination within a fortnight from the receipt of the copy of this order.
There will be no order as 10 costs.
Petition allowed.