Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner retired as Inspector, Cooperative Societies on October 3l, 1982.
At that time, he had completed a service of 32 years, 4 months and 5 days which qualified for pension.
His pension was accordingly fixed.
With effect from April 26, 1985, Rule 4.12-A of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Vol-II was amended.
It was inter alia provided that "in respect of class III and class IV employees, who are required to undergo departmental training relating to jobs before they are put on regular employment, training period upto one year may be treated as qualifying service for pension, if the training is followed immediately by regular appointment."
2.
Relying on this Rule, the petitioner claims that with effect from April 26, 1985, his pension has to be redetermined as he had undergone 15 months training prior to his appointment as Inspector.
3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, the claim has been controverted on the ground that the Rule was amended after the petitioner's retirement on April 26, 1985 and its such, the petitioner is not entitled to the benefit claimed by him.
4.
It is undoubtedly correct that the Rule is not retrospective in its operation.
However, the petitioner had admittedly undergone more than one year's training immediately prior to his appointment as Inspector, Cooperative Societies.
If a person who retires on or after April 26, 1985 is entitled to the benefit of the period of training towards the fixation of his pension, there is no basis for denying it to the petitioner.
This matter is settled by the decision of this Court in Justice SS Dewan (retd.
C.J.
v. Union of India & Ors. 1991(2) PLR 501 : 1991(3) S.C.T.
209.
5.
In view of the reasons in the aforesaid decision, the writ petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to re-fix the petitioner's pension after taking into account the period of one year as admissible under Rule 412A wef.
26.4.1985.
The needful shall be done within three months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.