KP Bhandari, J - The petitioner is a student of MSc.
in the Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana.
She joined the University for MSc.
degree in Microbiology in the year 1988.
This course is of two years duration i.e. 1988-89 and 1989-90.
The course is divided into four semesters.
The course is governed by the Semester Rules laid down in the prospectus.
Provisions of Rule 52, 613, 76, 762, 763, 63 reads as follows;  Rule 52 : Advisory system for Post-graduate Students.
A major adviser shall be assigned to each postgraduate student by the Head of the Department in which the student is doing his major work.
Besides, there shall also be an Advisory Committee for each student which will be appointed by the Dean, Post-graduate Studies, on the recommendations of the Advisor through the Head of the Department.
The members of the Advisory Committee shall be chosen from the Post-graduate faculty.
For a student preparing for the Master's degree, the Advisory Committee shall consist of two members of the Faculty representing the major subject.
One of them will be Major Advisor who will also be Chairman of Committee and one will represent the minor subject provided, however, that the Dean, Post-graduate studies may add one or more members of this Committee."
Rule 613 provides as under :  "Rule 613 : Significance of Grades :  While grading a student the instructor shall make use of letter grades.
The significance of the points carried by the letter grades shall be as follows :  FOR UNDER-GRADUATES A A Excellent B 3 Good C 2 Fair D 1 Pass but not satisfactory F 0 Fail I - Incomplete S - Satisfactory US - Unsatisfactory W - Withdrawn NC - Non-Credit Course.
FOR POST-GRADUATE A 4 Excellent B 3 Good C 2 Fair F 0 Fail I - Incomplete S - Satisfactory US - Unsatisfactory W - Withdrawn NC - Non-Credit Course.
Rule 76 Provides as under :  "Rule 76 : Minimum Grade Point Average Requirement 761, Requirement of GOOD STANDING for Graduation.
The minimum overall grade point average requirements at the undergraduate level shall be 200 (400 basis) provides that the student must have taken minimum of 24 and 48 credit hours of courses at the end of 2nd and 4th Semester respectively.
The minimum overall grade point average required at the Postgraduate level shall be 300 (400 basis).
A student who has achieved this minimum requirement, shall be deemed to be on GOOD STANDING."
Rule 762 and 763 provides as under :  "Rule 762 Scholastic Probation.
If a student fails at the end of a semester to achieve the minimum standard prescribed under Rule 761 above, he shall be placed on SCHOLASTIC PROBATION during the semester immediately following.
Rule 763.
Repeating Courses in order to fulfil the minimum requirement.
2.
An undergraduate student getting 'D' grade in a course may repeat that course with the prior permission of the Dean subject to the following conditions :  (a) The repetition shall be allowed only once.
(b) The repetition shall be permitted only to enable the student to fulfil the minimum grade point average requirement and not for the improvement of his grade point average or for enabling him to qualify for the award of scholarship/fellowship or for competing for a certificate of merit or for a position in the University.
(c) When a student repeats a course after getting grade 'F' or if permitted to repeat a course after getting grade 'D' as the case may be, credits corresponding to that course shall be counted only once for the graduation requirements.
(d) A student on scholastic probation be allowed to repeat a course only once and revised grade shall be mentioned if there is improvement in this grade otherwise the original grade 'D' shall stand.
But in the official record of the student maintained in the Registrar's office both the earlier and the grade obtained after repetition improved or otherwise shall be indicated by the letter 'r' written above the letter grade which he obtained after such repetition.
But, till such time as student repeats the course the original grade and credits shall be used to compute the overall grade point average.
If a student even after repeating a 'D' grade and after having studies all the courses prescribed for the given programme does not obtain an DG.P.A.
of 200 he shall be allowed to repeat 'D' in other course(s) in which he has obtained 'D' till he obtained DGPA of 200 to complete his degree requirement subject to provision of semester rule 72.
(e) The restriction contained clause (a) of this rule shall apply in case of an undergraduate student getting 'D' grade.
An undergraduate or post-graduate student who is on good standing, but who might get 'F' grade in a particular course may be allowed to repeat that course without any such restriction."
Rule 63. reads as under :  "Rule 63.
Evaluation of the Thesis and, Final Examination for MSc/M.V.Sc/M.Tech./Ph.D  The thesis shall be evaluated and the final oral examination conducted by an examining committee constituted as under :  (i) Student's Advisory Committee.
(ii) External Examiner (s) specialists in the student's major field to be appointed by the Dean, Post-Graduate Studies from a penal recommended by the Head of Department.
Procedure  (i) Thesis writing : The thesis writing be approved only after a seminar is given by the student presenting all the date and its analysis.
After the approval of the Advisory Committee on the quantum of work done, the thesis should be written.
(ii) Approval of the Thesis Draft : The draft of the thesis should be submitted to the members of the Advisory Committee before the submission of thesis to the Dean.
A certificate to this effect should be given to the Dean at that time by the members of the Advisory Committee and such thesis will be accepted.
The Preliminary Examination should have been passed at least nine months earlier.
(iii) The thesis be first sent to the External Examiner for his examination.
He should submit a report commenting on the thesis and whether he recommends acceptance or rejection.
If he recommends acceptance, then the oral examination be arranged.
If he rejects, this may be placed before the Advisory Committee for a decision.
If the Advisory Committee accepts the recommendations, then thesis be rejected.
If the Advisory Committee does not accept, then the thesis be re-examined by another External Examiner whose decision for conducting oral or not will be final.
(iv) If thesis is not accepted or the final oral is found unsatisfactory, the student will have to re-submit or reappear in the following semester (nor earlier than three months).
(v) A student who fails to appear in the final oral examination should apply for arranging a fresh examination through the Head of the Department.
If the circumstances are beyond the control of the student the Dean, Post Graduate Studies may permit the re-examination within the same semester.
If, however, the Dean, Post Graduate Studies is not satisfied with circumstances stated by the student, the student shall register for one more semester and the examination shall be arranged on the payment of fresh thesis/dissertation fee."
3.
The petitioner secured over all grade point average DGPA as 308 as per Semester Report/Result Card issued by the University on 1931990.
A copy of the same is annexed as Annexure P/1 to the writ petition.
In view of the result declared by the University on 1951990, the petitioner became entitled to submit her thesis under the rules.
The petitioner after completing all the formalities submitted her thesis on 17121991.
The thesis fee was accepted vide Receipt No. 18 dated 2311992.
Thereafter viva examination was to be arranged for awarding the degree.
Suddenly the University refused to conduct the viva examination.
The petitioner approached the authorities and she was told that no viva has been arranged in her case as according to the University there was a mistake in calculating the DGPA of the petitioner on the basis of the calculation DGPA in the year 1988 and as such the result declared by them in 1990 was not correct.
No objection was taken by the authorities during the last 1-1/2 years.
Suddenly, the authorities had raised this issue regarding the mistake in calculation.
The petitioner claimed that if the authorities had told about any shortage of marks then she could have improved.
It is also averred in the writ petition is that the petitioner got married with a boy from Norway on 29121991.
Due to the delay in holding viva examination she had not been able join the matrimonial home.
Her married life is being affected as result of the action of the respondents.
It is also averred in the writ petition that the petitioner submitted her thesis on 17121991 which was duly received.
She also paid the thesis fee as everything was found to be in order.
Now at this stage respondents cannot refuse to conduct the viva.
It is further averred that action of the respondents in withholding the viva test of the petitioner for the purposes of awarding MSc.
degree is wholly arbitrary, unreasonable and capricious.
In the writ petition a prayer has been made that a writ of mandamus should be issued to the respondents to conduct the viva according to Rule 63 for the purposes of awarding MSc.
degree to the petitioner.
A prayer has also been made the respondents should be restrained from changing the result card issued vide Annexure P/1 in the year 1990 at this stage.
Respondent Nos. 1 to 3 have filed the written statement through the Registrar of the University.
Broadly, the facts stated in the writ petition are admitted.
The stand taken is that in the preparation of the result of the petitioner, there was a mistake and the card (Annexure P/1) was wrongly issued.
In this view of the matter, as the petitioner does not have the necessary grade no viva test could be arranged for her.
4.
The petitioner has filed rejoinder to the writ.ten statement wherein it is stated that Annexure P/1 result card issued by the University in the year 1990 shows that her overall grade point is average as 308.
Overall performance is good.
The petitioner has appended proforma for statement of draft thesis as Annexure P/2.
A perusal of Annexure P/2 shows that it bears a certificate that the petitioner has completed his course/research requirements for the award of MSc degree There is also a note 'final' thesis to be submitted after four weeks of the rough thesis submitted to the Advisory Committee.
The Head of the Department issued a certificate, (Annexure P/3) certifying that the petitioner has completed all course/research requirements for the award of MSc.
degree.
The name of the External Examiner was also recommended.
Annexure P/4 is the forwarding note of the Head of the Department stating that the petitioner has delivered her thesis on 23121991 at 10.00 A.M. before the faculty of the department.
It is also certified that quality and quantum of her research work was found satisfactory for the submission of her thesis entitled "Processing of substandard fruits for ethanol production".
Annexure P/5 is the certificate issued by the Members of the Advisory Committee that they have read the thesis/dissertation and that suggestions made for improvement have been incorporated.
5.
The only stand in the written statement is that now it has come to the notice of the University that the result card (Annexure P/1) was wrongly issued as there was a mistake in calculation.
The stand taken by the University at this stage if accepted will mean that all the studies of the petitioner for two years, that is, 1989-89 and 1989-90 for conferment of MSc.
degree will go waste.
She will have to start afresh.
If at the right time, the University had pointed out the petitioner could have improved her grade.
Now, at this stage, the respondent-University is estopped from withdrawing the result card (Annexure P/1) and altering the result notified to the petitioner and on the basis of which the petitioner has prepared the thesis.
The thesis have been duly accepted and only viva test is to be performed.
6.
Considering the case of a student, I cannot stand upon technical objections.
I have to see the practical affect on the career of the student.
If the stand of the University is accepted it will be highly inequitable, unjust and improper and it will completely undermine the academic career of the petitioner.
Now, it is well settled that Article 14 of the Constitution ensures that action of the executive and legislative authorities must be reasonable, not arbitrary and non discriminatory, See Ramana v.
I.A.A., AIR 1979 SC 1628, Ajay v. Khalid, AIR 1981 SC 487 and Royappa v. State of Tamil Nadu, AIR 1981 SC.
7.
Another question for consideration is whether the action of the University is just and fair and is in consonance with equity.
A Division Bench of this Court consisting of SS Sodhi and GC Garg, JJ.
In Kamal Masih v. Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, 1992(1) Services Cases Today, 455 observed in para 5 as follows :  "5.
In dealing with this matter the point that stands out as of material significance is that there is no hint or suggestion of the petitioner having obtained admission by any concealment or misrepresentation of facts.
In the absence thereof while, no doubt, the question whether the qualification possessed by a candidate is recognized by the University or renders him eligible for admission is one solely for the University to consider.
It cannot, however, be permitted after having granted admission to cancel it on any of these grounds after such passage of time as would put the candidate to irreparable harm."
Same view has been taken in Kumari Veena Rani v. State of Haryana, 1991(2) RSJ 181; Kashmir Kaur v. Guru Nanak Dev Univ., 1991(3) SCT 253; Meenakshi Kochhar v. State of Punjab, 1992(2) RSJ 787 : 1992(2) SCT 677 and Subhash Chander v. Guru Kanshi Institute, 1990(1) RSJ 805.
If at this stage I permit the University to recall the result card (Annexure P/1) and cancel the same, this will cause irreparable harm to the petitioner and it will grossly hamper her academic career.
Such a harsh action cannot be permitted when there is no fault of the petitioner and there is no allegation that the petitioner has in any manner mis-represented or concealed any facts.
It is the responsibility of the relevant authority/University to issue the result care after proper card and caution.
Once the result has been declared by the University, the University cannot be permitted to alter the result.
Such an action will be grossly unfair, unjust and arbitrary.
8.
In my opinion, the University is estopped for altering its stand.
The result declared by the university vide Annexure P/1 forms the basis for the assessment of her thesis and for declaration of her final result.
9.
Article 14 of the Constitution clearly provides that authorities should not act in unreasonable and capricious manner while dealing with the people which affect their civil rights.
If the respondents are allowed to alter the result declared vide Annexure P/1, this will be very unjust unfair and unequitable.
10.
As a result of the foregoing discussion, I am of the opinion that the writ petition deserves to be allowed .
In view of the above, this writ petition is allowed with no order as to costs.
A writ of mandamus is issued directing the respondents to not to alter the result declared vide Annexure P/1.
Respondents are also directed to arrange for viva examination of the petitioner expeditiously preferably within two months from today.
The respondents are restrained from withdrawing the result card (Annexure P/1).
For the purpose of conferment of MSc.
degree they are to accept the result card (Annexure P/1).
Petition allowed