GR Majithia, J - The petitioner has impugned the termination order contained in Memo No. Arch-81/10718 dated September 30, 1981, issued by the Chief Architect, Haryana, Chandigarh, in this petition under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
2.
The petitioner was offered a temporary post of Assistant Draftsman in the Department of Architecture, Haryana vide Memo No. Arch-79/7006/E2, dated August 3, 1979.
The appointment was made purely on ad hoc basis for a period of six months or such less period for which her services were actually required.
On the same date, another letter was issued as contained in Memo No. Arch-70/7006/E2, dated August 3, 1979 stating that the appointment of the petitioner would be purely temporary on ad hoc basis for a period of six months or till such time an approved candidate of the Subordinate Services Selection Board joins, whichever was earlier and that her appointment would be against the reserved post meant for Scheduled Caste.
The petitioner's service were terminated on September 30, 1981 and the said order is under challenge in this petition.
3.
Written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents by the Chief Architect, Haryana.
It is admitted that the petitioner was appointed on temporary basis against a temporary vacancy for a period of six months.
On the advice of the S.S.S.
Broad, it was mentioned in the appointment order that the appointment was made against the post reserved for Schedule Caste.
The SSS Board had pointed out the shortfall of notified vacancies.
This was necessitated to clarify the reserved post for Scheduled Caste and Ex-servicemen candidates.
In order to show the exact position of the petitioner in the roster of vacancies, necessary correction was made in the appointment letter to indicate that she had been appointed against the reserved post.
She was allowed to continue for two years against the reserved post meant for Scheduled Caste.
Since the appointment was purely temporary, her services were terminated since these were no longer required.
4.
I have gone through the record and find no merit in the writ petition.
The petitioner was appointed purely on ad hoc basis for a period of six months against a reserved post meant for Scheduled Caste candidates or till such time an approved candidate of the SSS Board joined service, whichever was earlier or the appointment of the petitioner was recommended by the SSS Board.
It appears that the appointment of the petitioner was not recommended by the SSS Board and her services was terminated when the approved candidates were available for joining the service.
The right of the petitioner follows from the contract of service which is embodied in the letter of appointment.
The petitioner's appointment was purely on ad hoc basis for six months.
After the expiry of the said period, she had no right to continue in service.
The view taken by me finds all support from a Full Bench judgment of this Court in Sant Ram Bhal v. The State of Haryana and another, ILR 1992(1) Pb & Har.
546 : 1992(1) SCT 534, where Hon'ble the Chief Justice BC Verma (as he then was) speaking for the Bench observed thus:-  "apparently, therefore, in terms of the order, the petitioner had no right to the post of the Veterinary and Livestock Development Assistant and that appointment could be terminated on the expiry of nine months or on the joining of the recommendee of the SSS Board and without assigning any reason.
This is why what exactly has been done vide Annexure P 3.
The petitioner, in our opinion, had acquired no right to hold that post."
For the reasons stated above, there is no writ in the petition.
The same is dismissed, but with no orders as to costs.
Petition dismissed.