Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioners are working as linemen on workcharged basis in the Bhakra Beas Management Board.
They were initially appointed in the pay scale of Rs. 400-600, which has since been revised and raised to Rs950-1800 with effect from January l, 1986.
It is averred that various persons, who were performing exactly the same and similar duties as the petitioners, have been placed in the scale of Rs. 1200-2100.
Aggrieved by this disparity in the scale of pay, the petitioners represented but having failed to achieve the desired result, they have approached this Court through the present petition.
2.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents.
It has been averred by way of a preliminary objection that the petitioners were appointed/promoted as workcharged linemen in the year 1979 to l985 in the pay scale of Rs. 400-660 as applicable to the workcharged employees.
They never raised any objection and voluntarily accepted the pay scales allowed to them.
According to the respondents, the petitioners are now estopped from making a grievance especially when they have been allowed the pay scale of Rs. 1200- 2100 with effect from January 1, 1989, viz the date from which they were brought on the regular cadre.
It has been further averred that the petition suffers from the vire of suppression and concealment of material facts.
According to the respondents, the workcharged employees are governed by the Certified Standing Orders, whereas the regular employees are governed under the Punjab Civil Services Rules.
The age of retirement of Class-III employees is 58 years, whereas workcharged employees continue till the age of 60 years.
The respondents maintain that "the degree of responsibility and duties of workcharged employees and regular employees also differ because of the nature of their appointment."
It has also been stated that on the constitution of the Board, a policy decision was taken "to adopt the Punjab Govt. Irrigation Department Pay Scales for workcharged employees and also pay scales meant for regular employees in its Irrigation (Civil Wing ) and Punjab State Electricity Board's pay scales for workcharged and regular employees working in the Power (Electrical) Wing of the respondent Board."
A copy of the decision of the Punjab a State Electricity Board has been produced alongwith the written statement.
On merits, it has been pointed out that "there is a qualitative difference in the degree of reliability and responsibility between the regular and workcharged employees who are governed by the different sets of service rules."
On these premises, the claim made on behalf of the petitioners has been contested.
3.
As for the objection regarding delay, it deserves notice that the averment made on behalf of the petitioners that they have submitted various representations, copies of which have been produced as Annexures P.l to P.6, has not been denied.
Further, in my view, the denial of scale of pay furnishes a continuing cause of action.
The employee suffers discrimination every day when he is denied something, which is being given to others and is actually his due also.
In such a situation, it cannot be said that the writ petition deserves to be dismissed on account of delay alone.
This is all the more so, as the petition was, in fact, admitted after notice to the respondents and after hearing the learned counsel on their behalf.
Accordingly, the plea raised on behalf of the respondents cannot be accepted.
4.
Equally lacking in merit is the objection that the petitioners are estopped from making a grievance in this behalf.
Keeping in view the prevailing situation, it cannot be denied that there is a large scale unemployment.
A person is forced to accept a job on whatever condition or terms it is offered to him.
This, however, cannot amount to a waiver of the right to equality enshrined in Articles l4 and l6 of the Constitution of India.
In fact, the constitutional provisions give a mandate to the State.
It is the duty of the State to treat all persons who are similarly situated in an identical manner.
The State cannot be absolved of this responsibility by any action of the citizen.
Consequently, even this plea cannot be sustained.
5.
Nor am I satisfied that the petitioners can be accused of suppressing or concealing a material fact.
Their primary grievance in the petition is that they have been denied equality in the matter of pay scales.
I am unable to hold that they have withheld any information relevant for deciding this limited question.
6.
Coming to the merits of the controversy, it appears that the petitioners are working as linemen.
They were initially placed in the pay scale of Rs. 400-600 which has since been revised and raised to Rs. 950-1800 with effect from January l, 1986.
It is also correct that they have been placed in the scale of Rs. 1200-2100 with effect from January 1, 1989.
It is also the admitted position that persons appointed as linemen on regular basis were placed in the scale of Rs. 1200-2100 with effect from January 1, 1986.
Was there any basis for treating the members of the workcharged establishment differently from those who were in the regular cadre ?.
7.
The petitioners have categorically averred that they are performing exactly the same and similar duties as are being performed by other who were placed in the scale of Rs1200-2100.
The respondents have made a vague averment that there is a `qualitative difference' in the degree of reliability and responsibility.
It has not been shown that there is any difference in the matter of qualification, the duties or the responsibility between the members of the workcharged establishment and those working on regular basis.
No date has been furnished to show a valid basis for any classification.
Further the fact that years after their recruitment from November 15, 1979 to December 31, 1985, the petitioners have been placed in the regular establishment with effect from January 1, 1989 shows that they possessed the qualifications required for the post of lineman and were thus eligible and suitable for appointment as linemen in the regular cadre.
8.
It has been stated that the respondent-Board is following the decisions of the Punjab State Electricity Board.
A reference to the order dated April 26, 1990 passed by the Punjab State Electricity Board, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure Rl/l with the written statement, shows that even the Board had held that "the employees borne on work-charged establishment would be entitled to the revised scales of pay applicable to the regular employees ..." In such a situation, I am unable to discover any valid basis for the impugned action of the respondents.
9.
Accordingly, the writ petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to place the petitioners in the scale of Rs. 1200-2100 with effect from January 1, 1986 instead of January 1, 1989.
Their pay shall be refixed and the consequential benefits shall be granted to the petitioners.
However, in the circumstances of the case, the prayer for grant of interest on the arrears as made in the petition is declined.
Since the counsel for the petitioners has not appeared, I make no order as to costs.