VK Bali, J - Kailash Nath, in this writ petition, filed by him under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India seeks issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondent to consider his claim for promotion to the post of Chief Engineer from the date, his immediate junior was promoted as also to grant him all consequential benefits that may flow from such promotion.
2.
Brief facts need be noticed first.
Petitioner joined Irrigation Department as Temporary Engineer on November 17, 1956 and in due course of time was promoted and appointed to the ranks of Executive Engineer and Superintending Engineer in the years 1968 and 1978 respectively.
He claims unblemished service career spreading for a period of 33 years and is said to have earned excellent, very good and good reports all through his career.
He, on the basis of his excellent service record, was selected and appointed against the post of Director, Research and Training at Kurukshetra where he was made in charge of imparting training to Senior Engineers, besides organising research work.
On the retirement of three Chief Engineers namely Sarvshri VR Kalra, PS Rao and AR Gupta, three vacancies of Chief Engineers became vacant and the claim of petitioner is that against one of three posts, he had become due for being promoted but without considering his claim, Shri SN Vig, a person immediately below him in seniority was promoted.
Even though in the order of posting of Shri Vig Annexure P-6, it is mentioned that his services have been placed at the disposal of Bhakra Beas Management Board and he is posted there as Chief Engineer, the case of petitioner is that as a matter of fact it is a case of promotion and with a view that he is unable to stake his claim to the post of Chief Engineer, the word 'posting was deliberately mentioned.
It is further his case that in fact order Annexure P-5 was substituted on January 25, 1989 wherein it was specifically mentioned that he is promoted as Chief Engineer on ad hoc basis in the scale of Rs. 5900-6700 with effect from November 14, 1988.
The representations filed by the petitioner so as to consider him for promotion to the post of Chief Engineer filed prior and after the promotion of Shri Vig when did not bring any tangible result, the present writ petition was filed in this Court.
3.
The service conditions of the petitioner are governed by the Rules known as Punjab Service of Engineers, Class I, PWD (Irrigation Branch) Rules, 1964 and as per Rule 9, the members of the service are eligible for promotion to any of the posts in the service, namely Executive Engineers, Superintending Engineer and Chief Engineers which shall be made by selection on the basis of merit and suitability in all respects.
As per instructions issued from time to time, the petitioner contends that his case for promotion should have been processed for prior to September 30, 1988 when three vacancies became vacant and delay in the process of finalising the case of promotion of petitioner had resulted in cutting short his tenure as a Chief Engineer.
It requires to be mentioned here that the petitioner was ultimately promoted to the post of Chief Engineer on March 8, 1989.
In the alternative, the case of the petitioner is that he should at least be promoted from the date when his immediate Junior Shri Vig was promoted to the post of Chief Engineer as he was a step below him in seniority while promoting him, the case of petitioner was not even considered.
4.
The claim of petitioner has been opposed by the respondent and in the written statement filed through Shri Rattan Singh, IAS, Joint Secretary to Government, Haryana it has been pleaded that three posts of Chief Engineers fell vacant on October 1, 1988 and immediately thereafter the petitioner was considered alongwith four others immediate Senior Shri D.R.
Luthra.
The matter remained under consideration due to pendency of departmental cases under Rules 7 and 8 of the Punishment and Appeal Rules.
Vide order dated March 8, 1989, the immediate senior of petitioner Shri D.R.
Luthra, petitioner and his immediate junior Shri SN Vig were promoted and that from 1101988 to 831989, no person senior or junior to the petitioner was promoted.
It has also been averred that the entire record of the petitioner was not good as three of his confidential reports had adverse remarks.
Besides, he was issued show cause notice under Rule 8 and charge-sheet under Rule 7.
A resume of the adverse remarks for the last ten years conveyed to the petitioner has been placed on the records by mentioning synopsis thereof in Annexure R-1.
5.
They delay for processing the case for promotion has been explained in the written statement and in the facts as narrated, it is pleaded that it was on account of good reasons and not on account of motive.
In so far as promotion of Shri SN Vig is concerned, the case of respondent is that he was sent on deputation and he was selected as Chief Engineer by the Bhakra Beas Management Board authorities.
The said promotion did not confer any right of Chief Engineer on Shri Vig in Irrigation Department and he was Superintending Engineer for all intents and purposes.
In fact, as mentioned above, the case of respondent is that Shri SN Vig was promoted alongwith the petitioner.
6.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the considered view that in so far as the alternative plea of petitioner is concerned, the same has considerable merit and the petitioner deserves relief to the extent that his case should be considered on the basis of his record for promotion to the post of Chief Engineer from the date when his immediate Junior Shri Vig was so promoted.
The plea of respondent that Shri SN Vig was actually not promoted and was sent on deputation, on the material available on the record, has to be repelled.
It shall be seen from order Annexure P-5 that Shri SN Vig was initially placed at the disposal of Bhakra Beas Management Board on deputation to enjoy his present status as Superintending Engineer in the Bhakra Beas Management Board till he was promoted in his parent department but vide Annexure P-6 dated November 6, 1989 he was posted as Chief Engineer consequent upon orders placing his services at the disposal of Bhakra Beas Management Board.
The orders Annexure P-5 and Annexure P-6 were later substituted by another letter dated January 25, 1989 which reads as follows :-  'Consequent upon the orders issued by the Financial Commissioner and Secretary to Government of Haryana, Department of Irrigation and Power, Chandigarh, vide No. 28/10/88/IIEP dated 41188 placing the services of Er.
SN Vig, SE Irrigation Department, Haryana, at the disposal of BBMB for his appointment as Chief Engineer on ad hoc basis in the scale of Rs. 5900-6700 (Haryana Govt. scales) w.e.f.
14 Nov, 1988 i.e. the date of his assuming the charge of the office of the Chief Engineer/BSL, Sundernagar, thereby relieving Er.
PC Gandhi, Chief Engineer/Beas Dam, Talwara of the additional charge of the said office from the said date.
This ad hoc promotion as Chief Engineer shall not confer upon Er.
SN Vig any right of seniority, fixation of pay or other benefit in his parent Department in case of his repatriation to the parent department.
3.
It is certified that but for his promotion as Chief Engineer on ad hoc basis, Er.
SN Vig would have continued to officiate as Superintending Engineer.
4.
This order supersedes this office earlier order No. 896/PD-65/88/APD-I dated 6.11.88.
5.
This issues with the approval of the Chairman, Bhakra Beas Management Board."
A perusal of order aforesaid would show that from the date he assumed charge of the post of Chief Engineer, he was promoted as Chief Engineer.
It is true that it is also mentioned in the aforesaid order that this ad hoc promotion as Chief Engineer or will not confer upon SN Vig any right of seniority, fixation of pay or other benefit in his parent Department in case of his repatriation to his parent department but that would not make any difference for the reason that the word 'deputation' as mentioned in Annexure P-5 was deleted vide orders dated March 27, 1989.
There was a specific reason for doing so and that was that the sanctioned strength of Chief Engineers in the parent department on the relevant date was 10 as is clearly made out from Annexure P-17.
It is an order of Haryana and was issued on January 19, 1982.
By virtue of the aforesaid order, sanction was accorded under Rule 3 of the Rules of 1964 to the fixation of the strength of service of Haryana Services of Engineers Class I of P.W.D.
(Irrigation Branch) Haryana on January 1, 1983 but it was specifically mentioned in paragraph 2 that the sanctioned strength will stand automatically reduced to the extent of not reduction in the number of posts by the Beas Construction Board and Bhakra Management Board falling to this share of Haryana.
The sanctioned strength of Chief Engineer on January 1, 1981 was 10 in the department and the said strength was to be reduced by number of posts required by Beas Construction Board and Bhakra Management Board.
Thus, it would necessarily follow that any one who was to be sent to the Bhakra Beas Management Board had to go as Chief Engineer and that could not be by any method but for by way of promotion.
The petitioner appearing in person vehemently contends that simply with a view to bypass him and confer undue advantage upon Shri Vig, the order initially was styled in such a manner that the said order was substituted or modified when petitioner had since been promoted to the Post of Chief Engineer on 831989 or immediately before.
It may not be necessary to go into the allegation of mala fide alleged by the petitioner and suffice it to mention here that Shri Vig has come from the Board and for that precise reason, the order of his deputation or posting was later substituted or modified.
The petitioner has actually been promoted to the post of Chief Engineer although on 831989, on the same very record of service that was before the authorities at the time Shri Vig was promoted to the post of Chief Engineer but consideration of the case of the petitioner for promotion to the post of Chief Engineer has necessarily to be considered by the authorities which consideration was admittedly not done at the relevant time.
7.
For the reasons recorded, this petition succeeds and a direction is issued to the respondent to consider the case of the petitioner for promotion to the post of Chief Engineer when his immediate junior Shri Vig was promoted and in case he is found fit for promotion, he be given all the consequential benefits like arrears of pay on the promotional post from the date he ought to have been promoted as also other reliefs that may accrue to him under the law.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.