KP Bhandari, J - The petitioner-Ashwani Kumar Dhawan, Engineer (Electrical) in National Hydro Electric Power Corporation was appointed as Probationary Executive (Engineer) in the Corporation vide office order dated 25101982 (Annexure P-1).
The Corporation is a public sector of undertaking.
This Corporation is under the control of the Government and the work of the Corporation is generation of the hydro electric power.
This Corporation is State for the purpose of Article 12 of the Constitution of India.
The action of the Corporation is subject to the scrutiny of this court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
2.
The petitioner completed his probation period and was confirmed by the Corporation vide order dated 31.12.1983.
The petitioner was never conveyed and adverse report.
3.
According to the criteria laid down by the Corporation, an Engineer is to be promoted to the post of Assistant Manager after the completion of four years.
The petitioner completed four years, service in January, 1987 and thus he became eligible for promotion as Assistant Manager in January, 1987.
4.
The main grievance of the petitioner is that persons junior to him have been promoted as Assistant Manager from 111987 but the petitioner has been denied promotion illegally, arbitrarily and without assigning any reason.
It is pleaded that the action of the Corporation contravenes the provisions of Article 14 of the Constitution of the India.
The petitioner specifically pleaded that in the service record there was no adverse remarks.
The respondents have not denied the stand taken by the petitioner.
If there was any adverse remark, it was the duty of the Corporation to convey the same to the petitioner and give an opportunity of being heard.
No such remark were ever conveyed.
The Corporation has filed written statement.
It is admitted in the written statement that persons junior to the petitioner have been promoted with effect from 111987.
The only ground stated in the written statement is that Departmental Promotion Committee did not recommend the name of the petitioner but recommended the names of the juniors and they were promoted.
It has not been pleaded at all in the written statement that the appointing authority considered the record of service of the petitioner.
Nothing has been said to this effect in the written statement.
The Departmental Promotion Committee is the recommending body.
The powers of promotion cannot be divested by the appointing authority in favour of the Advisory body.
The recommendation of the Promotion Committee must be considered by the appointing authority.
Nothing has been disclosed in the written statement that even the record of the petitioner was summoned from the Corporation.
The only argument raised by the counsel for the corporation was that some of the reports were average and therefore, the petitioner was not promoted.
The average reports cannot be considered adverse.
Promotion can be denied only if the reports are adverse.
It must be noticed that according to the written statement, the criteria for determining suitability of an employees for promotion to the next higher post is seniority, competence, rectitude and antecedent as per official records.
Thus, the Corporation has wrongly denied promotion to the petition merely on the ground that some of the reports cannot be considered adverse.
In this view of the matter, the petitioner is entitled to be promoted with effect from 111987, the date on which persons junior to him were promoted.
It has been laid down in Shadi Lal v. The Deputy Commissioner, Gurgaon, 1974(1) SLR page 217 that selection be made on the basis of seniority, i.e., if the senior most eligible person has merit, he shall be selected irrespective of better merit of his juniors.
The promotion to the post of Assistant Manager is the first step of promotion.
This cannot be denied to the petitioner.
Normally first promotion is to be allowed on the basis of seniority if there is no adverse remarks.
In this view of the matter, the petitioner is entitled to be considered for promotion with retrospective effect from 111987.
The respondents are directed to promote the petitioner to the post of Assistant Manager with retrospective effect from the date his juniors have been promoted.
The petitioner will be entitled to all consequential benefits as a result of promotion.
This petition is accordingly accepted with costs and the writ of Mandamus is directed to be issued.