Harmohinder Kaur Sandhu, J - The short question for determination in this writ petition is whether the reversion of the petitioner from Class-I to Class-II post was illegal on the ground that after his promotion to Class-I service in the year 1976 a number of persons junior to him were promoted and while coming to the conclusion that in 1976 the petitioner was unsuitable his case for promotion along with persons junior to him, who were subsequently promoted, was not considered.
2.
Shri Arjan Dass petitioner jointed service as Agricultural Inspector on 2281950 in the Agriculture Department.
He was promoted to Punjab Agricultural Service Class-I vide order of promotion Annexure P/1 dated 2071976.
By another order dated 14101976 he was confirmed as Class-II Officer with effect from 191972.
His case was referred to the Punjab Public Service Commission for approval.
Since the time he was promoted he worked as Class-I officer.
From 2911977 to the year 1980-81, 25 Class-II officers junior to the petitioner were promoted to Class-I service.
The petitioner learnt that respondent No. 1 issued orders on 12101982 reverting him from Class-I to Class-II service on the ground that the Public Service Commission had not found him suitable for promotion to Class-I service.
The order was not conveyed to the petitioner but he obtained copy of the same unofficially which was Annexure P/3.
The petitioner alleged that the impugned order of reversion was patently illegal as persons Junior to him were continuing on higher post and his case was never considered vis-a-vis those persons.
Moreover, he could not be reverted after seven years on the ground that in 1976 on the basis of then existing record he had been found unsuitable.
The petitioner, thus, filed this writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for issuance of a writ of certiorari quashing the order Annexure P/3.
3.
In the return filed by the respondents it was maintained that case of the petitioner was referred to the Public Service Commission after his conditional promotion.
It was admitted that after the promotion of the petitioner his juniors were also promoted on the availability of the vacancies but as the petitioner stood promoted as PAS-Class I Officer, his case was not considered every time when the case of his juniors was considered and decided.
Actually in a separate case of inquiry against the petitioner the Government had decided to remove him from Government service.
The Public Service Commission also approved the action of the Government.
However on re-consideration it was decided that the penalty of removal from service being very harsh may be condoned and the petitioner may be punished otherwise in a suitable manner.
4.
The petitioner joined service in the year 1950 and it is contended that he has retired from service.
Reversion of the petitioner was stayed by this court on 29.10.1992, and he retired as Class-I Officer.
His reversion order was bad in the eyes of law on the short ground that his juniors stood promoted to Class-I posts and at the time the case of promotion of juniors was decided, the petitioners case was not considered alongwith them.
In the case of Dharam Jiwan Lal Chaudhary v. The State of Haryana, 1976 SLWR 490 this very question was in issue and it was held :  "The record of service of the appellant upto the date of his ordinal promotion alone was considered when he was reverted.
Admittedly several of his juniors were promoted subsequent to the original promotion of the appellant.
Even if the appellant was found unsuitable for promotion on the original date of his promotion he had a right to be considered for promotion on every one of the later occasions when his juniors were promoted.
Without such consideration he could not be reverted when his juniors were continuing in the superior posts.
Reversion in this case was held illegal.
5.
In the present case the petitioner was promoted on 29th July, 1976 to Class-I post vide order Annexure P-1.
As per return filed by the respondents it was admitted that persons junior to the petitioner were promoted subsequently on the availability of vacancies and at that time case of the petitioner was not considered.
Subsequent order reverting the petitioner is rendered illegal on this score alone.
I, therefore, accept this petition and quash the impugned order Annexure P/3.
Order accordingly.