GC Garg & AL Bahri, JJ.
- Petitioner Roshan Lal, an Inspector of Haryana Police has challenged in this writ petition notice of retirement, Annexure P-10 show cause notice for reversion to the substantive rank of Sub Inspector, Annexure P-7 and adverse remarks recorded against him for the period May 23, 1989 to October 31, 1989 contained in Annexure P-1.
2.
On notice of motion having been issued written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents.
Record has also been produced for perusal of the Court.
3.
From the pleadings of the parties, it emerges that adverse remarks of doubtful honesty, and average moral character, moral courage, reputation for fair dealing, attitude towards subordinates, and unsatisfactory initiative, personality, power of command and reliability were recorded against the petitioner on May 24, 1990.
He was adjudged as an average officer against the column of general remarks.
Besides the above remarks, certain other remarks adverse to the petitioner were also recorded.
The petitioner made a representation against the adverse remarks communicated to him.
The representation was partly accepted by order dated November 19, 1992.
The remarks referred to above were allowed to stand whereas certain other remarks which were adverse to the petitioners were ordered to be expunged.
Shortly, after the recording of adverse remarks, the petitioner was promoted as an officiating Inspector vide order dated November 5, 1990.
He was so promoted as the adverse remarks recorded against him were not available on the record and in any case, his representation against the adverse remarks was pending.
The case of the petitioner for retention in service beyond the age of 55 years happened to be considered and he was allowed to continue in service after the age of 55 years by order dated August 19, 1992, Annexure P-5.
On coming to know by the authorities that there were certain other adverse remarks against the petitioner which were of serious nature, he was served with a show cause notice, annexure P-7 wherein it was communicated to him that the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Gurgaon Range, Gurgaon was provisionally of the opinion that in view of the report of doubtful integrity, he deserves to be reverted to his substantive rank of Sub Inspector.
Before taking the proposed action the petitioner was served with a show cause notice affording him an opportunity to show cause against the proposed action.
It was after service of this notice, representation of the petitioner, as noticed above, was disposed of.
After disposal of the representation, the petitioner was served with a notice dated December 24, 1992, Annexure P-10 whereby he was informed that he would stand retired from service in public interest after the expiry of three months from the date of receipt of said notice.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner contended that after the order, Annexure P-5 allowing the petitioner to continue in service beyond the age of 55 years was passed, order Annexure P-10 retiring him from service before attaining the age of 58 years could not be passed by serving a three months' notice in public interest.
We find no merit in the contention of the learned counsel.
It was categorically stated in the return filed on behalf of the respondents that the annual confidential report of the petitioner for the period May 23, 1989 to October 31, 1989 was not placed in his Annual Confidential Reports' file and his representation against the adverse remarks was pending at the time when he was allowed to continue in service beyond the age of 55 years.
After disposal of the representation against the adverse remarks, the Government was competent to reconsider the matter and pass a fresh order, as has been done in the present case by serving a notice of retirement.
It cannot be said that once the Government decides to allow a government employee to continue in service beyond the age of 55 years, it cannot review its order and retire the employee before attaining the age of 58 years.
In the present case, the adverse remarks were available on the record and the representation against these remarks was dismissed on November 11, 1992.
After the disposal of representation the government was well within its right to reconsider the case of the petitioner for his retention in service beyond the age of 55 years and it did reconsider the matter and took the decision to retire him in terms of the service rules.
It was held in the State of Punjab and others v. Kulwantbir Singh, 1993(1) PLR Page 1 (FB) that unfavourable remarks pertaining to a government employee even after crossing of efficiency bar by him, could be taken into consideration for considering his continuance in service.
In other words, it was held that the entire service record of an employee can be examined for coming to this conclusion which deciding the matter pertaining to his retention in service or premature retirement after the requisite qualifying service.
In the present case, the adverse remarks happened to be recorded in May 1990 and the representation made against these remarks was disposed of on November 19, 1992.
It was thereafter that the case of the petitioner for premature retirement was considered and the petitioner can draw no support from the fact that he was allowed to continue in service beyond the age of 55 years.
State of Uttar Pardesh v. Chander Mohan Nigam, 1978(1) SLR 12, another case relied upon by the learned counsel for the petitioner in no way helps the petitioner and in any case, the said case was duly considered by the Full Bench in Kulwantbir Singh's case (supra).
In Baikunthnath Das v. The Chief District Medical Officer, 1992 Labour Industrial Cases 945 : 1992(2) SCT 92  , it has been held that compulsory retirement is not a punishment and it implies no stigma and the decision of compulsory retirement is a subjective decision on consideration of the entire service record by giving more importance to the record of the latter years.
The contention of the learned counsel in thus, rejected.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner further argued that petitioners representation against the adverse remarks was not decided within three months and in having not been done, it be deemed to have been accepted.
We are unable to accept this contention.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner could refer to no rule or law to show that the representation if not decided within three months would be deemed to have been accepted.
The government instructions are issued from time to time and even if the instructions are issued, providing that the representation against the adverse remarks be disposed of within three months, yet the petitioner gets no vested right in the absence of there being anything provided in the instructions that if the representation is not decided within three months, it will be deemed to have been accepted.
6.
Faced with the above situation, learned counsel for the petitioner vehemently contended that there was no material with the authorities for recording adverse entries against the petitioner.
We have gone through the service record of the petitioner shown to us at the time of hearing and we are satisfied that the adverse reports were based on some material and such material has been disclosed by the Superintendent of Police while making comments on the representation of the petitioner and the representation against the adverse remarks was disposed of the competent authority after looking at the comments of the Superintendent of Police.
7.
It is not necessary to consider the effect of notice served upon the petitioner to show cause as to why he be not reverted to the rank of Sub Inspector as no order adverse to the petitioner on the basis of the said notice has been passed.
8.
In view of what has been observed above, the writ petition failed and is consequently dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.