RS Mongia, J - The petitioner was working in the Punjab State Electricity Board and was promoted as Foreman w.e.f.
27.8.1992.
He was reverted to the post of Linesman, vide order dated 881993.
However, it is the case of the petitioner that this order was neither communicated to him nor was it implemented.
This is evident from the fact that on 1891985 Superintending Engineer, Division Circle, Khanna wrote to Executive Engineer, Division Circle, Khanna that the petitioner had been reverted to the post of Linesman, vide order dated 881993 and it was mentioned in the order that order be now implemented by reverting the petitioner.
The petitioner filed the present writ petition on 21.11.1985.
Notice of motion was issued for 811986 and reversion was stayed meanwhile.
The stay continued.
On the next date of hearing when the case came up for further motion hearing on 1541986, following order was passed :-  "The learned counsel for the Board has given an undertaking at the Bar that the order of reversion would be effective only from today.
As regard the merits of the order, the petitioner, if so advised, may suitably amend the petition to challenge the same.
But, in the present circumstances, we do not find any reason to allow the stay order to continue, which is accordingly vacated."
Accordingly, the writ petition was amended and the impugned order of reversion was challenged.
2.
The ground for reverting the petitioner as mentioned by the respondents now is that he was junior person and, therefore, reverted as Linesman because of administrative exigencies.
Petitioner in Para 13 of the writ petition has mentioned two names of those Linesmen who were allegedly junior to the petitioner, but were allowed to continue as Foreman.
However, learned counsel for the petitioner confined his challenge to the fact that even during the pendency of the writ petition, some Linesmen who were junior to the petitioner were promoted as Foremen whereas the petitioner was not so promoted.
He further submitted that there was nothing against the petitioner to deny him promotion when his juniors were promoted.
In Para 13(iii) of the writ petition, it has been mentioned that Jai Ram, who was junior to the petitioner was promoted as Foreman w.e.f.
481987, vide Annexure P/3, whereas some more Juniors were promoted later on w.e.f.
26.11.1987.
The Board has filed additional written statement to Para 13 in the court and the averments made in Para 13(iii) have been admitted.
3.
In view of the admission by the Board to the averments made by the petitioner in Para 13(iii) that Jai Ram a junior Linesman was promoted w.e.f.
481987 (petitioner's seniority No. as Linesman is 1632 whereas seniority number of Jai Ram is 1695), it cannot be disputed that petitioner had a right to be promoted w.e.f.
481987, if not earlier, inasmuch as a person junior to him, had been promoted, on that date.
If the petitioner is not promoted from that date, it would be violative of Article 16 of the Constitution of India.
Nothing has been suggested that there is anything adverse in the record of the petitioner.
Petitioner's case was never considered for promotion when Jai Ram was promoted w.e.f.
481987.
Consequently this writ petition is allowed and the respondents are directed to treat the petitioner as Foreman w.e.f.
481987.
He would be entitled to the pay of Foreman upto 1541986, the day, he was reverted and again w.e.f.
481987 onwards till his retirement.
Needless to mention that he will be entitled to the arrears counted on the basis of pay-scale as were admissible during the relevant period and revised from time to time.
Arrears etc. be calculated and disbursed to the petitioner within four months from the date of receipt of this order.
I make no order as to costs.