SS Sodhi, J - Long settled seniority being disturbed and that too not at the instance of anyone prejudicially affected thereby but following merely a letter by a member of the legislative Assembly to a Minister in the Haryana Government, is what is involved in this appeal.
2.
To give the factual background, the appellant KL Sharma was appointed clerk in the Directorate of Social Welfare on June 2, 1965.
While he was serving in this Directorate, the Director of Welfare Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes circulated a letter on February 10, 1969, to all Heads of Department seeking recommendations for appointment to two temporary posts of Assistants, "by way of transfer of employees working in other departments of the State."
The minimum qualifications for these posts being graduate with five years office experience.
The appellant was amongst the persons who applied for these posts.
He later qualified in the written test too.
Two other persons were, however, selected for these posts, while the name of the appellant was put on the waiting list.
Later, when one of the persons selected left to take up an appointment elsewhere, his post of Assistant was given to the appellant.
Before, however, he was appointed to it, he had already been transferred from the Directorate of Social Welfare to the Directorate of Welfare of Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes.
The appellant had got this appointment as Assistant on September 1, 1969.
He was also promoted later as Head Assistant on May 26, 1975.
3.
Admittedly, respondents 3 to 6 (in the writ petition) had been appointed as Clerks prior to the appointment as such of the appellant KL Sharma.
At no stage, however, did they object to or question, either the appointment of the appellant as Assistant and later has promotion as Head Assistant nor did they file an objection to the seniority list which was circulated in 1976.
This seniority list which showed the appellant to be senior to the respondents was also so reflected in the gradation on lists published during the year 1977 to 1979.
It was left to a member of the Legislative Assembly Shri Jai Narain to take such objection by addressing a letter to the Minister Incharge, sometime in August, 1977, that the appellant had been promoted as Head Assistant while his seniors had been ignored.
We may pause to note here that there is no material on record to suggest that this letter was written at the instance of the concerned private respondents.
At any rate, it appears that it was in pursuance of this letter that on January 14, 1983, the Director Social Welfare issued notice to the appellant and the respondents to show-cause regarding their inter se seniority.
It was thereafter that the impugned order of May 13, 1983 came to be passed whereby the appellant was put below the respondents in seniority and as a consequence he was revert to the post of Assistant while the respondents were given promotion as Head Assistant.
This order stanted upheld by the learned Single Judge and hence this appeal.
4.
It will be seen that what weighed with the learned single Judge in holding against the appellant was that the private-respondents had been appointed as Clerks on a date prior to the appointment as such of the appellant and further that the appellant lacked the essential qualifications for appointment as Assistant inasmuch as he was not a graduate on the date on which recommendations for appointment as Assistant were to be received and nor did he possess the requisite five years experience.
The other factor taken against the appellant was that he was already in the department of Welfare of Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes when he was given the post of Assistant and he could not, therefore, be appointed to it, rather it was a case of promotion and that being so, his seniors who were eligible were entitled to be considered and as this was not done his appointment stood vitiated.
5.
In answer, counsel for the appellant adverted to the fact that the appellant was a graduate by the time he was actually appointed as Assistant and further that he was appointed as such by virtue of his name having been on the waiting list.
It was further contended that even if the appellant had, in the meanwhile been transferred to that very department, it would not be a case of promotion.
6.
The main stress was, however, upon delay and lack in the seniority of the appellant being questioned.
It would be recalled that it was as far back as in 1969 that the appellant had been appointed as Assistant and in 1975 he was also promoted to the post of Head Assistant but it was only in 1977 that objection was raised by the member of the Legislative Assembly writing to the Minister and then too it was after another six years in 1983 that the matter was eventually taken up culminating in the impugned order of May 13, 1983.
In other words it was after almost 14 years that the appellant's seniority came to be disturbed.
7.
The learned Single Judge quashed aside the aspect of laches with the observation "the fact that the justice has been done after 8 years is no ground for perpetuating injustice."
The reference to 8 years being to the promotion of the appellant as Head Assistant in 1975.
This with respect does not, in our view, constitute the correct approach.
This stands spelt out in ML Cecil D'Souza v Union of India, AIR 1975 Supreme Court 1269, where Khanna, J while dealing with a delayed claim for seniority observed :-  "It is essential that anyone who feels aggrieved with an administrative decision affecting one's seniority should act with due diligence and promptitude and not sleep over the matter."
Further  "Although security of service cannot be used as a shield against administrative action for lapses of a public servant, by and large one of the essential requirements of contentment and efficiency in public services is a feeling of security.
It is difficult no doubt to guarantee such security in all its varied aspects.
It should at least be possible to ensure that matters like one's position in the seniority list after having been settled for once should not be liable to be reopened after lapse of many years at the instance of a party who has during the intervening period chosen to keep quiet.
Baking up old matters like seniority after a long time is likely to result in administrative complications and difficulties.
It would, therefore, appear to be in the interest of smoothness and efficiency of service that such matters should be given a quietus after lapse of some time."
8.
Seen in this light, we cannot but hold that there was no occasion to warrant interference with the seniority of the appellant which stood fixed and settled several years earlier and against which none of the other employees who may have been adversely affected thereby chose to object.
We are constrained, therefore, with respect, to overrule the judgment of the learned single Judge and hereby quash the impugned order of May 13, 1983 and direct that the petitioner be treated as senior to respondents 3 to 6 in the writ petition and to grant to the petitioner all consequential benefits arising therefrom.
This appeal is accordingly hereby accepted with costs.
Counsel's fee is Rs. 500/-.
Appeal accepted.