Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner, a Manager in the Haryana Land Reclamation and Development Corporation (hereinafter referred to as `the Corporation'), is aggrieved by the action of the respondents in not considering his claim for promotion and in proceeding to fill up the post of Regional Manager by deputation.
A few facts relevant for the decision of the controversy may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as a Deputy' Manager in November, 1978.
While he was working as such, posts of Mangers became available.
These were, advertised.
The petitioner applied for being appointed as such in October, 1979.
A copy of this order has been produced as Annexure P.1.
He continues to hold this post to date.
3.
There are two posts of Regional Managers in the Corporation.
According to the petitioner, the Corporation has prescribed the following qualifications for recruitment to the post of Regional Manger :-  S. No. Category of posts For direct recruits For Promotees.
xx xx xx Regional-Manager, 1.
At least 2nd class MSc.
in Soil Science or Agriculture Chemistry or Agronomy.
Desirable :- Ph.D. in Soil Science.
2.
Experience : At least 5 years experience in planning formulation of projects and supervision and execution of soil conservation, land development and land reclamation work.
5 years as Manager in HLRDC.
4.
The petitioner avers that in spite of the fact that he is fully qualified for promotion to the post of Regional Manager his claim is not being considered.
Instead the Government is forcing the Corporation to fill up the post by deputation.
In this situation, the petitioner claims that he submitted a representation on September 16, 1992 requesting the Corporation to consider his claim for promotion which was turned down vide order dated September 29, 1992, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P.B.
Finding that his legitimate rights were likely to be adversely affected, the petitioner has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
The action of the respondents in refusing to consider the claim of the petitioner for promotion to the post of Regional Manager has been challenged as being arbitrary and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
5.
Two separate written statements have been filed on behalf of the respondents.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the State of Haryana and the Director of Agriculture, Haryana, it has been inter alia averred that the Corporation has been established to promote measures for land development, conservation and improvement to soil and water resources.
Consequently, a person from the department of Agriculture, who is an expert in soil conservation can be effective in the implementation of the scheme and is better suited for appointment to the post of Regional Manager.
It has been further averred that respondent No. 1 and 2 have never put any pressure or influence on respondent No.
3."
It has been pointed out that a panel of three officers has been sent by respondent No. 2 to the Government with a copy to the Corporation in response to a request received from the Managing Director vide letter dated September 11, 1992.
The respondents maintain that no right of the petitioner has been violated and there is no infringement of Articles 14 & 16 of the Constitution of India.
6.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the Corporation (respondent No. 3), it has been inter alia averred that "the answering respondent had written to the Government to fill up the post of Regional Manager by promotion but the Government did not allow the Corporation to fill the post by promotion, and the said decision of the Government is binding on the answering respondent."
It has been further averred that "since the Government did not agree with the request of the answering respondent Corporation to fill up the post of Regional Manager by promotion, therefore, the post was to be filled up through deputation from Agriculture Department and accordingly the answering respondent requested the Government to send the panel of names for filling up the post of Regional Manager on deputation basis."
The respondent admits that a representation was submitted by the petitioner but "it was found that the candidature of the petitioner for the post could not be considered at present.
The said representation was considered in the light of the decision taken by the Government to fill the post by deputationist."
On these premises, the claim of the petitioner has been sought to be controverted.
7.
The Motion Bench while admitting the petition had vide its order dated November 11, 1992 debarred the Government "from filling up this post during the pendency of this writ petition."
It was further ordered that the Corporation may "as a stop-gap arrangement, fill up the post from amongst its own employees."
8.
I have heard Mr. PS Patwalia, for the petitioner, Mr. Arun Nehra, Additional Advocate General (Haryana) for respondent Nos. 1 and 2 and Mr. RK Handa for respondent No. 3.
Mr. Patwalia contends that a person working as a Manager has a right to be considered for promotion to the post of Regional Manager and that the action of the respondents in refusing to consider the petitioner for promotion is wholly illegal and arbitrary.
The claim is controverted by the learned counsel for the respondents.
Mr. Nehra contends that under Article 140 of the Articles of Association prepared by the Corporation, the Government has the right to issue any directive or instructions in regard to "the finances, conduct of business and affairs of the Company" and that the Company has to give effect to the directive.
It is further contended that in any event, there are no statutory rules conferring the right on the petitioner and as such the action of the Government or the Corporation is unassailable.
9.
It has not been disputed before me that the Corporation is wholly owned and controlled by the Government.
Accordingly, it is an instrumentality of the State.
It cannot, therefore, act arbitrarily.
Its actions must be fair and reasonable.
Its employees have the right to equality of opportunity as guaranteed under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
10.
It is also the admitted position that the petitioner was appointed as Manager in October, 1979 and has accordingly held this post for the last more than 13 years.
It is also not disputed that a person, who has worked for five years as a Manager is eligible to be considered for promotion to the post of Regional Manager.
Accordingly, it is indisputable that the petitioner is eligible to be considered for promotion to the post of Regional Manager.
11.
Every employees has a right to expect at least one promotion in his career.
Otherwise, stagnation on a particular post would completely defeat the incentive for good and hard worker.
According to the policy followed by the Corporation, a person after working for five years as a Manager is eligible to be considered for promotion.
That being so, there is no basis whatsoever n which the action of the Corporation in rejecting the petitioner's representation and declining his request for being considered for promotion vide letter dated September 29, 1992 (P.8) may be justified.
Every eligible person has a right to be considered for promotion subject to his fulfilling the qualifications and it is only when no suitable person is found within the Corporation that the question of appointing an outsider by way of deputation etc. may arise.
In the present case nothing of the sort appears to have happened.
The Corporation has even declined to consider the claim of the petitioner for promotion.
Such a course of action of the Corporation is wholly arbitrary and violative of Articles 14 & 16 of the Constitution of India.
No reason whatsoever has been assigned either in the order or mentioned in the written statement to justify the impugned action.
Even at the time of hearing, learned counsel for respondent Nos. 1 and 2 has not been able to show as to how the petitioner could be denied a right to be considered for promotion.
Even if it is assumed that in the absence of rules, there is no statutory right of the petitioner to be considered, it is undeniable that the equality of opportunity in the matter of appointment is a constitutional guarantee.
It cannot be arbitrarily taken as way by any authority.
In such a situation, the action of the respondents in not considering the claim of the petitioner for promotion to the post of Regional Manager and declining his request vide Annexure P.8, which has been primarily impugned in this petition, deserves to be set aside.
12.
Mr. Nehra contends that under Articles 140, the Government has a right to issue a directive to the Corporation and the Corporation is bound to give immediate effect to the said directive.
Article 140 undoubtedly authorises the Government to give a directive in matters relating to the finances, conduct of business and affairs of the Company.
It is also clear that the Corporation had initially decided to fill up the post of Regional Manager by promotion from amongst the Managers, but it is only when "the Government did not allow the Corporation to fill the post by promotion", the Corporation asked for a panel of names from the Government.
However, in the written statement filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2, it has no where been stated that any directive was ever issued to the Corporation.
On the contrary, the pleaded case of Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 is that they have never put any pressure or influence on respondent No.
3."
It is thus apparent that there was no binding directive ever issued by the Government and, therefore, the Corporation was free to take its own decision.
Even otherwise, no justification for such a directive appears to exist.
13.
Consequently, the action of the Corporation in refusing to consider the claim of the petitioner for promotion to the post of Regional Manager cannot be sustained.
Accordingly, the writ petition is allowed.
It is directed that the Corporation shall consider the claim of the petitioner for promotion to the post of Regional Manager in accordance with law.
It has been pointed out that the petitioner is already holding the post on an officiating basis.
He will thus continue to hold this post till the Corporation considers and decides his claim.
In case he is found suitable for promotion, he will continue to hold this post.
In the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to the bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.