GR Majithia, J - This judgment disposes of C.W.P.
No. 4318 of 1983, C.W.P.
No. 2962 of 1980 and C.W.P.
No. 4223 of 1985 since common questions of law arise for determination therein.
2.
In these petitions, challenge has been made to officer order No. 169, dated December 24, 1982, issued by the Chief Conservator of Forests, Haryana fixing the seniority of Forest Rangers recruited through the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana in accordance with the merit list prepared by the Board.
3.
The petitioners and the private respondents in these petitions were recommended for appointment as Forest Rangers by the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana (for short `the board').
On completion of two years' training at Northern Forest Rangers College, Dehradun (for short, the College), they were appointed as Forest Rangers in officiating/temporary capacity against the existing vacancies.
Their seniority was fixed according to the merit list prepared by the college was challenged by some of the affected parties.
The State Government took a decision dated September 10, 1982 that the seniority of the Forest Rangers who had been appointed by direct recruitment through the Board shall be fixed according to the merit determined by the Board.
The Chief Conservator of Forests, Haryana, vide his office order No. 169, dated December 24, 1982 fixed the seniority of the Forest Rangers in accordance with the decision of the State Government dated September 10, 1982.
The petitioners aggrieved against this order have moved this court.
4.
Indisputably, the service conditions of the Forest Rangers are regulated by the Rules called the Punjab Forest Subordinate Service (Executive Section) Rules, 1944 (for brevity, the rules).
Rule 2 says that the `service' means the Punjab Forest Subordinate Service (Executive Section).
Rule 3 says that the service shall consist of Forest Rangers, Deputy Rangers, Foresters and Forest Guards.
Rule 4 says that all appointments to posts in the service shall be made from time to time as required by the authorities specified in Appendix `B'.
Rule 6 provides for selection of classes of persons for training at the College to fill vacancies of Forest Rangers in the service in any given year.
Appendix `C' contains the procedure' for the direct recruitment of Forest Ranger candidates.
It provides that the Commission shall invite applications by advertisement in the Punjab Government Gazette and such newspapers as it may think fit; that the Commission will conduct the examination and those candidates who obtain minimum 50% marks in each subject of examination will be called for interview by the Commission; that out of the successful candidates, the Commission will recommend to the Government in order of merit the names and number of successful candidates, save in most exceptional circumstances and for reasons which will be recorded in writing.
The Chief Conservator of Forests, with the approval of the State Government, will accept the candidates recommended by the Commission in order of merit, subject to production of Civil Surgeon's certificate required by proviso (1) (b) (i) to rule 6.
All the candidates who have been selected for admission to the college are required before joining the training, to undergo a course of practical training in the forests for at last three months.
The Chief Conservator of Forests selects such number of persons for training at the College as are likely to be required to fill vacancies of Forest Rangers in the service every year.
Rule 7 provides for eligibility criteria for appointment to the post of Forest Ranger.
Under this rule, the persons, who have been selected for training under rule 6 and have obtained the higher standard certificate, are appointed to the posts of Forest Ranger in case of direct recruitment.
Under rule 12(1) of the rules, members of the service who are appointed against permanent vacancies remain on probation for a period of one year.
Explanation to sub-rule(1) of rule 12 says that approved officiating service shall be reckoned as a period spent on probation but no member, who is officiating in any appointment, shall on the completion of his period of probation be eligible for confirmation until he is appointed against a permanent vacancy.
Sub-rule (3) of rule 12 provides that on the completion of the period of probation of any member, the appointing authority prescribed in rule 4 may confirm such member in his appointment.
First proviso to rule 12(3) says that the total period of probation, including extensions, if any, shall not exceed three years.
Rule 13 provides for determining seniority of members of the Service in each class of appointments shown in Appendix `A'.
5.
For appreciating the contentions raised, it will be apt to reproduce rule 6, appendix `C' rules 12 and 13 of the rules :-  "Rule 6.
Qualifications and method of recruitment of Forest Rangers -  The Chief Conservator shall, subject to the regulations contained in Appendix `C' select from among the following classes of persons such number of persons for training at the College as are likely to be required to fill vacancies of Forest Rangers in the service every year, namely :  (1) Persons not already in the service of the Crown;  (2) members of the Service other than Forest Rangers;  (3) commissioned or non-commissioned officers of His Majesty's Forces in India :  Provided that no person shall be selected for training -  (1) In the case of persons not already in the service of the Crown unless  (a) He has passed his 18th birthday, but not his 25th birthday on 1st April of the year in which he is admitted to the College;  (b) he produces -  (i) a certificate signed by any Civil Surgeon in the Punjab or Delhi Province testifying to his sound constitution, good vision and hearing and general fitness for rough outdoor life in the Forest Department, and to the fact that he has been vaccinated and revaccinated for smallpox within the last twelve months or has already had small-pox and shows obvious scare thereof;  Note :- The regulations for the medical examination of candidates are contained in Chapter III of the Civil Service Rules (Punjab) Volume I Part I, (1940 Edn.)
(ii) Certificates of respectability and good moral character from two responsible persons not being his relatives, who are acquainted with him in private life and unconnected with his University, College or School;  (iii) a certificate of character from the Principal, academic officer of his University, College or School, last attended;  (iv) Age certificate - The matriculation or a certificate equivalent thereto will be accepted;  (v) A certificate that he has passed the Intermediate Examination of a recognised university with mathematics and one or more of the following subjects :  Physics, Chemistry, Botany, Zoology.
A certificate of having passed any other examination of an equivalent or higher standard will be admissible :  Provided that in passing the examination he had taken one or more of the subjects mentioned above;  (c) he has satisfied the Commission that he can read Urdu fluently and can write Urdu in Persian character with facility.
Explanation - No certificate as items (i) and (ii) in sub-clause (b) of clause (i) of this proviso shall be accepted unless it was signed on a date not earlier than nine months previous to the first day of April of the year in which the person is to be admitted into the College.
(2) In the case of members of the Service other than Forest Rangers unless -  (a) he has passed the Matriculation Examination of a recognised University;  (b) he has been in the service for not less than two years at the time of application;  (c) he has not passed his 25th birthday on 1st April of the year in which he is admitted to the College.
(3) In the case of commissioned or non-commissioned officers of his Majesty's Forces in India, unless :-  (a) he is recommended as fit for appointment to the Service by the Commanding Officer of his unit;  (b) he has not passed his 30th birthday on 1st April of the year in which he is admitted to the College.
(c) he has satisfied the Chief Conservator that he has received sufficient general education to be able to follow the Forest Rangers' course at the College; and  (d) he has obtained a certificate of physical and mental fitness for active out-door duty signed by any Civil Surgeon in the Punjab or Delhi.
APPENDIX `C'  1.
Procedure for the direct recruitment of Forest Ranger candidates.
1.
The Commission will call for applications by advertisement in the Punjab Government Gazette and such newspapers as it may think fit.
Applications may be sent either direct or through a Deputy Commissioner or Forest Officer of rank not lower than a Divisional Forest Officer and must be accompanied by the certificates other than the Civil Surgeon's certificate mentioned in rule 6 and also a certificate showing the candidate's caste and place of residence and whether he is a zamindar.
2.
All the candidates whose applications are complete in every respect and who are otherwise held eligible will be admitted to the examination prescribed in the following rule conducted by the Commission.
Only those who qualify, i.e., obtain 50% of the marks in each subject of the examination will be interviewed by the Commission.
Out of the successful candidates, the Commission shall recommend to Government in order of merit the names and number of successful candidates, save in most exceptional circumstances and for reasons which will be recorded in writing.
The Chief Conservator of Forests shall with the approval of Government accept the candidates recommended by the Commission in order of merit, subject to their producing a Civil Surgeon's certificate required by proviso (1) (b) (i) to rule 6.
3.
(a) Every candidate before admission to the College is required to pass a qualifying examination in the following subjects, namely :  (i) Dictation of a piece of ordinary English prose;  (ii) An essay to be written in English on one of several simple subjects;  (iii) Mathematics up to the Intermediate standard including (Arithmetic, Geometry and Algebra).
(The standard of this paper will be that of the Matriculation);  (iv) General knowledge - this will include elementary science, geography and current events.
(b) Twenty per cent of the marks allotted for dictation will be given for handwriting.
(c) In order to qualify every candidate must obtain fifty per cent of the number of marks allotted to each of the above subjects.
(d) No fee will be charged but candidates will be required to defray their own travelling expenses in connection with this examination.
(e) The examination will be held at Lahore between August 15 and 30 of the year previous to that in which admission will be made.
4.
All candidates who have been selected for admission to the College are required before joining the College, to undergo a course of practical training in the forests for at least 3 months.
Candidates will not be allowed to join the College unless they can produce a certificate signed by the Divisional Forest Officer under whom they have served and countersigned by the Chief Conservator that they have undertaken the course of practical training in a satisfactory manner and are likely to become useful Forest Officers.
The President of the College may exempt a candidate from the whole or a portion of the practical course above prescribed, after satisfying himself that the minimum prescribed term was due to no fault of the candidate and that the Chief Conservator has certified that he is likely to make efficient Forest Officer.
Rule 12.
Probation of members of the service.
(1) Members of the service who are appointed against permanent vacancies shall on appointment to any class of posts specified in Appendix `A' remain on probation for a period of one year.
Explanation - Approved officiating service shall be reckoned as a period spent on probation, but no member, who is officiating in any appointment shall on the completion of his period of probation be eligible for confirmation until he is appointed against a permanent vacancy.
(2) If the work or conduct of any member during his period of probation is, in the opinion of the appointing authority, not satisfactory, the appointing authority may dispense with his service if he has been appointed direct or may revert him to his former post if he has been recruited otherwise than by direct appointment.
(3) On the completion of the period of probation of any member, the appointing authority prescribed in rule 5 may confirm such member in his appointment, or if his work or conduct has, in the opinion of the appointing authority, not been satisfactory, the appointing authority may dispense with his services if he has been appointed direct, or revert him to his former post if he has been appointed otherwise than by direct recruitment or may extend the period of probation and thereafter pass such orders on the expiry of the period of probation as it could have passed at the expiry of the first period of probation :  Provided that the total period of probation including extensions, if any, shall not exceed 3 years :  Provided further that no Forest Subordinate promoted to the post of Forest Ranger shall be confirmed in his appointment unless he has passed such examination in the reading maps, forest law and procedure and accounts as the Chief Conservator may from time to time prescribe and if he fails so to pass such examination he shall be reverted to his former post :  Provided further that no Deputy Ranger or Forester recruited under rules 8(2) (b) and 9(2) (a), respectively shall be confirmed unless, he has obtained the certificate of training from the school, and if he fails to obtain such certificate he shall be removed from the service.
Rule 13.
Seniority of members of the service.
The seniority of members of the service shall in each class of appointments shown in Appendix `A' be determined by the dates of their substantive appointment to a permanent vacancy in such class :  Provided that if two or more members are appointed on the same date  (1) Members promoted from the Service shall take rank in the order of seniority above members appointed direct;  (2) In the case of members, who are promoted from the service, seniority shall be determined according to pay, preference being given to a member drawing a higher rate of pay; and if the rates of pay drawn are the same, seniority shall be determined according to the length of service, preference being given to a member having the longer service; and if the length of service is also the same; seniority shall be determined according to age, the older member being senior to the younger member;  (3) in the case of members who are appointed direct the older members shall be senior to the younger :  Provided further that if any member is reverted to his former post, and is subsequently re-appointed to the post from which he was reverted, the date of his appointment for the purpose of this rule shall be such date as the appointing authority may determine."
6.
A conjoint reading of these rules suggests that competitive examination for selecting candidates for appointment as Forest Rangers is to be conducted by the Punjab Public Service Commission.
The posts now fall within the purview of Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana.
Consequently, the examination was held by the Board in the instant case.
The names of successful candidates in order of merit were forwarded to the State Government.
The Board can make a departure in a particular case and place a candidate, on the merit list whose name is otherwise not borne on the merit list.
The appointing authority of the Forest Rangers is the Chief Conservator of Forests, Haryana.
The Chief Conservator of Forests, with the approval of the State Government, has to accept the candidates recommended by the Board in order of merit.
The Chief Conservator of Forests, on receipt of the recommendations from the Board through the State Government, has to select suitable number of persons for training at the College for filling vacancies of Forest Rangers in the Service every year.
On completion of the training, except where it is dispensed with, the Chief Conservator of Forests makes appointments to the posts of Forest Rangers as prescribed by Rule 7 of the Rules.
If appointed against a permanent vacancy, they will remain on probation for a period of one year.
On completion of probation period, the appointing authority may confirm such member in his appointment.
If his work and conduct has not been found satisfactory, the appointing authority can dispense with his services.
A member of the service, who has been given officiating appointment, becomes eligible for confirmation, provided he has been appointed against a permanent vacancy.
If a candidate has been appointed on officiating basis against a temporary vacancy, he will not automatically be entitled to confirmation.
The confirmation will be made only if the appointment has been made against a permanent vacancy although initially on officiating basis.
The seniority of the members of the class of service is to be determined by the dates of their substantive appointment to a permanent vacancy.
If two or more members are appointed on the same day, their inter se seniority will be determined as mentioned in clauses (1),(2) and (3) of the first proviso to Rule 13.
The State Government has been fixing the seniority of the members of the service, namely, Forest Rangers on the basis of the merit list prepared by the College on completion of training by the candidates at the college.
7.
There appears to be no basis for the criterion adopted by the State Government.
The members of the service were agitated against the criterion adopted by the State Government and made representation to it.
The State Government, on the basis of legal advice tendered and after affording an opportunity of hearing to the affected parties and disposing of their representation on merits, decided to determine the seniority of the members of the service in conformity with rule 13 ibid.
On the correct analysis of the relevant rules, referred to above, the decision taken by the State Government fixing the seniority of Forest Rangers on the basis of the merit list prepared by the Board is unexceptional.
8.
It was further submitted by the learned counsel, who represented the petitioner in C.W.P.
No. 2962 of 1980, that in that writ petition the petitioner was not afforded an opportunity of hearing before changing the date of confirmation as Forest Ranger.
This submission appears to be incorrect.
A perusal of the Government record reveals otherwise.
Moreover, in Para 12 of Civil Writ Petition No. 4318 of 1983, it is averred thus :  "That respondent No. 2, vide his order dated 2481981 issued notice to all Forest Rangers proposing change in the date of confirmation of Forest Rangers, on the analogy of new criteria of the merit achieved in the Training Course as determining factor for governing the seniority list among the Forest Rangers."
Corresponding reply to that para in the written statement filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2 reads thus :  "With regard to para 12 of the civil writ petition it is submitted that notices had to be issued for changing the dates of confirmation as a result of a clarification that the merit at the time of selection by the SSS Board will have to be maintained."
The affected parties were afforded an opportunity of hearing before effecting any change in their inter se seniority as Forest Rangers.
For the reasons recorded above, the writ petitions fail and are accordingly dismissed, but with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.