GC Garg, J - The petitioner, who was appointed as JBT teacher, acquired higher qualifications of BA BEd.
while in service.
He was consequently granted master's grade, with effect from September 5, 1979.
The petitioner now seeks adjustment against the post of a master from a date, a JBT teacher junior to him has been posted as such.
2.
Services of the Masters are governed by the Punjab Education Services Class-III (School Cadre) Rules, 1955 (for short `the Rules').
Rule 7 of the Rules provides mode of recruitment to various posts specified in Appendix `A'.
It further provides that the posts in the service shall be filled in by direct recruitment, by transfer and by promotion from the lower Grade in the service.
Seniority for the purpose of promotion is taken from the date of acquiring the qualification of BA, B.T./B.Ed.
In exercise of the power under this rule, it was provided that 75% of the posts shall be filled in by direct recruitment and the remaining 25% by way of promotion from amongst the JBT teachers who have acquired that qualification of BA, B.T./B.Ed.
This ratio has further been changed to 50 : 50.
Appendix `B' to the Rules lays down the minimum qualification required before a person can be posted as Headmaster, Second Master or a Master.
It in categorical terms provides that an incumbent should have the qualification of BA, M.A./M.Sc., SSTC or BT Senior Basic Trained.
The appendix or any other rule no where provides combination of particular subjects in the B.A, or B.Ed.
to make an incumbent eligible to be appointed as a Master.
Different qualifications have been laid down for agriculture, commerce and physical training masters.
There is no manner of doubt that these are statutory rules having been framed under proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India Instructions to supplement these Rules can always be issued by the authority competent to frame or amend the Rules and by no other authority.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that many JBT teachers who acquired qualification of B.Ed.
similarly as the petitioner but after him, have been promoted and posted against the post of master against the quota of 25%, now changed to 30%, by illegally ignoring the claim of the petitioner.
According to the learned counsel, the claim of the petitioner has been ignored on wholly illegal and untenable ground.
Reference to Annexure P-2 would show that the claim of the petitioner was declined by observing thus  "The case of the petitioner was considered for promotion for the post of SS Master in accordance with rules/instructions.
The prescribed qualification of SS Master is as under :-  BA B.T./B.Ed.
or BA Education from Govt. College of Education, Kurukshetra with any two of the following subjects in BA in addition to English (a) History (b) Economics (c) Geography (d) Political Science (e) Sociology.
Whereas the petitioner has passed BA Examination with following subjects :  1- English  2- Hindi  3- History  Hence the petitioner has no combination of subjects and does not fulfil the prescribed qualifications of SS Master.
Therefore, his representation is rejected and the claim of petitioner cannot be accepted."
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner vehemently contended that the petitioner who possessed the requisite qualifications as prescribed by the service Rules detailed in Appendix `B' to the Rules, could not be denied promotion against the promotion quota by holding that he did not possess combination of subjects and thus did not fulfil the qualification of SS Master.
5.
Learned Additional Advocate General, Haryana appearing for the respondents sought to justify the action of the authorities in declining adjustment to the petitioner against the post of Master on the ground that he did not possess the requisite qualification as contained in the enclosure to Annexure R-1.
Learned counsel by reference to the Rules or otherwise could not refer to the source of instructions contained in the enclosure to Annexure R- 1, which only provides that while appointing teachers on ad hoc basis, the qualifications are not being checked up properly and some teachers have been appointed who did not even fulfil the requisite qualification.
It was thus, impressed upon the District Education Officers that such appointment be not made and appointments be made of persons who ful-filled the requisite qualifications as contained in the enclosure to Annexure R-1.
The said enclosure to Annexure R-1 provides that in the case of SS Masters, the candidates having BA BEd.
qualifications should have passed in any two subjects in BA out of History, Economics, Geography, Political Science and Sociology in addition to English.
6.
Learned counsel for the respondents could not point out to the source of prescribing the changed qualifications for the post of a Master on the basis of combination of subjects.
The Rules as already noticed do not prescribe the combination of subjects as is sought to be argued by the learned counsel for the respondents.
According to Appendix `B' to the Rules, a person who possesses qualification of BA BEd, is entitled to be appointed as a Master.
Qualifications for appointment to a post can be changed only by amending the Rules or by the authority empowered by the Rules to do so.
The Director or any other authority cannot prescribe a different qualification than the one laid down by the Rules, unless it is so provided by the Rules.
Change in the qualifications for appointment to the post of Master cannot be said to be by way of supplementing the Rules.
The Director of Public Instructions who is alleged to have issued the instructions as contained in the enclosure to Annexure A-1 is not a competent authority to frame the rules.
Even on pointed reference, learned counsel for the respondents could not point out that the instructions as contained in the enclosure to Annexure R-1 were issued by a competent authority under the Rules.
It was also not shown that the Rules had been amended to that effect.
The Director of Public Instructions, who has prescribed the changed qualifications cannot issue such instructions which may be termed as supplementing the Rules.
It is well settled now that statutory rules cannot be amended by executive order.
The Government has no jurisdiction to issue any executive order in violation of statutory rules.
It has been held by this Court in Sardool Singh v. State of Punjab 1970 SLR 505 that the instructions cannot be enforced as supplementary to the Rules as these had not been issued by the State Government which alone had the right to make the Rules.
The supplementary instructions can only be issued by the State Government which is competent to make the Rules provided these are not inconsistent with the Rules already framed.
The change of qualifications in the present case is rather on the face of it contrary to the rules which can only be done by an authority competent to amend the Rules.
Mr. Nehra, learned Addl.
Advocate General, appearing for the respondents has not been able to show that the changed qualifications which are sought to be insisted upon before promoting the petitioner, have been incorporated in the Rules by way of amendment or that these have been prescribed by an authority competent to do.
Once that is so, the petitioner could, not be denied the post of a Master against the promotion quota only on the ground that he did not possess the combination of subjects which combination has not been prescribed by the Rules or provided by the competent authority.
In the circumstances thus, it cannot be said that the Director of Public Instructions was competent to modify qualifications for appointment to the post of a Master by way of issuing instructions.
Thus, the changed qualifications cannot be enforced till such time the statutory Rules are amended in accordance with law or the qualifications are prescribed by the authority competent to do so.
7.
It has not been disputed that the persons junior to the petitioner have been posted as Masters against the promotion quota by way of promotion.
In the circumstances, there is no option but to allow the writ petition and grant to the petitioner the relief claimed.
8.
In view of the above discussion, the writ petition succeeds and is allowed.
Order Annexure P-2 is quashed and the respondents are directed to consider the claim of the petitioner for his posting as a Master, with effect from the date his junior was posted as such.
The petitioner is not entitled to any consequential relief as he already getting salary in the Master's Grade.
In the circumstances, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.