Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner is aggrieved by the action of the respondent in not granting the pension.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner joined Border Security Force on December 16, 1967.
He was promoted as a Lance Naik.
While working as such, it appears that the petitioner applied to the Commandant, 14th Bn.
B.S.F.
(respondent No3) for premature retirement under rule 19 of the Border Security Force Rules, 1969.
The petitioner's request was accepted vide letter dated January 26, 1982.
A copy of this letter has been produced as Annexure P-1 on the record.
On February 1, 1982, discharge certificate was issued to the petitioner showing that he had served for a period of 14 years, 1 month and 15 days.
Vide letter dated March 23, 1982, the petitioner's claim for pension was declined on the ground that he has not completed the requisite period of service.
An offer was made to the petitioner to rejoin service.
He did not proceed any further in the matter till December 3, 1986 when he served a legal notice on the respondents.
The reply to this notice was sent by the respondent vide letter dated March 24, 1987 in which it was inter alia observed that pensionary benefits are not allowed to the petitioner as there is no rule in the Central Civil Services Pension Rules permitting the grant of pension before the employee has put in 20 years of service.
Aggrieved by this order, the petitioner has approached this Court.
The action of the respondent has been challenged primarily on two counts.
It has firstly been urged that while accepting the petitioner's prayer for premature retirement under rule 19, it was guaranteed that he would get all pensionary benefits as admissible under rules in pursuance to the letter dated January 14, 1977 issued by the authorities.
It has been further averred that such benefits have been granted to various other persons who had resigned/retired under similar circumstances prior to November 4, 1981 and that the action of the respondent suffers from the vice of discrimination.
3.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents.'
It has been inter alia averred that the petitioner's resignation was accepted on compassionate grounds.
However, he was not "entitled for pensionary benefits, because he had not completed the required number of years of service for earning pension.
It has also been stated that "pensionary benefits were stopped with effect from November 4, 1981", to persons who resigned under rule 19 of the Border Security Force Rules, 1969.
It is averred that the Commandant while accepting the petitioner's resignation under rule 19 had committed an irregularity which was rectified and the petitioner was recalled to join duty.
Since the petitioner has failed to join duty, the respondents maintain that he is not entitled to the grant of any pension.
It has also been averred that "no pensionary benefits were granted to any person prior to 14th Jan, 1977 and it was decided by the FHQ vide their letter No. PAD/32 -PN/77/BSF dated 14th January, 1977 (Copy of letter enclosed herewith as Annexure `RI') that pension will be admissible to personnel, who resign under Rule 19 BSF Rules.
After that FHQ had again issued ruling vide letter No. F.35036/3/76-Staff/BSF dated 4.11.1981 (Copy of letter enclosed as Annexure R-1) that pensionary benefits to BSF personnel retiring after 41181, after completion of 10 years qualifying service, will not be granted.
The petitioner was discharged from service w.e.f.
3111982, after the issuance of letter referred to above and hence petitioner was not divested of any of his valuable rights".
4.
Mr. TP Singh, learned counsel for the petitioner contends that the petitioner's request was accepted with the clear stipulation that all pensionary benefits shall be admissible to him.
Consequently, the respondents are now estopped from denying pension to the petitioner.
He further contends that every person who had resigned as the petitioner prior to November 4, 1981 has been granted pension.
According to the learned counsel, the action of the respondents is discriminatoy and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
5.
Having heard learned counsel, I find no merit in the claim made by the petitioner.
Rule 19 provides as under :-  "19.
Resignation - (1) The Central Government may, having regard to the special circumstances of any case, permit any officer of the Force to resign from the Force before the attainment of the age of retirement or before putting in such number of years of service as may be necessary under the rules to be eligible for retirement :  Provided that while granting such permission the Central Government may: (i) require the officer to refund to the Government such amount as would constitute the cost of training given to that officer; or (ii) make such reduction in the pension or other retirement benefits of the officer if so eligible as that Government may consider to be just and proper in the circumstances.
2.
The Central Government may accept the resignation under sub-rule (1) with effect from such date as it may consider expedient :  Provided that it shall not be later thin three months from the date of receipt of such resignation.
(3) The Central Government may refuse to permit an officer to resign : (a) if an emergency has been declared in the Country either due to internal disturbances or external aggression : or (b) if it considers it to be inexpedient so to do in the interests of the discipline of the Force; or(c) if the officer has specifically undertaken to serve and such period has not expired.
(4) The provisions of this rule shall apply to and in relation to Subordinate Officers and Enrolled Persons as they apply to and in relation to any officer of the Force and the powers vested in the Central Government under sub-rules (1) and (2) shall be exercised in the case of a Subordinate Officer by a Deputy Inspector General and in the case of an Enrolled Person by a Commandant."
A perusal of the Rule shows had it permits an officer or a member of the Force to resign; and it confers jurisdiction on the Central Govt. or the appropriate authority to accept the resignation with such conditions relating to reduction in pension etc. as may be considered appropriate.
In pursuance to this power, the appropriate authority appears to have taken a general decision which was conveyed to Inspector General Border Security Force, vide letter dated November 4,1981, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure R-1 with the written statement.
In this letter it has been clearly mentioned that "even if resignation is accepted under Rule 19 of the BSF Rules, this will not entitle the members of the BSF Force to claim pro-rata pensionary benefits unless there is a corresponding rule that resignation is such circumstances.
will be deemed as premature retirement and pensionary benefits allowed."
The view taken in the letter at Annexure R-1 has not been challenged by the petitioner in any manner whatsoever.
It has not been shown that this letter is violative of any provisions of law.
In fact, it appears that the letter incorporates a decision which may be uniformally followed in case of all persons serving in the Border Security Force who may submit their resignations under rule 19.
It has also not been shown that even after the issue of this letter, any person who may have been permitted to resign under rule 19 was given any pensionary benefits.
Consequently, the fact that certain other persons had been given pensionary benefits prior to the issue of this letter, does not constitute any discrimination against the petitioner.
Even otherwise, it appears that a person who resigns from this post under Rule 19 is not actually retiring from the post.
If the resignation entails the consequence of forfeiture of pensionary benefits, that is a matter for the employee to consider before tendering the resignation.
A person who resigns under rule 19 cannot claim that he has been retired and as such can have no claim to the grant of pension.
The fact that certain persons were granted pension in pursuance to the executive decision prior to November 4, 1981 cannot confer a right to pension or to claim a similar benefit.
Consequently, the contention that action suffers from the vice of discrimination cannot be sustained.
6.
Nor I am persuaded to hold that the respondents are estopped from declining pension to the petitioner.
It is no doubt correct that vide letter dated January 26, 1982 (Annexure P- 1) the Commandant had observed that the petitioner's resignation had been accepted with effect from January 31, 1982 (FN) "with all pensionary benefits as admissible under rules in pursuance---".
However, later on, when the authorities found that factually the pensionary benefits were not admissible, vide letter dated March 23, 1982, an offer was made to the petitioner to rejoin the service.
A copy of this letter is at Annexure P-3.
He chose not to rejoin.
In such a situation, it cannot be said that the petitioner acted to his own disadvantage and representations were made by him or that the respondents are estopped from declining the petitioner's claim for the grant of pensionary benefits.
7.
In view of the above, I find no merit in this petition.
It is dismissed.
In the circumstances of the case, I make no order as to costs.
8.
Vide order dated September 7, 1992, the case had been adjourned at the request of the learned counsel for the respondents subject to payment of Rs. 500/- as costs.
Mr. TPS Singh points out that the costs have not been paid to him so far.
Mr. Mehtani undertakes to pay the costs within two weeks from today.
In view of this undertaking, no further direction is necessary in this behalf.
Petition dismissed.