NK Sodhi, J - This judgment will dispose of civil writ petitions 13883, 15523 of 1990 & 16933 of 1991 as common question of law and fact are involved in them and they were ordered to be heard together by the motion bench.
The main arguments were however, addressed in civil writ petition 15523 of 1990 and the facts are being taken therefrom.
2.
Petitioner was initially recruited to the Punjab Service of Engineers as a Sub Divisional Officer and was promoted to various ranks in the course of his service.
His last promotion was as Chief Engineer (Irrigation) on January 6, 1988 and he ultimately retired from the said post on November 30, 1989 on attaining the age of superannuation.
The primary grievance now made is that the petitioner who was promoted as Chief Engineer on January 6, 1988 retired with lesser emoluments than a person who was promoted after September, 1988.
This anomaly, according to the petitioner, has arisen on account of the implementation of the provisions of Rule 8 of the Punjab Civil Services (Revised Pay) Rules, 1988 (hereinafter referred to as 'the rules') and the instructions issued by the Government as per letter dated June 21, 1990 (Annexure P4 with the writ petition).
This, according to the learned counsel (or the petitioner, is arbitrary, discriminatory and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
3.
Basic pay of the petitioner as Superintending Engineer was fixed at Rs. 5900/- on 111986 under the rules and after grant of annual increments on 111987 and 111988, the same was fixed at Rs. 6100/- and Rs. 6300/- respectively the annual increment being Rs. 200/-.
When he was promoted to the post of Chief Engineer on 611988, his basic pay was fixed at Rs. 6500/- after giving him the benefit of one increment under Rule 44(c)(i) of the Punjab Civil Service Rules, Volume I, Part I.
The basis pay was then raised to Rs. 6700/- after a period of 12 months on 111989.
The petitioner had claimed the benefit of two increments in terms of Rule 8 of the rules at the time of his promotion as Chief Engineer but the same was declined on the ground that he was promoted prior to the date of publication of the rules.
Another grievance of the petitioner was that one Shri S.L.
Gupta who was junior to the petitioner both as Superintending Engineer and also as Chief Engineer and was prompted to the rank of Chief Engineer on March 1, 1989 was drawing higher pay than him.
The reason for this anomalous situation is stated to be that Shri Gupta though admittedly junior had been promoted after the promulgation of the rules and, therefore, given the benefit of two increments.
When the Government did not redress the grievances of the petitioner, he filed the present petition claiming the benefit of two increments from the date of his promotion with all consequential benefits thereafter including the refixation of his pension accordingly.
4.
The factual position has not been disputed by the respondents in their written statement.
However, the action of not granting the benefit of two increments to the petitioner at the time of his promotion is sought to be justified solely on the ground that he stood promoted prior to the date of promulgation of the rules and as such, was not entitled to the said benefit in terms of Rules 8 thereof.
5.
In exercise of the powers conferred by the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution, the President of India promulgated the rules revising the pay scales of the employees of the State of Punjab.
The notification dated September 9, 1988 was published in the Punjab Government gazette (extraordinary) on September 13, 1988 though the Rules were made to come into force retrospectively w.e.f.
the 1st day of January, 1986.
Rule 8 of the Rules providing for fixation of par on Promotion reads as under :-  "8.
Fixation of pay on promotion - Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules, in case of promotion to a higher post effected after the date of publication of this notification in Punjab Government Gazette, the benefit of minimum two increments shall be given while fixing the pay in the scale of the higher post.
The next increment in the scale of the higher post shall be allowed after the completion of twelve months' qualifying service in that scale."
In the matter of fixation of pay on promotion to the higher post, the aforesaid Rule classifies the government employees in two categories, namely, those promoted before and those promoted after the promulgation of the rules.
This classification has to my mind, no reasonable basis nor any nexus with the object to be achieved and, therefore, highly arbitrary, the implementation of which results in violation of Article 14 of the Constitution.
The employees after their promotion to the same higher post whether before or after the promulgation of the Rules from one class and cannot justifiably be treated differently.
In other words, unequal treatment is meted out to the same class of employees after their promotion which offends against Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
Unreasonableness of this provisions can be seen from the following illustration.
Let us assume that two Superintending Engineers drawing same pay in the department get promoted to the post of Chief Engineer, the senior of the two is promoted prior to the promulgation of the Rules while the junior gets promoted after the said date.
The result is that the senior does nto get the benefit of two increments as envisaged by Rule 8 whereas the junior gets the same and consequently draws higher pay than the senior though both are in teh same higher rank.
Could there be anything more unconscionable, unjust and unreasonable.
The Rule, thus, obviously operates in a discriminatory manner as against the senior.
When such anomalies were brought to the notice of the State Government, it realised that the Rule was operating harshly as against those who were promoted prior to the date of promulgation of the rules in as much as they we drawing lesser pay than those who were promoted thereafter even though they were senior.
The government then with a view to move the hardship of the senior employees decided that the pay of the senior employees could be stepped up to an amount equal to the pay drawn by the government employee who is junior to him and accordingly issued instructions to all Heads of Departments, Commissioners of Divisions, Registrar of this Court, District & Sessions Judge and the Deputy Commissioners in the State, as per letter dated June 21, 1990.
The Government further directed that the aforesaid stepping up shall be done w.e.f.
May 1, 1990 even though the rules became effective w.e.f.
111986.
It was also stated in the instructions that necessary amendment in the Rules would be made in due course.
Since the petitioner had already superannuated on November 30, 1989, he was not in service on 151990.
6.
After hearing counsel for the parties, I am of the view that the petitioner was entitled to the benefit of two increments at the time of his promotion.
As already observed earlier, Rule 8 in its implementation is discriminatory and the anomaly having come to the notice was sought to be removed only w.e.f.
151990.
If there is an anomaly in the implementation of the rules and the same had to be removed, it goes without saying that it should be removed from the date when the rules came into force.
There would, in my opinion, be no meaning in removing an anomaly from a date subsequent to the date when the Rules came into force and the fixation of the subsequent date of 151990 for removing the hardship/anomaly in the case of seniors is equally arbitrary and the affected seniors are entitled to the benefits of Rule 8 from the date of enforcement of the Rules no matter they were promoted before the promulgation of the rules.
No reason or justification has been pointed out on behalf of the respondents as to why May 1, 1990 was fixed as the date with effect from which the anomaly was sought to be removed.
Thus, if pay of the senior employees had to be stepped up in order to remove the hardship then it should be stepped up from the date of enforcement of the Rules.
7.
The question that now arises is as to whether Rule 8 should be struck down as unconstitutional.
If it is struck down the result would be that no employee whether promoted before or after the promulgation of the rules will be entitled to the benefit of two increments which will work still greater hardship.
Instead of striking down Rule 8 of the rules, in my opinion, it should be read down so as to give the benefit to all the employees who are promoted after the coming into force of the Rules irrespective of their dates of promotion whether they be before or after the date of promulgation.
For the reasons recorded above, the writ petitions are allowed and the petitioners are held entitled to the benefit of two increments at the time of their promotion with all consequential reliefs including the arrears and refixation of pension as a result thereof.
The respondents are directed to grant the arrears and refix the pension of the petitioners on or before March 31, 1993.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petitions allowed.