RS Mongia, J (Oral) - The petitioner joined the service as a Clerk with Respondent No. 3, i.e. the Municipal Committee, Mullanpur Dakha, Tehsil and District Ludhiana on 1st January, 1975.
Though the initial appointment was wholly on temporary basis, yet by a resolution passed by Respondent No. 3 the services of all the employees, including the petitioner were regularised with effect from 1st April, 1975.
It is further the case of the petitioner that in the year 1975, the State Government decided to provincialise the services of all Municipal employees of the rank of Inspector and above.
The petitioner's case was also sent to the Director, Local Government for screening and appointment as Inspector.
It has further been averred that Respondent No. 3 had been seeking approval of the Government for the appointment of the petitioner as Inspector and before the approval of the Government for the petitioner's appointment as Inspector was received, he was entrusted with the duties of Accounts Clerk and continued to work as such till 6th June, 1979, on which date the services of the petitioner were terminated by Respondent No. 3 vide Resolution dated 4th June, 1979.
2.
The facts and circumstances leading to the termination of the services of the petitioner may now be noticed.
3.
The petitioner was served with a charge-sheet on 22nd March, 1979, alleging that he had issued two receipts No. 21 and 22 in the names of Chandi Ram Charan Dass and Kundan Lal for Rs. 60/- each, but did not deposit the amount in the funds of the Notified Area Committee and that he fabricated another receipt book No. 119/339 and issued bogus receipts from that book to different citizens of Mullanpur.
These allegations were denied by the petitioner in his reply.
No Enquiry Officer was appointed to go into the charges and after consideration of the reply of the petitioner, the Committee vide its Resolution dated 4th June, 1979, terminated the services of the petitioner.
The petitioner filed an appeal before Deputy Commissioner, Ludhiana, against the order of his termination, which was heard by the Additional Deputy Commissioner, Ludhiana.
The Appellate Authority vide order dated 10th September, 1979 (Annexure P-2), accepted the appeal by holding that the Committee had not accepted the procedure as mentioned in the Rules.
It is not disputed by the respondents that for purposes of taking.
disciplinary action against the employees of the Committee, the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970 (hereinafter called the Rules), were applicable at the relevant time.
The non-service of a show cause notice proposing the punishment to be inflicted, was also taken as a ground by the Appellate Authority for setting aside the order of termination.
The Committee took the matter before the Government in revision and vide order dated 22nd December, 1980 (Annexure P-3), the revision petition of the Committee was accepted and the order of the Appellate Authority was set aside.
The Director-cum-Joint Secretary, exercising the Revisional powers, set aside the order of the Appellate Authority by observing as under :-  "Whereas Shri Romesh Chand has failed to satisfy me that the charge against him that he issued two receipts No. 21 and 22 in the names of Chandi Ram Charan Dass and Kundan Lal for Rs. 60 each but he did not deposit the money in the funds of the Notified Area Committee.
Whereas Shri Romesh Chand has also failed to satisfy me that he did not fabricates receipt book No. 119/339 and issued bogus receipts from that book to different citizens of Mullanpur.
Whereas I am satisfied that the charges have been brought home to Shri Romesh Chand and that the order of the learned Additional Deputy Commissioner is silent about veracity of the charges and has been passed only keeping in view the facts that the committee had not adopted the procedure mentioned in the rules (of course, without mentioning the specific rules which might have been infringed).
Now therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred under Section 237 of the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911, I reverse the order dated 10th September, 1979, of the learned Additional Deputy Commissioner, Ludhiana, setting aside the punishment imposed upon Shri Romesh Chand by the Notified Area Committee, Mullanpur Dakha, vide their Resolution No. 64 dated 4th June, 1979.
Therefore, I accept the appeal of the Notified Area Committee, Mullanpur Dakha, and order that the respondent, Shri Romesh Chand, shall stand dismissed from MAC services with effect from the date of Resolution No. 64 dated 4th June, 1979, passed by the Notified Area, Committee Mullanpur Dakha."
4.
The present writ petition was filed challenging the order of the Committee, dated 4th June, 1979 (Annexure P-1) and that of the Revisional Authority, dated 22nd December, 1980 (Annexure P-3).
5.
The primary ground raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner is that the services of the petitioner could not be terminated without following the procedure for holding regular enquiry under Rule 8 of the Rules.
According to the learned counsel if the reply to the charge-sheet was not found satisfactory, an Enquiry Officer should have been appointed who would have given the enquiry report after following the procedure under Rule 8 of the Rules.
6.
As observed in the earlier part of the judgment it is not disputed by the respondents that the Rules were applicable to the petitioner and factually after the reply to the charge-sheet, no regular enquiry was held against the petitioner and without affording any opportunity to the petitioner prove his innocence.
7.
In view of what has been observed above, the only unescapable conclusion that can be drawn is that the impugned orders are in utter violation of the Rules and also Rules of natural justice.
The Revisional Authority could not take up the vote of the Enquiry Officer and hold that the charges against the petitioner stood proved, as the petitioner had failed to satisfy it that he did not fabricate Receipt Book No. 119/339 and issued bogus receipts from that book to various citizens of Mullanpur.
Rule 8 of the Rules envisages a detailed procedure, whereby both the prosecution as well as the delinquent officer is allowed opportunity to lead evidence and then on the basis of the evidence, the enquiry report is to follow on the basis of which the disciplinary Authority is to take action after following the procedure envisaged by the Rules.
8.
Since, as observed above, the impugned orders are in clear violation of the Rules, the same serve to be set aside.
9.
Consequently, the writ petition is allowed and the impugned orders, Annexures P1 and P3 are set aside.
Needless to mention that the petitioner would be entitled to all the consequential benefits flowing from the setting aside of the impugned orders.
10.
Before parting with the judgment, I may observe that the petitioner, who is present in Court has voluntarily stated that as far as the arrears of pay etc. are concerned, he would be satisfied if the respondents pay him Rs. 50,000/- though in fact the arrears turn out to be much more than the said amount.
The arrears of pay as agreed to by the petitioner be paid to the petitioner within three months of the receipt of the copy of this order.
If the arrears, as mentioned above, are not paid within the stipulated period, the petitioner would be entitled to the entire arrears.
There will be no order as to costs.