HS Bedi, J - By the present judgment, we propose to dispose of Letters Patent Appeal No. 634 of 1990, Civil Writ Petition No. 5371 of 1990 and 18132 of 1991.
The facts have been taken from the Letters Patent Appeal.
2.
Respondent No. 1 Kuldip Singh was employed as a clerk with the Municipal Committee, Nabha, and while so employed, was placed under suspension on August 22, 1973.
The Municipal committee passed an order on October 17,1978 exonerating him of the allegations made and holding him to be innocent and in consequence thereof, he was reinstated with fullback wages, increments and other monetary benefits.
If appears that while respondent No. 1 was under suspension, the Employees Union of the Government and other Municipal committee in the State gave call for a State-wide strike for February 8, 1978, which was partially successful.
In order to show its appreciation to those employees who did not go on strike, the Chief Secretary to the Punjab Government issued a circular dated June 16, 1978, allowing the grant of one premature increment to the government employees.
This concession was later extended to the employees of the Municipal Committees vide Annexure P-6, dated 6-10-1986.
In this circular, no exception was made with regard to the grant of the increment in the case of those employees such as respondent No. 1, who were under suspension on the date of strike.
The claim of respondent No. 1 was however, rejected by the Municipal Committee, on the ground that he was under suspension on February 8, 1978 and there was accordingly no question of his non-participation in the strike and for reaching this conclusion, the Municipal Committee relied on a clarificatory circular dated January 6, 1979 issued by the Punjab Government and appended as Annexure P-5 to the petition, in which it was stated that an employee under suspension could not get the benefit of the premature increment visualised by Annexure P-4 and P-6.
Aggrieved by the circular, Annexure P-5, respondent No. 1 filed the present writ petition which on being allowed, has led to the filing of the present Letters Patent Appeal.
3.
In the reply filed to the writ petition, the stand of the Municipal Committee, was that the benefit of a premature increment could not be given to respondent No. 1 as he was under suspension on the crucial date and there was no question of his being called upon to stay away from the strike in that eventuality.
This interpretation was not accepted and the learned Single Judge who found that though the grant of a pre-mature increment by the State Government was a goodwill gesture and a concession which could not be enforced through a mandamus, yet respondent No. 1 having been exonerated from the departmental enquiry on October 18, 1978 the thereafter having been reinstated in service, it could be said that he would be deemed to be working on February 8, 1978 ie the date of strike and if had he not participated in the strike, he too would have been automatically 7 entitled to the grant of this concession.
The learned Single Judge further found that as respondent No. 1 had been deprived of the chance to make an option as to whether or not to participate in the strike by being erroneously put under suspension, he could not be made to suffer for no fault of his.
4.
Mr. HS Riar, learned Additional Advocate General, Punjab, has raised primarily two arguments before us (i) that the incentive was given to those employees who consciously opted not to join the strike but a person who was already under suspension had no opportunity to exercise that option and (ii) that the grant of a pre-mature increment being a concession could be modified or rescinded at any stage and the Government vide Annexure P-6 having decided that an employee under suspension could not be given such a benefit, this court would not issue a mandamus for that purpose.
For this assertion, Mr. Riar, placed reliance on Nand Lal and others v. Punjab State and others, 1990(1) RSJ 131.
5.
Mr. Ashok Sharma Nabhewala, learned counsel for the respondent has, however, urged that even if a concession is denied, arbitrarily, the action is liable to be struck down as being violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India, he has also urged that the denial of the concession to the respondent was in the nature of penalty as it would have serious effects on his salary and retiral benefits.
6.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, we find that the appeal deserves to succeed.
It will be seen that primary ground which led to the success of the writ petition was that as respondent No. 1 had been exonerated of the charges levelled against him and had been reinstated with continuity of service, he would be deemed to have been at work on the day of the strike, as he had been denied the opportunity of joining or not the strike.
This reasoning to our mind is erroneous as per Annexure P-4, P-5 and P-6 dated June 16, 1978, January 6, 1979 and October 6, 1986 respectively, a pre-mature increment was to be given only to such employees who did not participate in the strike on February 8, 1978.
In other words, before this concession could be given, the employee concerned was required to be in a position whereby he could make an option to participate in the strike or regain from doing so and it was only in the latter situation that he was entitled to the benefit aforesaid.
We have examined the matter from another angle as well.
In Stroud's Judicial Dictionary, Fifth Edition, the status of an employee when under suspension has been described as under :-  "When applied to a contract of employment, "suspend" means that the workman ceases to be under any present duty to work, and the employer ceases to be under any consequential duty to pay (Bird v. British Celanese Ltd (1945) KB 336).
"Suspension of employment" (Industrial Relations Act, 1971) (C. 72) S. 167(1)(b) does not refer to a mere suspension from duty but to temporary discontinuance of both work and pay under a contract which permits such discontinuance whilst the contract of employment remains in force Copy Lighterage v. Transport and General Workers Union (1973(2) All E.R.
558).
It would be seen from the above that the concept of suspension envisages that an employee would not be entitled to work though he would continue to be an employee of the master.
In this view of the matter, when the respondent was under suspension of February 8, 1978, he was already in a situation where he was not entitled to work and as such, the question of his participation or non-participation in the strike did not arise at all.
When examined in this perspective, the finding of the learned Single Judge that respondent No. 1 could not be made to suffer for the wrong committed by his employer, was obviously untenable.
7.
The additional argument of Mr. Sharma that even a concession cannot be denied arbitrarily is also without basis in the facts and circumstances of the case.
It is the admitted case of the parties that no exception has been made between different employees under suspension.
All such employees have been denied the benefit of the grant of a premature increment.
The final argument of Mr. Sharma that the denial of the concession aforesaid to his client had penal consequences for him, is also of no avail as the denial thereof is not a penalty by any stretch of imagination.
No regular increment has been denied, and the respondent not fulfilling the conditions for the grant of a concessional premature increment cannot make any grievance on that score.
8.
In the light what has been stated above, the second argument of Mr. Riar, learned Additional Advocate General, Punjab, that grant of a premature increment being merely a concession could not be enforced by a writ of mandamus, need not be gone into.
For the reasons recorded above, this appeal is allowed, whereas Civil Writ Petitions No. 5371 of 1990 and 18132 of 1991 are dismissed with no order as to costs.