MR Agnihotri, J - The petitioner joined as Airman in the Indian Air Force on 12th June, 1956, and served upto 12th August, 1974.
During his service span of more than 18 years, Emergency had been proclaimed twice due to war and external aggression for the first time on 26th October, 1962, and for the second time on 3rd December, 1971.
It was on 12th August, 1974, that the petitioner was discharged from service due to disability.
Thereafter, the petitioner was appointed in civil employment in the State of Punjab as Sub Inspector, Food and Supplies, on 13 May, 1975, on ad hoc basis, in the first instance, and his services were later regularised on 2nd July, 1985, with effect from 1st October, 1980.
The grievance of the petitioner, however, is that in pursuance of the instructions dated 3rd May, 1977, the employees who had put in one year's service were entitled to have their services regularised and, therefore, the services of the petitioner should also have been regularised as such with effect from 1st April, 1977, instead of lst October, 1980, and on that basis he was entitled to the benefit of entire military service towards seniority, promotion, pension, etc., that is, during the first Emergency period from 26th October, 1962 to 9th January, 1968, and during the second Emergency when it was proclaimed on 3rd December, 1971, upto 12th August, 1974, when he was discharged from the military service.
2.
In the written statement, it has been pleaded that after the discharge from military service, the petitioner was not appointed in civil employment against a reserved vacancy and had been appointed only on ad hoc basis, and that the benefit of entire military service rendered by him could not be granted to him, that is, for both the periods from 26th October, 1962 to 9th January, 1968 and from 3rd December, 1971 to 12th August, 1974, the date of discharge of the petitioner.
It has also been pleaded that the Demobilized Armed Forces Personnel (Reservation of Vacancies in the Punjab State Non- Technical Services) Rules, 1968, were not applicable to the petitioner.
As such, he could not be granted the benefit of seniority on the basis thereof, and also for the reason that the petitioner had qualified the departmental test in Punjabi after 1st April, 1977, and his services could only be regularised with effect from 1st October, 1980, and not with effect from 1st April, 1977,  3.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and having gone through the relevant record we find that the claim of the petitioner is meritorious and the stand taken by the respondents is wholly untenable in law.
The matter, in fact, is squarely covered by the Single Bench decision of this Court in Amar Singh v. Secretary to Punjab Government, Soil Conservation, etc., 1984(1) SLR 31, which was cited by the learned counsel for the petitioner at the time of the admission of the writ petition.
The Motion Bench, while admitted the writ petition to DB, passed the following order on 29th November, 1988 :-  "Cites 1984(1) SLR 31, to contend that the persons who were serving in the Indian Army during the course of Emergencies declared repeatedly, even if they were recruited or enrolled prior to the declaration of the first Emergency, are entitled to the benefit of Military service.
Prima facie we find it difficult to reconcile with this view.
Therefore, the petition is admitted to DB The main petition be listed for final hearing in the month of January, 1989."
4.
We have gone through the aforesaid Single Bench judgment very closely which has been followed in a number of decisions later on also, which are not necessary to be referred to, and we are in agreement with the view taken by the learned Single Judge.
5.
The erstwhile State of Punjab framed the Punjab Government National Emergency (Concession) Rules, 1965, which were notified on 20th July, 1965.
According to rule 4 of these Rules, the period of military service shall count towards increment, seniority and pension.
Rule 4 reads as under :-  "4.
Increments, seniority and pension.
- Period of military services shall count for increments, seniority and pension, as under :-  (i) Increments - The period spent by a person on military services; after attaining the minimum age prescribed for appointment to any service or post, to which he is appointed, shall count for increments.
Where no such minimum age is prescribed the minimum age shall be as laid down in rules 39, 310 and 311 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume 11.
This concession shall, however, be admissible only on first appointment.
(ii) Seniority - The period of military service mentioned in clause (i) shall be taken into consideration for the purpose of determining the seniority of a person who has rendered military service.
(iii) Pension - The period of military service mentioned in clause (i) shall count towards pension only in the case of appointments to permanent services or posts under the Government subject to the following conditions :-  (1) The person concerned should not have earned a pension under military rules in respect of the military service in question;  (2) Any bonus or gratuity paid in respect of military service by the defence authorities shall have to be refunded to the State Government;  (3) The period, if any, between the date of discharge from military service and the date of appointment to any service or post under the Government shall count for pension, provided such period does not exceed one year.
Any period exceeding one year but not exceeding three years may also be allowed to count for pension in exceptional cases under the orders of the Government."
Rule 2 of the aforesaid 1965 Rules defines the expression "military service" as service rendered by a person during the period of operation of the proclamation of Emergency made by the President under Article 352 of the Constitution on the 26th October, 1962, or such other service as may hereafter be declared as military service for the purposes of these Rules, and it shall count for the grant of benefit under these Rules.
Since the 1965 Rules have not been repealed till today and are still in force in the State for the last more than quarter of a century, the only irresistible conclusion is that if Emergency had to be declared by the President of India for the second time on 3rd December, 1971, and for that matter is to be declared any time in future also, the service rendered by the Armed Forces personnel during the period of Emergency shall have to be reckoned is military service ipso facto, for the purpose of these Rules.
In fact, the definition of the expression "military service' is so broad based and comprehensive that an enabling provision has been made for all times to come under which the State Government can always exercise its powers only by making a simple declaration.
Further, even if such a declaration is not formally made, the same can be inferred from the intention and action of the State Government.
It is not necessary for the grant of the benefit under these Rules that every time when necessity arises and the Emergency is proclaimed by the President under Article 352 of the Constitution, the Rules must be amended to enable the State to grant benefit to the eligible employees, In view of this interpretation, the plea made by the respondents is misconceived and untenable in law.
6.
Consequently, the writ petition is allowed and by issuing a writ of mandamus, we direct the respondents to grant to the petitioner the benefit of military service rendered by him, and as a consequence thereof, to ante-date the date of regularisation of his services from 1st October, 1980 to 1st April 1977, and to grant to him all consequential benefits of arrears of salary, seniority.
etc., as admissible under the service rules, to which he would have been entitled had his service been regularised from 1st April, 1977, instead of 1st October, 1980, in the very first instance.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs.