Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner, an Inspector of Police, is aggrieved by the order dated February 22, 1992 (annexure P17) by which he was given a notice of three months for retirement at the age of 55.
A few facts relevant for the decision of the case may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner was recruited as a Constable on August 4,1955.
He was promoted to the rank of Head Constable on December 22, 1962 and as an Assistant Sub Inspector of June 28, 1971.
The petitioner was confirmed as Assistant Sub Inspector of Police on May 10, 1980.
In the meantime, he had been promoted as a Sub Inspector on January 13, 1991.
The petitioner claims that he was confirmed as Sub Inspector w.e.f.
November 30, 1983.
3.
In July 1983, the petitioner was posted a Gurgaon.
In the annual confidential report for the year 1984-85, certain adverse remarks were recorded against the petitioner.
His honesty was described as doubtful.
He was stated to be a coward and communal.
It was also mentioned that the departmental enquiry was ordered against him for not making many attempt to control the incidents when he was posted as SHO Police Station Pataudi.
These remarks recorded by the Superintendent of Police were endorsed by the Deputy Inspector General of Police, who also observed that the petitioner `encouraged communalism.'
A copy of this report has been produced by the respondents as Annexure R.1 with the written statement.
In the meantime, the petitioner had been suspended on November 20, 1984.
He remained under suspension till December 18, 1984.
On November 3, 1985, the petitioner represented against the adverse report for the year 1984-85.
On February 26, 1986, the Superintendent of Police passed an order informing the petitioner that the enquiry officer had submitted his findigs on December 16, 1985 "exonerating the defaulters from the charges levelled against them on the ground that no evidence was forthcoming.
I have gone through the finding report submitted by the Enquiry Officer and find myself in agreement with him.
Hence, this departmental enquiry is hereby filed.
I also reinstate SI Ravinder Kumar and HC Jagdish Parsad No. 29 and order that the period of their suspension be treated as on duty for all intents and purposes."
4.
The petitioner was also conveyed an adverse report for the year 1985-86 for the period from April 1, 1985 to March 12, 1986.
During this interregnum, the petitioner remained under suspension from July 30, 1985 to October 7, 1985.
In this report, a copy of which has been produced on record as Annexure P.5, the petitioner's integrity was described as doubtful and it was observed that complaints for extorting money in case of petrol sample where received against him.
The work was described to be unsatisfactory.
The petitioner avers that even the allegations on the basis of which adverse remarks have been recorded and communicated to him were actually the subject-matter of an enquiry.
Without waiting for the result of the enquiry, he submitted a representation dated September 14, 1986, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-6 with the writ petition.
Ultimately, on July 8, 1988, the Superintendent of Police, Rohtak passed an order observing that the allegations levelled "against him in the D/E have not been substantiated and the DE has been filed on 9688.
He will draw his full pay and allowances for the suspension period and this period will be treated as duty period for all intents and purposes."
5.
The petitioner avers that the decision on his representation dated November 3, 1985 against the adverse remarks for the year 1984-85 had not been conveyed to him.
Consequently, he sent a reminder vide his representation dated May 16, 1987.
He also pointed out that the enquiry initiated against him had been conducted by Shri Anil Dewra, IPS, and that the matter had been dropped vide order dated February 26, 1986.
It appears that the petitioner still did not hear anything in reply to his representation, but he learnt that his representation had been rejected.
He consequently sent another representation dated August 25, 1988, a copy of which has been produced on record as Annexure P.11, to the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Gurgaon Range, Gurgaon.
In this representation, he pointed out that in view of the result of the enquiry and in accordance with the judgment delivered by Mr. Justice D V Sehgal, the remarks could not be sustained.
6.
On August 9, 1988, the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Gurgaon Range, Gurgaon accepted the petitioner's representation against the adverse remarks in his A.C.R.
for the period from April 1, 1985 to March 12, 1986.
His overall grade was even changed from "C" to "B".
By another order dated November 26, 1988, the petitioner's representation even against the report for the year 198485 was accepted.
A copy of this order has been placed on record as Annexure P-12.
On receipt of this order, the petitioner submitted a representation on January 28, 1989, to the Director General of Police, respondent No. 2, for retrospective promotion to the rank of Inspector w.e.f.
the data of a person junior to him had been promoted.
Vide order dated April 11, 1989, the Director General of Police admitted the petitioner's name to promotion list `F' w.e.f.
October 15, 1987.
He was also approved for promotion to the rank of Inspector.
A copy of this order has been produced on record as Annexure P-14.
Vide order dated April 15, 1989, the petitioner was actually promoted to the rank of Officiating Inspector.
It appears that the petitioner had submitted yet another representation claiming promotion w.e.f.
1984 or January 1985 when persons junior to him had been promoted.
7.
On November 22, 1991, the Director General of Police, Haryana wrote to the Deputy Inspector General, Gurgaon Range, Gurgaon, informing him that "SI Ravinder Kumar No. G/12 (Now Inspector) against adverse remarks recorded in his ACR for the period from 1484 to 31385 and 1485 to 12386 once rejected by the competent authority after due consideration could not be re- entertained by means of mercy petitioners as no second representation of mercy petition lies against adverse remarks.
In view of the circumstances the orders passed on his mercy petition by the Dy.
Inspector General of Police, Gurgaon Range, Gurgaon vide memo No. 14578/A-2 dated 26.11.88 accepting his mercy petition and expunging adverse remarks are hereby rescinded.
The adverse remarks may be constructed on his personal file under intimation to this office."
A copy of this order has been produced as Annexure P.18.
Some time thereafter a notice dated February 22, 1992 was sent by the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Gurgaon Range, Gurgaon to the petitioner in pursuance to the provisions contained in Rule 532(c) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Vol. II, Rule 3.26(d) of Punjab Civil Services Rules, Vol.
I Part-I and Rule 9.18 (i)(c) of the Punjab Police Rules, giving him three months notice informing him that he shall stand retired from service after the expiry of the said period.
A copy of this order has been produced as Annexure P17.
The petitioner represented against this notice.
Having failed to get any favourable reply, he has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
The petitioner has prayed for the quashing of the order of premature retirement (annexure P17) as also the order dated November 22, 1991 (annexure P.18) on various grounds, which shall be presently noticed.
8.
A written statement has been filed by Mr. K Koshy IPS, Deputy Inspector General of Police, Gurgaon Range on behalf of all the respondents.
It has been averred that "Petitioner has been reported adversely in the ACRs for the period from 1484 to 13385 and 1485 to 12386.
Petitioner's honesty and integrity was reported doubtful and he was conveyed the reports of doubtful integrity.
He filed representation against these reports and his representation were rejected after consideration.
Petitioner filed mercy petition against the order of rejection of presentation and the same was accepted.
But it is worth mentioning here that no mercy petition lies against rejection of representation against adverse remarks and the order of acceptance passed without authority were rescinded and the ACRs were reconstructed."
On merits, it has been pointed out that the petitioner had been confirmed as an Assistant Sub Inspector on May 10, 1980 and not on September 10, 1975, as claimed by him.
Further, he was confirmed as Sub.
Inspector on January 31, 1984 and not on September 30, 1983.
With regard to the representation against the adverse remarks, it has been pointed out that the representation against the adverse report for the period from April 1, 1984 to March 12,1985 was considered and rejected by the DIG, Gurgaon range.
The respondents aver that the departmental enquiry against the petitioner was filed on February 26, 1986 and that the representation was rejected keeping in view the order of enquiry.
It has been further averred that the mercy petition submitted by the petitioner was accepted and the adverse remarks were expunged.
However, "when this fact came to knowledge the orders of expunction were rescinded by the Director General of Police and the adverse remarks have been reconstructed.
According to rules and instructions no second representation lies against the adverse remarks and that is why the orders of expunction passed without any authority have been properly rescinded and adverse remarks reconstructed.
It is also relevant here that the D/E was relating to only one of the adverse remarks.
Other points of adverse remarks were not subject of this D/E and were based on personal knowledge of the reporting officer and assessment.
Thus it cannot be said that by filing of D/E the basis for adverse remarks goes."
It has been further averred that the petitioner has been "reported adversely in the ACRs for the period from 1484 to 13385 and 1485 to 12386.
Though he has been awarded commendation certificates for specific good work but, it cannot be said that commendation certificates have been awarded for his overall good work."
It has been further averred that "the petitioner filed representation against adverse remarks in the ACR for the period from 1485 to 12386.
This representation was accepted and the petitioner also filed a mercy petition against adverse remarks for the period 1484 to 13385 by suppressing the facts and the same was also accepted and the adverse remarks in both the ACRs were expunged but the lapse came to the knowledge while reviewing his case for extension beyond 55 years and the DGP rescinded the orders of expunction passed by the DIG Range, Gurgaon on the ground that no second representation lies against the adverse remarks and the adverse remarks had been expunged by accepting the time barred representation."
Accordingly, the respondents maintain that "the adverse remarks were expunged but now the same have been reconstructed."
It is also stated that the petitioner had been promoted as Inspector when adverse remarks from his ACRs were expunged.
But now after the reconstruction of the ACRs, his case for reversion is to be considered but in the meanwhile a notice for retirement at the age of 55 years has been issued.
The respondents aver that the "petitioner has been granted 133 commendation certificates and not 140....
The representation filed by the petitioner against notice of retirement has been rejected after consideration.
The order of reconstruction of ACRs has been passed after conveying the notice that the petitioner has filed the 2nd representation after rejection of 1st representation to the same authority which is not competent to entertain the same .... As per Govt. instructions, only those employees whose honesty has not been reported doubtful during the last 10 years of service are to be retained after completing 55 years age.
But the honesty of the petitioner has been reported doubtful for two consecutive years and so notice of retirement has been issued the public interest."
On these averments, the impugned orders are sought to be supported.
9.
The petitioner has filed a replication reinstating the position taken by him in the writ petition.
10.
I have heard Mr. Paramjit Singh Patwalia, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. Jaswant Singh, learned counsel for respondents.
Mr. Patwalia contends that the order dated November 22, 1991, by which the order dated November 26, 1988 has been cancelled is wholly illegal and invalid on the twin ground that it is based on wrong hypothesis and that it is violative of the principles of natural justice.
Accordingly the counsel submits that the order is vitiated.
He further contends that even otherwise the order expunging the adverse remarks after the result of the enquiry was absolutely legal and valid and that there was no ground for the Director General of Police to cancel those orders.
Learned counsel submits that since the order of November 22, 1991 is invalid, the reconstruction of the adverse remarks as also the order of premature retirement cannot at all be sustained.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioner has been controverted by the learned counsel for the respondents.
11.
In the order dated November 22, 1991 as noticed above, the Director General of Police observes that "the representation of SI Ravinder Kumar No. G/12 (now Inspector) against adverse remarks recorded in his ACR for the period from 1484 to 31385 and 1485 to 12386 once rejected by the competent authority after due consideration could not re-entertained by means of mercy petitions as no second representation of mercy petition lies against adverse remarks."
Learned counsel appearing for the respondents admits that the Director General of Police had proceeded on wrong hypothesis that the petitioner's representation against the adverse remarks for the period from April 1, 1985 to March 12, 1986 had been rejected on an earlier occasion.
He states that the representation against these remarks was not rejected by any authority at any time.
In view of this factual position, it is apparent that the order suffers from an error apparent on the record.
Mr. Jaswant Singh, however, submits that this representation was actually barred by limitation, Consequently the order passed by the authority was nullity.
12.
So far as this aspect of the matter is concerned, it is relevant to refer to the original file bearing No. 25-16/88 relating to the consideration of the representation submitted by the petitioner.
At page 9 of the file, there are two notes (photocopy retained as Mark A) dated August 3 and August 4, 1988.
These read as under :-  "Please intimate as to when adverse remarks were conveyed to the representationist and the date on which he made representation against them.
A-2, Sd/- Supdt.
", 3/8  "The adverse remarks were conveyed to SI Ravinder Kumar No. G/12 on 23686 and he submitted representation against adverse remarks on 14986, and hence the representation is within time.
Supdt., Sd/- A-2, 4.8.88"  It was thereafter that the DIG passed the order on August 8, 1988 accepting the representation.
13.
A perusal of the above shows that the adverse remarks are stated to have been communicated on June 23, 1986 and the representation was submitted by the petitioner on September 14, 1986.
Learned counsel concedes that the representation under the executive instructions issued by the State Government has to be submitted within three months.
It is thus apparent that the representation of the petitioner was within time.
It is further clear that even the office has reported that the representation was within limitation.
There is thus no basis for contention that the representation was barred by limitation.
14.
Mr. Jaswant Singh then refers to personal file of the petitioner to show that a copy of the adverse remarks had been conveyed to him vide letter dated May 26, 1986 and that he had actually received this letter on June 4, 1986.
Even though this fact has not been mentioned in the written statement, yet even if it is that the list the representation submitted by the petitioner was delayed by 10 days, Mr. Jaswant Singh concedes that the Deputy Inspector General of Police had the jurisdiction to condone delay in filing of a representation.
Further assuming that the Director General of Police was not satisfied with the facts as noticed in the office notes of D.I.G.
or his action in accepting the representation, he could not have reversed the order passed by the D.I.G.
without affording the petitioner an opportunity to show cause.
The action in ordering the reconstruction of the report for the year 1985-86 was totally violative of the principles of natural justice and cannot be sustained.
15.
This brings me to the consideration of the matter relating to the report for the year 1984-85.
A perusal of the pleadings of the parties shows that the petitioner had submitted a representation dated November 3, 1985 against the adverse remarks for the year 1984-85.
He had then submitted a reminder vide letter dated May 10, 1987.
In this letter, which was sent by way of a reminder, the petitioner has categorically averred that his representation dated November 3, 1985 "is still pending in your office for consideration."
It is thus reasonable to infer that no decision had been communicated to the petitioner till May 16, 1987.
Thereafter, the petitioner submitted another representation on August 25, 1988, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P.11, In this representation, the petitioner stated that he had learnt that his representation had been rejected.
However, he had not been intimated the decision taken on his representation.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents it has been averred that the D.I.G.
Gurgaon Range had rejected the representation of the petitioner vide order dated January 28, 1987.
A copy of this order has been produced as Annexure R.2.
There is nothing on record to indicate that the copy of the order was ever conveyed to the petitioner.
Even now, Mr. Jaswant Singh has not been able to show on record that the letter dated January 28, 1987 was ever served on the petitioner.
Even if it is assumed that this letter was sent by the D.I.G.
to the Superintendent of Police, Gurgaon, there is nothing on record to show that it was ever sent to the petitioner.
Consequently, there is no order communicated to the petitioner showing that his representation had been rejected.
In such a situation, if the petitioner submitted a representation bringing certain facts to the notice of the authority and his representation was accepted, or the remarks were expunged, it cannot be said that the order was nullity or void ab initio.
In any event, before the Director General of Police could review or reverse that order which had been passed by the D.I.G.
in favour of the petitioner, it was incumbent on him to give some opportunity to the petitioner.
If such an opportunity had been given to the petitioner, he could have shown that -  i) he had not received any order rejecting his representation;  ii) in view of the findings of the enquiry officer recorded after a departmental enquiry, the remarks cannot be sustained;  iii) under the relevant instructions, the D.I.G.
had the jurisdiction to review an erroneous order.
Failure to grant an opportunity certainly deprived the petitioner of a chance to prove his case.
It resulted in material miscarriage of justice.
It is apparent that the order passed by the Director General of Police has adversely affected the petitioner's career.
He has been retired from service.
His tenure has been curtailed.
Yet it is suggested on behalf of the respondents that no opportunity was required to be given.
16.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am satisfied that the action of the Director General of Police was in violation of the principles of natural justice and cannot be sustained.
17.
Accordingly, it is held that the order dated November 22, 1991, (Annexure P-18) suffers from time infirmities.
Firstly it is based on wrong assumption of facts.
Secondly it was passed in violation of the principles of natural justice.
It is consequently vitiated.
18.
It is the admitted position that the order of retirement has been passed on the basis of the reconstruction of the two reports relating to the years 1984-85 and 1985-86.
This reconstruction was done in pursuance to the order dated November 22, 1991.
This order having been set aside, the action in reconstructing the reports is obviously vitiated.
19.
It is also apparent that the notice for premature retirement was given to the petitioner only on account of these two reports.
In view of my findings with regard to the order dated November 22, 1991, the action in reconstructing the petitioner's record cannot sustained.
In view thereof, the action in retiring him prematurely only on the basis of these two reports also cannot be sustained.
Mr. Jaswant Singh concedes on instructions from Mr. Gurbachan Singh, Assistant, Office of Director General of Police that besides these two reports, there is nothing against the petitioner.
He concedes that in fact the petitioner has been awarded as many as 133 commendation certificates during his service.
20.
Taking the totality of circumstances into consideration, I am unable to uphold either of the two impugned orders.
These are consequently set aside.
Since the Motion Bench had stayed the operation of the impugned orders at the time of the admission of the writ petition and the petitioner has continued to be in service, it is not necessary to pass any order regarding consequential benefits.
The petitioner will be entitled to his costs which are assessed at Rs. 2,000/-.