Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was recruited as an Inspector in the Department of Co-operative Societies on January 15, 1961.
While working as such, he joined Indian Army on January 12, 1963.
The petitioner was commissioned as Officer on June 30, 1963.
On April 7, 1968, the petitioner was released from the Army.
After his release, he was appointed as an Inspector and promoted as Assistant Registrar, Cooperative Societies in October, 1977.
The petitioner claims that in accordance with the instructions issued by the Government through different letters and particularly vide letter dated October 19, 1965 he was entitled to be absorbed as Assistant Registrar w.e.f.
April 8,1968 when he came back after his release from the Army.
Reliance for this purpose has been placed on the instructions contained in Govt. Circular letter dated October 19, 1965.
The relevant portion quoted by the petitioner reads as under :  ".... Government employees in all the services who join Military Service during the present Emergency should, on their return, be absorbed in posts for which they possess the necessary qualifications.
If the Vacancies which have either been reserved for them or have not been filled on a substantive basis are not sufficient to absorb them, the requisite member of suitable additional posts would be created for that purpose."
2.
The petitioner's representation to the Department having borne no fruit, he has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
It has been averred that the action of the respondents is arbitrary and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
Accordingly, a writ in the nature of Mandamus directing the respondents to treat the petitioner as having been absorbed as Assistant Registrar, Cooperative Societies w.e.f.
April 8, 1968 with all consequential benefits in the matter of further promotion etc. has been made.
3.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents.
It has been initially averred that the Punjab Government had notified the Punjab Government National Emergency (Concession) Rules, 1965 vide notification dated July 29, 1965 which was published in the official Gazette.
It has been further mentioned that instructions had been issued by the Government for imposing a ban on direct recruitment on substantive basis.
These instructions were fully complied with and no direct recruitment to the post of Assistant Registrar was made during the period February, 1963 till the rejoining of the petitioner as an Inspector on April 8, 1968.
It has been further pointed out that upto 1973 no direct recruitment was made to the post of Assistant Registrar as there was no permanent vacancy available in the Department.
It has also been averred that the instructions referred to by the petitioner are not applicable in his case as the matter is covered by the provisions of Rules 5 & 7 of 1965 Rules referred to above.
It has been further pointed out that vide Govt.
Memo No. 795-CI-69/4786 dated 22-10-1968 the petitioner was advised to apply for the post of Assistant Registrar as and when the posts are advertised by the Punjab Public Service Commission for direct recruitment.
It has also been averred that 19 posts were, in fact, advertised, out of which, three were reserved for Ex-Servicemen during the period 1974 to 1983.
The petitioner did not apply for direct recruitment and consequently it is averred that he is not entitled to the benefit as claimed by him in this petition.
4.
I have heard Mr. VP Sharma, the learned Counsel for the petitioner and Mrs. Charu Tuli, Counsel for the respondents.
5.
The learned Counsel for the petitioner has not been able to base his claim on any specific instructions which might have been issued before he joined Army in 1963.
Further a reference has been made to the instructions issued subsequently, but it is apparent that on the date the petitioner had joined the Army, there was no specific instruction conferring any benefit on him or on any other person who joined Army while he was in the service of the State Government.
It is also admitted by the learned Counsel for the petitioner that, while the petitioner was still in service, the State Government had issued statutory rules referred to above, whereunder a definite provision was made with regard to benefits which could be granted by the Administration to a Govt. servant on his release from the Army.
In this behalf, it is relevant to refer to the provisions of Rule 5 of the Punjab Government National Emergency (concession) Rules, 1965.
It reads as under :-  "The period spent on military service by a Government employee shall count for seniority, promotion, increment and pension in the service or post held by him immediately before his joining military service.
A permanent Government employee who renders military service, shall earn leave during such service according to the leave rules applicable to him immediately before his joining military service.
A temporary Government employee shall during military service, be governed by the military rules in all respects.
The employee concerned shall be entitled to proforma promotion in his parent department under the next below rule and also to seniority in higher posts to which he would otherwise have been entitled if he had not joined military service."
6.
A perusal of the above rule would show that a Govt. servant, who joined the Army, was entitled to count the period of military service towards, seniority, increments, promotion and pension etc.
In other words, even though a person was not actually in the service of the State Govt. yet by virtue of provisions of rule 5 it was to be assumed that he had continued to be in the service of the State Government and was to be entitled to the grant of benefits which he would have earned if he had actually continued to so serve.
The rule virtually incorporates the concept of Next Below Rule as is known under the Punjab Civil Service Rules.
These benefits, as admissible under the statutory rules, have admittedly been given to the petitioner.
The entire period of service rendered the petitioner in the Army has been treated as it had been spent in service of the Deptt.
of Cooperative Societies.
The petitioner's pay, increment.
seniority, have been admittedly fixed on these premises.
He had also been promoted as an Assistant Registrar in accordance with the relevant rules.
In this situation, it is not possible to hold that the action of the respondent is, in any way, violative of the rules applicable in the matter.
7.
Mr. Sharma, the learned Counsel for the petitioner, contends that in accordance with the instructions dated October 19, 1965, the petitioner had a right to be absorbed on a post for which he possessed the necessary qualifications.
These instructions were issued long after the petitioner had joined the Army.
Staturoy rules having been notified, any instructions contrary to the Rules, which these appear to be, can be of no avail.
Further, if the contention of the Counsel is to be accepted, the petitioner, who is a Graduate, would even be entitled to claim appointment as a member of the Provincial Civil Service.
Such is not the purport of the instructions.
Actually, the underlying idea behind these instructions is that a temporary Govt. employee, who had joined the Army and in whose case the lien has not been retained, should, if possible, be absorbed on a post for which he is qualified on his return from the Army.
So far as the petitioner is concerned, he was actually absorbed on the post which he was holding immediately prior to his joining the Army.
In his case, the question of absorbing him on any other post for which he may have fulfilled the qualifications, therefore, did not arise.
8.
Even otherwise, if the petitioner's claim were to be accepted, rights of many other persons, who have been working as Assistant Registrars from a date prior to one on which the petitioner was appointed, shall be adversely affected.
As none of those persons has been impleaded as party to the petition, no order to their prejudice can be assed in their absence.
Necessary parties having not been impleaded, the petition is incompetent.
Accordingly, there is no merit in this petition and it is dismissed.
However, in the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.