RS Mongia, J - Brief facts giving rise to the present writ petition are in a narrow compass.
Petitioner as well as respondent No. 4, both PCMS doctors alongwith other candidates sought admission in the MD course in Medical College, Rohtak in the speciality of TB & Chest.
The said college is affiliated to Mahrishi Dayanand University, Rohtak.
The last date for submission of the applications was 2821992.
Both the petitioner as well as respondent No. 4 had applied for the admission prior to the last date of submission of application.
It may be observed here that respondent No. 4 prior to his applying for admission to MD course had also applied for admission to the Diploma Course in TB & Chest run by the same College for the session 1991-1992.
By the time he had applied for admission in the MD Course for the session 1992-93, he had not been admitted in the Diploma Course of the Session 1991-1992 or 1992-1993.
However, respondent No. 4 was admitted in the Diploma Course in TB & Chest in the College for the session 1992-1993 on 531992.
On 3041992, a notice for interview was issued by the Commissioner & Secretary to Government, Haryana, Health Department (Annexure P/1) regarding admission of HCMS doctors in the Post-Graduate Course against the seats reserved for HCMS doctors.
In this notice, against the name of respondent No. 4-Dr. Tribhuwan Kumar, it has been mentioned that he is to be interviewed in case he has already not joined the Diploma Course in Medical College, Rohtak.
Petitioner as well as respondent No. 4, alongwith others were interviewed for admission to the MD Course (TB & Chest).
Consequent upon this, respondent No. 4 was informed vide telegram dated 1861992 that he had been selected for admission in MD Course (TB & Chest).
2.
In the prospectus the following conditions are mentioned for being eligible for admission in the MD Course :-  "4.
A student who is already admitted to a diploma course in a subject shall be eligible to apply for admission to the degree course if he has passed the diploma course in the same subject before the last date of receipt of application for the course in which he is applying.
If selected for the degree course in the same subject in which he/she has passed diploma examination he/she will be admitted to the 2nd year of the three-year course.
5.
A student who is already admitted to/has passed a degree course in a subject shall not be eligible to apply for diploma course in the same subject.
6.
A student who is already admitted to any course can only be deemed to be eligible to apply for any other course after passing the first course."
3.
The grievance of the petitioner in the present writ petition is that respondent No. 4 could not have been given admission in the MD Course (TB & Chest) inasmuch as at the time of interview for admission he had already been admitted in the Diploma Course (TB & Chest), and in view of the conditions of eligibility referred to above, the respondent erred in offering admission to respondent No. 4.
The learned counsel further submitted that had respondent No. 4, who was ineligible for admission, not been admitted to MD Course (TB & Chest), the petitioner would have been admitted in the said course in his place.
He has further submitted that according to the averments made in the writ petition, respondent No. 3.
The Director-Principal, Medical College, Rohtak did not allow respondent No. 4 to join the course inasmuch as his admission was against the eligibility criteria referred to above.
However, on 12.8.1992, respondent No. 3 succumbed and admission was granted to respondent No. 4 in the MD Course (TB & Chest) and he joined on the same day.
This writ petition was filed on 1371992.
On 15.7.1992, petitioner was offered admission in MD Course in the speciality, of Eye, which was the second choice of the petitioner.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner argued that according to the criteria of eligibility to which references has already been made above, though strictly speaking respondent No. 4 may have been eligible to apply for admission to MD Course (TB & Chest) upto 2821992, as by that time he had not got admission in any Diploma course, yet the spirit and object to be achieved by eligibility criteria has to be kept in mind while admitting the students.
According to him, the object to be achieved by laying down the above criteria is that a candidate who has already been admitted in a Diploma course and thereafter joins the MD Course.
In such an eventuality the Diploma course seat may go waste as it may remain vacant.
Further, according to the learned counsel, it has to be seen on the date of admission to the MD Course as to whether a candidate has already got admission in a Diploma Course and if the answer is in the affirmative he should be held to be ineligible for admission to the MD Course.
To substantiate this argument, he relied upon a judgment of this Court in Dr. Pawan Kumar Gupta v. Mahrishi Dayanand University & others, 1992(1) SCT 68 (P&H) : 1992(1) RSJ 444.
5.
On the other hand, learned counsel for respondent No. 4 submitted that in accordance with the criteria of eligibility his client was eligible to apply upto 2821992 as by that time he had not been admitted in the any Diploma Course.
He further submitted that eligibility has to be seen on the last date of submission of the applications.
6.
After hearing counsel for the parties, I am of the view that there is considerable force in the argument of learned counsel for the petitioner.
The whole object of eligibility criteria is that a candidate should not be allowed to surrender the seat once he gets admission in the Diploma Course.
He cannot be allowed to get admission in the MD Course later on.
If such a thing is allowed and a candidate is permitted to surrender a seat, then the end result would be that a seat in the Diploma Course may go begging with this and in view the criteria of eligibility has to be read harmoniously with the object to be achieved.
7.
Constitution it has to be seen on the date of admission in the MD Course whether any candidate has already got admission in the Diploma Course.
Respondent No. 3 was right in declining initially admission to respondent No. 4 on this count.
However, for the reasons best known to the respondent, he ultimately granted admission to Respondent No. 4 on 12.8.1992.
Since more than 3 months have passed since respondent No. 4 got admission, I do not consider it appropriate at this stage to cancel his admission.
However on that count petitioner cannot be deprived admission to MD Course (TB & Chest).
8.
For the foregoing reasons, this writ petition is allowed and respondents are directed to allow the petitioner to shift forthwith from MD Course from speciality of `Eye' to the speciality of `TB & Chest', either by creation of an additional seat or by transfer of one seat from the speciality of Eye to the speciality of TB & Chest, it will be open to the respondents to offer a seat in MD `Eye' to a candidate who is on the waiting list, if so advised.
I make no order to costs.