Kalyan Jyoti Sengupta, J - By this writ application the resolution of the Screening Committee, dated 20th June, 1998 and the decision of the Executive Council dated 9th July 1998, the respondent, Burdwan University have been challenged and further asked for direction upon the respondent Nos. 1 to 5 to give re-employment to the petitioner with retrospective effect from 1st February, 1996.
The petitioner being an historian instead of writing history of battle and life profile of historical heroes and individuals has here written history of his legal battle he fought.
This is his second-round battle in Court of law for establishing his claim of re-employment in the post of the Head of the History Department, Burdwan University.
The fact of the case is more or less undisputed and the same is stated briefly as follows :  In August 1961 petitioner joined University of Burdwan as lecturer in the Department of History.
In course of time gradually he became Reader and Professor in the said Department and in fact he acted as head of the Department of History on several occasions from 1993-96.
Till he attained his age of 60 years he held the office of the Head of the aforesaid Department.
It appears his assumption of office of this status was not uneventful, as per his projection of career building, he was sought to be denied the aforesaid post, as a result whereof he had to come to this Court on or about 5h May, 1994 by filing a writ petition being Co. No. 13820 (W) of 1994.
Ultimately he succeeded in the said writ petition.
The University authority had to place him in the aforesaid office on regular rotational basis on or about 28th November, 1994.
2.
Thereafter, it appears, he could not continue in this post without any litigation and from time to time he was disturbed.
As such he came to this Court once against by filing another writ petition being No. C.O.
6039(W) of 1995 challenging the decision of Executive Council debarring him from all examination works for one year.
He succeeded this time too in the said writ petition.
This litigation presumably ensued because of university authority became adamant to illegally and unjustly victimize him.
These are particulars of allegations of bias levelled by the petitioner.
Before attaining his 60 years of age, he applied to the University authorities for his re-employment as per university Ordinance No. 10(TU) on 21st November, 1995 but the said authority refused such prayer.
On 30th January, 1996, the petitioner attained age of superannuation and he in spite of his attaining age as aforesaid, is said to have been allowed to remain in this office upon taking classes till 27th February, 1996.
On 12th February, 1996, the Executive Council of the University, accepting recommendation of the Screening Committee refused to re-employ him for initial period of two years with effect from 1st February, 1996.
3.
Challenging the aforesaid decision the petitioner came to this Court by filing a writ petition and also prayed for an order of re-employment.
On 24th December, 1997 the learned Single Judge of this Court by judgment and order allowed the writ petition rescinding and quashing the resolutions dated 7th March, 1996 and 12th April, 1996 of the Screening Committee as well as the Executive be Council of the University.
By the said order the learned Single Judge directed to pass necessary orders for re-employment of the petitioner in terms of the aforesaid provision of law within 6 weeks from the date of communication of the order.
The University authority preferred an appeal against the aforesaid judgment and order of the learned single Judge and the same was registered as MAT No. 44 of 1998.
On 6th April, 1998 the Appeal Court allowed the appeal partly setting aside and reversing the direction of the learned Single Judge for re-appointment of the petitioner as a matter of course but affirming decision of rescinding and quashing of both the resolutions.
The Appeal Court while disposing of the appeal gave the following direction, which are appropriately set out hereunder :  "Keeping in view the peculiar facts and circumstances of this case, we are of the opinion that interest of justice demands that a new screening committee be constituted and his case may be considered afresh at an early date and riot later than 3 weeks from the date of communication of this order in terms of the suggestion given by the learned Counsel for the appellant.
We have no doubt in cur in that the Screening Committee and the Executive Council with a new Vice-Chancellor heading the said bodies shall act impartially, fairly and reasonably.
As statutory functionaries they are to act most honestly and in an unbiased manner.
The prayer of the writ petitioner for obtaining such reappointment must be considered on the relevant fact and a decision thereupon shall be taken on adopting objective criteria and not on whims and caprice.
The Executive Council while considering the recommendations, in the event comes, to the conclusion that the petitioner fulfils the criteria, may allow him that first re-appointment for a terms of 2 years and continue to do the same, as if his case is being considered immediately on his retirement.
His subsequent application for extension can be considered in similar fashion and for the purpose, the age bar may be relaxed, if permissible in law.
The writ petitioner, in our opinion, is also entitled to exemplary costs Counsels fee assessed at 500 Gms."
4.
It appears from the aforesaid judgment and order of the Division Bench the writ petitioner herein preferred an SLP however, the same was dismissed.
Therefore, the aforesaid direction judgment and findings of the Division Bench has now become final and conclusive.
Pursuant to the aforesaid direction and order the Screening Committee took fresh decision, however, did not recommend the petitioner's case for re-employment.
By the aforesaid impugned resolution, the Executive Council which having accepted the recommendation and decision of the Screening Committee, refused to grant re-employment to the petitioner under the provision of the aforesaid law.
On the aforesaid factual matrix the present writ petition has been filed.
5.
When the writ petition was filed, the petitioner did not attain his 65 years of age, which is the maximum outer limit of a teacher under the provision of law to remain in services even on re-employment.
At the time of final hearing his factual re-appointment in the said post appeared to be impossible but according to the writ petitioner since the case was filed before attaining 65 years of his age and in view of the direction of the Division Bench to consider the relaxation of age limit the petitioner would have been re-appointed, had he succeeded in the writ petition, if it were heard before attaining his of 65 years of age.
So, if he succeeds in this writ petition he is entitled to get monetary relief on getting notional reappointment and other consequential benefits.
6.
Both the learned Senior Advocate Mr. PK Das and Mr. SN Mukherjee, though Mr. Das led, Mr. Mukherjee, argued this matter jointly and in turn and conveniently with he permission of the Court on behalf of the petitioner.
Their convention and submission obviously is identical.
They contend, the University authority have misapplied and misconstrued the relevant Rules in the matter of re-employment, that is University Ordinance 10 (TU) of the Burdwan University Ordinance.
The Screening Committee made no real consideration of the petitioner's candidature on merit in accordance with requirement of University Ordinance 10 (TU) by omitting to consider the petitioner's performance as a teacher, and making adverse comments on his recent research work, which have been proved baseless and motivated, by the recent award of the prestigious national fellowship given by ICHRS.
In support of this part of their argument they have relied on the following decisions :-  AIR 1967 SC 295 (Barium Chemicals Case), AIR 1972 SC 591 (Challapan Case) paras 15 and 16, AIR 1975 SC 2216, 1987 (1) Cal HN 268.
7.
The Screening Committee as well as the Executive Council blatantly violated the Division Bench mandate by not having proceeded objectively and rather acted on subjective consideration, extraneous to University Ordinance 10 (TU).
8.
They say the matter of re-employment of this nature, is governed by the criteria laid down in the aforesaid Ordinance 10 (TU).
As a statutory body and/or its ofcicatil unlike natural person cannot act contrary to the provision of the statute under which they are created.
They can act in the manner prescribed in the statue.
The university has failed to do so.
In this context they referred to a judgment of this Court reported in (1975) 79 Cal WN 883 (paragraph 2) and Stroud Judicial Dictionary, decision of this Court reported in (1987) Cal HN 268 : (1987) Cal WN 532, and a Supreme Court decision reported in (1997) 2 SCC 85 (sic).
As this matter was required to be dealt with under statutory power with the guidelines laid down therein, such exercise of power no longer remains within the administrative field absolutely, it partakes he character of quasi-judicial function.
Therefore, the bogey of the matter being in educational field and capable of being untouched by the Court for any reason is not sustainable.
It is well settled principle of law, they contend, the decisions rendered in the quasi-judicial function, must be informed with reasons and in compliance with the natural justice.
They have referred to in this context the following decisions of the Supreme Court.
(1967) 3 SCR 302 : (AIR 1967 SC 1606) AIR 1970 SC 150, AIR 1978 SC 851, (1991) 3 SCC 38 : (1991 Lab IC 1256) and Administrative law (D. Basu) Vth Edition pages 224 to 226.
9.
The decision of the Executive Committee is vitiated because of the same having not been taken as per the relevant rules by reason of the fact that the Chancellor's, nominee was absent and further more one of the members of the Executive Council was not an expert in the field of petitioner's specialization.
Rather this member held an administrative post in an obscured organization.
They referred in this connection two Supreme Court decisions reported in AIR 1990 SC 2062 (AIR 1990 SC 2063) (1990) 4 SCC 510 (sic).
10.
Their next contention to challenge the impugned resolution of the Screening Committee is that the respondent No. 5 who was bias against the petitioner in the past incidents, was present in the Screening Committee room and he was capable of influencing the other Members of the Committee.
In fact, the petitioner duly informed the University authorities of his apprehension of bias.
The respondent No. 5 was also present at the relevant meeting of the Executive Council.
Therefore, the presence of the respondent No. 5 had vitiated the entire decision-making process and decision as a whole.
In this connection they relied on, in support of this proposition, on a decision of the Supreme Court reported in (1995) 1 SCC Supp 21.
They further contended that the case of bias would be inferred even when one of the Members of the Enquiry committee has a strong hatred or bias against the petitioner.
The said Member is in a position to influence decision-making process.
They have referred to decision in this regard reported in AIR 1993 SC 2155.
Their contention is that the University authority has illegally and arbitrarily resorted to pick and choose policy in the matter of granting re-employment.
They cannot deprive the petitioner of the same statutory benefit without reasons.
The petitioner's self-assessment for getting re-employment has not been questioned by the University.
They have urged to consider in this connection the decisions of the Supreme Court reported in AIR 1981 SC 1775.
AIR 1984 SC 1499 and (1996) 7 SCC 381.
Their next submission is that their client has been treated with hostile discrimination against the petitioner.
The university and its official are statutory authorities, their act and function therefore, mist conform to Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India with fair and equitable decision and lastly be devoid of any bias and/or discrimination.
They referred to on this proposition, two decisions of the Supreme Court reported in AIR 1962 SC 36 and AIR 1986 SC 210.
11.
Their concluding part of the argument is that though the petitioner cannot be allowed to join on re-employment even of he succeeds in the writ petition because of lapse of time, this Court will mould relief by declaring that the petitioner was eligible to be reemployed and all the consequential benefits.
They have relied on the following decisions of the Supreme Court in this connection.
12.
(2001) 4 SCALE 445, (1994) Supp.
3 SCC 671: (1993 AIR SCW 2598), AIR 1984 SC 758, AIR 1985 SC 1046, AIR 1986 SC 210, AIR 1989 SC 1854 and AIR 1981 SC 1915.
13.
Mr. Dipak Sengupta, learned Senior Counsel in matching reply to the argument of Mr. Das and Mr. Mukherjee on behalf of the respondents contends that the Screening Committee as well as the Executive Council have taken decision within their respective power as conferred by the statute and they are the supreme authority in the field of their academic administrative affairs, their authority is not questioned by the petitioner.
The aforesaid bodies in exercise of their statutory power have thought it fit not to grant any re-employment to the petitioner.
Therefore, the Court will not interfere with this.
The decision relates to questions of eligibility in academic field and this should be left with the academicians.
The Court ordinarily does not become academicians to substitute its decision.
All the records relating to the performance of the petitioner and his qualification were examined by duly constituted Screening Committee in terms of the Division Bench Judgment and following guidelines laid down thereunder.
They are of the view the re- employment to the petitioner was not called for and justified.
In this connection he has relied on the decision of the Supreme Court reported in (2001) 8 SCC 546 (Tariq Islam v. Aligarh Muslim University), a decision of the learned Single Judge of this Court reported in AIR 1998 Cal 285, (Ma.
Ananda Oil Mills Pvt. Ltd. v. WBFC), (2002) 2 SCC 712 (GA Nayak v. Goa University), AIR 2002 SC 2382 (Amrik Singh v. Union of India), AIR 1997 SC 2257 (Berhampur University v. Sailabala Padhi), AIR 1974 SC 460 (State of Mysore v. CR Seshardri).
14.
The decision in this case absolutely falls within the realm of administrative field, so personal hearing or compliance of natural justice in any form, is not necessary, when the person concerned is affected of his right or the decision entails civil or evil consequence the above rule of natural justice may be applicable.
In this case the petitioner has no right to be re- employed, until and unless decision is taken to re-employ no right is accrued in his favour.
In support of his contention he has relied on the following decisions : (1997) 4 SCC 362 (State of Uttar Pradesh v. Girish Bihari).
AIR 1987 SC 593 (RS Das v. Union of India), (1995) 3 SCC 383 (Major General I.P.S.
Dewan v. Union of India).
15.
Charges of bias and mala fide of the petitioner are wholly unfounded.
Mr. Sengupta submits these identical allegations were previously taken in the first writ petition and the same, were checked and rejected by the Division Bench.
The Bench disbelieved this story of bias and mala fide, this plea therefore is hit by the principle of res judicata.
Moreover factually the person against whom these allegations have been levelled, did no participate in the deliberation of the Screening Committee as well as Executive Council.
There were good number of members in the Committee apart from the respondent No. 5.
In accordance with the direction and guidelines of the Division Bench, Screening Committee was formed with new Vice-Chancellor.
It is absurd to suggest that a particular individual could influence or dominate will and mind of other members.
These allegations should be rejected outright.
He submits that University is a statutory body and it is functioning through various human agencies.
This body cannot have any interest in favour of any single person nor hostility against any individual.
As far as the discrimination is concerned, he submits, this question does not arise, as there was no other candidate competing with the petitioner to claim for the re-employment in the post of Head of the Department of History.
Each candidate is judged on his own merit and as such the Screening Committee was formed to assess their performance.
Discrimination can be complained when there exists distinction and differentiation between two equally placed candidates.
In support of this part of his contention he has relied on the decisions of Supreme Court reported in (1990) 1 SCC 305 (Dalpat Abasaheb Solunke v. BS Mahajan), (2002) 2 SCC 712 (GA Nayak v. Goa University).
16.
I have considered the respective contentions of the learned counsel and I have gone through the records of this case, the issue herein is as to whether the University authorities had taken decision following the direction and guidelines of the Division Bench as quoted above and following norms laid down in the said ordinance.
I think before deciding the case on merit while examining the decision of the university respondent refusing re-employment to the petitioner, I should examine whether the writ petition has got any life, in view of impossibility of the petitioner's giving back on re-employment to university, even if he succeeds on merit.
To clarify the position in view of attaining age of 65 years of the petitioner and having regard to the reliefs claimed in the petition and taking note of the subsequent event whether this Court can grant any relief or not.
In case of Nawal Kishore Prosad v. State of Bihar, reported in (2001) 4 SCALE 445 the Supreme Court while deciding the case of a judicial officer who was denied extension of services by the Punjab and Haryana High Court, in its administrative side, has held amongst other in paragraph 4 that :-  "..... High Court had ample jurisdiction to impart relief to be granted to the appellant since it had found that the appellant had been unjustly treated by refusal of benefit of two year extension to him.
The least that the High Court could have done so, to grant the appellant benefit of salary for two years.
After all, High Court while exercising its writ jurisdiction was exercising jurisdiction in equity.
It was required to do equity....."  17.
The scope and purview of Article 226 of the Constitution of India, as far as granting of relief is concerned, is in my view limitless unlike Article 32 of the Constitution of India.
The Supreme Court having taken note of this constitutional position has explained what is to be done in case where the relief, which ordinarily could have been granted, cannot be granted because of the subsequent development and lapse of time.
18.
In the case of Umacharan v. State of M.P., reported in AIR 1981 SC 1915 while examining legality and validity of selection list prepared under Indian Police Service Appointment of Promotion (Regulations) 55 granted full relief to the employee concerned after having found that he was illegally and wrongfully superseded even after his retirement.
Factually, in that case, Supreme Court found that had the employee concerned been read fairly, he would have got promotion, as such he was granted all the benefits by the Court.
19.
In case of Pyare Lal Sharma v. Managing Director of Jammu & Kashmir.
reported in AIR 1989 SC 1854 the Supreme Court grante relief of back wages to the extent of 60 percent of his salary after setting aside the order of termination.
In this case, I think, this judgment of the Supreme Court is not helpful to the petitioner as it was the case of an illegal termination from the employment.
Here the petitioner has not been re- employed until and unless his right of re-employment is established, question of granting monetary relief does not and cannot arise.
20.
Similarly the case decided by the Supreme Court reported in (1994) 3 SCC (supp) 671 Monorama Varma v. State of Bihar does not help this case as it was a case of reinstatement after setting aside the order of termination.
21.
In the case of Prabhakar Rao v. State of AP, reported in AIR 1986 SC 210, the Supreme Court by its Three Judges Bench in concurrence, after having found that the petitioners were illegally forced to retire prematurely, had granted full reliefs by way of monetary compensation as the employees were found on the date of said judgment not to be reinstated in view of attaining their lawful retirement age.
22.
In case of KC Joshi v Union of India, reported in AIR 1985 SC 1046 the Supreme Court while setting aside the impugned order of termination, granted monetary relief of Rs. 2 lacs on account of back wages and compensation in lieu of reinstatement.
I think this judgment will not help directly this case as it was the case of wrongful termination followed by notional reinstatement.
23.
Similarly in case of Harmindar Singh v. State of Punjab, reported in AIR 1984 SC 758. the Supreme Court granted relief to the petitioner of continuity of his service after setting aside the order of dismissal.
This decision will also not be helpful in this case.
24.
Therefore, it is clear from the aforesaid decision of the Supreme Court as observed by me that in principle, although the relief initially claimed in the writ petition cannot be granted but it it is found that he had been wrongfully and illegally refused re-appointment, then certainly pecuniary compensation to the petitioner can be granted, because of the fact that petitioner cannot be allowed to work on re-employment after attaining age of 65 years.
25.
In view of above legal position now it has become incumbent upon this Court to examine the fundamental issue whether the decision of the Executive Council of the respondent No. 1, accepting negative recommendation of the Screening Committee and denying the petitioner's claim of re-employment has been rendered in accordance with the provision of the Ordinance 10(TU) of the University following the guidelines and direction given by the Division Bench of this Court earlier.
26.
The petitioner alleged bias and mala fide as one of the members namely respondent No. 5 managed to influence the mind of other members of the Screening Committee as well as the Executive Council to take decision against the petitioner.
Such an apprehension was raised, before the Screening Committee could be formed, by a letter addressed on his behalf, by his learned Advocate.
In the affidavit-in-opposition of Registrar of the University, it has been specifically stated that on receipt of this letter the Vice- Chancellor adopted a resolution and copy of such resolution has been annexed.
It appears from the text of the resolution that the apprehension of the writ, petitioner as raised in the said letter of the learned Lawyer is unfounded but as a good gesture it was decided to form the Screening Committee inviting two independent persons.
The allegations of bias against a particular Member of the Screening Committee is in my view untenable, for it is difficult to believe that one particular member could influence all the members of the Screening Committee, who under the aforesaid provision of Ordinance is obliged to make recommendation if any upon collective decisions and deliberation.
Moreover, under the provision of the aforesaid Ordinance it is the Executive Council, which has to take decision finally.
I am unable to accept the case of bias or malice said to have harboured by the respondent No. 5 against the petitioner for that matter his opinion could influence or dictate the members of the Executive Council.
27.
Moreover, it has been noted by the Division Bench of this Court as rightly argued by Mr. Sengupta that mere allegation of bias will not do and this has to be established that, but for such bias the decision would have been in favour of the petitioner.
In the case of Dalpat Abasheb Solunke v. Dr. BS Mahajan, reported in (1990) 1 SCC 305 it has been held that even one of the members of the Selection Committee who is alleged to be biased will not render the selection process vitiated on the ground of bias, unless it is shown or proved that, that particular person has played any role or had been in a position to influence the decision of the Selection Committee.
The affidavits of other members of the Screening Committee have been filed and they have denied unanimously having been influenced by any person.
Therefore the impugned decision of the Screening Committee and the Executive Council cannot be said to be vitiated with bias.
28.
The impugned order now has to be examined on the other aspect whether the same has been rendered in accordance with the provisions of Ordinance 10 (TU) read with the direction and guidance of the Divisions Bench or not.
It appears from the aforesaid ordinance the mechanism of the screening process has been provided for, and the same is reproduced hereunder :  "U. ord.
10 (T.U.)
A whole-time teacher of the University enjoying University Grants Commission scale of pay as approved by the State Government and introduced since January 1, 1973 shall retire after the completion of 60 years of age :- Provided that the Executive Council may give re-employment to such a teacher of the University beyond the age of 60 years considering his academic performance particularly during the last 5 years preceding the date of his superannuation.
On receipt of a written application for re-employment along with a self-assessment statement, the Executive Council shall form a Screening Committee with the following members for consideration of the relevant application and papers and submission of their recommendation to the Executive councils.
(a) the Vice-Chancellor, Chairman (ex-officio);  (b) the Dean of the concerned Faculty Council for Post-graduate Studies, if any;  (c) one expert in the field of specialization of the teacher concerned nominated by the Chancellor; and  (d) two experts in the field of specialization of the teacher concerned nominated by the Executive Council;  Provided further that :- (i) the Executive Council shall have the power to dispense with the requirement of submission of a written application and self assessment statement in exceptional cases on the recommendation of the Vice-chancellor; (ii) such period of re-employment shall initially be for a period of two years and subsequently for a period of not more than one year at a time;  (iii) such period of re-employment shall not be given if the teacher concerned has attained 65 years of age;  (iv) the recommendation of the Screening Committee regarding re-employment shall be made on the basis of the performance of the teacher concerned as a Teacher and/or quality of research papers or books produced by him as also on the basis of a medical certificate indicating his physical fitness; and  (v) the pay of such re-employed teacher shall be fixed in accordance with the normal rules applicable to the employees of the State Government.
29.
Upon fair reading of the above provision I think final decision of re employment has to be taken by the Executive Council on receipt of the recommendation of the Screening Committee, Executive Council ordinarily cannot take decision without following the procedure above.
Before the matter is sent to the Screening Committee, the Executive Council must receive an application for re-employment along with self-assessment generally.
However, in exceptional cases the Executive council may dispense with the requirement of submission of written application and self-assessment statement and take decision on the recommendation of the Vice-Chancellor instead that of Screening Committee.
Admittedly, in this case the petitioner was not regarded as being an exceptional candidate for whom aforesaid dispensation was felt to be necessary.
The petitioner submitted his application together with his self-assessment.
It appears the Screening Committee has to recommend on the basis of performance of the teacher concerned as a teacher and/or quality of research proper or books produced by him also on the basis of medical certificate indicating his fitness.
30.
Therefore, the Screening Committee while taking decision in the matter of recommendation either positive or negative way has to apply their mind to assess the performance of the teacher concerned of his teaching ability and research papers or books produced by him.
To put it differently, in the event the recommendation is not made by the Screening Committee then irresistible presumption would be performance of the teacher concerned or his quality of research papers are not up to the mark for re-employment in the same post.
Meaning thereby, the teacher concerned is stigmatized with inferior quality of his teaching performance in his past service period and his quality of research papers.
Thus, it cannot be said that the decision of the Screening Committee has got no civil or evil consequences in view of refusal of recommendations.
In this situation if after retirement any teacher wants to get further employment in other establishment in the same field, this decision of refusal of recommendation would certainly impair his reputation.
It is now well settled principle as rightly argued by Mr. Das and Mr. Mukherjee that it is not merely administrative function simplicitor in which no reason is required to be informed or recorded in the records.
31.
In the case of AK Kraipak v. Union of India, reported in AIR 1970 SC 150 Paragraph 13 amongst others that :  "The dividing line between an administrative power and a quasi- judicial power is quite thin and is being gradually obliterated.
For determining whether a power is an administrative power or a quasi-judicial power one has to look to the nature of the power conferred, the person or persons on whom it is conferred, the framework of the law conferring that power, the consequences ensuing from the exercise of that power and the manner in which that power is expected to be exercised.
In a welfare State like ours it is inevitable that the organ of the State under our Constitution is regulated and controlled by the rule of law.
In a welfare State like ours it is inevitable that the jurisdiction of the administrative bodies is increasing at a rapid rate.
The concept of rule of law would lose its validity if the instrumentalities of the State are not charged with the duty of discharging their functions in a fair and just manner.
The requirement of acting judicially in essence is nothing but a requirement to act justly and fairly and not arbitrarily or capriciously.
The procedures which are considered inherent in the exercise of a judicial power are merely those which facilitate if not ensure a just and fair decision.
In recent years the concept of quasi- judicial power has been undergoing a radical change.
What was considered as an administrative power some years back is now being considered as a quasi- judicial power."
32.
In Regina v. Criminal Injuries Compensation Board, Ex Parte Lain, reported in (1967) 2 Queen's Bench 864 at page 881 the said observation of the English Court is also quoted hereunder :  "With regard to Mr. Bridge's second point I cannot think that Atkin, LJ intended to confine his principle to cases in which the determination affected rights in the sense of enforceable rights.
Indeed, in the Electricity Commissioner case, the rights determined were at any rate not immediately enforceable rights since the scheme laid down by the commissioners had to be approved by the Minister of Transport and by resolutions of Parliament.
The commissioners nevertheless were held amenable to the jurisdiction of this Court.
Moreover, as can be seen from Rx.
V. Postmaster- General Ex Parte Carmichael and Rx v. Boycott, Ex parte Keasley, the remedy is available been though the decision is merely a step as a result of which legally enforceable rights may be affected.
The position as I see it is that the exact limits of the ancient remedy by way of certiorari have never been and ought not to be specifically denied.
They have varied from time to time being extended to mere changing conditions.
At one time the writ only went to an inferior Court.
Later its ambit was exended to statutory tribunals determinating lis inter parties.
Later again it extended to cases where there was no lis in the strict sense or the word but where immediate or subsequent rights of a citizen were affected.
The only constant limits throughout were that it was performing a public duty.
Private or domestic tribunals have always been outside the scope of certiorari since their authority is derived solely from contract that is, from the agreement of the parties concerned.
Finally, it is to be observed that the remedy has now been extended, see Reg.
V Manchester Legal Air Committee, Ex parte RA Brand & Co Ltd to cases in which the decision of an administrative officer is only arrived at after an inquiry or process of a judicial or quasi-judicial character.
In such a case this Court has jurisdiction to supervise that process.
We have, as it seems to me reached the position when the ambit of certiorari can be said to cover every case in which a body of persons of a public as opposed to a purely private or domestic character has to determine matters affecting subjects provided always that it has a duty to act judicially.
Looked at in this was the board in my judgment comes fairly and squarely within the jurisdiction of this Court.
It is, as Mr. Bridge said, "a servant of the Crown charged by the Crown, by executive instruction, with the duty of distributing the bounty of the Crown."
It is clearly, therefore, performing public duties."
33.
In the case of Mohindar Singh Gill v. Chief Election Commissioner, the Supreme Court while deciding dispute arose out of order of cancellation of poll.
Justice Krishna lyer speaking for the majority in paragraph 76 observed as follows :-  "Fair hearing is thus a postulate of decision making cancelling a poll, although fair abridgment of that process is permissible.
It can be fair without the rules of evidence or form of trial.
It cannot be fair if apprising the affected and appraising the representations is absent.
The philosophy behind natural justice is in one sense, participatory justice in the process of democratic rule of law."
34.
The Supreme Court in the case of Union of India v. EG Nambudri, reported in (1991) 3 SCC 38 at page 39 considering the aforesaid Mohindar Singh Gill's case and the case of State of Orissa v. Dr. Binapani Dei, (AIR 1967 SC 1269) has been pleased to rule :-  "......Generally, principles of natural justice require that opportunity of hearing should be given to the person against whom an administrative order is passed.
The application of principles of natural justice, and its sweep depend upon the nature of the rights involved, having regard to the setting and context of the statutory provisions.
Where a statute requires an authority though acting administratively to record reasons, it is mandatory for the authority to pass speaking orders and in the absence of reasons the order would be rendered illegal.
Where a vested right is adversely affected by an administrative order, or where civil consequences ensure, principles of natural justice apply even if the statutory provisions do not make any express provision for the same, and the person concerned must be afforded opportunity of hearing before the order is passed.
But principles of natural justice do not require the administrative authority to record reasons for the decision as there is not general rule that reasons must be given for administrative decision.
Order of an administrative authority which has no statutory or implied duty to state reasons or the grounds of its decision is no rendered illegal merely on account of absence of reasons.
It has never been a principle of natural justice that reasons should be given for decisions.
However, there is necessity for giving reasons in view of the expanding law of judicial review to enable the citizens to discover the reasoning behind the decision.
Right to reasons is an indispensable part of a sound system of judicial review.
Under the Constitution an administrative decision is subject to judicial review if it affects the right of a citizen.
It is therefore, desirable that reasons should be stated."
35.
In paragraph 10 of the same judgment it has been spelt as follows :  "....No order of an administrative authority communicating its decisions is rendered illegal on the ground of absence of reasons ex facie and it is not open to the Court to interfere with such orders merely on the ground of absence of any reasons.
However, it does not mean that administrative authority is at liberty to pass orders without there being any reason for the same.
In governmental functioning before any order is issued the matter is generally considered at various levels and the reasons and opinions are contained in the notes on the file.
The reason contained in the file enable the competent authority to formulate its opinion if the order as communicated to the government servant rejecting the representation does not contain any reasons the order cannot be held to be bad in law.
If such an order is challenged in a Court of law it is always open to the competent authority to place the reason before the Court, which may have led to the rejection of the representation.
It is always open to an administrative authority to produce evidence aliunde before the Court to justify its action."
36.
From close scrutiny of the impugned decision of the Screening Committee it will appear that no reason has been recorded specifically as to what impelled the Screening Committee to conclude that the performance of the petitioner was not satisfactory or his research work and other books are not up to the mark.
It is true the assessment and consideration of the expert body, particularly academician cannot be scrutinized and/or reassessed by the Court as it is not clothed with such expertise, but absence of reasons compels the Court to examine whether decision has been taken and/or arrived fairly and honestly on the given material at or not.
The Division Bench judgment has clearly asked the Screening Committee to take decision honestly and fairly on adopting objective criteria and not on whims and/or caprice.
In the affidavit-in-opposition the respondent authority has not been able to produce any material to hold by any stretch of imagination that the performance of the petitioner was bad or for that matter the research work of the petitioner and his books are not of quality required for re-employment.
On the other hand the petitioner has brought various acclamation of reputed and renowned universities and other appropriate bodies in this field who have appreciated the works of the petitioner is of high standard and qualities by awarding National fellowship.
When a group of expert body have opined in favour of the petitioner, what were the reasons or materials that prompted the Screening Committee to take an adverse decision as reflected in the file are not make known nor explained, simply because there is none.
Therefore, it is difficult to understand how the decision is fair and honest.
The decision has to be taken on adopting objective criteria is the desire of this Court.
Objective criteria according to me is whether having regard to the petitioner's performance during the service period his service could be utilized in the same post for another five years or not.
It does not appear that there was adverse record against the petitioner regarding his performance as teacher.
There is no complaint from and amongst the students that his teaching ability or his power of motivation to the students was lacking.
When he could continue with reputation for full term, there is no reason as to why re-employment should be refused.
From the language of the aforesaid Ordinance it appears impliedly that if there is no adverse record about his performance as teacher and his research paper or books are otherwise acceptable, recommendation for re-employment followed by decision of re-employment, is a matter of course subject of course to medical certificate as to physical fitness.
That is why as a matter of course, almost in every case in past re-employment to the teacher had been granted.
37.
I do not think that the principle of discrimination under Article 14 in this case can be applied, since choice and/or selection for re-employment has to be made on the basis of the performance of the teacher concerned his quality of research paper or books produced by him and on the basis of medical certificate, the discrimination is bound to occur as there is scope for reasonable classification bring made in the procedure itself because performance of teacher varies from man to man and also the quality of research papers or books produced by them.
Moreover, discrimination can be complained where one is chosen amongst others having equality in all respects, leaving out others in justly and wrongly.
In this case I find the petitioner was the lone candidate in History faculty for consideration of re-employment.
Therefore, there was no scope for applying the principle of discrimination.
The other candidates were in different field.
their performance had to be adjudged differentially by the Screening Committee and so also the Executive Council.
The argument advanced by Mr. Das and Mr. Mukherjee that the respondents has adopted pick and choose policy are not at all appreciated by the Court.
Therefore, decisions cited by them reported in AIR 1981 SC 1775, AIR 1984 SC 1499 and (1996) 7 SCC 381 are not at all helpful in any manner in this case.
Those cases were found to have been placed on clear case of discrimination amongst the equals.
38.
Mr. Sengupta's contention, that this Court should not interfere with the decision of the Screening Committee and Executive Council, because the same are of administrative in nature.
This argument is not accepted by this Court, as administrative decision is not above the judicial review.
For the reason as above he of course has not argued to that extent rightly.
I am not forgetful of the limitation of this Court in exercise of the power of judicial review.
The administrative decision has to pass through the test of reasonableness, if challenged before the Court of law.
When the decision warranting reason, as have already observed in this case really does so, is without the same, cannot be sustained under law for it is hit by Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
The mechanism of the aforesaid Ordinance read with the Division Bench judgment made things abundantly clear, that without proper and effective consideration of the case and materials no fair and accurate decision could be taken.
In the case of Barium Chemical reported in AIR 1967 SC 295 and in case of Challapan reported in AIR 1972 SC 591, it has been held amongst other that :-  "the authority concerned has to have made real consideration of the case and matters placed before it.
If there is no proper and real consideration then this cannot be a decision at all and rather it would be an arbitrary decision."
39.
I hold in this case that the performance of the petitioner or his research works was not at all considered, to put it other way the respondents negatived the petitioner's worth without having any material.
This is apparent because no reason has been spelt out.
40.
The Executive Council has not independently applied its mind and they cannot afford to do so because it is the duty of the Screening Committee, which is sole authority generally to decide finally.
The Executive Council therefore, has faulted as not having carried out the direction of the Division Bench.
It has acted mechanically and without applying its own mind.
I fail to understand why the Executive Council has not expressed a single word as regard the performance of the petitioner although there is no adverse comments or stigma against him, and has not discussed as to why the research paper or his books are not acceptable to them, while these are accepted by renowned universities in the world.
41.
I accordingly hold the decision of the Executive Council is also bad as not having adopted any objective criteria and rather taken having been guided by whims and/or caprice.
It is not an impartial or fair decision.
Accordingly, these two decisions are set aside.
I have materials namely expert views and opinion as noted hereinbefore, that petitioner's performance and research work are quite satisfactory and I hold he was entitled to be re- employed and he has been wrongfully and unjustly/denied.
Consequently, I direct the respondent authority to treat him to have been re-employed notionally.
As far as the backwages are concerned, I think the petitioner shall be paid all the backwages, as had he been given re-employment on due date he would have earned.
Therefore, I direct the respondent authority to fix his pay on re-employment in accordance with law and calculate his back wages for full period of five years.
Since the petitioner has attained retirement age during pendency of the matter his all retirement benefit should be calculated afresh taking note of this order if needed, to if and/or pay the balance after adjusting all the payments made already.
This shall be done within a period of three months from the date of communication of this order.
The petitioner is, also entitled to cost; assessed at 700 Gms.
to be paid by the respondents to the petitioner within the aforesaid time.
Order accordingly.