NK Sodhi, J - The petitioner who was not permitted to sit in the written test held on September 20, 1987 for promotion from Junior Management Grade Scale-I to Middle Management Grade Scale-II under the `Merit Channel' has challenged this action of the respondent - State Bank of Patiala (for short, `the Bank') in the present petition under Article 226 of the Constitution.
2.
Facts of the case lie in a narrow compass.
The officers working in the Junior Management Grade Scale-I (JMGS-I) are eligible for promotion to the Middle Management Grade Scale-II (MMGS-II) on completion of six years of service.
There are two channels for this promotion - (i) `Merit Channel' and (ii) `Seniority Channel'.
In this case, we are primarily concerned with the merit channel.
The promotional exercise for the vacancies that existed on August 1, 1995 was undertaken in the year 1987 and the Bank issued a circular dated February 9, 1987 whereby the eligibility criteria for promotion from JMGS-I to MMGS-II was circulated.
The eligibility of the candidates was to be seen as on January 1, 1985.
The Bank thereafter circulated an office note dated May 22, 1987 containing the names of all the eligible candidates.
This note included the name of the petitioner at Sr. No. 133.
But promotional test was to be held on September 20, 1987 and prior to this another list of eligible candidates was circulated as per memo dated September 1, 1987 which did not include the name of the petitioner.
Petitioner immediately filed a representation dated September 11, 1987 seeking a clarification as to why he was made ineligible for the test.
The Bank through its Zonal Manager sent a reply dated 1791987 informing the petitioner that while he was posted as Manager of Sadiq Branch he committed certain lapses inasmuch as he was found late to the office on September 26, 1984 and October 15,1984 without any cogent reasons.
It was also pointed out that the keys of the two branch almirahs containing ledgers/registers etc. were allowed to remain in the over-night custody of the Daftri of the branch.
Some more irregularities were also pointed out.
It was further mentioned that since disciplinary action was contemplated against him in November, 1984 and that after due consideration of the reply given by him to the explanation called for by the Regional Manager, the Disciplinary Authority as per order dated December 19, 1986 had imposed upon him the penalty of `Censure' in terms of Regulation 76(a) of the State Bank of Patiala (Officers) Service Regulations, 1979 (hereinafter called `the Regulations') he had become ineligible for promotion in the year 1985.
The written test was, however, conducted on September 20, 1987 and the petitioner was not allowed to sit in the same.
Feeling aggrieved against this action, the present petition was filed.
In order to complete the narration of facts, it is necessary to mention that another test was held in September, 1988 for promotions to MMGS-II under the `merit channel' for the vacancies which existed as on August 1, 1986.
Admittedly, the petitioner had by then become eligible even according to the Bank and he sat in the test but could not clear the same.
He has made some allegations against the respondents in para 3 of the rejoinder to the effect that he was deliberately made to fail in the interview as he had moved this Court by filling the present writ petition.
Another promotional test was again held sometime in October/November, 1988 under `seniority channel' for the vacancies which existed on August 1, 1987.
The petitioner took the test and was selected.
He is now working as an officer in the Middle Management Grade Scale-II w.e.f.
August 1, 1987.
3.
It is not disputed that during the surprise visits and quarterly short inspection by the Regional Manager of the Sadiq branch of the Bank where the petitioner was working as Manager, a number of irregularities on the part of the petitioner were noticed and on the matter being reported to the General Manager, the following order was passed in November, 1984 :-  "Shri Garg is repeatedly found coming late to the bank.
He is not residing at his Head Quarter; has violated RBI directives and exercises loose control over the office.
Disciplinary action/proceedings for minor punishment be therefore, initiated against Shri Garg.
The case file with full evidence/details be passed on to D.A.C."
The Bank and its Disciplinary Action Cell remained quiet for more than year and half and it was only on June 6, 1986 that a memo was served on the petitioner seeking his explanation in regard to the various irregularities/lapses pointed out therein.
On receipt of this letter, the petitioner furnished a detailed explanation dated June 26, 1986.
After due consideration of the submissions made by the petitioner in his reply to the explanation, the Disciplinary Authority found the same unsatisfactory and inflicted on him the penalty of `Censure' under Regulation 76(a) of the Regulations as per order dated December 19, 1986.
It is on the basis of this order that the Bank claims that the petitioner was ineligible to sit in the promotional test under the `merit channel' held on September 20, 1987.
4.
There is no provision in the Regulations which makes an officer ineligible for being considered for promotion if disciplinary proceedings are contemplated/continuing against him.
However, according to Regulation 17 promotions to all grades of officers in the Bank are to be made in accordance with the policy laid down by the Board or the Executive Committee from time to time having regard to the State Bank's guidelines.
The Executive Committee of the Bank had in its meeting held on 2661982, adopted the guidelines issued by the Government of India in the matter of promotions/confirmation of the officers who have been suspended or against whom disciplinary proceedings are in progress or are contemplated.
In terms of these guidelines, the interviewing committee/staff committee is required to consider for promotion the cases of all officers under suspension or against whom disciplinary proceedings are in progress or are contemplated.
In the case of such officers, `sealed cover vacancies procedure' the details of which have been mentioned therein is required to be followed.
In the present case, there is no provision in the guidelines followed by the Bank which debars an officer from being considered for promotion only because disciplinary proceedings against him are contemplated.
No doubt, such proceedings against the petitioner were under contemplation on January 1, 1985, the date on which the eligibility was to be seen but this could not make him ineligible for sitting in the test and being considered for promotion.
It was in November, 1984 that disciplinary proceedings against the petitioner were ordered to be initiated but no steps were taken and they were actually in vitiated on June 6, 1986 when a memo calling for his explanation was served on him.
Thus, all this time the proceedings remained in a state of contemplation only.
After he furnished his explanation on June 21, 1986, the disciplinary authority passed the order of `censure' and it was then that the proceedings concluded.
The mere fact that disciplinary proceedings are contemplated or are under consideration against an employee does not constitute a good ground for not considering him for promotion if he is otherwise eligible and falls within the zone of consideration.
In the light of what has been stated above, I am of the view that the Bank was in error in unjustifiably debarring the petitioner from appearing in the promotional test as held on September 20, 1987.
5.
The question that now arises is as to what relief the petitioner is entitled.
The test has already been held in which persons junior to the petitioner were allowed to appear and many of them after clearing the same have been promoted to MMGS-II.
Petitioner for no fault of his was declared ineligible and debarred from taking the examination.
He has already been promoted to MMGS-II with effect from 181987 after he cleared the test though under the `Seniority channel'.
We cannot put the clock back and make the petitioner appear in the test that was held on 2091987.
In my opinion, the ends of justice will be met in the circumstances of this case if the petitioner is deemed to have cleared the test from appearing in which he was wrongfully debarred.
The respondents are, therefore, directed to treat the petitioner as having cleared the test that was held on 2091987 and promote him to MMGS-II with effect from August 1, 1985 like those who appeared in the test and cleared it.
It is made clear that since the petitioner has not actually worked on the higher post with effect from August 1, 1985, he will not be entitled to any arrears of pay and other allowances during the in terregnum period.
6.
Before concluding, I may notice the alternative argument advanced by learned counsel for the petitioner.
It was urged that at any rate, the petitioner was entitled to promotion to MMGS-II with effect from August 1, 1986 as he had secured more marks in the test than one Shri SK Jha who was promoted with effect from the said date.
Since the petitioner was emphatic in his submission, the original record was summoned and I have perused the same.
This alternative contention of the petitioner which is of no consequence now in view of what I have already held above, is factually incorrect.
Mr. SK Jha had obtained more marks than the petitioner.
7.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed in terms mentioned above.
The petitioner shall have his costs which are assessed at Rs. 1000/-.