GR Majithia, J - Mr Dilraj Singh, Assistant Design Engineer, Ranjit Sagar Dam Design Organisation, Irrigation Department, Punjab, Chandigarh has challenged the validity of the Government circular contained in No. FD-Loans- 88-SOI/1838, dated February 18, 1988, issued by Joint Secretary, Finance (M), Government of Punjab, Department of Finance (Loan Cell) requiring the Government employees asking for loan for the purchase of built up houses to furnish an undertaking form the concerned agency such as Housing Board for the execution of conveyance Deed at the time of making full payment in favour of the Government and an undertaking from the employee to pay penal interest in case the execution of the conveyance deed and the mortgage deed is delayed beyond the prescribed period, in this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
Facts first :-  2.
The Chairman, Chandigarh Housing Board vide memo No. Board-DO-DAI- 86/4091 dated June 30, 1986 intimated the petitioner that as a result of draw of lots held on June 7, 1986, he had been allocated ground floor of a dwelling limit under the Housing Scheme for HIG-UT employees.
He was asked to pay Rs. 7,500/- within 30 days from the date of issue of the letter Rs. 15,000/- before December 30, 1986 and another sum of Rs. 15,000/- before June 30,1987 The petitioner paid the said amounts and was allotted dwelling unit No. 460 in Sector 44-A, Chandigarh vide allotment letter No. RDO(DA)AA/2700, dated February 5, 1988, for a total consideration of Rs. 198 lacs.
He was required to deposit Rs 90,273/- and out of this amount, he had already paid Rs. 42,500/-.
Thus, he was required to deposit a sum of Rs. 47,773/-, which was deposited by him on February 19, 1988.
The balance consideration amount was to be paid in monthly instalments of Rs. 1560/- each for a period of 12 years.
He had paid 4 monthly instalments before the filing of this writ petition.
3.
The petitioner being employee of the Punjab Government is entitled to raise loan from the Government for the construction/purchase of the house as per the provisions contained in the Punjab Financial Rules, Volume 1.
Although he is entitled to a loan of Rs. 125 lacs for purchase of the dwelling unit, but he applied for loan of Rs. 100 lac only.
He fulfilled the requirements laid down under the Punjab Financial Rules, Vol.
I Chief Engineer, Irrigation Works, Punjab, forwarded the petitioner's application for loan to the State Government on May 20, 1988.
The application was returned by respondent No. 1 vide Memo No. 5994-FDLoans-88/6173, dated June 7,1986, with the remarks that the petitioner be asked to get an unconditional undertaking from the Chandigarh Housing Board that they would execute the conveyance deed after getting full payment of cost of the dwelling unit and that he would make full payment of the cost of the house along with the loan amount and penal interest in case the conveyance deed/mortgage deed is delayed beyond the period prescribed under the Rules.
4.
The petitioner approached the Chandigarh Housing Board for getting an undertaking that the Board would execute the conveyance deed on payment of full price.
He was informed that on receipt of full payment of the cost of the dwelling unit, conveyance deed would be executed in his favour provided the Estate Officer, Union Territory, Chandigarh executed the lease deed in respect of the land, on which the said dwelling unit had been constructed, in favour of the Board and if the Estate Officer did not execute the lease deed, the Board would not execute the conveyance deed.
5 Written statements have been filed on behalf of the state of Punjab and the Chief Engineer, Irrigation Works, Punjab.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the State of Punjab, a preliminary objection has been taken that the petitioner has got no legal right for the grant of loan for purchasing a house.
The provisions contained in the Punjab Financial Rules, Vol.
I for grant of loan to the Government employees are not denied.
The instructions under challenge were justified only on the ground that the loanee must have acquired a clear transferable title in the property before the loan was released to him and the instructions were in compliance of the Financial Rules.
It was admitted that the Chandigarh Housing Board had given in writing to the State Government that it would have no objection if the employees mortgage these houses in favour of the Punjab Government, yet this could not be done by the Government employees as the conveyance deed had not been executed by the Chandigarh Housing Board since Chandigarh Administration had not transferred title of the land underneath the house to the Chandigarh Housing Board.
If a valid mortgage deed is not executed by the Government, interests of the latter will remain unsafe.
6.
The Chief Engineer, Irrigation Works, Punjab, in his written statement, stated that the application filed by the petitioner for grant of loan was forwarded to the State Government and the same was returned by the State Government with the observations as referred to in the earlier part of the judgment.
7.
This case reveals a sorry state of affairs.
Lack of coordination between the Government of Punjab, Chandigarh Administration and the Chandigarh Housing Board has created an unsavory situation.
If at any point of time, the person at the top of the hierarchy of these three august institutions had met in congress to brood over the matter, the misery and anguish which the petitioner or similarly situated employees had to undergo would have been obviated.
The Punjab Government is willing to grant the loan.
The Chandigarh Housing Board has allotted the dwelling unit to the petitioner and has no objection if the petitioner mortgages the same with the Punjab Government, but it places a rider that the Government employee could only mortgage the house after the conveyance deed has been executed in his favour by it.
The Board will execute conveyance deed only if the lease deed is executed in its favour by the State Officer, Union Territory, Chandigarh in respect of the leased, land underneath the dwelling unit.
Since the Estate Officer has not executed the lease deed in favour of the Chandigarh Housing Board, it is not possible for it to execute the conveyance deed in favour of the petitioner.
The petitioner cannot force the Estate Officer, Union Territory, Chandigarh to execute the lease deed in favour of the Chandigarh Housing Board, nor can he force the Chandigarh Housing Board to execute the conveyance deed in his favour in respect of the dwelling unit without insisting upon the condition that the Estate Officer must first execute the lease deed in favour of the Board.
The Punjab Government is willing to grant loan to the petitioner only if the conditions, mentioned supra, are fulfilled, which the petitioner is unable to fulfil.
We are not impressed with the conduct of the Chandigarh Housing Board and it has not taken us into confidence for imposing these regours which have been stated by the State of Punjab in its written statement.
We leave the matter at thus.
8.
For the reasons stated above, the writ petition is disposed of with the following directions:  i) The Chandigarh Housing Board will execute the conveyance deed in favour of the petitioner within one month on payment of the balance sale consideration of the dwelling unit.
The Punjab Government will release the loan amount to the petitioner within two weeks, provided it is otherwise permissible to him.
The petitioner will execute the mortgage deed in favour of the Punjab Government within two weeks of the execution of conveyance deed by the Chandigarh Housing Board in his favour.
ii) The Chandigarh Housing Board will not ask for any interest on the delayed payment by the petitioner and the Punjab Government will not insist upon furnishing any undertaking by the petitioner as in mentioned in Memo No. 599-FD Loan- 88/6173 dated June 7, 1988.
(iii) The Estate Officer, Union Territory, Chandigarh will execute the lease deed in respect of the leased land under underneath the dwelling unit in favour of the Chandigarh Housing Board, if not already executed, within fifteen days from the date when it is so required to do.
iv) The Chandigarh Housing Board, the Chandigarh Administration and the Punjab government would frame a rationale policy in the matter within six months.
Keeping in view the larger interest of the Government employees, it is further directed that respondents No. 1 and 2 will permit similar relaxation to them irrespective of the fact that they have not approached this Court.
A copy of this judgment be sent to the Chandigarh Administration, Chief Secretary to Government, Punjab and the Chairman, Chandigarh Housing Board, Chandigarh each forthwith.
There will be no order as to costs.