AL Bahri, J (Oral) - Suraj Bhan was employed as Constable in March, 1988 vide Annexure P.1 under the Punjab Police Rules.
He was supposed to pass certain test.
He took the examination in 1988.
However, he failed in one of the papers relating to VIP Security.
The second chance, he took in January, 1989 and again failed.
The next examination was to be conducted in April, 1989.
However, this chance petitioner could not avail as he was deputed on training starting from April 1, 1989.
Training period was of three months.
On October 25, 1992, an order was passed (copy Annexure P2) discharging the petitioner under Rule 12/21 of the Punjab Police Rules which is impugned in this writ petition.
The allegation of the petitioner is that he was not informed of the examination which was held in April, 1989.
Therefore, he could not appear in the examination to avail the opportunity which was second opportunity.
There were three persons who were discharged vide impugned order and one of them approached this Court and succeeded in getting the relief in C.W.P.
No. 16498 of 1991, copy of the order is annexure P-6.
On the other hand, the stand of the State in the written statement is that under Rule 193 only two chances were to be afforded to the candidate to pass the test and thereafter, it was for the competent authority to decide whether the person was to be discharged under Rule 12.
21 and in the present case, the petitioner was allowed two chances and he failed and the order is valid.
2.
We have heard counsel for the parties.
Reading of Rule 193 makes it clear that ordinarily two attempts the candidate could take to pass the test rather on failure of the first attempt the matter could be examined to discharge the candidate under Rule 1221.
Even after the second attempt, similar exercise was to be done and still a person could be remanded to further period of instructions.
This would show that every time such a Constable took examination.
It was to be decided as to whether, he was to retain in service or not.
As far as the judgment in C.W.P.
No. 16498 of 1991 is concerned, at that time it was taken that after the first examination in which the Constable had failed, he could pass in the remaining papers in two more attempts and in that case in second attempt, Ram Niwas, petitioner could not be available as information was received in the Office one day late and the relief was granted.
The aforesaid decision, therefore, cannot be taken as precedent to be followed.
3.
Annexure P-5 is the order of the Superintendent of Police recommending the case of the petitioner along with Ram Niwas aforesaid for allowing him another opportunity of passing the test.
Although it was within the domain of the competent authority to decide whether more chances are given or not but in the present case, we find that when his case was recommended by the Superintendent of Police and the petitioner was also deputed for further training from April, 1989 and he continued in service upto October, 1990, he could reasonably be afforded an other opportunity to pass the test.
4.
Thus in the peculiar circumstances, we only give direction to the respondents to give one more chance to the petitioner to pass in the failed paper and if he passes the test, he would be deemed to be in service otherwise not and petitioner will not be paid any arrears in that eventuality.