JL Gupta, J. (Oral) - The two petitioners herein are working as Mali-Cum-Chowkidar on work charged basis in the P.W,D Public Health Branch of the State of Haryana.
They were appointed as such on January 12, 1984 and November 19, 1984 respectively.
Three other persons viz. respondent Nos 3 to 5 were similarly recruited as Mali-cum-Chowkidar after the petitioner, on May 14,1985 November 23, 1984 and November 21, 1984 respectively.
On these premises, the petitioners claim that respondent Nos 3 to 5 are junior to them.
2.
Inspite of the fact that the petitioners are senior to respondent Nos. 3 to 5, they were not promoted to the posts of Water Pump Operator Grade II on July 26, 1985 when respondent Nos. 3 to 5 were promoted.
The petitioners aver that they represented and that in spite of the recommendation having been made in November 12, 1987 by the Executive Engineer to the Superintending Engineer, the petitioners have, not been granted the requisite relief.
As a result the petitioners have approached this Court through the present petition with a prayer for the issue of a mandamus directing the respondents to consider the petitioners for promotion with effect from the date the persons junior to then were promoted.
3.
This writ petition was admitted in the year 1989.
On august 20, 1992 when Mr. Jaswant Singh, Advocate appeared on behalf of the State of Haryana but no one appeared on behalf of the private respondents, it was directed that actual date notice be sent to the respondents for October 12,1992.
The office reports that the notices were actually sent on August 28, 1992 and they have been duly served on the respondents.
4.
Today, no one appears on behalf of either The official of the private respondents.
No written statement has been filed even on behalf of the official respondents.
In this situation, the facts as stated in the writ petition have to be treated as correct.
5.
I have heard Mr. R K Malik, the learned counsel for the petitioners.
6.
Mr. Malik contends that the Executive Engineer had categorically observed in his letter of November 11, 1987 that 4 persons including the two petitioners had been ignored without any remarks.
The learned counsel contends that on a perusal of this letter it is clear that the petitioners are senior to respondent Nos. 3 to 5 and in spite of that their claim was not considered.
This according to the learned counsel is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
7.
Keeping in view the fact that the averments in the writ petition have not been, controverted and that an officer of the Department had clearly observed that the two petitioners were ignored without any remarks, it is clear that the claims of the petitioners were not considered.
Further, the respective dates of appointment of the petitioners and, the respondents show that both the petitioners had started working or the post of Mali-cum- Chowkidar with affect from the dates prior to those on which respondent Nos. 3 to 5 had so started in the absence of any rule laying down the method of determination of seniority, the proper criterion is furnished by the date of continuous appointment.
On this premises, the petitioners are senior to respondent Nos 3 to 5.
There is nothing on record to indicate that any qualification or experience had been prescribed which the petitioners did not possess.
In such a situation, the petitioners, it appears, were eligible to be considered for promotion.
It is further clear that their claim was actually not considered.
No justification has been offered by any of the respondents by not putting in appearance.
There is, thus no alternative except to allow this petition and direct the respondents to consider the claim of the petitioners for promotion to the posts of Water Pump Operator Grade II with effect from July 26, 1985 when respondent Nos 3 to 5 were promoted.
If the petitioners are found suitable for promotion, they will be granted actual promotion with effect front the said date.
The consequential reliefs in the nature of refixation of pay and arrears of salary shall follow.
Keeping in view the fact that no one has appeared or behalf of the respondents to contest this petition, I make no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.