BC Verma, CJ.
& Ashok Bhan, J - The petitioner appeared in the First Professional examination held in February/March, 1991.
Petitioner got re- appear in the subjects of Anatomy and Biochemistry and was not allowed to join classes of Second Professional starting on 1651991 as according to the Regulations a candidate who did not clear the First Professional examination was not allowed to join the Second Professional course.
The petitioner filed Civil Writ Petition No. 9065 of 1991 in which notice of motion was issued and by an interim direction was allowed to join the classes of Second Professional MBBS Course at her own risk and responsibility.
2.
The petitioner appeared in the supplementary examination held on June 26, 1991 for the subjects of Anatomy and Bio-chemistry.
The petitioner got 175 marks out of 300 in the subject of Anatomy whereas in Bio-chemistry she got 72 marks out of 150 marks.
The minimum pass percentage under the Regulations is 50 marks to be obtained in each subject.
The petitioner was declared `fail' as she had not cleared the Biochemistry paper.
The petitioner has filed the present writ petition claiming that she is entitled to the grant of 1% of the aggregate marks as grace marks in the papers in which she had appeared and as she had appeared in two papers of Anatomy and Biochemistry the aggregate of which comes to 450 marks, she is entitled to get five marks in the subject of Biochemistry.
The petitioner, if given three marks in Bio-chemistry, her total comes to 75 out of 150 marks and thus becomes entitled to be declared successful.
The relevant Ordinance 11(b) which relates to the First Professional examination is reproduced :  "(i) A candidate who fails in one or more papers/subjects and/or aggregate may be given grace marks, upto 1% of the total aggregate marks (including the marks for practical and internal assessment) to his best advantage in order to be declared to have passed the examination.
Provided that the number of grace marks to be given in individual subject should not exceed five.
(ii) A candidate who fails in one/more subject/subject be given grace marks upto 1% in each subject separately in order to declare him/her eligible for placing him/her in a compartment (for illustration see Ordinance 26 relating to the Final MBBS Examination).
(iii) A candidate who gets exemption in certain subjects and reappears in a subject/subjects may be given grace marks, upto one per cent of marks in each subject separately in which he/she reappears in order to declare him/her to have passed the examination and/or who with this benefit becomes eligible for earning exemption in a subject or subjects or for placing him/her in a compartment, (for illustration see Ordinance 26 relating to the Final MBBS examination)."
3.
Notice of motion was issued.
Written statement was not filed as counsel appearing for the respondents addressed arguments on the basis of Ordinance 11 only other facts being admitted.
The learned counsel appearing for the petitioner argued that her case is covered by Ordinance 11(b)(i) and is thus entitled to the grant of 1% of the total aggregate marks to her best advantage in the individual paper of Bio-chemistry whereas the case of the respondents is that the petitioner would be governed by Ordinance 11(b)(iii) and shall be entitled to 1% of the marks in the subject in which she had appeared and not the total aggregate marks of the subjects in which she had appeared.
We find substance in the submission of learned counsel appearing for the respondents.
Ordinance 11(b)(i) shall come into play where a candidate appears in all the papers of that examination and sub Regulation (iii) shall apply to those candidates who get exemption in certain subjects and re-appear in certain subject/subjects.
The present case is a case of re-appearance in two papers and thus shall be squarely governed by sub Regulation (iii) of Regulation 11(b).
This is also clear from the illustration given by Ordinance 26(B)(iii), reference to which has been made in Regulation 11(b)(iii).
Regulation 26(B)(iii) deals with the Final Professional examination which is in the following terms  "26(B)(i) xx xx xx  (ii) xx xx xx  (iii) A candidate who gets exemption in certain subjects and reappears in a subject/subjects may be given grace marks, upto one per cent of marks in each subject separately in which he/she reappears in order to declare him/her to have passed the examination and/or who with this benefit becomes eligible for earning exemption in a subject or subjects or for placing him/her in a compartment e.g. if a student does not pass at the first annual examination and is to reappear, say in Surgery/Medicine in the supplementary examination, he/she can be given a benefit of 5 marks in Medicine and 4 marks in Surgery in order to pass the examination in Medicine/Surgery."
Learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has relied upon a decision of this Court rendered in Civil Writ Petition No. 6823 of 1989 decided on June 1, 1989.
The ratio of this case is not applicable to the facts of this case as the said case relates to the first category and falls under Ordinance 11(b)(i) whereas the present case pertains to a candidate who got exemption in certain subjects and was permitted to re-appear in two subjects which is clearly governed by Regulation II (b) (iii).
4.
Accordingly, we find no substance in the present writ petition and the same is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.