Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - Vide order dated May 22, 1989 (Annexure P-2), the petitioner was sought to be retired w.e.f.
September 20, 1989.
He challenged this order through the present petition.
The matter came up before the Motion Bench on August 18,1989.
The Bench directed the issue of notice of motion to the respondent.
When the matter came up for hearing on September 18, 1989, the Bench directed that "during the pendency of this petition, the petitioner will not be retired from service and will be allowed to continue on the post he is holding."
This interim order was continued vide order dated October 31, 1989.
Ultimately, the writ petition was admitted on November 16, 1989.
It has come up for hearing today.
2.
On account.
of the interim orders passed by the Motion Bench, the petitioner continued in service till September 30, 1991, when he had even completed the age of 60 years.
As a result, by mere lapse of time, the petition has become in fructuous.
3.
Learned counsel for the respondents contends that the petitioner had no right to continue beyond the age of 58 years.
In view of the fact that the petitioner had actually worked till the age of 60 years, it does not appear to be necessary to go into this controversy in the present case.
Accordingly, I do not express any opinion on the merits of the controversy.
4.
Mr. Ashok Sharma submits that on account of pendency of the writ petition, the amounts of gratuity and provident fund due to the petitioner have not been released by the respondents.
Mr. Gujral, appearing for the respondents, states that these benefits have been withheld as the petitioner had no right to continue till the age of 60 years.
5.
Whatever be the legal position, the fact remains that the petitioner has served the Committee till the age of 60 years and he has been paid wages for the duties actually performed by him.
Therefore, the benefits which had become due to the petitioner cannot be withheld by the Municipal Committee.
It is accordingly directed that all the benefits like gratuity and provident fund etc. due to the petitioner be released within two months and in case the benefits are not released within the time given above, the petitioner shall be entitled to interest @ 12 per cent from the date of his retirement, i.e. September 30, 1991, till the date of actual payment.
The writ petition is accordingly disposed of.
No costs.