Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - This order will dispose of CWP Nos. 5655 and 5887 of 1992.
The facts as stated in CWP No. 5655 of 1992 may be noticed.
2.
The three petitioners herein appeared for interview and other tests for recruitment as Constables on April 27, 1992 and April 29, 1992.
After having qualified the physical test, they were sent to the Chief Medical Officer for medical examination.
After selection, the petitioners were given orders of appointment on April 30, 1992.
The petitioners aver that they were allotted constabulary numbers and had been supplied the uniforms etc.
In the first week of May 1992, the then Superintendent of Police is alleged to have been transferred.
The new Superintendent of Police is alleged to have asked the petitioners to vacate the premises of Police Lines on May 10, 1992 as the appointments of the petitioners had been cancelled.
Feeling aggrieved, the petitioners have approached this court through these petitions and challenge the action as being totally arbitrary.
3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been stated by way of preliminary objection that there is serious dispute on facts and that the petitioners' services have been terminated as they did not fulfil the conditions as laid down in Rule 1215 of the Punjab Police Rules.
It has been further mentioned that there were certain complaints in this behalf.
Directions were issued by the Deputy Inspector General, Hissar Range vide his letter dated May 4,1992 for the physical measurement of the candidates recruited in Jind District on April 27, 29 and 30, 1992.
Physical measurements were carried out on May 9, 1992.
On measurement, it was found that the petitioners did not fulfil the conditions as laid down in Police rule 1215(1).
They were consequently discharged from police service with effect from May 10, 1992.
Copy of the order has been produced as Annexure R-1 with the written statement.
4.
In the document Annexure R-1 the measurements of height and chest in respect of seven persons including the three petitioners have been given.
A perusal thereof shows that the petitioners in the present case did not fulfil the requirement regarding the chest measurement.
Similar is the position in the connected petition.
Learned counsel for the petitioners was asked if he disputed the factual position as stated in this document and as to whether or not the petitioners are willing to file affidavits controverting the position as reflected in the document at Annexure R-1.
Learned counsel is categorical in his assertion that the petitioners do not wish to file any additional affidavit controverting the factual position.
It is in this background that the contentions raised by the learned counsel for the petitioners have to be examined.
5.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties.
It is apt to notice the provisions of Rule 1215(1).
It reads as under :-  "12.15.
(1) Recruits - age and physical standards of: - Recruits shall be not less than 18, and not more than 27 years of age at the time of enrolment, and shall have a minimum height of 5'-7' and normal chest measurement of 33", with expansion of 1-1/2 inches.
These physical standards shall not be relaxed without the general or special sanction of the Deputy Inspector General.
A general reduction of the standard may be allowed by Deputy Inspectors-General in the case of special castes or classes, which provide desirable recruits, but whose general height does not come up to that prescribed.
In such cases a standard of chest measurement and general physique shall be fixed, which will permit the enlistment of strong and well proportioned youths of the class in question.
The Inspector General may, in special circumstances to be recorded in writing, relax the upper age limit and the physical standards in the case of recruits."
A perusal of the above rule shows that a recruit must have a minimum height of 5'-7" and chest measurement of 33" with expansion of 1-1/2 inches.
This is the minimum condition of eligibility which every.
person must fulfil before he can be recruited as a constable.
This qualification is reasonable.
It has a rational relationship with the requirement of the post of constable in the police force.
It is not unreasonable or fanciful.
A person who does not fulfil this condition is ineligible to enter the portals of the State police force.
The requirement in the very nature of things is mandatory and not directory.
6.
None of the petitioners fulfills the prescribed standards.
Accordingly, they were not eligible to be recruited.
As such, I find no infirmity in the action of the respondents.
Persons who do not fulfil the conditions of eligibility are not entitled to continue on their posts.
7.
Learned counsel contends that the petitioners had a right to be heard.
Keeping in view the fact that the petitioners admit the position as depicted in Annexure R-1 to the written statement and that there is no claim on their behalf that the measurements as depicted in the written statement are wrong, no useful purpose would be served by directing the respondents to hear them.
The purpose of the grant of an opportunity of hearing is only to ascertain the factual position.
In a case where there is no dispute on facts, no useful purpose would be served by directing the respondents to hear the petitioners.
It is no doubt correct that normally before passing an order adverse to the interests of a person he is entitled to be heard so that he can put forth his view point.
However, such an opportunity is necessary only when a person disputes the facts on the basis of which the action is sought to be taken.
In the present case, learned counsel for the petitioners is categorical in his assertion that he does not want even to controvert the factual position as depicted in the written statement.
This being the admitted position it is clear that no useful purpose would be served by directing the respondents to redecide the matter after hearing the petitioners.
8.
Accordingly, there is no merit in these petitioners.
These are dismissed.
In the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.