Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioners in these two cases viz. CWP No. 1436 of 1991 and 2463 of 1991, are aggrieved by the action of the respondents in refusing to consider their claim for appointment on compassionate grounds.
A few facts relevant for the decision of this case as enumerated in CWP No. 2463 of 1991 may be briefly noticed.
2.
The petitioner's father, an Assistant Lineman in the Haryana State Electricity Board died on July 25, 1981.
The petitioner who was born on August 20, 1971 was a minor at that time.
After he passed the Matriculation examination and attained majority, his mother submitted an application on August 30, 1989, a copy of which has been produced on record as Annexure P-2.
The application was rejected.
The petitioner submitted a representation followed by a notice through counsel.
The efforts having not yielded any fruitful results, he has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
3.
The State of Haryana had issued instructions vide letter dated December 22, 1970 providing for the grant of appropriate ex gratia reliefs and facilities to the families of the employees who died while in service.
According to these instructions, the reliefs like ad hoc ex gratia grant, free medical aid, free educational facilities, accommodation, employment and waiving off recovery of loans were to be given to the family of the deceased employee.
The Board it appears, adopted these instructions and took the decision with regard to the grant of similar reliefs in the meeting held on October 22, 1971.
Thereafter, a memo was issued vide letter dated November 26, 1971 providing for the grant of reliefs.
So far as the present case is concerned the relevant provision is contained in clause (V) which reads as under.
:  "(v) Employment  One or more members of the family of the deceased may be considered for employment in the Board's services, relevant rules being relaxed, if necessary and if feasible."
According to the above, one or more members of the family of the deceased employee were eligible to be considered for the grant of employment in the Board.
It appears that these instructions were subsequently modified vide letter dated March 9, 1979 issued by the Chief Secretary to Govt. Haryana whereby it was provided that only one member of the family of the deceased employee shall be eligible to be considered for the grant of employment on compassionate grounds.
It further appears that the Board had fixed a time- limit of one year during which "the dependent of the deceased is to be provided employment."
Vide letter dated October 1, 1986, it was clarified that the "above period of one year maybe extended to three years provided a request for providing employment is made to the Board within a period of one year of the death of the employee."
Vide letter dated February 29, 1988, Board decided after reviewing the entire policy that the grant of employment under ex gratia scheme "should be considered in line with the policy of State Govt. Haryana as notified by the Board from time to time."
It was also observed that the cases under ex gratia scheme which had arisen prior to April 1, 1989 will not be reopened.
4.
Relying on the instructions issued by the Govt. the respondents claim that an application for the grant of employment has to be made by the person concerned within three years of the death of the employee and that no application can be entertained after the expiry of said period.
On this premises, it is claimed that the petitioner's father having died on July 25, 1981, and the application having not been submitted on or before July 24, 1984, the claim for seeking employment has become time-barred and cannot be entertained.
Accordingly, the action in refusing to consider the claim of the petitioner is ought to be defended.
I have heard learned counsel for the petitioner and perused the record of the case.
5.
It is no doubt correct that the appointment on compassionate grounds is in the nature of concession.
It may also be true that the instructions issued by the Govt. or the Board are only intended to provide immediate relief to the family of the deceased employee, so that it has some means to survive after the death of the breadearner.
However, in the case of a person who leaves behind minor children, the condition of the widow is far worse than in a case where the children are grown up.
While grown up and educated children can seek employment forthwith, the widow has to bear the burden in a case where the children are still minor.
To deny relief to such a widow only on the ground that the application has not been submitted within a period of three years causes acute hardship to the entire family.
It will even result in discrimination against the members of such a family inasmuch their right to be considered for employment on compassionate grounds would be completely defeated by a reason entirely beyond their control.
The instructions contained in the Govt. letter dated May 19, 1989 and the decision of the Board not to entertain an application after the expiry of three years as contained in its letter dated November 9, 1989 would cause acute hardship in a case where the deceased employee leaves behind minor children.
The instructions in so far as "the minor children are concerned, would suffer from the vice of arbitrariness and be thus violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
6.
There is another aspect of the matter.
Supposing the instructions are strictly adhered to.
The widow on the death of her husband puts in an application for employment of a minor child who is neither educated nor otherwise eligible to be considered for employment.
The technical requirement of submitting of an application has been met with.
However, the grant of actual employment will have to be kept pending till the person concerned has received sufficient education and attained majority.
No useful purpose would be served by the mere submission of the application.
Its consideration shall have to be deferred for a number of years.
In such a situation, the candidate is required to be considered inspite of the fact that the candidate is not eligible.
It will be more reasonable to interpret the instructions to mean that the dependent of the deceased employee can submit application within three years of his attaining majority/eligibility.
In that event, the hardship to the family will be mitigated and the purpose for which the executive instructions have been issued by the appropriate authorities would be carried out.
Still further, even the instructions dated May 10, 1989 are capable of such an interpretation.
These provide as under -  `After considering the matter, the Government has taken the following decisions :  (i) The employees who die on 3-11-1988 or thereafter, the dependent of such deceased employees can make application for employment within three years to the concerned department.
The application received after three years, will not be considered.
This decision will also be applicable to the cases, who die before 3.11.88 and the dependents have not made any application for employment."
The above instructions inter alia provide that the employees who die on November 3, 1988 or thereafter, the dependents of such deceased employees can make an application for employment within three years of the date of death.
Further it is provided that this decision will also be applicable to the cases "who die before 3.11.1988" and the dependents have not made any application for employment.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the instructions gave an opportunity even in case where the employees died prior to November 3,1988 to submit an application within three years of the issue of the letter, viz. May 19, 1989.
Such an interpretation of the instructions would save him from attack on the ground of discrimination under Article 14 of the Constitution.
Under these instructions it is open to the dependents of the deceased employees to submit an application within three years from May 1989.
7.
Accordingly, the impugned order rejecting the application for "compassionate employment' viz. the letter dated August 30, 1989 (Annexure P-2) is quashed.
The respondents are directed to consider the -petitioner's claim for the post for which he has applied and is eligible.
The needful shall be done within three months from the date of the receipt of copy of this order.
CWP No. 1436 of 1991.
8.
In this case, the factual position depicts a grimmer picture.
The petitioner's mother had died when he was only one year old.
His father, a JBT teacher died on January 15, 1982.
The petitioner passed Matriculation examination in June 1989 and he submitted his application immediately thereafter on July 5, 1989.
The application was rejected on November 9, 1989 on the ground that it had been, submitted more than three years after the death of the father.
9.
Admittedly, at the time of the death of the petitioner's father, he was ineligible for any job in the Govt.
He was not a major as he was only 12 years old and he had not even passed the Matriculation examination.
To interpret the instructions in the manner the respondents have done, would result in extreme hardship to the petitioner  Taking the totality of circumstances into consideration, the impugned order rejecting the petitioner's application vide letter dated November 9, 1989 (Annexure P-6) is quashed.
The respondents are directed to consider the petitioner's claim for the post for which he has applied and is eligible, in accordance with law within three months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
In the circumstances of the case, I made no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.