AL Bahri, J (Oral) - One post of Professor of Veterinary Parasitologist was to be filled, for which advertisement Annexure P/1 was issued in 1991.
The essential qualifications are mentioned in this advertisement Annexure P/1, which are as follows:  "(i) Second Class B.V.Sc.
& A.H./B.V.Sc./B.Sc;  (ii) PhD in Veterinary Parasitology/Zoology with specialisation in Entomology/Protozoology with good academic record;  (iii) Ten years' experience in case of Veterinarians and 12 years for non Veterinarians in teaching/Research/extension in Veterinary Entomology/Protozoology out of which at least three years should be as Associate Professor of equivalent;  (iv) Substantial contribution to Research and Scholarship as evidenced by the quality of papers published in Professional Journals of repute, and/or adoption of result of research, innovation in teaching/extension education;  (v) Knowledge of Punjab upto Matric level.
Desirable Administrative experience."
The petitioner, who was already working as Parasitologist in Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana, applied for the post.
A Selection Committee was constituted and ultimately Dr. IS Kalra was selected and posted.
This selection is impugned in the present writ petition filed by Dt. Jasmer Singh.
The stand taken up by the petitioner was that though he was absent in the meeting of the Selection Committee, he had given in writing that his name be considered in his absence, but the same was not done.
It has further been stressed during arguments that constitution of the Selection Committee was not in accordance with the Statue.
2.
On notice of motion having been issued, reply has been filed on behalf of the University-Respondent No. 1 specifically denying the allegations of the petitioner, as aforesaid.
it is asserted that the name of the petitioner was duly considered by the Selection Committee in his absence, as requested by him, but he was not selected.
The name of other persons were also considered and ultimately Dr. IS Kalra was selected and appointed.
It is further asserted that the Selection Committee consisted of duly qualified persons, including Head of Department who is PhD in Parasitology.
3.
We have heard counsel for the parties and we find no ground to interfere in the matter of selection aforesaid.
Dr. IS Kalra, who was selected and appointed against the post of Professor of Parasitology, has not been impleaded as party.
In his absence, obviously, no order adverse to him can be passed.
Apart from above, we have also considered the arguments addressed at the bar.
Learned Counsel for the University has produced copy of the proceedings of the Selection Committee, which show that the name of the petitioner Dr. Jasmer Singh was considered in his absence.
Thus, this ground on which notice of motion was issued, is no more available to the petitioner that his name was not at all considered by the Selection Committee.
4.
Counsel for the petitioner while referring to para 15 of the replication has argued that comparative study of the qualifications of the petitioner and Dr. IS Kalra would show that on merit Dr. Kalra could not be preferred.
The petitioner is alleged to have done PhD in three years, whereas Dr. Kalra completed his PhD in five years.
Likewise, the petitioner completed M.V.Sc.
in two years with merit scholarship, whereas Dr. Kalra did it in three years.
The petitioner completed B.V.Sc.
and AM in four years with merit scholarship, whereas Dr. Kalra completed it in six years.
It is not for this Court to comment on the merits of the candidates, as it was the function of the Selection Committee to consider and adjudicate upon the same.
The members of the Selection Committee being experts in the line were the best judge in the matter of selection to the post of Professors.
The mere fact that the petitioner completed his educational career in lesser number of years whereas Dr. IS Kalra took a little more time will not make Dr. IS Kalra ineligible for the post.
The fact remains that Dr. Kalra fulfilled all the qualifications, which were advertised in the advertisement Annexure P/1.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has challenged the constitution of the Selection Committee on the ground that no member of the Committee was specialist in either Entomology or in Protozoology, for which specialities the selection was to be made.
It has been pointed out on behalf of the University that the Head of Department was a Specialist in Parasitology, which is a major speciality.
In para 4 of the writ petition itself, the petitioner himself has stated that the field of Veterinary Parasitology has further three distinct sub-disciplines, i.e. 1) Veterinary Helminthology, II) Veterinary Protozoology, and (111) Veterinary Entmology.
That being the position, it cannot be held that the Selection Committee was illegally constituted.
6.
Counsel for the petitioner has further argued that in the minutes of the Selection Committee, no reasons or criteria were suggested to select Dr. IS Kalra.
We are of the opinion that there was no legal requirement of doing so when for the post of Professor Parasitology necessary qualification were prescribed and the persons who applied fulfilled those qualifications, it was for the Selection Committee to consider which one of them was meritorious.
It was not necessary for them to record any reasons.
No written test was prescribed in the matter of selection, nor any marks were to be allocated for that.
7.
For the reasons recorded above, we find no merit in this writ petition and the same is dismissed.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.