NK Sodhi, J - This order will dispose of civil writ petitions 1476 and 5386 of 1992 in which common questions of law and fact are involved.
Since arguments were addressed in civil writ petition No. 1476 of 1992 facts from this case are being noticed.
2.
Petitioner after passing her matriculation examination cleared the `Prabhakar' examination held in December 1989 by the Punjabi University, Patiala, being entitled to appear in BA II examination, she sat in the said examination in December, 1990 held by the Punjabi University and cleared the same.
Thereafter, she appeared in BA III examination held by the same University in April 1991 and was declared pass, She obtained more than 50% marks in her BA (pass), examination as she secured 287 marks out of a total 550.
With a view to do her post-graduation in the subject of English, the petitioner applied for admission to MA I (English) in Kanya Mahavidyalaya Jalandhar City (hereinafter referred to as `the College') which stands affiliated to the Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar (respondent).
She was admitted in August, 1991 and on deposit of requisite fee, she was issued her class roll number.
Since then she is studying as a student of MA I (English) in the aforesaid college.
3.
As the petitioner joined the College at Jalandhar that stood affiliated to the respondent-University she was required to produce a migration certificate from the Punjabi University, Patiala from where she had done her BA (Pass).
The migration certificate dated November 14, 1991 was obtained from the Punjabi University and the same was produced before the college authorities and in turn, it was sent to the respondent-University.
It was in January, 1992 that the college received a letter from the respondent-University to the effect that the petitioner was not eligible for admission to MA (English) for the session 1991-92 and the reason given in the said letter was that the Ordinances under which the petitioner had passed her BA examination from Punjabi University, Patiala were not recognised by the respondent-University.
Consequently, her admission to MA-I in July, 1991 was declared invalid and thereafter her name was removed from the College rolls.
It is this letter of the University which has been impugned in the present writ petition.
The motion bench while admitting the writ petition directed that the petitioner shall be allowed to continue with her studies in MA.
I at her own risk and responsibility and subject to the result of this petition and it is in pursuance of that order that the petitioner has by now not only completed her studies in MA I but has also appeared in the final examination under the orders of this Court but her result has not been declared by the respondent- University.
4.
In the return filed on behalf of the respondent-University, the action of declaring the petitioner ineligible is sought to be justified on the ground that the Academic Council of the University which is said to be its highest decision making body in its meeting held on April 16,1991 had decided not to recognise the BA degree of Punjabi University, Patiala awarded after two years duration after passing of Gyani/Prabhakar examination as equivalent to the BA degree of the respondent-University.
This decision is stated to have been taken by the University because, according to it, in some Universities the students get BA degree while spending 1-1/2 years whereas in the Guru Nanak Dev University a student is required to spend four years time after matric/higher secondary in obtaining a BA degree.
Since the petitioner had obtained her BA degree from the Punjabi University within 1- 1/2 years of her passing Prabhakar examination she could not be equated with those students who had obtained BA degree from the respondent-University and for this reason, she is stated to be ineligible.
5.
It is not disputed that admission to Master of Arts examination conducted by the respondent-University is governed by its Ordinances which have been framed under the Guru Nanak Dev University Act, 1969 (for short, `the Act') and, therefore have statutory force.
The relevant extract of Ordinance 16 pertaining to MA I examination is reproduced hereunder for facility of reference :  "ORDINANCES  MASTER OF ARTS EXAMINATION  PART I  16.
The examination shall be open to any person who :  (A) has passed at least one academic year previously :  (i) x x x x x x x  (ii) any of the following examination of a recognised University with at least 50 per cent marks in the aggregate :  (a) BA (Pass), BSc (Pass), BSc (Hons.
School), BSc (Home Science), B.Com., BSc (Agri.
), LL.B., BSc (Engg.
), BSc (Chem, Engg.
), BSc (Dairying), MBBS, BAM.S., B Pharm., BSc Nursing, BT, B.Ed., B.Arch.
Bachelor of Physical Education, Bachelor of Library Science, Bachelor of Journalism, BSc (Textile) or B.D.S.
or any other examination which has been granted equivalence to the above examination by this University; or  (b) x x x x x x  (iii) BA (Pass) BSc(Pass) examination in full subjects or has obtained BA degree through English only Ordinances obtaining at least 45% marks in subject of the postgraduate Course; or  (iv) BA Degree under Ordinances for the examination to qualify in English, after passing examination in an Oriental Classical Language or a Modern Indian Language with at least 45% marks in the Honours in Oriental Titles or Modern Indian Languages examination in the subject of a Post-graduate course; or  (v) x x x x x x x x  (vi) x x x x x x x x  Provided that a candidate for BA./B.Sc Part III of this University or another recognised University who is placed in compartment shall be allowed to join MA Part I class provisionally if he is otherwise eligible for such admission, subject to the condition that subject in which he has to re-appear will not be permitted to be taken up for such admission to MA Part I class.
x x x x x x"  A bare perusal of this ordinance would show that admission to MA.
I examination of the respondent-University is open to a candidate who has a BA (Pass) degree of a recognised University with at least 50% marks in the aggregate.
In addition, it is also open to a candidate who has passed an examination other than those mentioned in subclause (a) of clause (ii) of the Ordinance with at least 50% marks in aggregate provided that the examination has been granted equivalence to the examination held by the respondent- University.
However, in regard to the examinations mentioned in sub-clause (a), what is necessary is that the degree should have been obtained from a recognised University with at least 50% marks and the Ordinance does not require any equivalence to be granted by the respondent-University so far as these degrees are concerned.
Equivalence is required to be granted only to examinations other than those mentioned in sub-clause (a) of clause (ii) of Ordinance 16A In other words, since BA (Pass) examination finds a specific' mention in sub-clause (a), it does not, therefore, require any equivalence to be granted by the respondent-University.
It is not disputed before me that Punjabi University, Patiala is a recognised University in this regard.
In this view of the matter, the petitioner who possesses a BA (Pass) degree with more than 50% marks from Punjabi University, Patiala which is a recognised University was eligible under the Ordinance to seek admission to MA.
I examination and it was not granted equivalence by the respondent-University.
The action of the University in declaring the petitioner ineligible is, therefore, illegal and in clear, contravention of Ordinance 16 referred to above.
6.
The Academic Council of the respondent-University in its meeting held on April 16, 1991 took a decision that a BA degree of Punjabi University, Patiala awarded after two years duration after passing the Gyani/Prabhakar examination be not recognised.
As is clear from Section of the Act, all decisions of the Academic Council are subject to the provisions of the ordinances.
The aforesaid decision could be implemented only after amending the ordinances and not otherwise.
It was conceded on behalf of the University that the decision of the Academic Council has not so far been incorporated in its Ordinances.
Thus, in view of the provisions of Ordinance 16 as it stands at present the decision of the Academic Council cannot override the ordinances and cannot, therefore, be implemented.
7.
For the reasons recorded above, the writ petition is allowed and the impugned letters dated January 8, 1992 and January 10, 1992 are quashed.
It is declared that the petitioner was eligible for admission to MAI (English) and was rightly admitted by the College.
The respondents arc directed to regularise her admission and declare her result of MA I (English) examination and permit her to continue with her further studies in accordance with rules and ordinances.
No costs.
Petition allowed.