Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioners in this bunch of 14 writ petitions viz Nos. 1920, 9643-48, 9649-54 of 1987 and 7232 of 1988.
The facts as enumerated in CWP No. 1920 of 1987 are noticed.
2.
The petitioners are Sanitary Inspectors in the Health Department.
They have a two-fold grievance.
Firstly, they claim parity of treatment in the grant of pay scale with their counterparts in the Department of Local Self Govt. Secondly, they claim the grant of selection grade as has been granted to various other persons similarly situate in different departments of the Govt. A few facts relevant for the decision of this controversy may be noticed.
3.
As a result of the commendation, of the Second Pay Commission, the pay scales of Sanitary Inspectors in the Health Department as well as in the Department of Local Self Govt. were fixed at Rs. 510-940.
This brought the employees in both the departments at par with each other.
By a subsequent notification dated March 24, 1983, the personnel working in the Department of Local Self Govt. were placed in the scale of Rs. 570-1080 while those in the Health Department continued to draw the pay in the original scale of Rs. 510- 940.
The petitioner's claim that once they had been put in an identical scale of pay, there was no basis for this differential treatment.
They further aver that the qualifications, the job requirements and duties are identical.
Consequently, there is no basis for any differential treatment in the matter of pay.
It is further averred that vide letter dated October 29, 1984 the Govt. has decided that there should be a selection grade to the extent of 20 per cent of the strength of the personal in the basic scale in every cadre.
The petitioners aver that while this selection grade has been granted to the various categories of the employees, the Sanitary Inspectors have been treated in a discriminatory way and have not been granted their rightful due.
4.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, the factual position is not disputed.
It has been averred that the Sanitary Inspectors engaged in the Municipal Committees are not on State cadre and as such their duties and scale of pay are not comparable with the Sanitary Inspectors/Malaria Inspectors working in the Health Department.
It has been further averred that the case "for the grant of selection grade was considered in the light of Punjab Govt. Memos.
No. 8/30/78(5)-845 dated 33-82 and 9/30/78/FR(5)Pb-3369 dated 5480.
Consequently, a proposal has already been sent to the Govt. vide this office letter No. E7(I) Pb/82/211, dated 16782 (Annexure R-2) for the grant of 20% selection grade of Rs. 580-1200 to the Senior Malaria Inspectors.
The Govt. decision is still awaited".
On this premises, the claim of the petitioners has been contested.
5.
I have heard Mr. JPS Sandhu for the petitioners and Mr. GK Chatrath, learned Advocate General, Punjab for the respondents.
6.
Indisputably, the employees working in the Health Department as well as those working in the Deportment of Local self Govt. were placed in an identical scale of pay viz. Rs. 510-940 with effect from 111978.
It is also not disputed that their qualifications, job requirements and nature of duties are identical.
In such a situation, the action of the Govt. in treating the two sets of employees performing identical duties, in a different manner in the matter of pay scales, cannot be justified.
It apparently appears to be arbitrary.
Furthermore, one can only lament the absolute indifference of the authorities in considering the matter.
Admittedly, the recommendations from the Department of Health for the grant of Selection Grade to the petitioners has been made vide letter dated July 16, 1982.
In spite of the fact that more than ten years have already lapsed, the Govt. has not been able to decide the matter.
As a result, number of persons are approaching Courts of law.
7.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, I consider it appropriate to direct the respondents to decide the whole matter expeditiously and in any case within three months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
The appropriate authority shall pass a speaking order and unless there are valid reasons, the employees in the two Departments shall be accorded parity of treatment in the matter of pay scales.
8.
Learned counsel for the petitioners has pointed out that even the employees working under the Municipal Committees are now members of the Provincialised cadre.
If that be so, there is no basis in treating them differently from those working in other Departments.
Even if, they are not members of the Provincialised cadre, they are all working under the State.
Even Municipal Committees fail within the definition of the State under Article 12 of the Constitution.
9.
Taking the totality of circumstances into consideration, it is directed that the Govt. should decide the whole matter within three months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
If the petitioners are not satisfied with the order that may be passed, they will be at liberty to approach this Court on the same, similar or other grounds.
It may be mentioned that the pay scales have already been revised with effect from January 1, 1986.
The decision taken by the Govt. shall cover all stages of revision of pay starting from January 1, 1978 till today.
If the Govt. accepts the claim of the petitioners, the Govt. will implement this order within three months from the date of passing of the order and grant all consequential reliefs.
In the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Order accordingly.