Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner, a candidate for the post of Constable in the Haryana Armed Police is aggrieved by the action of the respondents in appointing persons lower than him in order of merit and arbitrarily denying appointment to him.
A few facts may be noticed :  2.
In January 1990, the Police Department of the State of Haryana decided to fill-up 300 vacancies of constables for the Haryana Armed Police.
According to the petitioner, candidates were required to appear before the Selection Committee headed by the Comandent 5th Battalion, Haryana Armed Police, Madhuban, respondent No. 3.
The petitioner claims that he appeared before the Selection Committee and having been found suitable.
he was sent for medical examination to the Chief Medical Officer, Civil Hospital, Karnal on January 5, 1990.
On his having been found to be medically fit, respondent No. 3 wrote to the Superintendent of Police, Kaithal and Deputy Commissioner, Kaithal to verify the character of the petitioner.
He avers that his character was found to be good and a report in this behalf was sent vide letter dated May 9, 1990.
The petitioner further avers that in the merit list prepared by the authorities, his name appeared at Sr. No. 16.
Persons whose names appeared at Sr. No. 17 to 29, were also sent for medical examination to the Chief Medical Officer, Karnal.
The grievance of the petitioner is that these persons who were below him in order of merit have been given appointment by respondent No. 3 while he has been left out.
It has been further averred that after the petitioner's selection, about 500 persons have been appointed by respondent No. 3 during the last four months.
This action has been challenged as being totally arbitrary and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
3.
A written statement has been filed by Mr. Surat Singh, Commandant, 5th Battalion, Haryana Armed Police on behalf of all the respondents.
It has been inter alia averred that it was proposed by the Director General of Police, Haryana vide his letter dated December 22, 1989 to fill-up 616 vacancies of constables for the Haryana Armed Police by making fresh recruitment.
This letter was later on cancelled vide a message dated January 9, 1990.
The respondent further avers that even though the petitioner had appeared before him for his measurement alongwith other candidates but no selection committee was instituted and no selection was made.
The fact that the petitioner was sent for medical examination and found fit by the Chief Medical Officer as submitted by him in paragraph 3 of the writ petition and the fact that his name appeared Sr. No. 16 in the merit list.
has not been denied.
It has, however, been stated that "there was no merit list prepared in this office."
In reply to paragraph 7 wherein a specific grievance has been made by petitioner that persons who were below him in the merit list from Sr. No. 17 to 29 have been appointed while he has been left out, the respondents aver that "the contents given in this para are admitted only to this extent that some candidates were appointed as constables by respondent No. 3.
Rest of the para is wrong and denied."
The respondent further state that "There was no merit list prepared and only those candidates are given appointment who were found eligible for the post of constable by the appointing authority."
4.
Presumably realising that the reply was not adequate, Mr. Surat Singh has filed an additional affidavit dated April 24, 1992.
In this affidavit, it has been inter alia averred that the State Government has prescribed that the candidates must qualify the eligibility tests and Standard Physical Efficiency tests.
These tests were laid down by the Director General of Police, Haryana, Chandigarh vide his memo No. 12215-32/B-3 dated 22121989, copy of which is attached as Annexure R-1.
The petitioner qualified the eligibility tests i.e. height, chest and educational qualification but he has not qualified the Standard Physical Efficiency tests.
No person is appointed as constable unless he fulfils the prescribed Standard Physical Efficiency tests.
It has also been averred that the petitioner having been born on April 12, 1964, was more than 27 years of age when he filed the writ petition on 2691991.
Affidavit is, however, wholly silent with regard to the fact as to whether or not others who were actually appointed had passed those tests.
It has not been suggested that every body who has been appointed has actually passed the tests.
5.
A perusal of the written statement filed originally on November 28, 1991 and the affidavit dated 24.4.1992 show the apparent contradiction in the stand of the respondents.
In the written statement, it has been categorically averred that the letter dated December 22, 1989 regarding filling-up of 616 vacancies of constables was cancelled by the Police Haryana Chandigarh vide his TPM No. 337-66/B-3 dated 911990.
It was also directed to all the units that no recruitment of any kind is made till further orders.
On one hand, the respondents maintain that the directions contained in the letter No. 12215-32/B-3 dated 22121989 have been cancelled vide TPM dated 911990 and on the other, they relied upon this letter to suggest that certain Efficiency Tests have been prescribed and the petitioner had not passed those tests.
Be that as it may, a specific averment made by the petitioner to the effect that he was placed at Sr. No. 16 of the merit list and those whose names appeared at Sr. No. 17 to 29 have been appointed, has not been denied either in the original written statement or in the affidavit filed thereafter.
Even at the hearing, no record has been produced to show that this averment made by the petitioner is false or that only those persons who were above him in order of merit were appointed.
In this situation, it is not possible to reject the specific claim made on behalf of the petitioner to the effect that persons lower than him in merit have been appointed.
6.
Mr. Jaswant Singh, learned counsel appearing for the respondents contends that the Department had not prepared any merit list.
In fact, he goes to the extent of suggesting that factually no selection had been made.
If that be so, it is difficult for him to explain as to how various persons have been actually appointed.
Learned counsel is unable to give any explanation whatsoever.
He was finally driven to contend that a Division Bench of this Court has dismissed Civil Writ Petition No 19071 of 1991 Vajender Singh v. State of Haryana on 2211992.
Learned counsel, however, concedes that in the said petition, there was no allegation that any one lower than the petitioner had been actually appointed.
That is the vital difference in the two cases.
7.
In view of the above, it is held that the petitioner had a right to be considered for appointment before any one below him in order of merit could be appointed.
In the normal course, only a direction for the consideration of this claim could have been given.
However, in the present case, it is established on the record that the petitioner has been found to be medically fit and even his character and antecedents etc. are found to be good.
The only objection to his appointment being raised now is that he had crossed the age of 27 years on the date on which he filed the writ petition.
That is wholly irrelevant in view of the fact that he was within the prescribed age limit both at the time of his submission of application and at the time of consideration of his claim by the selecting authority.
The date of filing of the writ petition is wholly irrelevant.
8.
Accordingly, the writ petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to appoint the petitioner as constable in the Haryana Armed Police.
His seniority vis-a-vis other persons appointed in pursuance of the same process of selection shall be determined by the order of merit.
In the circumstances, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.