Harjit Singh Bedi, J. (Oral) The petitioner was appointed an Accounts Clerk in the Haryana State Co-operative Federation Ltd (hereinafter referred to as `Federation') on 25.7.1975 through letter of appointment Annexure P-1.
He was thereafter promoted to the post of Accounts Assistant vide order dated 2731978 on temporary basis subject to the approval of the Board of Directors.
The Management Committee of the Federation granted approval to the promotion of the petitioner vide its Resolution dated 471978 and the promotion was thereafter confirmed on 2341979.
Respondent No4, Sahi Ram, who felt aggrieved by the promotion of the petitioner to the post of Accounts Assistant, represented to the Department and on consideration of the matter the Registrar, Co-operative Societies, Haryana, vide his order Annexure P-5 to the petitioner, asked the Executive Director of the Federation to withdraw the promotion order of the petitioner and to promote respondent No. 4 instead.
It appears that in pursuance of the order Annexure P-5, the matter was re- considered by the Federation in its meeting held on 1431980 and the petitioner was reverted to his earlier post, whereas, respondent No4 was promoted.
This order is Annexure P-4 to the petition.
The orders Annexures P-4 and P-5 have been impugned by way of the present writ petition.
2.
Although a number of points have been raised in the petition questioning the legality of the orders Annexures P-4 and P-5 but the main attack has been focussed on the fact that no show cause, notice was given to the petitioner before his reversion was ordered.
In sub-para (i) of Para 18 of the petition, it has been asserted that no opportunity of hearing was given to the petitioner before the impugned order was made.
In reply to this assertion the stand of respondent No3 i.e. Federation is as under :-  "In reply to sub-para (i) of para 18 it is submitted that the petitioner has come before this Hon'ble court with tainted hands and he abetted the officials of the Federation to commit all sort of illegalities to retain his post in the Federation at all costs.
In such circumstances, the petitioner cannot say that he was denied the right of opportunity of being heard, as he was well aware of all the illegalities right from the beginning in this regard.
Hence no question arises to afford opportunity of being heard in such cases."
From a reading of the above it would be apparent that the Federation was quite oblivious to the legal position that once a person has been promoted (and in this case the petitioner was also confirmed on the promoted post) he was entitled to at least a show cause notice before reversion is ordered even though the initial promotion may or may not have been in order.
3.
For the reasons recorded above, the present petition is allowed; Annexures P-4 and P-5 are quashed but liberty is given to the respondents to take action in accordance with law in case they deem it necessary.
It is however, made clear that all consequential reliefs that would accrue resultant to the quashing of Annexures P-4 and P-5 would be given to the petitioner within a period of, six months from today.
No costs.