Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - Petitioner served the Indian Army from May 3, 1954 to February 2, 1971.
After release from the Army, he joined the Haryana Roadways on August 8, 1972.
By order dated March 24, 1988, the respondents gave the benefit of military service rendered by the petitioner from October 26, 1962 to January 10, 1968.
As a result, the petitioner's date of appointment to the service and pay etc. were refixed.
The petitioner then gave a notice of three months for retirement from service w.e.f.
March 31, 1989.
Vide orders dated May 28, 1989, the petitioner's request was accepted.
Consequently, he retired from service w.e.f.
March 31, 1989.
The petitioner then claimed pension from the respondent-State of Haryana.
His claim having been declined on the ground that he had not completed 20 years qualifying service, he has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
2.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents.
It has been inter alia averred that the petitioner had remained under suspension or on extraordinary leave for a total period of 980 days viz. 2 years, 8 months and 20 days during his service in the State of Haryana.
According to the respondents, this period of suspension/extraordinary leave has to be excluded from the total service rendered by the petitioner.
Consequently according to the respondents, the petitioner had rendered a service of 19 years, one month and 18 days only.
As a result, the respondents maintain that the petitioner is not entitled to the grant of any pension as he had not completed the requisite period of 20 years service.
The respondents also aver that the petitioner having not completed the requisite period of service as contemplated under Rule 532-B of the Punjab Civil Services Rules Vol II, is not entitled to the grant of pension.
3.
The petitioner has filed a replication by way of affidavit wherein it has been averred that certain periods of service have been wrongly excluded from consideration.
By way of illustration, it may be noted that the period from February 28, 1983 to September 17, 1983 viz 202 days is stated to have been treated as extraordinary leave.
It has been mentioned in this affidavit that the period of suspension was regularised and that the petitioner had been paid the subsistence allowance.
There is no order for treating this period as extraordinary leave.
It has been further mentioned that various broken periods of service mentioned at Serial No. 5 in the document attached as Annexure R-1, were treated as leave without pay but there is no order for treating them as extraordinary leave.
On this hypothesis, it is claimed that the action of the respondents in denying the pension to the petitioner is illegal.
4.
Rule 532 B, as amended by the Haryana Government Notification No. 1/2 (27)-79-2FRII dated March 29, 1983 reads as under :-  "(i) At any time after a Government employee has completed twenty years qualifying service, he may, by giving notice of not less than three months in writing to the appointing authority retire from service.
However, a Government employee may make a request in writing to the appointing authority to accept notice of less than three months giving reasons therefor.
On receipt of a request, the appointing authority may consider such request for the curtailment of the period of notice of three months on merits and if it is satisfied that the curtailment of the period of notice will not cause any administrative inconvenience, the appointing authority may relax the requirement of notice of three months on the condition that the Government employee shall not apply for commutation of a part of his pension before the expiry of the period of notice of three months."
A perusal of the above Rule shows that a Government employee can seek voluntary retirement only after he "has completed 20 years qualifying service."
It is the admitted case of the parties that the petitioner had sought premature retirement under the provisions of Rule 5.32-B.
A condition precedent for seeking retirement under this Rule is completion of 20 years of qualifying service.
The fact that the petitioner was permitted to retire vide order dated 2831989 w.e.f.
3131989 (copy of the order is Annexure P-2) shows that the Department was satisfied that the petitioner had completed 20 years qualifying service.
Consequently, the respondents are now estopped from claiming that the petitioner had not completed the requisite period of service so as to entitle him to claim pension.
5.
Further a perusal of Clause 3 of the Rule quoted above shows that a person retiring under the provisions of Rule 5.32-B, shall be entitled to have "a period no exceeding 5 years" to be added to the qualifying service subject to the overall condition that the total period of service does not exceed 30 years.
The petitioner is even entitled to the benefit of the provision contained in Clause 3.
Nothing has been pointed out to show as to why the benefit under this provision should not be granted to the petitioner.
6.
Still further, even on merits, the respondents have not been able to point out an order showing that the petitioner was treated as on extra- ordinary leave for the period from February 28, 1983 to September 17, 1983.
The period of 202 days could not thus be excluded from consideration.
7.
Taking the totality of the circumstances into consideration, it appears that the appropriate authority has not considered either the provisions of Rule 532 B or the actual facts of the case in the correct perspective.
Accordingly, the order rejecting the petitioner's claim, is quashed.
The respondents are directed to compute the pension admissible to the petitioner.
The needful shall be done within three months from the date of the receipt of a copy of this order.
The petitioner shall be entitled to his costs which are assessed at Rs. 2000/  Petition allowed.