Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The three petitioners herein are members of Scheduled Caste.
They competed for selection for admission to Lower School Course at the Police Training College, Phillaur.
It is averred that in spite of the fact that the names of the petitioners were placed at serial numbers 1, 6 and 11 in the merit list of candidates, they were not deputed for the Course while those who were below them in order of merit were actually sent.
Aggrieved by this action, the petitioners have approached this Court through the present petition.
2.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been pointed out that the petitioners had been placed at serial numbers 18, 25 and 27 in the merit list.
However, their names were shown at serial numbers 1, 6 and 11 only on the ground that they were members of the Scheduled Caste.
It has been further averred that the sanctioned strength of Head Constables for district Kapurthala is 162.
The share of members of Scheduled Caste comes to 32.
Out of these 32 posts in the cadre of Head Constables 29 posts were already occupied by members of the Scheduled Caste.
Four more persons had already undergone the promotion course for constables, and "are available for being promoted to the rank of Head Constables."
As a result, it is claimed that no seat falling to the share of Scheduled Caste was available in April 1988 or October 1988 against which any of the Scheduled Caste candidates could be deputed for the course.
On this premises, the claim of the petitioners has been contested.
3.
By an interim order passed by the Motion Bench, the petitioners were actually deputed for the Course.
They have since completed the course.
4.
Mr. TP Singh, learned counsel for the petitioners submits that from the perusal of the written statement it is not clear as to whether or not the members of the Scheduled Caste adjusted against the quota of their category were appointed by giving them the benefit of reservation or on the basis of their merit.
He submits that in case some members of the Scheduled Caste have been promoted as Head Constables on the basis of merit and not on the basis of reservation, then to that extent, the posts would be available in the category of Scheduled Castes.
Mrs. Tuli, learned counsel appearing for the respondents does not dispute this legal position.
She, however, states that it is not possible to state categorically as to whether or not the contention of the petitioners is factually correct.
5.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, it is directed that the respondents will check up as to whether or not the members of Scheduled Caste had been given their due share upto the year 1988 by having given the benefit of reservation.
While doing so, the number of persons belonging to the category of Scheduled Caste who may have been promoted on their own merit shall be excluded.
In case it is found that they had been given their share in accordance with the Govt. instructions, then the petitioners.
would not be entitled to the grant of any relief.
However, in case it is found that there was some deficiency in the quota allotted to the category of Scheduled Caste then such of the petitioners as can be accommodated in order of merit will be adjusted.
6.
With the above directions, the writ petition is disposed of.
It is however directed that the needful shall be done within three months from the date of the receipt of a copy of this order.
In case any of the petitioners is found entitled to be, promoted, then he will be promoted with effect from the date a vacancy falling in the quota of Scheduled Caste was available.
In the circumstances, there will be no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.