GR Majithia, J - This Letters Patent appeal is directed against the judgment of a learned Single Judge of this Court dated September 17, 1991 rendered in C.W.P.
No. 1656 of 1983 (Harbans Lal Bhatia etc. v. The State of Punjab & others) The respondents were petitioners in the writ petition (hereinafter referred to as the petitioners) and private respondent Nos. 4 to 9 in the writ petition and not made a party to the Letters Patent Appeal (hereinafter to be referred to as the private respondent) were working as Assistants in the Cooperation Department of the State of Punjab.
It is undisputed that the petitioners are senior to the private respondents as Assistants.
On the basis of seniority the petitioners and the private respondents were given selection grade of Rs. 225-500 with effect from October 14, 1976 in the rank of Assistants.
With effect from February 28, 1977, the office of Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Punjab was upgraded from `B' class office to `A' class office and consequent thereupon, six posts of selection grade Assistants were declared to be there in the office of the Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Punjab and were created in the pay scale of Rs. 300-600 as compared to the posts of selection grade Assistants in the `B' class office which were in the pay scale of Rs. 225-500.
It was for the first time that selection grade posts of Assistants in `A' class office were created in the pay scale of Rs. 300-600.
By order dated February 5, 1982, the private respondents, who happened to be working in the office of the Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Punjab were granted the selection grade of Rs. 300-600.
They were junior to the petitioners.
They were granted selection grade only on the ground that they were working in the Head Office although the Assistants working in the field offices or in Registrar's office were borne on one joint seniority list and the petitioners were senior to the private.
respondents.
They were granted selection grade only on the ground that the Assistants working in the `A' class office formed a separate cadre.
2.
The learned Single Judge came to the conclusion that before February 23, 1977, the Assistants working in class `A' office or in `B' class office, i.e. in the field office, were borne on one joint seniority list.
Their cadre also remained one.
The selection grade has to be granted strictly in accordance with the joint seniority list of Assistants and not on the basis that the Assistants working in the Head Office became senior to the Assistants working in the `B' class office.
Once the Assistants working in the `A' class office or in `B' class office are borne on the joint seniority list, selection grade has to be granted on the basis of the joint seniority list.
3.
We find no infirmity in the reasoning and conclusions arrived at by the learned Single Judge.
Learned counsel for the appellants could not refer to any order of the State Government by which the Assistants working in the Head Office were to form a separate cadre.
He also did not dispute that on the upgrading of the office of the Registrar Cooperative societies Punjab from `B' class office to `A' class office, option was given to the petitioners who were working in `B' class office i.e. in the field offices, either to join the Head Office or to remain in the field.
He also could not refer to any order of the State Government by which the joint seniority list of Assistants whether working in the Head Office or in the fields was bifurcated.
In the absence of these orders, respondent No. 2 was not justified in granting selection grade of Rs. 300-600 to the private respondents, who were junior to the petitioners.
4.
Apart from this, this appeal suffers from another serious infirmity.
The private respondents, who were granted the selection grade ignoring the claim of the petitioners and who were party respondents in the writ petition have not been arrayed as respondents to the appeal.
The learned Single Judge taking a compassionate view has directed that the benefits granted to the private respondents be not withdrawn and the petitioners be granted the same benefits as permissible.
We cannot interfere with the discretionary order passed by the learned Single Judge for the reason that the private respondents who have been benefited by these observations are not the respondents in the appeal and they cannot be deprived of the benefits granted under judgment of the learned Single Judge without hearing them.
The appeal suffers from non- joinder of necessary parties.
For the reasons stated above, the appeal fails and is dismissed, but with no order as to costs.