Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - On December 5, 1989, the department of Technical Education advertised various posts including one post of Painter Instructor.
It was reserved for the members of the Scheduled Castes.
The petitioner, who is not a member of the Scheduled Castes, but belongs to the category of backward classes, challenges the action of the department in reserving the post on the ground that it is violative of Article 16 of the Constitution as also the instructions issued by the Government.
It is averred that out of a total of three posts, one is already held by Lakhwinder Singh who belongs to the category of Scheduled Castes.
2.
On behalf of the respondents, it is averred that there are three posts of Painter Instructors, one each at Rajpura, Amritsar and Nawanshahar in the department.
It is further averred that these three posts are included in the cadre strength of Craft Instructors of the Industrial.
Training Department, which constitute one single Cadre having joint seniority and Roster Register."
It has been further averred that "Shri Lakhwinder Singh was adjusted at Roster point No. 481, which is reserved for Scheduled Caste."
It has also been stated that all the posts of Craft Instructors were reserved for the members of the Scheduled Castes to complete the backlog of the posts.
3.
A written statement has also been filed by Harbinder Singh, who was impleaded as respondent No. 3, by an interim order of this Court.
He avers that the interviews were held on Match 2, 1990 by the Departmental Selection Committee and that he was selected.
He further avers that the post has been rightly reserved for the category of Scheduled Castes.
4.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties.
It is the admitted position that there are three posts of Painter Instructors.
So far as the instructors in various disciplines are concerned, in the very nature of things, the qualifications and job requirements are entirely different.
To illustrate.
the record shows that there are posts of Instructors in the trades of Blacksmithy; Fruit Preservation; Electronics; Punjabi Stenography and English Stenography etc.
The qualifications for the respective posts are different.
Consequently, a candidate for one post cannot compete for recruitment to another post.
Nor can a person appointed against one post be transferred to the other.
Even otherwise, there is no order as to show that all the posts constitute one cadre.
A perusal of the provisions of Rule 29 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume-I, Part-I, shows that a cadre has been defined to mean "the strength of a service or a part of a service sanctioned as a separate unit."
There is nothing on record to show that the Government has constituted a common cadre of Instructors.
On the contrary it is the admitted position on the record that there are three posts of Painter Instructors.
Consequently, the cadre consists of only three posts.
Can the post advertised by the department be reserved for the members of Scheduled Castes?
5.
It is the admitted position that out of the three posts, one is- already held by Shri Lakhwinder Singh, who is a member of the Scheduled Castes.
It is also admitted that there is a reservation of 25% in Class-III posts.
Accordingly out of the three more than one post cannot at all be reserved.
In fact, a reservation of one post amounts to reservation of 33%.
By the action of the respondents in reserving the post of Instructor for the members of Scheduled Castes.
the reservation would amount to 66%.
Then, it would not only defeat the right of the members of the general category under Article 16, but would also be contrary to the Government's own instructions, where under only a reservation of 25% can be made.
Accordingly, the action of the respondents in making reservation of the post of Painter Instructor for members of the Scheduled Castes is held to be illegal.
As a result, even the selection made by the departmental Selection Committee cannot be sustained.
It is consequently quashed.
This would, however, not preclude the department from readvertising the post and filling it up in accordance with law.
In the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.