RS Mongia, J (Oral) - Petitioner joined Maharishi Dayanand University (hereinafter referred to as a University) as Director Physical Education (Females) on 31.10.77 on ad hoc basis for a period of six months or till regular selection for the post was made, whichever was earlier.
This ad hoc appointment was duly approved by the Executive Council of the University.
The tenure of ad hoc appointment was extended upto 31101987.
The University advertised the post in question and petitioner was one of the candidates for the post.
The University Selection Committee recommended the petitioner for the said post and the Executive Council in its meeting held on 2011979 approved the appointment of the petitioner.
A formal letter of appointment was issued by the University on 3111979 copy of which is attached as Annexure P-4.
The letter reads as under :-  "In continuation of this office letter No. ET-3/78/22948/23042 dated 181278 on the subject cited above, I am desired to inform you that the Executive Council vide Resolution No. 2 of its meeting held on 20.2.1979 has approved your appointment to the post of D.P.E.
(Female).
The other terms and conditions of your appointment as such, will remain the same as are specified in this office letter referred to above."
2.
Vide Resolution 40 dated 261980, the Executive Council resolved that in view of distinctly adverse reports of 2 successive Deans of Students Welfare the petitioner be not confirmed in her post.
This resolution was followed by a letter dated 561980 to the petitioner informing her about the resolution.
In view of the resolution, the petitioner's services stood terminated.
The petitioner has challenged the resolution of the Executive Council dated 261980 (Annexure P-12).
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has taken me through the pleadings in which allegations of mala fide have been levelled against the then Vice Chancellor Shri Hardwari Lal.
Shri Hardwari Lal has filed an affidavit denying the allegations of mala fide against him.
It is not necessary for me to go into the question of malafide for the view I am taking regarding the other point raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the period of probation of the petitioner was one year and since no order extending the period of probation was passed before the expiry of the probation period it would be deemed that the petitioner had successfully completed the period of probation and confirmation must automatically follow.
In para 14 of the written statement filed on behalf of the University it is admitted that the probation period of the probationer started w.e.f.
31101978.
According to the petitioner's counsel, at the most it can be taken that the probationary period started on 3111979 because formal order of appointment was issued on 3111979 (as the petitioner was already in the service of the University).
The petitioner's counsel went on to submit that even if for argument's sake, it is taken that the probationary period was to start from 3111979, when the formal appointment letter was issued, even then one year period of probation came to an end on 3111980.
There is no dispute on the fact that the University did not pass any order extending the period of probation of the petitioner.
He referred to Rule 15 of the Service and Conduct Rules for the non-teaching employees of the University which says that "every employee appointed substantively to a post shall be placed on probation for one year.
However, in an individual case, the period of probation may be extended but in no case the total period of probation shall exceed 2 years.
On satisfactory completion of the period of probation of an employee, the appointing authority shall confirm such an employee in the appointment.
If, however, the probation period of an employee is not extended during the pendency of such a probation, the same shall be deemed to have been completed satisfactorily from the due date and the employee confirmed accordingly."
Learned counsel in support of his submission cited a judgment of learned single Judge of this Court in Ramesh Kumar v. The Maharishi Dayanand University, Rohtak, 1989(3) SLR 587 where the above said rule came up for consideration.
5.
The stand of University in the written statement is that since no order of confirmation was passed after expiry of the one year period of probation, the period of probation of the petitioner would be deemed to have been extended.
Since under the rule referred to above, the probationary period is extendable the period of probation will stand automatically extended in the absence of an order of confirmation.
6.
After hearing the learned counsel for the petitioner and going through the pleadings in the written statement, I am of the view that there is considerable force in the arguments of learned counsel for the petitioner.
Ramesh Kumar's case supra was also a case against the University where under similar circumstances, after one year of the appointment, the services of the petitioner in that case had been terminated.
Learned Judge, while interpreting Rule 15 observed as under :-  "According to the said rule, if the probation period of an employee is not extended during the pendency of such a probation, the same shall be deemed to have been completed satisfactorily from the due date and the employee confirmed accordingly.
The rule is thus specific that in case there was not extension of probation period as admittedly there was none in the present case, then according to the said rule, the probation period will be deemed to have been completed satisfactorily from the due date and on that basis the employee will be deemed to have been confirmed accordingly.
In the presence of said rule, it could not be successfully argued on behalf of the respondent-University that any specific order of confirmation was to be passed."
I am in respectful agreement with the learned Judge regarding interpretation of Rule 15.
That being so, the petitioner would be deemed to be confirmed w.e.f.
31.10.1979 or in any case w.e.f.
3111980.
7.
If the services of the petitioner were to be terminated on any ground of misconduct then the relevant rules on the subject and the rules of natural justice had to be complied with.
8.
There is yet another aspect.
Admittedly the petitioner had completed more than one year of service before the resolution for not confirming the petitioner was passed.
It was based on some adverse reports recorded by the Deans of Students Welfare.
These remarks were never conveyed to the petitioner.
If any action after the period of one year was to be taken on the basis of any adverse remarks, the same should have been conveyed to the petitioner.
He might have been able to convince the University that the remarks were not well-founded.
9.
For the foregoing reasons, this writ petition is allowed and the resolution dated 261980 of the Executive Council of the University, Annexure P-12, is hereby, quashed.
The respondent-University is directed to reinstate the petitioner and give her all the consequential benefits which she may be entitled under the rules.
However, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.