AL Bahri, J - The petitioner joined police force as Constable in 1982.
Subsequently in April 1988 he was promoted as Head Constable.
On January 7, 1991 he was promoted by way of reward as Assistant Sub Inspector on ad hoc basis.
Various achievements of the petitioner in sports are mentioned in the writ petition on the basis of which he was allowed ad hoc promotion.
Vide order, Annexure P.1 dated February 14, 1992, the petitioner was reverted to the substantive rank of Head Constable.
It is this order which is challenged by the petitioner in this writ petition.
2.
On notice of motion having been issued, reply has been filed by the Deputy Inspector General of Police on behalf of the respondents.
It is not disputed that by way of reward the petitioner was promoted on ad hoc basis.
However, it is stated that by such promotion no right has vested in the petitioner to hold the post.
Ordinarily promotions to the posts of Assistant Sub-Inspectors are made after Head Constables have qualified in the Intermediate School Course and on the basis of seniority.
The impugned order was passed on administrative grounds otherwise the petitioner was not eligible for promotion as per the police rules.
The reversion to the substantive rank was in accordance with the terms and conditions of the promotion order, copy of which is Annexure R1.
3.
Shri RK Malik, Advocate appearing on behalf of the petitioner, has argued that on the transfer of the Commandant who had promoted the petitioner, a new Commandant came and passed the reversion order without there being any reason to do so.
Learned counsel stressed on different achievements of the petitioner in the field of sports as mentioned in the petition.
There is no force in the contention of the counsel for the petitioner.
Annexure R.2 is the order vide which the petitioner was promoted on ad hoc basis keeping in view his achievements in the field of sports.
It further provides as under :-  "His promotion is temporary, fortuitous and he will not claim any seniority over and above his seniors for this ad hoc promotion.
He will be liable to be reverted without the formality of show cause notice."
Since the petitioner was not promoted strictly in accordance with the rules i.e. after he had been deputed to the Intermediate School Course and in order of seniority, he could not claim any right to the promoted post.
Under Rule 13.9 of the Punjab Police Rules promotion to the post of Sub-Inspector is made from confirmed Head Constables, who after doing Lower School Course, are placed in list 'D' maintained for the purpose.
The petitioner was not promoted in order of seniority from the list 'D' as aforesaid.
He was promoted out of turn taking into consideration his achievements in sports.
Reversion from the aforesaid promoted post thus does not amount to punishment.
Article 311(2) of the Constitution could not be attracted to the case in hand.
As mentioned in the order of promotion-Annexure R1, the petitioner was promoted temporarily on ad hoc basis and he was liable to be reverted without the formality of show-cause notice.
The impugned order-Annexure P.1 reverting the petitioner to his substantive rank of Head Constable is just and in accordance with the terms and conditions of the order-Annexure R1.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has relied upon the decision of Amarjeet Chaudhary, J in Hardev Singh v. State of Haryana and others, 1992(2) SCT 393 (P&H) Civil Writ Petition No. 10434 of 1991, dated December 20, 1991, in support of his contention that since promotion of the petitioner was in order, in accordance with the Rules, he could not be reverted.
The ratio of the decision cannot be applied to the case in hand.
In that case a Constable was promoted as Head Constable and he continued working on that post for about nine years (pretty long time).
Order of reversion was considered detriment to his interest as no opportunity of hearing was given.
That case may be on the peculiar facts mentioned therein but the same can hardly be treated as a precedent.
A perusal of the judgment shows that the same was to some extent given on concession.
The Full Bench of this Court in Sant Ram Bhal v. The State of Haryana and another, 1992(1) RSJ 761 : 1992(1) SCT 534, had the occasion to consider the similar matter of promotion on ad hoc basis and reversion therefrom.
It was observed that while passing such an order of reversion provisions of Article 14 of the Constitution were not violated and on promotion the petitioner did not acquire any right to hold the post.
In view of the Full Bench judgment aforesaid, there is no scope for interference with the reversion order.
The writ petition is dismissed.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.