HS Bedi, J - The petitioner was appointed as a Sectional Officer in November, 1959 and while so employed improved his qualifications which led to his promotion as Sub Divisional Engineer, a Class-II Service to Class-I Service governed by Punjab Service Engineers Class-I Public Works Deptt.
(Public Health Branch), Rules, 1961, hereinafter referred to as the Rules.
The petitioner apparently fulfilled the qualifications laid down in Rule 6 of the Rules and was accordingly promoted as an Executive Engineer which is a Class-I post on ad hoc basis on June 13, 1977 for a period of six month or till the approval of the Punjab Public Service Commission, whichever was earlier.
The case of the petitioner for regular appointment to the Class-I Service was to be considered by a Screening Committee detailed in Rule 8.
This committee met in December 1977 and found him unfit for promotion as there was an adverse confidential report recorded against him, for the year 1971-72, copy whereof has been appended as Annexure P-2 to the writ petition.
A representation filed seeking the expunction of the remarks was also rejected.
The petitioner received a Show Cause Notice dated 9th of August, 1971 proposing to take action against him for imposition of a major penalty under Rule 10 of the Punjab Civil Services Punishment and Appeal Rules, 1970.
The petitioner replied to the said Notice and Statement of allegations and ultimately after a lapse of almost four years vide order dated 6th of October, 1975, Annexure P-4 to the writ petition, a penalty of stoppage of two annual increments without cumulative effect was imposed on him alongwith recovery of Rs. 81125.
On a representation filed by the petitioner, the Government, vide order dated 30th March, 1977, Annexure P5 to the writ petition, waived off the penalty of stoppage of two increments, but the order with regard to the recovery of Rs. 81125. was retained.
The petitioner thereafter moved yet another application before the authorities for expunction of adverse remarks and vide Annexure P-6 dated 24th July, 1978, this application was allowed and the adverse remarks for the year 1971-72 were also expunged.
As already mentioned above, the petitioner, already had been promoted on an ad hoc basis to the higher post of Executive Engineer on 13th of June 1977 and had been considered for regular promotion by the Screening Committee set up for this purpose in December, 1977 though no final decision had been taken, (sic) informed the Chairman, Punjab Public Service Commission vide representation, Annexure P-7 that as the only adverse report against him had been expunged, his case be reviewed.
Despite this communication, however, the Punjab Government on the advice of the Punjab Public Service Commission, reverted the petitioner to the post of Sub Divisional Engineer vide order dated 8th of April, 1980, Annexure P-8 to the writ petition.
The adverse circumstances of the petitioner were apparently still not over as on 12th May, 1980 the Govt. vide Annexure P-9 reconsidered its order dated 24-7-1978, Annexure P-6 and directed that the adverse confidential remarks which had been expunged would remain intact and this decision was duly communicated to the petitioner.
The petitioner has impugned the orders dated 8th April, 1980 and 12th of May, 1980, Annexures P-8 and P-9 respectively by way of present writ petition.
It is significant that the petitioner approached this Court by way of the present writ petition within a week of the order Annexure P-8 having been made and it was during the pendency of the original writ petition that the order, Annexure P-9, was passed which has also been impugned by way of an amendment to the writ petition.
2.
The case of the petitioner, as set out in the writ petition and by his Counsel, Mr. Balram Gupta, at the time of arguments, was that the order dated 24-7-1978, Annexure P-6 had conferred certain rights upon the petitioner and as such the impugned order Annexure P-9 withdrawing that order could not have been made without issuing a show cause notice to him, It has also been urged that although the blot on the career of the petitioner had been removed vide order dated 24-7-1978, Annexure P-6, which fact was brought to the notice of the Public Service Commission vide Annexure P-7 yet the Commission still proceeded to declare him unfit for regular promotion though the basis for declining regular promotion to him had ceased to exist.
In reply, the respondents have asserted that the representation filed by the petitioner against the adverse remarks for the year 197172 had already been rejected and as per Govt.
Instructions no second representation lay for securing the same relief.
The Public Service Commission has rather taken a curious stand by asserting that as no official communication had been received with regard to expunction of the adverse remarks, they were not bound to act on the representation of the petitioner, Annexure P-7.
3.
After hearing the learned Counsel for the parties, I am of the view that the present writ petition deserves to succeed.
It is to be noted that the order dated 24-7-1978, Annexure P-6, expuing the adverse remarks had created certain rights in favour of the petitioner.
Those rights could not be violated without affording an opportunity of a hearing to the petitioner.
It is also to be noted that there are no statutory rules debarring a second representation against an adverse report and the matter is only governed by executive instructions which are in the nature of guidelines for the guidance of the officers.
Having once made an order in favour of the petitioner expunging the adverse remarks, the same could not be reviewed without giving him a show cause notice and a hearing.
4.
The learned Counsel for the respondents had also urged on the basis of the averments made in the written statement that the adverse remarks had been expunged by an authority which was not competent to do so as it was the Social Welfare Minister who had examined the representation of the petitioner and expunged the remarks, whereas the petitioner belonged to Public Works Department.
This is impliedly a mis-statement.
It is to be seen that the order, Anexure P-6, which is a communication from the Secretary to Government Punjab, PWD, B&R, clearly shows that though the representation submitted by the petitioner was addressed to the Social Welfare Minister, but it was Government acting through the parent department that had decided to expunge those remarks.
5.
I also find no justifiable reason or logic in the argument of the learned Counsel for the respondents that though the Screening Committee had not yet finally made its recommendations after the meeting held in December, 1977, yet they were not bound to consider the claim of the petitioner afresh after the adverse remarks were expunged vide order, Annexure P-6, on the ground that this order had not been conveyed to the Commission through official channels.
It is to be noted that promotion to a higher rank is one of the very important incidents of service and it was incumbent upon the Government to have placed before the Screening Committee the required information through official channels enabling the Committee to reconsider the matter in the light of fresh facts.
The petitioner cannot be prejudiced merely because the Government and the Commission failed in their duty to inform the Commission or the Commission to seek information after receiving the representation, Annexure P-7, from the petitioner conveying the changed circumstances.
6.
For the reasons recorded above, the writ petition is allowed, the impugned orders dated 84-1980 and 12-5-1980, Annexures P-8 and P-9, respectively, are quashed, The Public Service Commission will reconsider the case of the petitioner for promotion to the Class-I post with effect from the date he became eligible ignoring Annexure P-9.
As the writ petition pertains to the year 1980 and the promotion is being claimed by the petitioner even prior to that date, a direction is issued to the respondents to complete the entire exercise in the light of this judgments within a period of two months and if the petitioner is found fit for promotion, all consequential benefits that flow therefrom will also be released within two months thereafter.
No order as to costs.