Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner a JBT teacher is aggrieved by the action of the respondents in not regularising her services in accordance with the instructions dated March 9, 1987 wef.
November 1, 1986.
A few facts relevant for the decision of the case may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner passed the Senior Secondary Examination from the Central Board of Secondary Education in the year 1977.
She had taken Hindi as one of the subjects and she had secured 47 marks out of 150.
She passed the JBT Examination from the State of Haryana in the year 1980.
On September 26, 1984, the petitioner was appointed as a JBT teacher on purely ad hoc basis.
While she was working as such, the State of Haryana issued instructions vide letter dated March 9, 1987.
It was inter alia mentioned that such teacher as had completed 2 years of service on November 1, 1986 and who "passed the prescribed qualifications under the rules for the post at the time of their appointment on ad hoc basis", besides certain other conditions, would be eligible for regularisation wef.
November 1, 1986.
The petitioner's claim was considered and rejected by the authorities on the ground that she did not fulfil the conditions laid down in the letter dated October 20, 1986, by which it was provided that such candidates as had passed the Examination from the Central Board of Secondary Education with 33 per cent marls in Hindi and Mathematics alone shall be considered as qualified.
Aggrieved by this action, the petitioner has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been mentioned that the petitioner was not eligible to be regularised as she had passed her Matriculation examination by securing less than 33% marks from the Central Board of Secondary Education, New Delhi.
Consequently, her claim has been rejected.
4.
The petitioner has filed a replication.
Alongwith the replication, the petitioner has produced a copy of the order dated April 10, 1991 by which the petitioner's services have been regularised wef.
January 1, 1991.
This order of regularisation has been passed in pursuance to the Government Notification dated February 28, 1991, a copy of which has been produced by Mr. RK Malik.
It is taken on record as Mark 'A'.
This is a Notification issued under the proviso to Clause 6 of the Haryana Government General Administration Department Notification dated January 28, 1970.
In clause 5 of this Notification, it has been inter alia directed that only such persons would be eligible for regularisation as "possessed the prescribed qualifications for the post at the time of their appointment on ad hoc basis."
5.
On the basis of the sequence of events, Mr. Malik contends that the condition of eligibility for regularisation prescribed by the Government in the Circular dated March 9, 1987 and the Notification dated February 28, 1991 in so far as the qualifications are concerned, is identical.
According to this, an employee is eligible to be considered for regularisation only if he fulfilled the prescribed qualifications for the post at the time of his appointment on ad hoc basis.
The fact that the petitioner's services have been regularised in pursuance to the Notification dated February 28, 1991 vide order dated April 10, 1991 wef.
January 1, 1991, shows that the Department considered the petitioner as possessing "the prescribed qualifications for the post at the time of her appointment on ad hoc basis".
Accordingly, he contends that there is no basis for rejecting the petitioner for regularisation wef.
November 1, 1986, in pursuance to the Circular dated March 9, 1987.
6.
Still further, the learned counsel points out that the Circular dated October 20, 1986, is only prospective in operation and it cannot apply to persons who had already been appointed to the posts of teachers in the State of Haryana.
7.
Mr. Jaswant Singh, the learned counsel appearing for the respondents controverts the claim made on behalf of the petitioner.
8.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, I find that the petitioner has been regularised as a JBT teacher wef.
January 1, 1991 in pursuance to the Notification dated February 28, 1991.
Obviously, the Department considered her eligible and possessing the prescribed qualifications for the post at the time of her appointment on ad hoc basis.
This was the precise condition laid down in the Circular of March 9, 1987.
Since the petitioner has been considered as eligible under the Circular of April 10, 1991, there is apparently no reason, either administrative or legal, which may disentitle the petitioner from being regularised under the Circular of March 9, 1987.
Accordingly the action of the respondents in not regularising the services of the petitioner wef.
November 1, 1986, is set aside.
The respondents are directed to consider the petitioner's claim for regularisation wef.
November 1, 1986 in accordance with the rules which were in force at that time on the hypothesis that she fulfils the qualifications.
If her services are regularised, she would be given all consequential reliefs in the nature of seniority etc. wef.
that date.
The needful shall be done within three months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
In the circumstances of the case, the parties are directed to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.