HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was recruited in the veterinary services of the State of Haryana in the year 1962.
As per his averments in the writ petition his work and conduct had been very good and no adverse remarks were ever communicated to him.
It has been further stated that his misfortunes started in the year 1975 when respondent No. 3 took over as a Deputy Director in the Department.
It has been asserted that on account of the strained relations between the petitioner and respondent No. 3, which went back to their days in College, the petitioner had to undergo harassment, including frequent transfers from one place to another.
The animosity between the two culminated in the service of a charge-sheet on the petitioner, Annexure P-1 to the petition, against which a reply was duly filed by him.
It has been averred by the petitioner that instead of taking action pursuant to the charge-sheet issued, the order Annexure P-3 ordering compulsory retirement of the petitioner was made in 19th March, 1980.
The aforesaid order has been impugned by way of the present writ petition.
2.
The main attack of the petitioner in the petition as also at the time of arguments has been that the order was actuated by the mala fides of respondent No. 3, that once having been issued a charge-sheet, an order of compulsory retirement could not be made and, finally, that the Department had taken into consideration certain adverse confidential reports which had not been conveyed to the petitioner, while making the impugned order.
3.
Respondent No. 3 has denied the allegation of mala fides made against him, whereas the State respondent has sought to controvert the other assertions made by the petitioners.
It has been stated that the record of the petitioner w.e.f.
1969-70 to 1978-79, the summary whereof has been appended as Annexure R-1 to the reply, was examined before the order of compulsory retirement was made.
It has also been stated that an order of compulsory retirement could be made even after an inquiry had been initiated.
4.
After hearing counsel for the parties, I find no merit in the petition.
The contents of Annexure R-1 are reproduced below :  Year Remarks 1969-70 Adverse 1970-71 Average 1971-72 Average 1972-73 Average 1973-74 Below Average 1974-75 Average 1976-77 Below Average 1977-78 Below Average The table above-quoted would reveal that the petitioner had as many as five adverse reports, four average and one was not recorded as he remained under suspension for that period.
Even accepting the fact that respondent No. 3 against whom allegation of mala fides have been made was instrumental in the recording of some of the reports, it would be clear that even prior to his induction into the Department in the year 1975, the petitioner did not enjoy a good service record.
I am of the opinion that the record of the petitioner suggests that he fell in the category of dead-wood which required to be removed.
The additional argument of the petitioner's counsel that the un-communicated adverse reports could not be used against the petitioner is also of no avail in view of the judgment of the Supreme Court reported as Baikuntha Nath Das and another v. Chief District Medical Officer, Baripada and another, 1990(2) RSJ 398 in which it has been clearly held that uncommuncated adverse reports can be taken into account in order to make an order of compulsory retirement.
5.
The final argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner that once having initiated an inquiry, the authority was not competent to order compulsory retirement is also on the facts of this case not tenable.
It will be seen that the inquiry was ordered against the petitioner in October 1979 for some misconduct attributed to him in the year 1978.
A reading of the resume of the service career of the petitioner would clearly indicate that even if the adverse report for the year 1978-79 is to be ignored, the earlier service record of the petitioner still does not inspire confidence.
After considering the matter and examining the record myself, I feel that it is not a fit case which requires interference in the writ jurisdiction.
6.
For the reasons recorded above, the present writ petition is dismissed but with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.