RS Mongia, J (Oral) - The petitioner is wife of late Shri Surjit Singh a famous Hockey player, who represented India in International Tournaments and Olympics and had brought laurels to the country.
He was working as an Inspector in the Punjab Police and unfortunately he died on 6th January, 1984 while in service.
On the death of her husband, the petitioner was appointed as an Inspector in the Punjab Police in the year 1984.
2.
The petitioner herself has been a Sportswoman of repute.
On her representation, she was appointed in the Sports Department as Assistant Director of Sports, vide order dated 19th March, 1986, as a measure of temporary transfer/deputation for a period of six months in the first instance, subject to the approval of the Punjab Public Service Commission.
Vide order dated 6th March, 1987 (Annexure P-2), the petitioner was absorbed in the Sports Department as Assistant Director.
3.
One Smt. GK Bajwa, District Sports Officer (Respondent No. 3) made a representation qua her seniority vis-a-vis the petitioner in the cadre of District Sports Officers, and vide order dated 17th May, 1990 (Annexure P-6), it was decided on the representation of Smt. GK Bajwa that the petitioner's seniority is to be fixed from the date of her absorption in the department i.e. 6th March, 1987.
It is this order that has been impugned in the present writ petition.
4.
The relief that is sought from this Court, is that in fact the seniority of the petitioner is to be reckoned from 17th March, 1986 when she was transferred to the sports Department and not from 6th March, 1987 when she was absorbed in the department.
The impugned order has been assailed on various grounds and one of the grounds being that the impugned order dated 17th May, 1990 has been passed on the representation of Smt. GK Bajwa without affording any opportunity to the petitioner to counter the claim of Smt. GK Bajwa, and put forth her own claim that she is entitled to reckon her seniority with effect from the date of her initial appointment in the department, ie 20th March, 1986.
According to the learned counsel, the impugned order is violative of the principles of natural justice.
5.
It has not been disputed by the respondents that the impugned order (Annexure P-6) was passed on the representation of Smt. GK Bajwa and no opportunity of hearing was affording to the petitioner before the said order was passed.
6.
It is by now well settled that if an order is passed to some body's detriment on the representation of another person, such a person should not only be heard before such an order is passed, but should also be given a copy of the representation, on the basis of which the order is passed.
As observed above, neither a copy of the representation of Smt. GK Bajwa was given to the petitioner nor she was heard before the impugned order, Annexure P-6, was passed.
The order is liable to be set aside on this short ground as being violative of principles of natural justice.
Since, I am inclined to set aside the impugned order on this score alone, I am not going into any other submissions made by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
7.
Consequently, I allow this writ petition and quash the order dated 17th May, 1990 (Annexure P-6) with the writ petition and direct Respondent No. 1 to reconsider the matter afresh after giving an opportunity of being heard to the petitioner as well as to the private respondents before me and may also hear any other person which Respondent No. 1 may deem necessary in the circumstances of the case.
The copy of the representation which was submitted by Smt. GK Bajwa, would be supplied to the petitioner within a fortnight of the receipt of the copy of this order and the petitioner may, if so advised, file a counter representation within another 15 days of the receipt of the representation of Smt. GK Bajwa and thereafter Respondent No. 1 would fix a date of personal hearing of the parties and then dispose of the matter by passing a speaking order.
Let this entire exercise be done within a period of three months from the receipt of the copy of his order.
The office is directed to send a copy of this judgment immediately to respondent No. 1 for compliance.
I make no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.