SS Sodhi, J - The controversy here is founded upon a plea of discrimination in the matter of emoluments payable to Research Fellows working at the Panjab University or the Post Graduate Medical Institute for Education and Research, Chandigarh, on projects approved by the Science and Technology Council of the Chandigarh Administration, in the context of what is being paid to Research Fellows working in these two institutions under other Research Agencies like UGC; C.S.I.R and the like.
The contention being that all Research Fellows, irrespective of the Agency under which they are working, are entitled to the same emoluments.
The principle of `Equal pay for equal work' being in this behalf strenuously pressed in aid as also the guidelines issued by the Government of India regarding revised emoluments for Research Personnel working in various Universities and Research Personnel working in various Universities and Research and Development Institutions (Annexures P-5/1 and P-6/1).
2.
A reference to the material on record would show that a Science and Technology Council has been set up by the Chandigarh Administration to advise it with regard to research projects to be sponsored by the Administration.
Selection of Research Fellows for such chosen projects is thereafter made by the Punjab University or the Post Graduate Medical Institute of Research and Education, Chandigarh, as the case may be, depending upon the project in question as per the policy and guidelines fixed by this Science and Technology Council.
It is in terms thereof, that the selected Research Fellows are paid a fixed salary which, to begin with, was Rs. 800/- per month by the Panjab University and Rs. 1,000/ per month by the Post Graduate Institute of Medical Research and Education.
This was, however, subsequently revised to Rs. 1500/- per mouth with effect from February 1, 1989.
3.
There were, at the same time, other Research Fellows working at the Panjab University and the Post Graduate Institute of Medical Research and Education under other Research and Development Agencies like UGC, CSIR, ICMR, ICAR, D.O.E.and the Department of Science and Technology of the Central Government who were and are being paid higher emoluments.
The revised emoluments for such Research Fellows under these Agencies with effect from April 1, 1987 being Rs. 1800/- per month and Rs. 2100/- per month for Junior and Senior Research Fellows respectively.
4.
In dealing with the point in issue, the significant aspect to note is that all the various agencies employing Research Fellows are separately funded.
Funds for most of these are, no doubt,provided by the Central Government, but as far as the projects on which the petitioners are working, funds for them are provided admittedly only by the Chandigarh Administration.
On the face of it, therefore, it lies wholly within the domain of the funding authority to fix the remunerations or emoluments to be paid to Research Fellows working on projects, chosen by it.
The fact that some other Agencies may be paying higher emoluments, provides no occasion for imputing any discrimination or suggesting thereby any violation of the provisions of Article 26 of the Constitution of India.
It goes without saying that, in this behalf, the Chandigarh Administration and the Central Government are two separate and distinct entities.
5.
Further, the guidelines issued by the Central Government with regard to the emoluments to be paid to Research Fellows are clearly not binding upon the Chandigarh Administration, nor is there any material to show that they have been adopted by it.
It would, no doubt, be desirable for all Research Fellows to be paid similar emolument, but merely on the basis of such guidelines or instructions by the Central Government, the Court cannot direct enforcement by the Chandigarh Administration, especially when funds for the project on which the petitioners are working, as mentioned earlier, are made available not by the Central government, but by the Chandigarh Administration.
6.
As regards the principles of "Equal pay for Equal work," it is wholly misplaced in the present context, when the comparison in the matter of emoluments is sought to be made amongst Research Fellows working under different schemes or the projects funded by different Agencies.
7.
We cannot, with respect, therefore, subscribe to the view expressed by the learned Single Judge with regard to the applicability here of the rule of "Equal pay for equal work," nor his observation, "No doubt, this Department of the Union Territory, cannot be considered a part of such department of the Government of India or the allied agency, but the fact cannot be lost sight of that the guidelines issued by the Ministry of Science and Technology on the subject are to be applied throughout India in all the projects of research and development."
8.
Such being the position, there can be no escape from the conclusion that the petitioners are not entitled to any emoluments as Research Fellows, other than that sanctioned to them by the Science and Technology Council of the Chandigarh Administration.
The judgment of the learned Single Judge is consequently hereby overruled and the writ petition is consequently dismissed.
In the result, this appeal is accepted.
There will, however, be no order as to costs.