Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner, a graduate in Civil Engineering, who is Orthopaedically handicapped, complains of violation of his rights guaranteed under Article 16 of the Constitution of India, by the Punjab State Agricultural Marketing Board, Chandigarh (hereinafter referred to as 'the Board').
A few facts necessary for resolving the controversy may be noticed :  2.
The petitioner qualified the Bachelor of Engineering examination from the Panjab University, Chandigarh in June, 1986.
After some time the Board advertised certain posts of junior engineers.
The persons possessing diploma of three years in Civil Engineering from the State Board of Technical Education were eligible.
The petitioner, who was graduate in Civil Engineering from the Panjab University, was obviously eligible and applied for the post.
It has further been averred that on account of being physically handicapped the petitioner was entitled to be considered against one of the posts reserved to be considered against one of the posts reserved for the category of handicapped persons.
It is averred that even the State Government vide its letter dated March 8, 1986 (Annexure P4) had directed that "preference should be given to all such handicapped persons who are nearing the age of maximum age limit and further that backlog, if any, be cleared by accommodating physically handicapped persons".
Even though the petitioner was interviewed by the Board on October 20, 1986, his claim was not considered while the persons who have been impleaded as respondents No. 2 to 21 were appointed.
Aggrieved by the decision of respondent No. 1 in not considering the claim of the petitioner, he has approached this court through the present writ petition.
3.
In the written-statement filed on behalf of the Board, it has been inter alia averred that "the petitioner falls in the category of Orthopaedically handicapped person whose reserve point falls at serial No. 71 of the roster."
It has further been averred that "the case of the petitioner was considered by the Board but as per the instructions issued by Social Welfare Branch a 100 point roster is to be prepared and the vacancy falling at point 11 was to go to the blind and the falling at No. 43 was to go to the deaf while the one reserved for Orthopaedically handicapped fell at No. 71.
That in view of the above roster the petitioner will be entitled to be appointed when the reserved roster point reached at Serial No. 71.
The appointments made number only 20 and as such the petitioner's turn has not arrived."
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the reason assigned by the respondent-Board for not appointing the petitioner is wholly contrary to the instructions referred to in the written-statement.
Copy of these instructions has been placed on record today as Mark 'A'.
These instructions inter alia provide that there would be reservation of 1% for the blind, 1% for the deaf and 1% for the orthopaedically handicapped.
It is further provided that "the above percentage of reservations should be implemented by means of 100 points roster and vacancies falling at points Nos. 11, 43 and 71 be reserved for the blind, the deaf and the orthopaedically handicapped persons respectively.
These instructions lay down that "the reservation made for the categories of handicapped persons mentioned above is interchangeable amongst themselves if candidates belonging to a category are not available or if the nature of vacancies in an office is such that a given category of persons cannot be employed."
It is thus apparent that the plea taken by the respondents that Orthopaedically handicapped persons can be considered only against the vacancy at serial No. 71 of roster point is not correct.
It is no doubt true that the vacancies falling at roster point No. 11 are reserved for the blind, at roster point 43 for the deaf and in the normal course vacancy at roster point No. 71 is reserved for Orthopaedically handicapped person.
However, posts at all the three points are mutually interchangeable in a case where a person from one or the other category is not available.
Learned counsel for the respondents does not dispute that except the petitioner no other handicapped person had competed.
In this situation, the reason for ignoring the petitioner's claim is wholly untenable.
Even in case only 2% vacancies falling at roster points 11, 43 and 71 are to be filled up from amongst handicapped persons the petitioner who admittedly belongs to this category was eligible to be considered.
He had a right to be considered for appointment and has been wrongly ignored.
5.
Accordingly, this petition succeeds.
However, keeping in view the fact that respondents No. 2 to 21 have been working against the posts of Junior Engineers for the last five years and even otherwise they are not to blame for anything, it would not be fair to quash their appointment.
It is, however, directed that the petitioner shall be considred and in case found suitable, he will be appointed against one of the vacancies, which may be available.
In case a vacancy is not available then the last person shall have to make room for the petitioner.
It is also evident that the petitioner has been denied appointment for no fault of his.
It is expected that the respondent Board shall favourably consider his claim for the grant of seniority especially when vacancy at roster point No. 11 is to be given to him.
As he has done no work, he will not be paid any arrears of salary.
No costs.
Petition allowed.