BC Varma, CJ.
and VK Jhanji, J - Petitioner No. 1 was a Clerk and petitioner No. 2 was a Peon-cum-Chowkidar under respondent No. 3.
It appears that Homoeopathic Dispensaries run by respondent No. 3, under the control of respondent No. 2 were to be taken over by the Government.
Accordingly, to being with nine such dispensaries were taken over.
The persons working in those dispensaries were also taken over and thus they became the employees of the Government.
The petitioners were, however, not absorbed as a consequence of the taking over of the dispensaries.
They have, therefore, come to this Court for a direction that like other employees working in the dispensaries they should also be absorbed in the Government service.
They base their cause of action upon the agreement, Annexure P6 and relied strongly upon clause 6 thereof which is in these terms :  "The employees will be treated to have been taken in Government service from the date of taking over of these Homoeopathic dispensaries by the Government."
2.
Notice of motion was issued.
The State of Haryana has appeared through the Additional Advocate-General, while respondent No. 3 has been represented by Shri CB Goel, Advocate.
They have filed their detailed written statements, in answer to the petitioners claims.
The Government has taken the stand that the agreement Annexure P6, is not final inasmuch as it has not been consented to by the Government.
It was further averred that the staff working in the Homoeopathic Dispensaries, so taken over has been absorbed in Government service.
Respondent No. 3 in a separate written statement has asserted that it was because of the paucity in funds and the inability to run the dispensaries that it agreed that the dispensaries be taken over by the Government.
The staff working in the dispensaries alone was to be taken over by the Government.
The petitioners were working in the office and not in the dispensary and, therefore, cannot claim the benefit of clause 6 of the agreement, Annexure P6.
The further assertion that by notice.
Annexure R3/2, dated November 29, 1989, the petitioners' services were terminated and instead they were appointed as Social workers on payment of suitable honorarium.
That appointment was to last up to March 31, 1990, or till the date of their appointment by the State Government, whichever is earlier.
They also relied upon the declaration made by the petitioner No. 1 that he was prepared to work as a Social Worker at a reasonable honorarium which may be decided by the President.
It is under these circumstances that petitioner No. 1 was allowed to continue as a Society Worker.
The contention, therefore, is that since the petitioners ceased to be the employees of respondent No. 3 and in any case, were not working in the dispensaries, they cannot be said to have been absorbed in the Government service.
3.
Counsel agreed that at this stage alone the matter may be heard on merits.
They were accordingly heard at length.
4.
It is the common ground that the petitioners were the employees of respondent No. 3.
It is also clear from Annexure P5 on which the learned counsel for the petitioners placed reliance, that the two petitioners were employed respectively as the Clerk and Peon-cum-Chowkidar in he head-quarters, i.e. not actually in the dispensaries.
To our mind, however, that hardly matters.
They were the employees of respondent No. 3 and employed only in connection with the working of the dispensaries by respondent No. 3.
The title of Annexure P5 shows that it is the statement regarding the staff position of the Homoepathic Dispensaries running in Mewat area.
Annexure P5 is appended to Annexure P4 whcih is dated March 25, 1991.
From paragraph 2 of Annexure P4, it is clear that the appendix shows the staff working in these dispensaries.
It can, therefore, be safely inferred that as on March 25, 1991, the two petitioners were members of the staff working in those dispensaries which were taken over.
5.
It does appear from the documents exhibited along with the written statement filed by respondent No. 3 that the services of the employees were terminated to avoid financial liabilities in future.
Certain persons were then re-employed as Social Workers.
It is also true that those persons had agreed to work as Social Workers and petitioner No. 1 is one such person.
However, when all these documents are read together along with Annexures P.4, P.5 and P6, which are of subsequent dates and reflect the position as on Mach 25, 1991, it is clear that the services of the employees working in the dispensaries were shown as terminated only with a view to avoid any financial liability.
However, for the purpose of absorption in the Government service as a consequence of the taking over of the dispensaries, they were all treated as the employees of respondent No. 3 working in the dispensaries.
Despite the formal termination of their services by order Annexure R3/1, dated November 29, 1989, they were shown as staff with the dispensaries even on March 25, 1991 when respondent No. 3 was required to report to Government the position of the staff in the dispensaries then and specifically for the purpose of absorption in the Government service.
We are, therefore, inclined to hold that the petitioners were on the staff of the dispensaries when they were taken over and that the purpose of action under Annexure R3/1 and R3/2 was only to mitigate the financial liability of respondent No. 3.
It also cannot be gainsaid that Annexure P6 was only tentative when, it in fact, had been acted upon and the persons working in those dispensaries and shown as staff in the Homoeopathic Dispensaries were actually absorbed.
The two petitioners were working in the headquarters but to all intents and purposes were treated as the staff of the Homoeopathic Dispensaries even by respondent No. 3 as can be clearly seen from Annexure P5.
6.
Our conclusion, therefore, is that at the time of taking over of the dispensaries the two petitions were borne of the staff of those dispensaries and in terms of clause 6 of the agreement, Annexure P6, should be treated to have been taken in Government service from the date of the taking over of the Homoeopathic Dispensaries by the Government.
The writ petition is consequently allowed and it is directed that the two petitioners shall be treated as in Government service as a consequence of the taking over of the dispensaries by the Government from the date of taking over the dispensaries will all consequential benefits.
They shall get costs of this writ petition which are quantified at Rs. 500/-.
Petition allowed.