Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner herein was working as a Sectional Officer with the Punjab Small Industries and Export Corporation (hereinafter to be referred to as the Corporation).
It appears that two charge-sheets were issued to him in which the charges have been held to be proved.
As a result, a show cause notice dated November 13, 1987 (Annexure P-6) was issued to him.
In this notice it was mentioned that "Keeping in view the gravity of the charges already proved against you, it is proposed to impose a major penalty of dismissal from service on you under Rule 6.1(e) read with Rule 62 of the Employees Service Bye-laws of the Corporation."
Accordingly, the petitioner was asked to give his explanation.
The petitioner submitted his reply vide letter dated December 14, 1987, a copy of which has been produced on record as Annexure P-7.
Vide order dated January 18, 1988, the Managing Director has ordered the petitioner's removal from service, and the recovery of the amount of Rs. 71,359-45 from him.
The order was challenged by the petitioner through an appeal before the appellate authority.
A copy of this appeal has been produced on record as Annexure P-13.
The appeal having been rejected vide order dated April 11, 1988 (Annexure P-14), the petitioner has approached this Court through the present petition.
The order dated January 18, 1988 (P-8) passed by the Managing Director as also the one rejecting the appeal passed by the appellate authority have been impugned in this petition primarily on the ground that while passing the order reliance has been placed on the previous record of the petitioner which did not form a part of the proceedings before the disciplinary authority or even the show cause notice issued to the petitioner.
2.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondent.
In the written statement it has been inter alia averred that "the order of dismissal is not based on the past record of the petitioner, but is based on the charges proved against the petitioner on the basis of a regular enquiry having been held against the petitioner.
The reference to the past track record of the petitioner in the order Annexure P-8 only shows that his performance throughout his service was not satisfactory and the same was reflected from the adverse remarks in his A.C.Rs.
right for the period that he remained in service."
3.
I have heard Mr. CM Chopra, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. Somesh Ojha for the respondent.
Mr. Chopra contends that the impugned order is vitiated on the short ground that the petitioners's previous record was taken into consideration without affording him any opportunity in that behalf.
It is apt to notice the relevant portion of the order.
The punishing authority has after noting the sequence of events observed as under :-  "And Whereas, after considering his reply to the show cause notice which was not found satisfactory, he was also given personal hearing on 7.1.1988, during which Shri Tuli could not rebut any of the charges proved in the regular enquiry.
The charges levelled against him are not isolated ones, as the perusal of his track record shows that his performance ever since he joined this Corporation has been either 'Average' or 'Below Average'.
The adverse remarks recorded in his Annual Confidential Reports for the years 1976-77, 1980-81, 1981-82, 1982-83, 1983-84, 1984-85, 1985-86 and 1986-87 were conveyed to him from time to time against which he never even represented.
Keeping in view the above, the said employee Shri KB Tuli, is not a fit person to be kept in the service of the Corporation.
Accordingly, the major punishment of dismissal from service as conveyed as per show cause notice is hereby confirmed subject to the modification that instead of dismissal, Shri KB Tuli, Sectional Officer is deemed to be removed from service of the Corporation.
Accordingly, the undersigned in exercise of the powers conferred under rule 6.1 read with Rule 62 of the Employees Service Bye-laws of the Corporation, hereby orders the remove of Shri KB Tuli, Sectional Officer from the service of the Corporation with immediate effect while reserving the right to recover a loss of Rs. 71,859.45 caused by Shri KB Tuli to the Corporation."
Even while challenging this order before the Appellate Authority, the petitioner raised a specific ground that "the punishment order is also bad as the same is passed on the basis of past record of the appellant which is not the subject matter of enquiry.
Moreover in the show cause notice for dismissal, nothing was mentioned about the past record and hence the same cannot be sustained in the eye of law in view of AIR 1961 SC 506."
In the order passed by the appellate authority, this aspect of matter does not even appear to have been noticed.
4.
A perusal of the order passed by the Managing Director, as extracted above, clearly shows that the punishing authority was considerably influenced by the adverse remarks recorded in the annual confidential reports of the petitioner.
It was after considering these reports that the authority formed an opinion that "Shri KB Tuli is not a fit person to be kept in the service of the Corporation."
Admittedly, the adverse confidential reports were not a part of charges levelled against the petitioner.
Further this record of service was not mentioned as a ground for inflicting a punishment against the petitioner in the show cause notice.
It is well settled that no material can be used to the prejudice against the petitioner without affording him an opportunity to meet it.
In the present case, the petitioner was offered no opportunity to meet the record of service which has been taken into consideration for the purposes of finding him unfit to be retained in service of the Corporation.
5.
Learned counsel for the respondent contends that the punishment of removal has been passed primarily on the basis of charges proved during the course of inquiry and not on the basis of record.
The punishing authority has passed a comprehensive order.
Its perusal shows that the authority has been influenced by the adverse confidential reports existing on the petitioner's record.
In such a situation, the contention that the record is not the basis of the order cannot be accepted.
Apparently, the authority was influenced by the record of service.
Its decision has been affected by the said record.
Consequently, it was incumbent on it to afford the petitioner an opportunity in this behalf.
No opportunity having been afforded, the order passed by the punishing authority as well as that passed by the appellate authority are vitiated.
6.
Accordingly, the writ petition is allowed.
The orders dated January 18, 1988 and April 11, 1988 as set aside.
It will, however, be open to the authorities to pass a fresh order in the matter in accordance with the law.
Keeping in view the fact that the petitioner is succeeding in this case only on a technical ground as also that he has not actually worked with the respondent after his removal from service and it is unlikely that the petitioner would have remained idle during all this time, I direct that a total amount of Rs. 40,000/- be paid to the petitioner towards full and final payment of arrears of salary.
In the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.