RS Mongia, J - Vide letter dated 33071991 (translated copy of which has been annexed a Annexure P-10/T with this writ petition), the Director, Public Relations Department, Haryana, issued a show cause notice to the petitioner regarding the proposed change in the inter-se seniority in the rank of Superintendent of the officers mentioned in the show cause notice.
The letter reads as under :-  "Sub : Representation of S/Sh.
BS Kahlon, Administrative officer, CL Sachdeva, Store Officer and ML Bindra, Public Relations Officer.
The Government has decided to refix the inter-se seniority of the following officers of this Department;- 1.
Sh. BS Kahlon.
2.
Sh. Naresh Dutta Sharma.
3.
Sh. CL Sachdeva.
4.
Sh. CL Chopra.
5.
Sh. SD Taneja.
6.
Sh. ML Bindra.
The government has also decided that before preparing the seniority it may be brought to the notice of the concerned officers.
Please note the same.
If you have any objection then the same may be filed within a period of seven days.
Thereafter, the matter will be given final shape."
2.
The petitioner submitted a reply to the show cause notice and was also given personal hearing by the Director, Public Relations Department, Haryana.
The following order was passed on 2781991 by the Director, Public Relations Haryana, (Copy Annexure P12) :  "The Government vide their letter No. 1/7/88-1 PP dated 871991 has decided to refix the inter-se seniority of the following officials/officers of this Department :- 1.
Sh. BS Kahlon, 2.
Sh. Naresh Dutt, 3.
Sh. CL Sachdeva, 4.
Sh. CL Chopra, 5.
Sh. SD Taneja 6.
Sh. ML Bindra.
The above refixation of inter-se seniority is subject to show cause notice to be given to the concerned officers.
Accordingly, the Department has issued notice to the above officers vide Memo No. PRDH Estt.
11-91/P-685(II)/24923-28 dated 3071991 for putting in representation, if any, within seven days.
Only Shri ML Bindra, (sic) in which he has also sought personal hearing to explain his case.
The undersigned has heard Shri ML Bindra in person on 2781991.
After careful consideration of the representation dated 281991 of Shri ML Bindra and personal hearing, I am of the opinion that there is no merit in the contention of Shri Bindra and no new issue or facts has been raised by him.
Hence, the above representation of Shri Bindra is rejected.
In pursuance of the above decision of the Government the inter-se seniority of the following officers, Public Relations Department, Haryana, is refixed as under for the purpose of their promotion to the higher posts :- 1.
Sh. BS Kahlon, 2.
Sh. Naresh Dutt, 3.
Sh. CL Sachdeva, 4.
Sh. CL Choptas, 5.
Sh. SD Taneja, 6.
Sh. ML Bindra."
3.
This order Annexure P12 has been challenged by the petitioner, inter-alia on the grounds that same should have been passed by the appointing authority of the petitioner, i.e. Secretary to the Government, in the Public Relations Department and in fact it was he who should have given personal hearing to all concerned.
Further the challenge to the order is that the same is not a speaking order and reasons have been given as to why the points raised by the petitioner in his representation did not find favour with the Director, Public Relations Department, Haryana.
Moreover the show cause notice did not give any basis as to why the seniority was sought to be refixed nor the copies of the representation made by the respondents were given to the petitioner.
4.
On the side of the respondents, it has been argued that the Director Public Relations Department, Haryana, was in fact acting on behalf of the Secretary to the Government and, therefore, the order passed by him (Annexure P-12) after applying his mind to be representation made by the petitioner and also after giving opportunity of personal hearing to the petitioner, passed a perfectly valid order and the same cannot be set aside on any ground.
It has been further argued that since the impugned order had been passed on the basis of the reply filed by the petitioner and the representations made by the private respondents, the order need not to be a speaking order and each and every point raised by the petitioner need not be mentioned.
5.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties I am of the view that the writ petition must succeed on the points raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
It is not disputed before me that the appointing authority of the petitioner and the private respondents is Secretary to the government.
The government had declared to refix the inter-se seniority of the petitioner and other officers mentioned in the impugned order on the basis of representations of the private respondents.
It was on the basis of the tentative decision of the government that the Director had issued show cause notice to the petitioner.
In this view of the matter, the representation made by the petitioner should have been considered by the government itself, i.e. Secretary to the Government in the particular department and it was he who should have given personal hearing to the concerned officers and after applying his mind should have come to an independent conclusion as to whether there was any force in the representation of the petitioner or not.
Apart from that, I find that the notice Annexure P10/T, which has been reproduced above, does not give any indication whatsoever as to on what grounds the government sought to change the inter-se seniority of the petitioner.
It is also not disputed before me that the copies of the representations that were made by the private respondents were not supplied to the petitioners before he was asked to represent against the proposed change in the seniority list.
Besides this the impugned order Annexure P12 does not give any reason whatsoever as to why there was no force in the representation of the petitioner.
The impugned order is not a speaking order at all.
6.
For the fore-going reasons, I accept this writ petition and quash the impugned order dated 2781991 Annexure P12, with the following directions to the respondent No.
I, i.e. :-  (1) A fresh show cause notice to the petitioner and other concerned officers be given regarding the proposed change of inter-se seniority indicating the grounds on which it is proposed to change the inter-se seniority.
(2) The petitioner and other concerned officers should be given at least a fortnight's time to make a representation against that show cause notice.
(3) The copies of the representation made by the private respondents regarding the change in the inter-se seniority be also provided to the petitioner and other concerned officers.
(4) The Secretary to Government, Haryana Public Relations Department (respondent No. 1) would himself give personal hearing to the petitioner and other concerned officers, i.e. private respondents, and, thereafter decide the matter by passing a speaking order.
7.
This entire exercise as indicated above, may be completed within a period of three months from the date of the receipt of the order of this Court.
I make no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.