AL Bahri, J - Vide this order two writ petitions are being disposed of as the facts and the questions involved therein are common.
Those are Civil Writ Petition Nos. 3575 and 3883 of 1992.
2.
The petitioners are Ex-servicemen.
Their meritorious service in the Army was described in the petitions.
Some posts of the Clerks were advertised by the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana (for short called 'the SSB') as reserved for Ex-servicemen category (copy of the advertisement is Annexure P-5).
The petitioner applied for the posts and participated in the written test held on November 24, 1991.
In all 1947 candidates appeared in the test.
Out of them 397 candidates were Ex-servicemen and 550 were dependents of Ex-servicemen.
After the result was declared, as per allegations of the petitioners, dependents of the Ex-servicemen 400 and Ex-servicemen 100 were selected.
This selection is challenged by the petitioners.
On notice of motion having been issued written statement has been filed in the present case.
However, in the other case it has not so far been filed.
Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents, from the records of the SSEB, has pointed out that the petitioners in both these cases have failed in the written test.
3.
Since the petitioners have failed to secure the minimum marks prescribed for the test, they cannot question the selection and on that ground Civil Writ Petition No. 2622 of 1992 (Moti Ram Dalal and others v. State of Haryana and Others) was dismissed on April 9, 1992.
An application for review of the order was dismissed on April 24, 1992.
In the review application another question was sought to be raised which is also pressed into service in the present writ petition.
The contention was that the petitioners being Ex-servicemen and having already passed Hindi upto the Matric standard were not required to take the test under the terms of the advertisement.
Since Ex-servicemen were available fulfilling educational qualifications, dependents of the Ex-servicemen could not be preferred.
This contention did not find favour with and was repelled.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioners Shri RK Malik, Advocate, urged that since in another case Division Bench of this Court has admitted the writ petition and ordered it to be heard by a Division Bench, the present writ petitions should also be admitted and listed for hearing along with the same.
Since we have given complete hearing to both the parties, it is not considered appropriate to further delay the disposal of these writ petitions.
Mere admission of another case to DB may be on the same point, is not a precedent to be followed.
The other case is yet to be decided on merits.
5.
Extract from the advertisement-Annexure P5 is reproduced below :-  "1) Some posts of Clerks for various Haryana Govt. offices, reserved for Ex-servicemen of Haryana only (Scale 950-1500) EQ Matric or Army Ist Class Certificate with 15 years service or its equivalent from a recognised University/Board.
Hindi upto Matric standard.
The candidates who have not passed Hindi upto Matric will have to qualify Hindi test within one year of the appointment otherwise their service will be terminated.
In case of non-availability of the Ex-servicemen, the dependents of ESM will be recommended on the basis of merit-cum-qualifications.
The minimum qualification is Matric.
The candidate will be examined in English, Arithmetic, General knowledge, Hindi (Matric Sandard).
There will be one paper of 100 marks and candidates obtaining 40% marks in the written examination would be considered to have qualified the test."
6.
The contention of Shri RK Malik, Advocate, is that the condition of passing the test was not applicable to the Ex-servicemen category.
It was only to be applied if persons belonging to Ex-servicemen category were not available and the posts were to be filled by the dependents of the Ex-servicemen.
This contention, when analysed in the context, has no weight.
The purpose of providing a test for making selection for the post is to select most suitable candidates for the number of posts available out of the number of suitable candidates.
If number of candidates is more than the number of posts to be filled, provision of written test will be most suitable and appropriate.
It may be that posts are to be filled from different categories or sources, such an Ex-servicemen and dependents of Ex-servicemen as provided in the advertisement Annexure P5.
If suitable candidates of Ex-servicemen category are available and all the posts are filled, then obviously dependents of the Ex-servicemen could not be accommodated.
However, if suitable Ex-servicemen candidates are not found to be available on test, dependents of Ex-servicemen who had passed the test, could be given an opportunity to fill the posts.
It is in this context that the aforesaid clause in the advertisement-Annexure P5 is to be read.
There was one paper of 100 marks and the candidates were required to obtain minimum 40 marks to become eligible for the post.
Since the petitioners in the present writ petition did not secure the minimum marks prescribed, they cannot be appointed to the posts and they cannot be allowed to question the selection of others.
7.
While referring to another letter of September 3, 1976 - Annexure P.6 issued by the Government in the matter of reservation it was stated that among the ex-servicemen further categories were made and preference was to be given in that order which is as under :-  i) Disabled Ex-servicemen with disability between 20% to 50%,  ii) Upto two dependents of service personnel killed/disabled beyond 50%, and  iii) other ex-servicemen."
8.
The contention of Shri Malik, Advocate is that some of the candidates falling in category I, as reproduced above, were to be given preference even if they had not passed in the test obtaining minimum 40% marks.
Further reliance was placed by Shri Malik on the judgment of the Division Bench in Civil Writ Petition No. 18759 of 1991 (Joginder Singh Virk and others v. The State of Punjab etc.) decided on March 17, 1992.
While allowing the writ petition and setting aside the selection and appointment of some others, a direction was given to consider the candidates belonging to the categories of Ex-servicemen.
It was observed in that case that it was not within the jurisdiction of the Punjab Public Service Commission to reject all the three candidates on the ground of unsuitability and to select a person who did not belong to the category of Ex-servicemen but was dependent of an Ex-serviceman.
This judgment is not helpful to the petitioners in the present case as it is not clear from the judgment as to whether the rules prevalent in Punjab provided for written test for making selection.
Even the directions given do not indicate that persons belonging to the Ex-servicemen were to be appointed.
The direction was only to consider the candidates of the category of Ex-servicemen.
As already stated above, if the number of candidates had been more than the number of posts to be filled some criteria was required to be followed to select the suitable candidates from the eligible candidates and in the present case written test was prescribed which was appropriate and just.
The petitioners in the two writ petitions in hand having failed to obtain minimum prescribed marks for passing the test cannot be granted any relief in these writ petitions which are dismissed.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.