Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner, a candidate for the post of Naib Tehsildar, is aggrieved by the action of the respondents in not declaring his result.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The Commissioner Patiala Division issued an advertisement inviting applications for 40 posts of Naib Tehsildars.
In his advertisement it was specifically mentioned that candidates who were members of a family which has lost a person as a result of terrorist action in the State of Punjab or who had lost its bread-winner in the riots in Delhi or other places in India between October 31 and November 7, 1984 "are also eligible.
Such candidates shall not be required to sit for the written examination but shall appear for interview along with other candidates who qualified on the basis of the written examination."
In response to this advertisement, the petitioner applied for the post.
In the original application which has been produced before me, against column No. 9 in which a query has been made regarding the fact as to whether the applicant belongs to "S.C./Tribe/B.C./Ex-Servicemen/Victim of Terrorist Act/1984 Riots affected," the petitioner had stated "victim of terrorist riots."
Along with the application, a photocopy of an affidavit of the petitioner duly attested by the Executive Magistrate, dated August 6, 1986, was also produced.
In this affidavit, it has been inter alia stated that "our family was attacked by terrorists on 2251984 in which may cousin Shri Faquir Chand son of Shri Chanan Ram was killed and may real brother was injured and due compensation as per rules was given by the Government.
The case was registered with the Police Station Sadar, Patiala."
A perusal of the official file further shows that the office of the Chairman, (Commissioner, Jalandhar Division, Jalandhar) Department Selection Committee, constituted for the purpose of making selections of A-Class Naib Tehsildars sent a Memo No. P/1588/1336 dated September 1, 1989 to the petitioner.
He was called upon to furnish two copies of his passport size photographs.
Yet another letter (which does not bear any date) was sent to the respondent in which it was inter alia mentioned that "on the basis of the notice issued in The Tribunal on 27289 and the subsequent written examination held on 2nd October, 1989, you have been declared successful."
The petitioner was called upon to appear for interview on March 20, 1990 in the office of the Commissioner, Patiala Division Patiala.
His roll number was shown to be 1588.
A copy of this letter has been produced as Annexure P2 with the writ petition.
Even the office copy has been produced as Annexure P2 with he writ petition.
Even the office copy has been produced before me by Mr. Arihant Jain, Assistant Advocate General, Punjab.
The copy produced by the petitioner tallies with the original one.
Thereafter, it appears that the result of the examination was declared on June 6, 1991.
So far as the petitioner is concerned, his result appears to have been withheld.
Aggrieved by the action of the respondents, the petitioner has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
It is averred that in the result declared by the Committee, the candidates at Roll Nos. 34157 and 10409, who were below the petitioner in order of merit, have been included.
On enquiry, the petitioner claims to have been in formed that the result of "all those candidates who appears under clause (6) of the advertisement was withheld by the respondents and the result of the other candidates except fourths category had been declared."
Without declaring the result of all the candidates, the state authorities are making appointments by adopting the method of 'pick and choose'.
This action has been challenged as being arbitrary and mala fide.
It is further averred that the result of nine posts has not been declared so far.
On this premises, the petitioner claims that he is entitled to appointment prior to those who were found lower in merit than him and that the action of the respondents in not doing so is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
The petitioner further claims that the was willing and ready to appear in the written test and that his result cannot be withheld on the ground that he was not eligible for the exemption granted to a category of riot affected candidates.
On this premises, the petitioner claims a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to declared his result and for a declaration that he is entitled to appointment prior to those, who were found lower than him in order of merit.
3.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents by the Commissioner, Jalandhar Division, Jalandhar.
It has been inter alia averred that the petitioner had applied for the post as a victim of terrorists riots.
His case, it is averred, was duly considered.
According to the policy of the State Government contained in the letter dated April 24, 1986 "a member of a family of a person killed as a result of terrorist action in the State and member of the family who lost their bread winner in the riots of Delhi and other places in India between October 31, 1984 to November 7, 1984 is entitled for employment in Government service on priority basis.
"On the basis of the copy of the affidavit furnished by the petitioner along with his original application, it has been averred that his brother was only injured in the terrorist action and his cousin Faquir Chand was killed.
On this premises, it is claimed that the petitioner does not "fall in the category of riot affected/terrorist victims and as such he is not riot affected/terrorist victims and as such he is not covered under the instructions referred to above for the benefit of employment in Government service."
On this basis, the claim of the petitioner has been contended.
4.
I have heard Mr. VK Jindal, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. Arihant Jain for the respondents.
Mr. Jindal submits that in pursuance to the advertisement dated December 21, 1987, the petitioner had submitted his application on January 15, 1988.
The written test was actually held on October 22, 1989.
In case the respondents were of the view that the petitioner is not eligible for exemption from passing the test, they were duly bound to call upon him to take the test.
He further submits that having failed to do so, the respondents actually issued a letter (Annexure P2 to the writ petition) declaring that the petitioner had qualified the written test.
Accordingly, he was called for the interview.
In this situation, the learned counsel contends that the respondents are estopped for cancelling the candidature of the petitioner.
He claim that as a result of the action of the respondents, the petitioners has been denied equality of opportunity as guaranted under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution inasmuch as he has not only been deprived of the chance of appear in the test, but has even been denied appointment in spite of the fact that those who were found lower in merit than him have, in fact, been appointed.
In any event, Mr. Jindal submits, that if the respondents thought that the petitioner was not covered under the instructions issued by the Government, it was incumbent on them to give him a chance to appear in the test and that they cannot now be permitted to take advantage of their own wrong.
On the other hand, Mr. Arihant Jain, appearing for the respondents, submits that the petitioner having opted to take benefit of those exemptions available to the category of riots affected cannot now be permitted to compete along with the others, who had appeared and passed in the written test.
5.
A persual of the sequence of events shows that the petitioner had submitted his application on January 15, 1988.
The written test was actually held on October 22, 1989.
Along with the application the petitioner had submitted a photocopy of his affidavit, according to which his cousin had been killed and his brother had been injured by the terrorists.
This factual position has not been disputed before me by the learned counsel for the respondents.
It is thus, evident that the written test was actually held more than 21 months after petitioner had submitted his application.
The respondents had to scrutinize his application and to decide as to whether or not the petitioner belonged to the category of riot affected candidates and to grant or to refuse the exemption from appearing in the written test.
Nothing was done.
On the contrary, in the letter at annexure P2 annexed with the writ petition sent to the petitioner, it was categorically stated that he had passed the written test.
On this premises the petitioner was called upon to appear for the interview.
In this situation, I am of the considered view that the respondents had to determine the eligibility of the petitioner for exemption from test well prior to Oct 22, 1989.
If they had thought that the petitioner was not eligible for the grant of exemption, they could not have stopped him from appearing in the written test.
Having not done so, the respondents cannot be permitted to take advantage of their own wrong and to completely cancel the candidature of the petitioner.
6.
What should be the fair solution in the present situation ?
Should the petitioner be called upon to take the test afresh.
If that is resorted to, the petitioner would be the lone candidate.
His inter se merit vis-a-vis the other candidates will not be judged with reference to the same question paper by the same set of examiners.
The only other way is that the petitioner's merit vis-a-vis other candidates be determined by calculating the percentage of marks secured by him in the interview as against the percentage of marks secured by the other candidates in the written test and the interview.
If by such calculations the petitioner makes a grade higher than the others already appointed, the respondents shall consider his candidature for appointment to the post of A-Class Naib tehsildar.
I am informed by the counsel for the parties that four posts are already lying vacant and as such the interests of no other candidate are likely to be adversely affected.
7.
Accordingly, I direct the respondents to determine the merit of the petitioner, vis-a-vis the other candidates by calculating the percentage of marks secured by him.
To illustrate, suppose the written test carried 100 marks and 50 marks allotted for the interview.
A candidate secures 40 marks in the written test and 20 in he interview.
As such, the secures 60 marks out of 150, viz. 40%.
As against this, the petitioner has secured 30 marks out of 50 in the interview.
He could thus be deemed to have secured 60% of marks.
The respondents shall consider the petitioner's merit by this method and if nothing is found against him and if the persons already appointed have lesser percentage of marks than the petitioner, the respondents shall consider the case of the petitioner for such appointment.
The needful shall be done within three months from the date of the receipt of a copy of this order.
However, in the circumstances of the case, I leave the parties to bear their own costs.
Orders accordingly.