Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - Learned counsel for the parties agree that the questions of law and facts involved in both the petitions viz. - 1932 and 5923 of 1991 are identical.
Accordingly, these petitions can be disposed of by one order.
The facts as mentioned in Civil Writ Petition No. 5923 of 1991 may be briefly noticed.
2.
The petitioner herein was appointed as store keeper on March 11, 1981, by the Haryana State Federation of Consumers Co-operative Wholesale Store Limited, Chandigarh (hereinafter referred to as the Confed).
On June 4, 1987, and September 14, 1987, the Confed issued certain orders with regard to fixation of petitioner's pay.
Vide orders dated March 16, 1988, and July 21, 1988, a direction with regard to the looking after of certain additional work responsibility was issued by the Managing Director of the Confed.
On September 15, 1989, vide order Annexure P-6, the petitioner was informed that he was not on the cadre of the Confed.
Some time thereafter, the Board of Directors of the Mandi Dabwali Central Co-operative Consumer's Store Limited, Mandi Dabwali (respondent No. 3), passed a resolution noticing that the petitioner and certain other employees had not been given their salaries since September, 1989, and that the Board had decided to let the staff be withdrawn by the Confed.
Aggrieved by this order, the petitioner has approached this Court with a prayer that a writ of mandamus be issued to the Confed for taking him back in service and for the quashing of its order dated September 15, 1989.
3.
In the reply filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been averred that the post, on which the petitioner had been appointed viz., Store Keeper, was originally borne on the common cadre, governed by the Staff Service Rules of Haryana State Federation of Consumers Co-operative Wholesale Store Limited (hereinafter referred to as the Rules).
The Board of Administrators of the Confed in their meeting held on September 20, 1983, decided to amend Rule 13, as a result of which the persons working on the posts of Helpers, Peons, Drivers, Salesman, Clerks and store Keepers in various co-operative Stores were allocated to the Co-operative Consumers Store, where they were working on the date of enforcement of the Rule, i.e. December 14, 1983.
This amendment was approved by the Registrar, Co-operative Societies, under Section 84(A) of the Punjab Co-operative Societies Act, 1961, vide his order dated December 14, 1983.
It is claimed that as a result of this Rule, the petitioner ceased to be an employee of the Confed and came to the allocated to the Stores with respondent No. 3.
It has been further averred that any employee aggrieved by the allocation was invited to make appeal to the Staff Committee.
The claim of such persons as had filed an appeal was considered and an appropriate order was passed.
However, the petitioner failed to file an appeal and consequently he stood allocated to the Stores w.e.f.
December 14, 1983.
On this premises, it is claimed that the petitioner's employment with the Confed stood terminated and he had become an employee of respondent No. 3 only.
4.
I have heard Mr. Shish Pal Laler for the petitioner and Mr. Hemant Kumar, Mr. Jaswant Singh and Mr. Harish Rathee for the respondents.
It has been contended on behalf of the petitioner that he was appointed by the Confed and in consequence of that had continued to be an employee of the Confed.
Mr. Laler has specifically referred to the orders dated June 4, 1987, and September 14, 1987, whereby the petitioner was sanctioned annual increments etc. by the Managing Director of the Confed.
He has also contended on the basis of the orders dated March 16, 1988, and July 21, 1988, that the petitioners was assigned additional duty by the Managing Director of the Confed.
On this premises, it has been contended that the petitioner continued to be an employee of the Confed.
His claim has been controverted on behalf of the respondents.
5.
It is the admitted position that the Rules were amended w.e.f.
December 1983.
By the amendment in Rule 13, posts of Peons, Helpers etc. including that of Store Keepers were excluded from the common cadre.
It was specifically provided that all Helpers, Peons, Drivers, Clerks and Store Keepers working in different Co-operative Stores on the date of endorsement of these Rules shall stand allocated to the stores whereby are working.
In view of this provision, there was an automatic termination of relationship between the petitioner and the Government.
The validity of this Rules has not been challenged.
Consequently, it has to be held that the petitioner ceased too be an employee on the common cadre of the Confed and came to be allocated to the Store, where he was working.
It may be added here that in the copy produced by the respondents as Annexure R-2/2, the provisions has not been correctly typed.
Mr. Rathee has produced before me a photocopy of the exact Rule.
6.
So far as the issuance of various orders is concerned, it has been explained on behalf of the respondents that the Confed had issued the orders regarding the fixation of increments etc. because the petitioner had originally joined service with the Confed.
It became further necessary to issue orders assigning additional duties because some temporary arrangement had to be made in the exigencies of the service.
A perusal of the orders shows that various orders, referred to above, were issued only with the object of tiding over a particular situation and not by way of asserting the right of the employer vis-a-vis the employee.
7.
Faced with this situation, Mr. Laler has contended that these Rules were never brought to the notice of the petitioner.
It has been asserted on behalf of the respondents that a copy of the Rules was sent to all the Central Co-operative Consumers Stores in the State of Haryana.
A copy of this letter has been produced as Annexure R2/1 with the written statement.
No replication has been filed to suggest that it was not received in the store, where the petitioner was posted.
Furthermore, it has been pointed out on behalf of the respondents that Mr. Boar Singh, who was working along with the petitioner as Store Keeper had submitted an appeal.
This is prima facie proof of the fact that intimation regarding the rules had been given in the Store, where the petitioner was posted.
He still did not file any appeal.
In any case, it is disputed question of fact, which cannot be gone into in the writ proceedings.
Accordingly, it is held that the petitioner stood allocated to the Store on December 14, 1983.
8.
Faced with this situation, learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that even the store to which the petitioner is deemed to have been allocated has not been paying his salary since September 1989.
Reference to this effect has been made to the resolution of Board of Directors wherein this fact has been specifically noticed.
This indeed appears to be so.
In spite of service, no one has appeared on behalf of the store viz. respondent No. 3 No written statement has been filed.
The petitioner having performed the duties of his post, is entitled to the release of his pay.
If the store did not have adequate funds, it could proceed in accordance with law to terminate his services.
However, if it has continued to have the petitioner in service, it is bound to pay him his salary.
Accordingly, it is appropriate to direct the Store to pay the petitioner his salary w.e.f.
September 1989, within three months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
In all other respects, I find no merit in this petition.
It is dismissed.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.