Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioners, who were recruited as Draftsmen in the Punjab P.W.D.
Irrigation Branch are aggrieved by the order, dated June 19, 1991, by which the Government directed that their services be regularised with effect from February 1, 1985 and that their seniority had been finalised by the competent authority vide order dated September 21, 1988 (Annexure P.9) and that the action of the Government in passing the order dated June 19, 1991 (Annexure P10) is inter alia violative of the principles of natural justice.
They claim that the representations submitted by various persons, including respondent Nos. 2 to 59 had been accepted without any notice to them.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioners possess the qualification of Diploma in Engineering.
They were selected by a Departmental Selection Committee for appointment to the posts of Draftsmen.
Believing that selection for regular appointment could be made only by the Subordinate Service Selection Board, the department appointed the petitioners on ad hoc basis.
It is averred that vide letter dated April 7/10, 1981 the categories of posts which required an Engineering Degree or Diploma or a technical degree or diploma were specifically excluded from the purview of the Subordinate Services Selection Board.
As such, the recruitment to the Post of Draftsman was not required to be made on the recommendations of the Board.
In view of this the office of the Chief Engineer vide letter dated February 1, 1984 recommended that "necessary concurrence of Government to treat the selection of JEs and Draftsmen by the Chief Engineer's Committee as regular, may kindly be conveyed at an early date."
In pursuance to this recommendation the Government of Punjab in the department of Irrigation and Power issued a letter dated February 1, 1985 approving the selection of Draftsmen made by the Chief Engineer's Selection Committee.
As a consequence the Chief Engineer issued an order dated March 7, 1986 (Annexure P.8) observing that the "services of draftsmen selected by the Chief Engineer's Selection Committee, have been regularised from the date, they submitted their joining reports, after having been sponsored for appointment as such, by this office."
Thereafter, the seniority list of the Drawing establishment was issued in which the various petitioners were assigned their due position on the basis of their date of joining service.
3.
It appears that certain persons, who had been promoted from the posts of Tracers to the post of Draftsmen submitted representations challenging the dates from which the services of the persons, like the petitioners, had been regularised.
After examining these representations, the Chief Engineer recommended to the Government that the decision conveyed vide Memo dated February 1, 1985 (Annexure P7) be reviewed "so that seniority list of Draftsmen may be prepared accordingly to avoid unnecessary litigation and to give due justice to all the Draftsmen working in the department".
As a result the Government issued an order dated February 5, 1990 advising that the servicers "of the ad hoc employees selected by the Chief Engineer's Committee.....be regularised from the date on which the Government have approved the selection i.e.
121985."
A copy of this order has been produced on record as Annexure R/2/5.
In pursuance to this letter certain further correspondence appears to have ensued.
Finally, vide letter dated June 19, 1991, it was directed that the seniority of the Draftsmen who had been appointed on ad hoc basis by the Chief Engineer's Selection Committee should be regularised with effect from February 1, 1986 and their seniority be also fixed from that date i.e. February 1, 1985.
Aggrieved by this order the petitioners have approached this Court through the present writ petition.
This order has been challenged inter alia on various grounds including that the action was violative grounds including that the action was violative of the principles of natural justice, contrary to the rules governing the service and that vested rights could not be taken away.
It was also alleged that the action of the Government was without any legislative sanction and was wholly lacking in jurisdiction.
4.
Certain persons, who were likely to be affected by the decision of the writ petition, moved CM Petition No. 5661 of 1991 praying that they be impleaded as respondent Nos. 2 to 59.
Notice of the application was given to the learned counsel for the petitioners.
Finally, vide my order dated November 1, 1991 this prayer was allowed and the applicants were impleaded as respondent Nos. 2 to 59.
5.
Separate written statements have been filed on behalf of No. 1 and respondent Nos. 2 to 59.
6.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondent No. 1, it has been inter alia stated that the conditions of service of the petitioners are governed by the provisions of Public Works Department (Irrigation Branch) Draftsmen and Tracers State Service Class-III Rules, 1960.
The issuance of the various letters and orders, including those at Annexures P6, P7, P.8, P.9 and P10 has also been admitted.
It has been further stated that the orders impugned in this petition are absolutely legal and valid.
The averment made on behalf of the petitioners that the order dated February 1, 1985 (Annexure P7) had been reviewed by the impugned order without affording any opportunity to the petitioners has not been specifically denied.
Various other contentions have been controverted.
It has, however, been specifically admitted that the post of Draftsman had been taken out of the purview of the Subordinate Services Selection Board and the appointments had been made by the Departmental Selection Committee constituted by the Chief Engineer.
It has been further stated that the petitioners do not have an absolute right to seniority.
The Government enjoys the"unfettered right to amend the seniority list of the petitioners in accordance with the rules and the regulations and the policy of the Government as per Annexure P/10.
To the same effect is the written statement filed on behalf of respondents Nos. 2 to 59.
A replication was filed on behalf of the petitioners, with which two documents were produced.
7.
I have heard Mr. Sarjit Singh, learned counsel for the petitioners and M/s JS Khehar and SS Dhaliwal for the respondents.
The primary contention raised on behalf of the petitioners is that the action of the Government in reviewing the order dated February 1, 1985 by which the proposal of the Chief Engineer for the regularisation of the services of the petitioners had been approved without giving any notice to the petitioners was violative of the principles of natural justice.
It was contended that in pursuance to the order dated February 1, 1985 (Annexure P7), the Chief Engineer had issued an order dated March 7, 1986 regularising the services of the petitioners with effect from the date they submitted their joining reports.
Still further, the seniority of the Drawing establishment which included the petitioners was finally determined.
An extract from that list has been appended as Annexure P.9.
Subsequently, the Government had issued the impugned order by which the date of regularisation was changed from the date of joining to February 1, 1985.
It was further directed that the seniority of the petitioners would be determined on that basis.
As a result the impugned order affected the seniority and other chances of promotion of the petitioners.
It was also pointed out that this order deprived the petitioners of a vested right inasmuch as their seniority which had already been finalised was sought to be changed to their prejudice.
Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents conceded that no hearing was given to the petitioners and others who were likely to be affected by the issue of the impugned order.
8.
Having heard the learned counsel for the parties and having perused the record of the case, I find that vide orders dated April 7/10, 1981 the posts requiring a technical degree or diploma had been taken out of the purview of the Board.
As such the selection and recruitment was not required to be made through the agency of the Board.
It was on account of this fact that the Chief Engineer had made a recommendation to the Government for the grant of approval to the selections.
This approval had been accorded by the Government by its letter dated February 1, 1985.
In pursuance to this approval by the Government the services of the petitioners had been regularised from the date they had submitted their joining reports.
Even their seniority had been determined on that basis.
Once this had happened, certain persons, like respondent Nos. 2 to 59, who had been promoted from the posts of Tracers submitted representations.
Those representations were considered by the Chief Engineer and a recommendation was made to the Government for reviewing the order.
The Government reviewed the order on February 5, 1990 and conveyed the final directions vide its letter of June 19, 1991.
During all this process neither the Chief Engineer nor the Government afforded any opportunity whatsoever to the petitioners.
If an opportunity had been afforded the petitioners could have brought the full facts to the notice of the competent authority and shown that the post had been taken out of the purview of the board, the Selection Committee had been properly constituted; the constitution of the Selection Committee and the actual selections made by the Committee had been duly approved by the Government, the appointments of the petitioners had been duly regularised by the competent authority with effect from the date of the submission of the joining reports; the appointments had been wrongly made on ad hoc basis and in fact they had to be made on regular basis from the inception and that there was no reason or rule justifying the review of the action by the Government.
Failure to grant a hearing to the petitioners deprived them of an opportunity to bring the relevant facts to the notice of the authority.
As a result by the issue of the impugned order, the seniority etc. of the petitioners were bound to be adversely affected.
The course of action adopted by the Government was violative of the principles of natural justice.
It resulted in a material miscarriage of justice.
It vitiates the action of the Government in reviewing the order dated February 1, 1985.
9.
In view of may above finding, I do not consider it necessary to go into the other contentions raised on behalf of the petitioners.
10.
Accordingly, the writ petition is allowed.
The order dated June 19, 1991 (Annexure P10) is quashed.
Since an interim direction had been given on July 16, 1991 for maintenance of status quo and the respondents have not changed the seniority list etc., no further directions by way of grant of consequential relief are required to be issued.
CM Application No. 4673 of 1991 has, thus, become infructuous and is disposed of as such.
In the circumstances of the case, I make no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.