AL Bahri, J - Ex Naik Bhag Chand has approached this Court in this petition filed under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution for quashing orders dated March 7, 1991 (Annexure P4) and April 27,1991 (Annexure P5).
He further prays for direction to the respondents to pay him a sum of Rs. 11,334/- illegally deducted from the petitioner out of general provident fund.
The petitioner was working as Naik Driver w.e.f.
1975 on promotion.
There was an accident with the jeep driven by him and a bus on November 23, 1986.
This resulted in several injuries being suffered by him.
With effect from November 23, 1986, he was hospitalised and ultimately discharged on May 13, 1988.
On account of being completely and permanently incapacitated from service, he was discharged from service vide order dated April 25, 1989 (Annexure P-1).
Subsequently, his pension was fixed at Rs. 375/- per month and the period of hospitalisation was treated as the leave of the kind due.
An adjustment was made on the account and a sum of Rs. 11,334/- from general provident fund account and a sum of Rs. 269/- from his dearness allowance were adjusted having been paid in excess vide orders Annexure P-4 and P-5.
These orders are under challenge on the ground that as per instructions issued vide letter dated March 11, 1986 (Annexure P-2) and substituted by further instructions issued in May, 1988 (Annexure P-3), the petitioner was entitled to a sum of Rs. 25000/- in lump sum and a sum of Rs. 400/- per mensem towards pension.
The stand of the respondents in the written statement is that the petitioner's pension has been rightly fixed and the amounts have been rightly adjusted.
2.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, we are of the view that the case of the petitioner was covered by Para 7(b)(i) of the scheme which is reproduced from Annexure P-2.
"(b) Invalidation cases :  When a person becomes completely capacitated or is rendered absolutely immobile on account of disability like complete insantive/total blindness, total deafness, amputation of both upper limbs at any level, (right limb for right handed person or left limb for left handed person)/amputation of both lower limbs at any level/amputation one limb at hip level/paraplegia/ himiplegia guardriplegia/ankyosing spondilitis with complete stiffness of all major joints/Phamataid Arthritis with complete stiffness of all major joints will be entitled a lump sum grant of Rs. 15000/- besides a recurring payment of Rs. 200/- per month for 15 years.
(ii) In other routine cases of invalidation a lump sum grant of Rs. 15000/- only will be paid."
3.
The case of the respondents is that the petitioner's case would be covered under sub-clause (ii) as reproduced above.
Initially, it was in 1981 that the scheme was framed by the Union of India, circulated by letter dated March, 1981.
Para 7 covered the case of completely incapacitated.
This was subsequently substituted in 1986 which has been quoted above from Annexure P2.
Vide Annexure P-3, the amount of compensation to be granted for cases covered by sub-clause (i) of sub-clause (b) of para 7 above was increased to Rs. 25,000/- and pension at Rs. 400/- per mensem of 20 years.
The question for consideration is as to whether the case of the petitioner would fall under clause (i) as above.
Annexure P-1 is the office order vide which the petitioner was discharged.
Para 1 of the order is reproduced as under :  "No. 690483678 Naik Bhag Chand of HQ 48 B. CRPF has been declared completely and permanently incapacitated for further service in this department by the Chief Medical Officer base Hospital-I, CRPF, New Delhi vide Medical Certificate dated 26.7.1988 in consequence of 1-1/4 years old operated case of fracture neck and supracondylar fracture right femur and cruciate ligament tear left knee joint with residual moderate restriction of right hip and knee with inability to climb stairs and sit across legged with 1" shortening of tight lower limb."
The contention of the government advocate, is that the type of injuries/diseases as mentioned in clause (i) was not suffered by the petitioner that he was absolutely immobile and thus sub-clause (i) will not be attracted to the case of the petitioner an his case would fall under clause (ii) where a fixed amount of Rs. 15000/- was only payable.
We are afraid that this contention cannot be accepted.
Clause (i) is made applicable to the case of persons becoming completely incapacitated or rendered absolutely immobile on account of other types of disability mentioned therein.
The significant word used 'or' is indicative of the fact.
Sub-clause (i) is to apply in the case of persons becoming completely incapacitated and the petitioner as per order Annexure P-1 was declared to be completely and permanently incapacitated.
It is, therefore, not necessary to refer to details of the further injuries suffered by the petitioner as mentioned in Annexure P.1 to find out if he was absolutely immobile also on that account.
The respondents thus were not justified in denying the benefits of clause (i) referred to above to the petitioner.
The petitioner is held entitled to sum of Rs. 25000/- compensation in lump sum and monthly pension of Rs. 400/- for 20 years, as per instructions Annexure P-3 issued on May 6, 1983.
4.
Counsel for both the parties have referred to Rules 44, 45 and 46 of the Central Service Leave Rules.
On going through the same, we find that no injustice appears to have been done in case of the petitioner.
Under Rule 45 medical leave was permissible as has been treated in Annexure P-4 i.e. for first 90 days in full pay earned leave was to be granted and for another 120 days on full pay disability leave was to be granted and the remaining period to be treated as half pay leave.
It was rightly so ordered.
Even if Rule 46 is made applicable, 120 days full pay leave would be granted on account of hospitalisation and their remaining period was to be treated for half pay leave, which would go upto the extent of 28 months.
The present is not a case of 28 months.
The petitioner's total leave period is 583 days, which is much less than 28 months.
If Rule 46 is to apply the petitioner was not entitled to 90 days full pay leave which was taken as earned leave.
Even if 90 days leave is converted into half day leave, the petitioner is not going to suffer any loss by passing the impugned order.
5.
Since leave was rightly taken into consideration, the adjustment of general provident fund and dearness allowance was correct.
The petitioner is not entitled to any relief in this respect.
6.
For the reasons recorded above this writ petition is partly allowed with a direction to the respondents to pay a sum of Rs. 25000/- in lump sum to the petitioner alongwith pension at the rate of Rs. 400/- per mensem for 20 years w.e.f.
the date the petitioner was discharged from service.
Let these directions be complied with expeditiously preferably within three months.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition partly allowed.