Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner approached this Court with a two-fold grievance.
Firstly, he was aggrieved by the order dated October 12,1989 by which he was ordered to be retired from service under rule 3(i) (a) of Punjab Civil Services (Premature Retirement) Rules, 1975.
The second grievance made by the petitioner was against the order dated November 22,1982 passed by the Director State Transport Punjab which was conveyed to the petitioner vide letter dated June 14, 1989.
These documents are on record as Annexures P-22 and P-23.
By this order, petitioner's two increments were stopped and the period of absence from 1031970 to 2181980 was directed to be treated as leave without pay.
2.
The Motion Bench vide its order dated February 5, 1990 dismissed the claim of the petitioner in so far as it related to the challenge to the order dated October 12,1989 by which he was ordered to be retired.
This chapter is consequently closed.
The only thing that remains here is regarding the payment of retirement benefits.
Mr. Bal learned counsel for the petitioner states that the dues have not been released to the petitioner till now.
Learned counsel for the respondents states that no grievance in this behalf has been made in the petition.
3.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, I direct that in case the retirement benefits due to the petitioner have not been released so far, the respondents shall decide and do the needful within three months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
4.
In so far as the petitioner's challenge to the order dated November 22, 1982 which was communicated vide letter dated June 14, 1989 is concerned, Mr. Bal states that he is not making any grievance against the punishment of stoppage of two increments.
He only prays that the period during which he associated with the enquiry may be taken into consideration while computing his pension.
For this purpose, he wishes to make a representation to the State Govt. and seeks to withdraw the writ petition.
Mr. Kang has no objection.
5.
Accordingly, in so far the challenge to the orders at Annexure P-22 and P-23 is concerned, the writ petition is dismissed as withdrawn.
In the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.