Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner, who has since been retired from service has made a two fold prayer in the writ petition.
He has claimed a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to finalise the disciplinary proceedings against him and to consider his claim for promotion as Foreman Instructor with effect from the date the persons junior to him have promoted viz. 1.7.1986.
2.
So far as the first part of the prayer is concerned, Mr. Roshan Lal, learned counsel for the petitioner states that the enquiry proceedings have been finalised and the petitioner was exonerated by the Enquiry Officer.
Differing with the finding recorded by the Enquiry Officer, the Punishing Authority has passed an order of stoppage of two increments.
The petitioner has already filed a writ petition against that order, which has been admitted and is pending.
3.
In view of this, the first part of the prayer has become infructuous so far as this petition is concerned.
4.
The second part of the petitioner's claim is that even though he has retired but his retrospective promotion as Foreman Instructor would not only result in payment of some arrears of salary but can also enhance the rate of his monthly pension as well as the amount of gratuity etc. A few facts may be noticed.
5.
Vide orders dated 2161985 (Annexure P.6) and July 1, 1986 (Annexure P.7) certain persons, whom the petitioners claims to be junior to him were promoted as Foreman Instructors.
It is averred that the petitioner's claim was not considered as disciplinary proceedings were pending against him.
6.
In the written statement, it has been stated that an adverse report to the effect that the petitioner's integrity was doubtful was conveyed to him for the period from August 1, 1981 to August 2, 1982.
7.
Admittedly, the petitioner had submitted a representation against this adverse report which was pending consideration, while orders dated 2161985 (Annexure P.6) and 1.7.1986 (Annexure P.7) had been passed.
According to the dictum of the Supreme Court in Brij Mohan v. State of Punjab, 1987 S.L.R.
54, an adverse report against which representation is pending cannot be taken into account for consideration for promotion.
In view of this position of law the consideration of the petitioner's claim in the year 1985 and 1986 was not in accordance with law.
8.
The respondents are directed to consider the claim of the petitioner for promotion in accordance with law.
The needful shall be done within three months from the date of receipt of the copy of judgment.
In case, the petitioner is found suitable for promotion, all consequential reliefs shall also be granted to him.
In the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.