HS Bedi, J - The petitioner who has a degree of Bachelor in Electrical Engineering was selected by the Punjab Public Service Commission and appointed an Assistant Engineer in the Municipal Committee, Amritsar, with effect from 15.9.1969 and was subsequently confirmed on that post with effect from the said date.
It has been averred that the service of the petitioner was governed by the provisions of the Punjab Municipal Corporation Act, 1970 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Act') whereby the Municipal Committee, Amritsar, was re-constituted as a Municipal Corporation with effect from December 31, 1976.
Vide order Annexure P-1 dated 1.12.1977, the Commissioner, Municipal Corporation, Amritsar served the petitioner with a charge-sheet pertaining to nine charges and appointed the Assistant Commissioner of the Corporation as an inquiry officer to conduct a regular inquiry into these charges.
The petitioner denied all the charges and submitted his defence.
The inquiry officer submitted his report finding some of the charges as proved.
Vide proceedings dated 271980 Annexure P.6 to the petition, a proposal was put before the Corporation recommending that the petitioner be demoted to the lower post of Junior Engineer.
The resolution was adopted and the formal order annexure P-7 dated July 9, 1980 was made stating that it had been decided to demote the petitioner to the next lower posts of Junior Engineer.
The petitioner has impugned Annexure P-6 and P.7 by way of present writ petition.
2.
A three-fold argument has been made by Shri JS Wasu, learned Senior Advocate, appearing on behalf of the petitioner.
He has argued that as per Rule 11 read with Appendix 'C' of the Punjab Municipal Corporation Services (Recruitment and Conditions) Rules, 1978 (hereinafter called 'the Rules') the punishment of demotion could have been made only by the Government, and as such, the order Annexure P-7 made by the Commissioner of the Corporation could not be sustained.
It has also been urged that as the petitioner had been appointed directly as Assistant Engineer, he has not liable to be demoted to the lower post and for this purpose has cited Babaji Charan Rout v. State of Orissa and others, 1981(3) S.L.R.
189.
The final argument of Mr. Wasu is that the written statements filed on behalf of the respondents could not be taken into account as they had not been filed by duly authorised persons.
3.
In reply to the arguments and averments of the petitioner, the stand of the respondent is that the services of the petitioner had not been provincialised and as such the Rules were not applicable to his case.
Reliance has been placed on Annexures R.7, R.13 and R14 in support of this contention.
4.
After hearing the counsel for the parties, I find the petition deserves to be allowed.
The case of the petitioner is that his services were governed under the Act as also the Rules which came into force with effect from June 30, 1978 and govern the service of the petitioner as stated in Appendix 'A' Rule 11(2) of the Rules provides that the authority empowered to impose penalties in the category of service shall be as specified as against each in Appendix 'C'.
Appendix 'C' as it then stood clarified that with respect to minor punishments of censure, withholding of promotion and recovery from the pay of any pecuniary loss caused by the employee to the corporation and withholding of increments was a matter which came under the purview of the Commissioner of the Corporation whereas the major penalties including demotion were to be imposed by the Government.
From a bare reading of the Rule along with Annexure P-7 was required to be made by the Government, and having been made by the Commissioner of the Corporation, cannot be sustained.
It is also clear from the documents appended with the replies, that the Corporation was alive to the problem and sought the opinion of the Government but ultimately, in view of what has been held by me, chose to err.
5.
The argument of Mr. Joginder Sharma, learned counsel for the respondent is untenable because in reply to the assertion made in para 7(ii) of the petition that the services of the petitioner were governed by the Rules, there has been no clear cut denial and vague assertion has been made as under :  It also appears to me from Notification No. 3432-2CI-78/24543 dated August 8, 1978 that the Punjab Service of Corporation Assistant Engineers had in fact been duly constituted by virtue of the notification dated August 8, 1978 which has been produced in the court and has been put on the record of this case.
The reliance by counsel for the respondent on Annexures R-7, R-13 and R-14, is therefore, misconceived as there has been no denial that services of the petitioner had been provincialised and he came within its purview.
6.
In view of the what has been held above, the writ petition is allowed, Annexures P-6 and P-7 are quashed, with no order as to costs.
It is also directed that all the benefits to the petitioner which have been denied as a consequence of the impugned order shall be restored to him within a period of three months from the date of the receipt of a copy of this judgment by the respondents.
Petition allowed.