Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - This order will dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 6509 and 7807 of 1991.
The facts at stated in Civil Writ Petition No 6509 of 1991 may be briefly noticed.
2.
The Punjab Agricultural University appears to have issued an advertisement on October 3, 1987 inviting applications for various posts including those of Clerks "to prepare a panel for further vacancies."
A copy of one such advertisement has been placed on record by the petitioner as Annexure P-1.
The petitioners submitted their applications and competed.
After having qualified the written test they appeared in the interview.
The petitioners claim that their names were included in the panel prepared by the University.
This penal was finally approved by the Appointing Authority on July 7, 1988.
3.
Instead of appointing the petitioners, whose names are stated to be borne on the panel, the University issued a fresh advertisement on May 31, 1990.
The petitioners did not apply.
The University prepared a fresh panel.
Aggrieved by the action of the University in proceeding to prepare a fresh panel and in not appointing the petitioners from the panel which had been approved on July 7, 1988, the petitioners have approached this court though the present writ petition.
4.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the University.
It has been inter alia averred that by orders dated May 13, 1971, it had been decided that a panel for recruitment to various posts should be considered to be valid for a period of six months only.
The vacancies which arise hereafter should be filled only after preparing a fresh panel.
Accordingly it is averred that the vacancies that arose during the period of the operation of the panel i.e. within six months from July, 1989 were filled up by appointing candidates whose names were borne on the panel.
The subsequent advertisement was issued in May, 1990 for the preparation of a fresh panel.
Apparently, it is claimed that the turn of the petitioners for appointment having not come within the period of six months, they have no cause of action which may be justiciable through the present writ petition.
On this premises, the claim of the petitioners has been contested.
5.
I have heard Mr. KS Kapur for the petitioners and Mr. PS Kang for the respondent-University.
Mr. Kapur has vehemently contended that the University is bound by the terms of the advertisement.
In this advertisement the University had not fixed a period of six months and consequently the life of the panel could not be confined to that period only.
He submits that the petitioners whose name have borne on the panel have a right to be considered for appointment and that the University can prepare a fresh panel only after the old one is exhausted.
On behalf of the respondents it has been pointed out that the University had as far back as May 13, 1971 decided to limit the life of a penal to a period of six months.
This practice has been consistently followed.
Any departure therefrom would deny the fresh candidates a right to compete for the post and would thus result in denial of equality of opportunity as guaranteed under Article 16 of the Constitution.
6.
An advertisement of posts is only an intimation to the eligible candidates to apply and compete.
It does not create any contractual or legal obligation.
Persons, who apply, compete and get selected have a right to be considered for appointment subject to various other relevant factors.
However, the selected candidates do not get an indefeasible right to be appointed.
If the appointing authority on the basis of certain relevant considerations decides to scrap a panel and to prepare a fresh one, its action can be successively impugned only if it is shown to have violated a provision of law or the action is shown to be otherwise arbitrary and unfair.
7.
In the present case, it is undoubtedly correct that the petitioners have competed and presumably their names are borne on the panel.
However, this might itself not confer on them a right to be appointed for all times to come.
The University in conformity with its past practice appears to have operated the panel for a period of six months.
Learned counsel for the respondent.
University points out that during this period 17 posts had become available and these had been duly filled up from amongst the persons, whose names were borne on the panel.
It has neither been averred nor otherwise shown at the hearing that any person, who was lower in merit to one or the other of the petitioners has been appointed.
In this situation, apparently the action of the University in not keeping the panel alive after the expiry of six months does not appear to suffer from any fatal infirmity.
Learned counsel for the petitioners has not been able to refer to any provision of the rules, statutes or even the executive instructions to show that the action of the University was vitiated.
He only submits that this condition having not been laid down in the advertisement could not have been incorporated at a later stage.
I am unable to accept this contention.
The advertisement was only an intimation to the eligible candidates and it is not necessary that all conditions have to be incorporated therein.
A period of six months having been prescribed more than 16 years prior to the issue of the advertisement and the University having acted thereupon, I do not find any merit in this contention raised on behalf of the petitioners and it is consequently rejected.
8.
Even otherwise, the action of the University does not appear to suffer from the vice of arbitrariness.
It is well known that the number of posts under the State is limited.
The number of candidates, who become eligible every year is far larger.
It is thus, fair and proper that the advertisements are issued at regular intervals of time so that persons who become eligible should get a chance to compete.
If a panel, as in the present case, prepared in the year 1988 is kept alive till it is fully exhausted, a large number of persons who become eligible every year would never get a chance to compete.
This would result in denial of opportunity to all such persons.
A prescription of a time limit for six months avoids such situations.
It affords an opportunity to the eligible candidates to compete.
I cannot, as such, persuade myself to hold that the stipulation regarding six months is either arbitrary or unfair.
9.
Learned counsel for the petitioners also contends that the Vice Chancellor has no jurisdiction to prescribe a limitation of six months.
Admitted the Vice Chancellor is competent to make appointments to the posts of Clerks.
In fact, even the Registrar can make appointments to the posts of Clerks.
As an appointing authority, the Vice Chancellor can decide as to how many posts should be filled up as also the period for which a particular panel should be kept alive.
In order to void arbitrariness or adoption of different yardsticks at different times, a uniform policy decision was circulated in the year 1971.
It has stood the test of time for the last more than 20 years.
I do not find any infirmity or lack of jurisdiction in the action of the Vice Chancellor.
It is a self-imposed restriction adopted by the appointing Authority on its own power.
It does not seem to suffer from any legal infirmity.
10.
Taking the totality of facts and circumstances into consideration, I do not find that the petitioners have been treated arbitrarily or that their rights under Article 14 and 16 of the Constitution have been violated.
Accordingly, I find no merit in this petition and it is dismissed.
11.
In Civil Writ Petition No. 7907 of 1991, there is a slight difference in the factual position.
This petition relates to the filling up of the posts of Clerks by promotion from among the Class-IV employees.
Even in their case a panel is prepared.
The life of the panel is confined to a period of six months.
The claim and contentions are otherwise identical.
As such, even the final conclusion is also the same.
Both the writ petitions are accordingly dismissed.
However, in the circumstances of the case, I leave the parties to bear their own costs.