Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner, an Assistant in the Office of the Chief Medical Officer, Sirsa was served with a charge-sheet dated August 24, 1982 After an enquiry, the Director Health Services vide his order dated September 27, 1986 ordered the petitioner's removal from service.
He found the petitioner specifically guilty of the following charges :  (i) Trying to defraud the Govt. of Rs. 4270/- supplying inferior quality of woollen livery cloth to the Medical Superintendent, ESI Hospital, Faridabad.
(ii) Doing private business while in government service.
(iii) Wilful absence from duty w.e.f.
201279 to 17180 from 19.6.80 to 10.11.80, from 201280 to 19781 and from 21781 to date.
2.
Aggrieved by this order, the petitioner filed an appeal before the Commissioner and Secretary to the Government of Haryana, Department of Health.
The Appellate authority inter alia observed and decided as under :-  2.
He was heard in person on 19488.
I have gone through the office file and also the relevant documents on the record.
On perusal of these record and reply of Shri Pritam Pal Gupta, it is observed that the charges are not substantiated specifically against Mr. Gupta.
Only on the basis of doubt he was found present in the premises of shop of his relative and the charges were established by the Enquiry Officer.
3.
In view of the position explained above and taking a lenient view.
I accept the appeal to the extent that Shri Pritam Pal Gupta, should be taken in service at the lowest pay scale of Head Clerk.
3.
The petitioner submitted another representation contending that in view of the conclusion that the charges were not established, no penalty whatsoever could be imposed on him.
Having failed, he has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
The order of the appellate authority has been challenged primarily on the ground that the action imposing of penalty when the charges were not established is wholly arbitrary and unfair.
4.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been inter alia averred that the petitioner was not exonerated of the charges levelled against him.
The appellate authority has only taken a lenient view.
The petitioner's appeal having been partly allowed, no further interference was called for on a petition for review.
5.
I have heard Mr. RK Malik for the petitioner.
None has appeared on behalf of the respondents.
6.
A perusal of the order dated August 23, 1988 (Annexure P.2) shows that the appellate authority has categorically found that the charges are not substantiated specifically against Mr. Gupta.
Only on the basis of doubt he was found present in the premises of shop of his relative and the charges were established by the Enquiry Officer.
I cannot read this to mean that the charges have been substantiated against the petitioner.
In fact, the Appellate Authority does not appear to have adverted to the relevant evidence at all.
In this situation, the order dated August 23, 1988 is set aside.
The case is remanded to the appellate authority for being decided afresh.
In case it is found that the charges are not established, the question of imposing any penalty does not arise.
During the pendency of the appeal, the status quo as existing today shall continue.
7.
The writ petition is accordingly disposed of.
As no one has appeared on behalf of the respondents, there shall be no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.