GR Majithia, J - The petitioner has sought a mandate from this Court to the respondents to take him back into the Civil service of respondent No. 1 as Block Development and Panchayat Officer in this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
2.
Facts first :-  The petitioner was selected as a Co-operative Inspector in the office of the Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Punjab, on August 9, 1956.
He was selected as Block Development and Panchayat Officer (for short `B.D.P.O') through the Punjab Public Service Commission; he joined as such on April 23, 1960; that he joined the Indian Army as an Emergency Commissioned Officer with the permission of the State Government in the year 1963; that he was granted permanent commission in the army in the year 1967; that he submitted his resignation from the permanent post of Inspector, Co-operative Societies, which was duly accepted; that he did not submit his resignation from the post of BDPO and on his release from the army on March 31, 1985, he was entitled to be taken back into civil service as BDPO  3.
The respondents, in the written statement, have taken a categorical stand that the petitioner resigned from the permanent post of Inspector Co- operative Societies with effect from December 1, 1967 on having been granted permanent commission in the Indian army.
On acceptance of the resignation, the petitioner ceased to be an employee of the State Government.
It was admitted that the petitioner was selected as BDPO but he was never confirmed against this post.
On his joining Indian army, the petitioner resigned from the substantive post held by him in the civil service which was duly accepted.
The petitioner has only a lien against the substantive post which was terminated on his having accepted a permanent commission in the Indian army.
He voluntarily submitted his resignation from the substantive post which was duly accepted.
On acceptance of the resignation, the relationship of master and servant ceased to exist.
The petitioner relinquished his charge from the post of BDPO to join pre-commission training in the Indian army.
The petitioner cannot retain lien in the Government service on two or more permanent posts.
The post of BDPO held by him was not a permanent post and as such, he had no lien against it.
4.
The petitioner in para No. 15 of the petition has stated that his exact date of birth is April 1, 1933.
He will attain the age of superannuation on March 31, 1991.
In view of this conceded position, the issuance of any writ prayed for will be merely an exercise in futility.
5.
The petitioner admittedly had no lien against the post of BDPO He was holding substantively the post of Inspector Co-operative Societies on the day he was granted Emergency Commission in the Indian army.
He was granted permanent commission in the Indian army on December 1, 1967.
He earned his promotion to the rank of substantive Major with effect from April 15, 1978.
After he was granted permanent commission, he submitted his resignation from the substantive post of Inspector Co-operative Societies with effect from December 1, 1967, which was duly accepted.
A government employee cannot be appointed substantively except as a temporary measure to two or more permanent posts at the same time as is provided in rule 311 of the Civil Service Rules Volume I Part 1.
It will be useful to reproduce the same :-  "(a) Two or more government employees cannot be appointed substantively to the same permanent post at the same time.
(b) A government employee cannot be appointed substantively except as a temporary measure to two or more permanent posts at the same time.
(c) A Government employee cannot be appointed substantively to a post on which another government employee holds a lien."
The petitioner was holding the substantive post of Inspector Co-operative Societies on the day he was granted permanent commission in the army.
He was not holding the substantive post of BDPO under respondent No. 1.
He could not retain lien against two or more permanent posts at the same time.
Having been given a permanent commission in the army, he tendered his resignation from the substantive post of Inspector Cooperative Societies in wow of the provisions of clause (b) of rule 311 of the aforesaid rules.
On submission of his resignation from the substantive post, he ceased to have a lien against the post from which he had submitted his resignation.
He was not appointed substantively against post of BDPO In fact, he could not be appointed substantively to two permanent posts at the same time.
Since he was not appointed substantively to the post of BDPO, it was not obligatory for him to resign from the post of BDPO on his permanent absorption in the Indian army.
After he was granted permanent commission in the Indian army, he got promotions to the substantive rank of a Major.
As per his own showing, after having been granted the substantive rank of a Major, he was approved by the Selection Board for grant of the rank of Lieutenant Colonel on February 9, 1985.
He was released from the army on March 31, 1985.
The petitioner has no lien against the post of BDPO and he cannot be absorbed in the civil post as B.D.P.O on his release from the army.
After he was granted permanent commission in the Indian army, he submitted his resignation from the permanent post, he was keeping in the civil service.
On the acceptance of his resignation, he had ceased to have any lien against the substantive post and thus he has no claim to that post after his release from the army.
6.
For the reasons recorded above, the writ petition is devoid of merit and is dismissed as such.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.