Jawahar Lal Gupta, J (Oral)- The petitioner, who was enrolled as a Sepoy in the Indian Army on October 10, 1960, was discharged on August 22, 1970.
The cause for his discharge was the medical condition of the petitioner, which was described as a personality disorder.
It is also clear from the record that the percentage of disability was 20 per cent.
On this factual premises, the petitioner claims that he was entitled to the grant of disability pension.
The needful having not been done inspite of issue of legal notices through counsel besides various representations, the petitioner has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
2.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it is averred that the petitioner is not entitled to the award of disability pension as the cause was neither attributable to nor aggravated by military service.
According to the respondents, the disability was a "constitutional one".
3.
I have heard Mr. Sanjay Majithia for the petitioner and Mr. HS Giani for the respondents.
Pension Regulation 173 provides as under :-  "173.
Unless otherwise specifically provided a disability pension may be granted to an individual who is invalided from service on account of a disability which is attributable to or aggravated by military service and is assessed at 20 per cent or over".
The manner in which the question of attributability has to be determined is laid down in paragraph 423 clause (c).
It reads as under :-  "(c).
The cause of disability or death resulting from a disease as attributable to service when it is established that the disease arose during service on the conditions and circumstances of the disease.
Cases in which it is established that service conditions did not determine or contribute to the onset of the disease but influenced the subsequent course of the disease will be regarded as aggravated by service.
A disease which led to an individual's discharge or death will ordinarily be deemed to have arisen to service if no note of it was made at the time of the individual's acceptance for service in the Armed Forces.
However, if medical opinion holds, for the reasons to be stated, that the disease could not have been detected on medical examination prior to acceptance for service, the disease will not be deemed to have arisen during service."
4.
A perusal of the above provision would show that the disease which leads to an individual's discharge is ordinarily deemed to have arisen in service if "no note of it was made at the time of the individual's acceptance for service in the Armed Forces."
It is only in a case where it is found that "the disease could not have been detected on medical examination prior to acceptance that the presumption is rebutted.
5.
Admittedly, no note regarding, any personality disorder was made at the time of petitioner's enrolment in the Army.
It is also not the case of the respondents that the disorder could not have been detected on medical examination at the time of enrolment in the Army.
Accordingly, it is to be presumed that the disorder was attributed to the Army Service.
6.
The disability being 20 per cent, the requirements of Regulation 173 (supra) are obviously met with.
Accordingly, the petitioner was entitled to the grant of pension under the Regulations.
Action of the respondents in not doing the needful cannot be sustained.
Accordingly, the writ petition is allowed.
The impugned order is set aside and the respondents are directed to pay the petitioner the disability pension.
He will be entitled to the payment of arrears of pension.
In the circumstances of the case, I make no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.