JL Gupta, J - The petitioner herein claims to be a qualified Physical Training Instructor.
It is averred that he has served for a period of 1 year 4 months and 28 days during the interval from May 20, 1972 to May 27, 1978.
The petitioner claims that in accordance with the circular dated May 2, 1984 issued by the Director of School Education, Haryana, the department has to prepare a seniority list of all ad hoc teachers at the District level on the basis of their length of service.
He further submits that the claim for ad hoc appointment has to be considered in order of seniority list thus prepared against vacancies which may arise thereafter.
It is for the issue of this precise direction that the petitioner has approached this court through this writ petition.
2.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been, inter alia, pointed out that the instructions dated May 2, 1984 were superseded vide letter dated April 2, 1987.
A copy of these instructions has been produced on record as annexure R-1.
It is further pointed out that the claim of ad hoc appointment has now to be considered only in accordance with the instructions issued vide letter dated April 12, 1987.
According to these instructions the selection committee has to prepare a panel of teachers of all different categories cadre-wise after getting the names of candidates sponsored by the Employment Exchange in accordance with the formula circulated vide office memo No. 12/2480-Co.(2) dated November 9, 1983.
This panel is required to be prepared in the month of March every year.
The constitution of this committee has laid down.
3.
I have heard Mr. SN Singla, Advocate, for the petitioner and Mr. Jaswant Singh, for the respondents.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I find that the instructions relied upon by the petitioner viz. those issued vide letter dated May 2, 1984 were superseded by the department vide instructions dated April 2, 1987.
Consequently, no direction for the consideration of the name of the petitioner in accordance with the instructions dated May 2, 1984 can be given in favour of the petitioner.
However, if the petitioner is qualified and eligible to be considered in accordance with the instructions dated April 2, 1987, it would be open to him to submit his application and the respondents will consider the petitioner in accordance with the instructions and the law.
Subject to above, there is no merit in the writ petition and it is accordingly disposed of.
In the circumstances, there will be no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.