AL Bahri, J (Oral) - On November 1, 1990, petitioner Ramesh Pal was appointed as Mali-cum-Chowkidar on daily wages with respondent No. 2/Executive Engineer, P.W.D., Public Health Division No. 2, Yamuna Nagar.
His services were terminated on September 13, 1991, as he was not allowed to do his duty thereafter.
The petitioner served a notice Annexure P/1 on the respondent, challenging order of his termination supported by copy of judgment in civil writ petition No. 5129 of 1991, Jasbir Singh v. Ambala Central Co-operative Bank and others, decided on April 23, 1991 copy Annexure P/2.
No action having been taken on the representation, the petitioner has approached this Court in this Writ Petition.
2.
The case of the petitioner is that he had completed more than 240 days in service and he could not be removed without following the procedure laid down under the Industrial Disputes Act.
The stand of the respondent in the written statement filed is that petitioner had not completed 240 days of service in the calendar year.
In support of this assertion copies of the muster rolls were filed.
3.
After hearing counsel for the parties, we are of the view that this writ petition deserves to be allowed.
Section 25-B of the Industrial Disputes Act contemplates calculating period of 240 days in twelve calendar months preceding the date with reference to which calculation is to be made.
Since the petitioner was not allowed to continue in service from September 13, 1991, twelve months prior to the aforesaid date are to be taken into consideration and if that is so the petitioner had in fact put in more than 240 days in service as per calculations to be made from copies of muster rolls Annexures R1 to R 10, filed with the written statement.
4.
Additional Advocate General appearing on behalf of the respondents has argued that the department of Public Health will not be an `Industry' as defined under Section 2(j) of the Industrial Disputes Act and petitioner cannot be granted any relief in this writ petition.
This contention again cannot be accepted.
Section 2(j), as amended, reads as under -  "Industry" means any systematic activity carried on by co-operation between an employer and his workmen (whether such workmen are employed by such employer directly or through any agency; including a contractor) for the production, supply or distribution of goods or services with a view to satisfy human wants or wishes (not being wants or wishes which are merely spiritual or religious in nature), whether or not -  (i) any capital has been invested for the purpose of carrying on such activity; or (ii) such activity is carried on with a motive to make any gain or profit, and includes (a) any activity of the Dock Labour Board established under Section 5-A of the Dock Workers (Regulation of Employment) Act, 1948 (9 of 1948) ; (b) any activity relating to the promotion of sales or business or both carried on by an establishment."
5.
A perusal of aforesaid definition of industry does not contemplate that any charges were to be levelled for rendering services of distributing water etc.
The function of Public Health Department being to supply water to rural as well as urban area concerned would bring the department under the definition of industry, as defined above.
6.
Since the services of the petitioner were terminated without following the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act in the matter of retrenchment, the termination was illegal.
While allowing the writ petition, a direction is given to the res dents to take back the petitioner forthwith and pay him back wages.
The petitioner will be entitled to costs, which are assessed at Rs. 1,000/-.