Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - This order will dispose of Civil Writ Petition No. 10434 of 1991, 1850, 1851 and 1852 of 1991 involving common questions of law and facts.
The learned Counsel for the parties have consented that all these writ petitions be disposed of by a common judgment.
For the purpose of judgment, facts have been taken from CWP No. 10434 of 1991 Hardev Singh v. State of Haryana & others, 1992(2) SCT 393 (P&H)  2.
In this writ petition filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner has prayed for quashing the order dated 15-1-1991, copy of which is Annexure P-5 to the writ petition, vide which the petitioner was reverted to the rank of Constable w.e.f.
1-3-1990.
The petitioner was promoted to the rank of Head Constable under Rule 138(2) of the Punjab Police Rules, hereinafter referred to as the 'Rules' with the prior approval of the Deputy Inspector General of Police.
This promotion was made with a view to giving incentive to the petitioner for his interest in sports.
The petitioner remained on the promoted post for 9 years and months.
3.
The petitioner's promotion to the rank of Head Constable was challenged by some Constables by filing representation, which was rejected.
While rejecting the said representation, the Superintendent of Police, Hissar, vide his memo.
dated 14-1-1988 informed the representations that the petitioner's promotion was made in accordance with Rule 138(2) of the Rules.
4.
Subsequently, some Constables filed Civil Writ Petition No. 3601 of 1988 challenging the promotion of the petitioner and various other Head Constables.
The Superintendent of Police Hissar, filed an affidavit on behalf of the respondents, wherein State of Haryana took the stand that the petitioner was promoted on ad hoc basis with the approval of the Deputy Inspector General of Police and while promoting the petitioner, the Police Rules were strictly kept in view.
The petitioner was promoted being best athlete player of the game and was possessing meritorious service record.
His promotion was ordered with a view to giving incentive to him for his interest in support.
5.
Later on, some constables of Hissar Range filed Civil Writ Petition No. 13761 of 1990 again challenging the promotion of various service personnel in this writ petition, they had prayed for issuance of a direction to the respondents to promote them as Head Constables prior to the promotion of respondents No. 4 and 45 in that writ petition.
6.
This court, vide its order dated 911991, disposed of the said writ petition in view of the undertaking given by the Counsel for respondents No. 1 to 3 in that writ petition that memo.
Annexure P-3, mixed with that writ petition would be complied with Annexure P-3 is a letter dated 4.9.1991 in which the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Hissar Range, Hissar, directed all District Superintendents of Police.
Hissar Range, to review the promotion of such promotee made on ad hoc basis, except in the case of those Head Constables, who have been promoted by way of reward and in their place, C-I Constables be promoted on the basis of seniority-cum-merit.
Thereafter, the petitioner was reverted to the post of Constable by the Superintendent of Police, Hissar, vide his order dated 1511991, copy of which is Annexure P-5 to the writ petition.
7.
The impugned order of reversion has been challenged mainly on the plea that once the official respondents in C.W.P.
No. 3601 of 1988 had taken a categoric stand that the promotions to the rank of Head Constables have been made strictly in accordance with the provisions of rule 138(2) of the Rules, they cannot revert the petitioner to the rank of Constable.
Counsel further contended that the reversion has been made without affording any opportunity of hearing to the petitioner.
As such, the impugned order of reversion is liable to be quashed being against the principles of natural justice.
8.
The learned Deputy Advocate General Haryana appearing for the respondents contended that the promotions to the post of Head Constables were not made in accordance with the provisions of Rule 138(2) of the Rules.
As such, they were rightly reverted to the rank of constable.
He further argued that no opportunity of being heard is required in the matter.
9.
I have considered the respective stands of the parties.
10.
The State of Haryana in Civil Writ Petition No. 3601 of 1988 had taken a categoric stand that promotions to the rank of Head Constables were strictly made keeping in view the provisions of rule 138(2).
The respondents cannot shift from the stand taken in the aforesaid writ petition.
Once the promotion of the petitioner was found to be in order, it does not lie in the mouth of the respondents to say that the promotion was not made in accordance with the rules.
11.
It is not in dispute that the petitioner was promoted as Head Constable and he continued to hold the same for a pretty low time.
He must have earned increments during this period.
The law is well settled that if any order detriment to the interest of a Govt. employee is passed, the concerned employee has a right to know the circumstances/background, which led to the passing of the impugned order.
Admittedly, in the instant case, no opportunity of being heard, was afforded to the petitioner.
No reason in the impugned order for reverting the petitioner has been recorded.
As such, the impugned order of reversion being against equity and violative of principles of natural justice is liable to be quashed.
12.
In view of the foregoing discussion, the writ petition is allowed and the impugned order dated 1511991, copy Annexure P-5, is quashed with no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.