RS Mongia, J - Haryana Government had issued instructions on 22121970 to alienate, inter alia sufferings of the unfortunate families whose bread earners happen to die while in government service.
According to these instructions one or more members of the family of the deceased employee are to be considered for absorption in government service.
These instructions were clarified by subsequent instructions of the government dated 1391971.
By the later instructions, it was made clear that it was not the intention to provide employment to the dependent of the deceased government employee as a matter of course, in spite of that each individual case should be examined carefully for employment, which should be confined to Class-III and Class-IV posts, and should be given only if it is justified in order to avoid financial hardships and not otherwise.
2.
The petitioner in the present case is an unfortunate person whose father (Hans Raj Nagpal) died on 20101985 while in government service working as Assistant Excise and Taxation Officer, Gurgaon.
The petitioner who is MA in Public Administration as also MA in Economics from the Panjab University, applied to the respondents for being considered for appointment in government service in view of his qualification and in accordance with above referred to instructions.
He is the eldest son of the deceased and has two brothers.
The petitioner had made representation that since he fulfils the qualifications for the post of Excise and Taxation Officer, he may be absorbed that post.
However, on 31.10.1986 the petitioner was offered an appointment of Taxation Inspector.
The petitioner did not join this post as according to him, he was entitled to get the post of a higher status in view of his qualifications.
He stake his claim for being appointed as an Excise and Taxation Officer.
3.
The petitioner went on making representations that he should be appointed to a post of higher status and since his qualifications were good enough for being appointed as Excise and Taxation Officer, the government should reconsider his case and give him appointment as Excise and Taxation Officer instead of Taxation Inspectors.
Since the representations of the petitioner did not bear any fruit, he filed the present writ petition for issuing a writ of mandamus to the respondents to give him appointment as Excise and Taxation Officer as he fulfils the qualifications for the same.
4.
The Motion Bench on June 8, 1991 issued notice of motion to the respondents for 981991.
On 981991 the case was adjourned to 691991 for arguments on the request of the counsel for the respondents and it was further ordered that reply, if any, be filed a week earlier.
On 691991 no reply was filed and the case was submitted and was ordered to be listed for hearing within six months.
I started hearing the case on 6.2.1992 when Mr. RC Setia, Additional Advocate General, Haryana, appearing on behalf of the respondents prayed that he may be allowed an opportunity to file the written statement.
I, in the interest of justice, allowed respondents to file the written statement within 15 days subject to payment of cost.
No reply has been filed inspire of adjournment and, therefore, I had no option but to proceed with the case without the written statement of the respondents.
5.
The learned counsel for the respondents submitted that under the relevant instructions the petitioner had no vested right to be appointed to any post as it was a mere concession.
He further submitted that under the instructions of the Government, persons like the petitioner could only be appointed to Class-III and Class-IV posts and since the post of Excise and Taxation Officer was a Class-II post, the petitioner could not be appointed.
6.
It has already been held by this Court in Tarsem Kumar Sehgal v. The State of Punjab and another, 1986(2) S.L.R.
774 and Daya Krishan Bhardwaj v. The Commissioner and Secretary to Government Haryana & others, 1989(5) S.L.R.
153 that a person falling under the instructions has a right to be considered for appointment in the Haryana Government Service.
As far as the other point is concerned that the petitioner is only entitled for appointment to Class-III or Class-IV post, the learned counsel for the petitioner has given instances in the writ petition to show that under these very instructions many persons have been employed to Class-II or even to Class-I posts.
One son of Raghbir Singh, who died as a Deputy Food & Supplies Controller, was appointed as a Deputy Food and Supplies Controller which is a post above Class-II.
Vinod Dahiya son of Balbir Singh was given the post of Excise and Taxation Officer when his father had died during the course of his employment.
Smt. Bimla Chohan was given the post of Assistant Excise and Taxation Officer.
The petitioner has further averred in his writ petition that he is more qualified than the persons mentioned above.
The learned counsel for the petitioner also cited before me in Daya Krishan Bhardwaj v. The Commissioner and Secretary to Government Haryana and others, 1989(5) S.L.R.
153 to show that even a person like the petitioner had been appointed as Deputy Superintendent of Police and while dealing with the argument that under the instructions only Class-III or Class-IV post could be offered, the learned Judge relied on the instance given by the petitioner in that case wherein many others had been offered appointments to the post which were Class-II or even Class-I.
The learned Judge held as under :  "The State had drawn a policy to help the heirs of the deceased Government employee dying during the course of service tenure.
The object behind this policy being to rehabilitate one or two heirs of deceased government servant who could not complete his tenure of service.
Such rehabilitation has to be prompt, otherwise the very idea of rehabilitation is frustrated if the decision is unnecessarily delayed.
In the present case, father of the petitioner died in January 1983.
The Cabinet took the decision on September 12, 1985 to appoint the petitioner as Deputy Superintendent of Police, in the alternative as Assistant Excise and Taxation Officer.
It was in implementation of this decision .that the petitioner was called to appear for tests.
Inspite of the fact that he was found fit and also that there, was nothing found against him on police verification, there was no reason to delay his appointment as Deputy Superintendent of Police.
The order of the Cabinet was reviewed much thereafter when representations of the petitioner to appoint him as such did not bear any fruit.
This action of the State is clearly arbitrary.
The reason put forth for review is that the petitioner could not be offered Class-I post as per earlier instructions of the State Government issued in 1970 and 1971, copies Annexure R1 and R2.
At the same time, when it, was pointed out in the writ petitioner that posts higher than Class-III and Class-IV were given to heirs of the deceased Government servants namely to Mrs. Kamal Kuttapan and Mrs. Balambikei Sundram, the stand of the respondents is that the State Government had the power to do so.
Even the additional affidavit furnished by the petition discloses several other cases where the State of, Haryana had given posts higher than Class-III and Class-IV to the of the deceased.
Thus, the ground given for reviewing the earlier Cabinet decision does not seem to be valid.
It cannot be said that when the Cabinet took the decision, it had no knowledge of present Government instructions.
It was inspite of such instructions that the State Government had been giving higher posts to the heirs of deceased.
Since no other reason has been put forth in the written statement, there is no option but to hold that the review of the earlier decision is arbitrary and violates the provisions of Article 14 of the Constitution 7.
No reasons are forthcoming from the respondents as to why the persons of which the instances have been given by the petitioner in the writ petition were given the appointment to posts higher than Class-III and Class-IV under the instructions.
Even it is evident from the observation in Daya Krishan Bhardwaj case (supra) which has been upheld by the Letters Patent Bench, (Commissioner and Secretary to Govt. Haryana Department of Home, Chandigarh and ors. v. Daya Krishan Bhardwaj, 1990 (5) S.L.R.
776) that Haryana Government itself was deviating from the instructions and was appointing persons to posts which were higher than Class-III and Class-IV.
There is no reason as to why the petitioner who is really qualified to be appointed as Excise and Taxation Officer be not offered that appointment when earlier on persons who were even less qualified were given the appointment to the post of Excise and Taxation Officer or even to higher post.
It cannot be left to the whims of the Government that in a given case they may adhere to instructions to an extent to deny appointment to a higher post than Class-III and Class-IV, but in other similar cases they may deviate from the instructions.
Such an action would be clearly arbitrary and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
8.
For the foregoing reasons this writ petition is allowed and the respondents are directed to give appointment to the petitioner as Excise and Taxation Officer for which post he was staking his claim and is admittedly qualified for the same.
The respondents would give appointment to the petitioner to the post as and when the same becomes available from now onwards.
It will be open to the State Government to create a post for the petitioner to absorb him as Excise and Taxation Officer.
The parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.