Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioners herein claim that the period of ad hoc service rendered by them as Assistant Superintendents (Jails) prior to their regular appointment through the Subordinate Services Selection Board has to be taken into consideration while determining their seniority.
The respondents dispute this.
Consequently, this petition.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner Nos. 1 to 4 were appointed as Assistant Superintendents (Jails) on ad hoc basis with effect from September 23, 1976.
Petitioner Nos. 5 and 6 were similarly appointed on December 9, 1976.
Ultimately, after advertisement of these posts through the Subordinate Services Selection Board, the petitioners and respondent Nos. 3-31 Were selected and appointed vide orders dated August 27, 1979.
While determining the seniority between the petitioners and respondents No. 3-31, the period of ad hoc service rendered by the petitioners has not been taken into consideration.
It is their claim that the petitioners had rendered continuous service after their appointment on ad hoc basis and as such, this period cannot be excluded from consideration while determining their inter se seniority vis-a-vis respondent Nos. 3 to 31.
3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it is claimed that the petitioners are direct recruits to the cadre of Assistant Superintendents (Jails) and that under the rules governing their service and determination of seniority, the period of ad hoc service cannot be taken into consideration.
4.
I have heard Mr. DS Brar for the petitioners and Mr. SS Nijjar and Mr. Varinderpal Singh for the respondents.
The conditions of service governing the parties are laid down in the rules called the Punjab Jails Department State Service (Class III-Executive) Rules, 1963, (hereinafter referred to as the Rules).
The provisions regarding the determination of seniority are contained in rule 11, which reads as under :-  "11.
Seniority.
The seniority inter se of members of the Service shall be determined by the dates of their continuous appointments in the service :  Provided that in the case of members appointed directly the order of merit determined by the Board shall not be disturbed and persons appointed as a result of an earlier selection shall be senior to those appointed as a result of a subsequent selection :  Provided further that in the case of two or more members appointed on the same date, their seniority shall be determined as follows :  (a) a member recruited by direct appointment shall be senior to a member recruited otherwise; (b) A member recruited by promotion shall be senior to a member recruited by transfer; (c) in the case of members recruited by promotion or transfer, seniority shall be determined according to the seniority of such members in the appointments from which they were promoted or transferred; and (d) in the case of members recruited by transfer from different cadres their seniority shall be determined according to pay, preference being given to a member, who was drawing a higher rate of pay in his previous appointment and if the rates of pay drawn are also the same then by their length of service in those appointments; and if the length of such service is the same, an older member shall be senior to a younger member, Note : I - This rule shall not apply to persons appointed on purely provisional basis pending their passing the qualifying test.
Note : 2 - In the case of members whose period of probation is extended under rule 10 of these rules, the date of appointment for the purpose of this rule shall be deemed to have been deferred to the extent the period of probation is extended :  Provided that if the order of appointment of any candidate is cancelled and such candidate is subsequently appointed to the service, the date of his appointment to the service, for the purpose of this rule shall be the date of such subsequent appointment."
A perusal of the above rule shows that the inter se seniority of the members of the service has to be determined by the dates of their continuous appointments.
The proviso to the rule carves out an exception.
It postulates that in the case of direct recruits, the inter se seniority has to be determined on the basis of order of merit determined by the Board.
It is not the case of the petitioners that their seniority has not been determined in accordance with the order of merit.
The only contention raised on their behalf is that period of ad hoc service should be taken into consideration for the purpose of determining the dates of their continuous appointment.
The rule does not contemplate the counting of the period of ad hoc service towards the date of continuous Service.
Mr. Brar relies on the judgment of the Supreme Court in DP Doval and others v. Chief Secretary, Govt. of UP and others, 1984(2) SLR 555 to contend that on selection through the Board, the date of appointment relates back to the original date of ad hoc appointment.
5.
I am unable to accept this contention.
Firstly, there was no inter se competition between the petitioners and respondent Nos. 3-31 at the time of ad hoc appointment.
Relating back the date of regular appointment to the date of ad hoc appointment would result in invidious discrimination against the respondents who never got a chance to complete with the petitioners at the time of their ad hoc appointment.
Secondly, there was no provision like the one contained in rule 11 in Doval's case (supra).
Herein, the rule categorically provides that amongst the direct recruits, the inter se seniority shall be determined by the order of merit.
This is what has been actually done by the department.
In this situation, I am unable to find any merit in the claim made on behalf of the petitioners.
6.
Mr. Brar contends that the date of continuous appointment has to be determined from the point of time when the petitioners had actually started to perform the duties to the posts of Assistant Superintendents (Jails).
It cannot fictionally be counted from the dates on which their names were recommended by the Subordinate Services Selection Board.
It is undoubtedly correct that it is the normal rule of seniority.
However, the proviso to the rule in this case makes an exception.
It provides that "the order of merit as determined by the Board shall not be disturbed."
Furthermore, there is a note appended to this rule.
It provides that the provisions of rule 11 shall not apply "to persons appointed on purely provisional basis pending their passing the qualifying test."
Apparently, the policy behind the rule is that the rule of continuous appointment is not applicable to case where the appointment is on provisional basis.
Similarly, wherever the period of probation is extended the date of appointment is also deemed to have been deferred.
In this situation, I am unable to take the view that the period of ad hoc service is required to be taken into consideration while determining the inter se seniority.
This view is further supported by the third proviso to the rule which contemplates that if the order of appointment of any candidate is cancelled and such candidate is subsequently appointed to the Service for the date of his appointment to the service for the purpose of this rule shall be the date of such subsequent appointment.
Admittedly, the petitioners were given an order of appointment in August 1979, after they had been duly selected by the Board.
This was the date of their regular appointment as distinguished from the ad hoc or provisional appointment.
It is with effect from this date that they are legally recognised to be continuously working as Assistant Superintendents of Jails.
7.
Under the scheme of the rules, the appointment by direct recruitment has to be made by the subordinate Service Selection Board.
This appointment was made only in August 1979.
The appointments prior thereto were not in conformity with the rules.
Accordingly, if at all, proposition (A) as given in paragraph 44 of the judgment in The Direct Recruit Class-II Engineering Officers Association and others v. State of Maharashtra, and others, AIR 1990 SC 1607 only helps the respondents and not the petitioner.
Proposition (A) reads as under :-  "(A) Once an incumbent is appointed to a post according to rule, his seniority has to be counted from the date of his appointment and not according to the date of his confirmation.
The corollary of the above rule is that where the initial appointment is only ad hoc and not according to rules and made as a stop-gap arrangement, the officiation in such post cannot be taken into account for considering the seniority."
8.
Accordingly, I find no merit in this petition.
It is dismissed with costs.
The costs are, assessed at Rs. 2000/-.
Petition dismissed.