Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner herein is aggrieved by order dated July 19, 1991 by which he was reverted from the post of Joint Manager in the Haryana State Cooperative Supply and Marketing Federation Ltd, Chandigarh to that of a District Manager.
A few facts may be noticed :-  2.
The petitioner was promoted from the post of District Manager to that of Joint Manager vide order dated July 11, 1989.
A copy of this order is on record as Annexure P1.
The petitioner was placed on probation for a period of one year "as required under Rule 10 of the Haryana State Supply and Marketing Cooperative Service (Common Cadre) Rules, 1988" (hereinafter referred to as the Rules).
He actually joined this post on July 20, 1989.
Vide order dated July 10, 1991, the period of probation was extended by an order of the Managing Director for a period of one year from July 20, 1990 to July 19, 1991.
On July 19, 1991, the petitioner was ordered to be reverted as "the Board of Administrator in its meeting held on July 15, 1991 considered the matter and found the work and conduct of the officer during the extended period of probation not satisfactory ......" Aggrieved by this order, the petitioner approached this court through the present writ petition.
3.
A two-fold attack has been made on the order by Mr. KK Malik, learned counsel for the petitioner.
He firstly challenges the order extending the petitioner's period of probation.
It is submitted that the period of probation could be extended only if the work and conduct were not found to be satisfactory.
He submits that there was no basis with the authority for extending the petitioner's period of probation as only an average report had been communicated to the petitioner which would not amount to saying that the work and conduct of the petitioner were unsatisfactory.
He further submits that even the order of extension was passed at a very late stage.
It is further submitted that the petitioner had a right to submit a representation against the report within a period of three months from the date of the communication of the adverse report and that the order of reversion having been passed even before expiry of maximum period of submission of representation, the order was violative of the principles of natural justice.
In any case, he further submits that the order had to be passed by the appointing authority and not by any authority subordinate to the appointing authority.
He submits that under Rules, appointing authority is Administrative Committee while the order extending the period of probation had been passed by the Managing Director.
He further submits that there was no power of delegation and as such, the order of extension of probation was wholly without jurisdiction, and even subsequent notification of the order could not cure the initial defect of lack of jurisdiction.
4.
On the other hand, Mr. Gill, learned counsel for the respondent has pointed out that adverse report had been recorded against the petitioner for the years 1989-90 and 1990-91.
The report for the year 1989-90 was conveyed to the petitioner vide letter dated June 21, 1991 (Annexure P4).
According to the learned counsel, the petitioner's performance having been found to `average' or 'below average' he was not good enough to continue on the post of Joint Manager.
Accordingly, the order of reversion at the expiry of the period of probation was in strict conformity with the Rules and terms of appointment.
He further submits that the delay in passing the order of extension was of no consequence as factually, the petitioner had to continue to remain on probation till the expiry of the period of the period prescribed under the Rules.
He further submits that a person appointed or promoted is basically on trial and the principles relating to communication of adverse report etc. as applicable in the case of promotion do not strictly apply to the case of confirmation.
The learned counsel has also tried to point out that the order delegation had been passed by the Board of Directors in their meeting held on April 15, 1976 and in view thereof, the impugned order was absolutely legal and valid.
5.
In order to resolve the controversy in the case, it is pertinent to note the provision of Rule 10 which prescribes the period of probation.
It reads as under :-  Rule 10 : Probation :  1) Persons appointed to any post in the service shall remain on probation for a period of two years, if appointed by direct recruitment and one year, if appointed by promotion :  Provided that :  a) any period after such appointment spent on deputation on a corresponding or a higher post shall count towards the period of probation; b) any period of work in equivalent or higher rank, prior to appointment to the service may, in the case of an appointment by transfer, at the discretion of the appointing authority, be allowed to count towards the period of probation fixed under this rule; and c) any period of officiating appointment shall be reckoned as period spent on probation.
2) If, in the opinion of the appointing authority the work or conduct of a person during the period of probation is not satisfactory, it may :  a) if such person is appointed by direct recruitment, dispense with his service; and b) If such person is appointed otherwise than by direct recruitment :- i) revert him to his former posts; or ii) deal with him in such other manner as the terms and conditions of the previous appointment permit.
3) On the completion of the period of probation of a person, the appointing authority may  a) if his work or conduct, has, in its opinion, been satisfactory, declare that he has completed his probation satisfactorily.
b) if his work or conduct has in its opinion been not satisfactory : i) disease with his service, if appointed by direct recruitment, revert him to his former post or deal with him in such other manner as the terms and conditions of previous appointment permit, if appointed by promotion; or ii) extend his period of probation and thereafter pass such order, as it could have passed on the expiry of the first period of probation : Provided that the period of probation shall not be extended by more than one year."
A perusal of the above Rule would show that a person appointed to any post in his service by promotion remains for period of probation of one year.
The rule further postulates that total period of probation shall not be extended by more than one year.
It follows that the Rule prescribes the maximum period of probation of two years.
Consequently even no order of extension of probation is passed at the expiry of one year, the person concerned continues to be on probation.
Even if a person has completed one year of probation and even if no order of extension has been passed, he continues to be on probation and cannot be deemed to have been automatically confirmed.
This being the situation, the basic challenge levelled by the learned counsel for the petitioner against the impugned order on the ground that the order of extension of probation was illegal or that it had not been passed by the competent authority or that it was belated is actually of no consequence.
The petitioner would have continued to remain on probation for a period of at least two years irrespective of the fact whether any order of extension was passed or not.
In any event, the petitioner could not be deemed to have been confirmed before the expiry of the period of two years.
If legally, the petitioner has to be assumed on probation during the period of two years, in my view it is of no consequence that an order of my extension was validly or invalidly passed.
Even if, it is assumed for the sake of argument that the order extending the period of probation was not valid, in my view, it was not of any consequence as the petitioner would have remained on probation till the completion of the maximum period of two years.
In such a situation, the validity or otherwise of the order of extension becomes wholly irrelevant.
Factually and legally, the petitioner was on probation.
During the period of probation, two adverse reports had come into existence.
The competent authority viz; the Board of Directors (a body higher than the Administrative Committee) had formed an opinion that the petitioner's work and conduct were unsatisfactory.
On that basis, the order of reversion was passed.
The grouse made by Mr. Malik that the order extending the period of probation had been passed by the Managing Directory is wholly irrelevant.
The case of the petitioner for continuance on the post of Joint Manager had been examined by the Board of Directors.
It had found the petitioner unsuitable for continuance on the post and ordered his reversion.
This order of reversion having been passed by the competent authority on consideration of the petitioner's performance during the period of probation did not violate any provisions of the Rules and as such cannot be assailed on the ground that the order of extension of probation was not valid.
6.
Mr. Malik submits that the petitioner had a right to submit representation against the adverse reports and the action in ordering his reversion even before the period for submission of representation had expired vitiates the impugned order.
Admittedly, the petitioner was on probation.
It is also beyond dispute that under the Rules, an employee can remain on probation for a maximum period of two years.
It is not unknown that soon after the expiry of the period of probation, the claim of automatic confirmation is raised.
In such a situation, it cannot be said that the action of the Board of Directors in proceeding to examine the petitioner's case even before he could submit a representation was either arbitrary or unfair.
Further an appointment on probation is in the nature of a 'trial'.
During or at the end of the period of probation, the employer has to consider as to whether or not the performance has been satisfactory.
This consideration has to be based on consideration of the relevant material i.e. service record etc.
If on consideration of the performance of the employee, the employer forms an opinion that the employee has not come up to the requisite standard and thereupon decides either to terminate the services or to revert him, the order would not be normally interfered with except when it is shown to be arbitrary or tainted with extraneous considerations etc.
It has not even been suggested that anybody was inimically disposed towards the petitioner.
Two reports on the petitioner's performance also do not show that it was impossible for any authority to have formed an opinion that the petitioner was not suitable for continuing on the post of Joint Manager.
In such a situation, I do not find any fault with the order of reversion passed by the Board of Directors.
7.
It is no doubt correct that an aggrieved employee has a right to submit representation against an adverse report.
The employer is under obligation to examine that representation and decide it within a reasonable time.
In case on examination of the representation, it is found that assessment of the performance as originally made is required to be reviewed, the appropriate authority can pass a suitable order in that behalf.
In the present case also, if the petitioner submits any representation or if the employer has already received any representation, the competent authority shall consider that representation and decide it.
In case any change is brought about in the assessment of the petitioner's performance, the competent authority shall be entitled to review the order of reversion.
However, till such time as any change actually takes place, I cannot find any infirmity in the order only on the ground that if had been passed even before the petitioner could have submitted a representation against adverse reports.
8.
Accordingly, I find no merit in this petition and it is dismissed.
However, in the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
9.
When this matter had come up for motion hearing before the Division Bench on August 8, 1991, the respondents had been directed to produce the original record of the petitioner.
This record was produced before the Division Bench on October 11, 1991.
It had been ordered to be kept in sealed cover.
The Registrar (Judicial) had sealed the record and had produced it before me during the course of hearing.
Since on examination of the case, it has not been considered necessary to examine the record, it has remained in the sealed cover and is ordered to be returned to Mr. Gill, learned counsel for the respondent.
Petition dismissed.