RS Mongia, J - These two Letters Patent Appeals Nos. 1808 and 1809 of 1989 arise out of a common judgment of learned Single Judge in C.W.P.
No. 4455 of 1981 and C.W.P.
No. 4454 of 1981, decided on 26th July, 1989, by which both the writ petitions were allowed and the orders of dismissal were set aside.
2.
Petitioner Mohinder Singh Cheema in C.W.P.
No. 4454 of 1981 was working in the Department of Food and Supplies Punjab Government as an Inspector, whereas the other writ-petitioner in C.W.P.
No. 4454 of 1981, namely Prem Kumar was working as a Sub Inspector in the Food and Supplies Department of the State of Punjab.
On the basis of preliminary enquiry separately conducted against them by Sarvshri AS Brar (Deputy Director, Fields) and SS Suri (Joint Director), the petitioners were chargesheeted for misappropriation etc. of foodgrains.
Shri SS Suri had submitted his report in this regard on 561079, 6.6.1979 and 16.6.1979, while Shri AS Brar had submitted his report on 16th June, 1979.
After following the procedure under the Punjab Punishment and Appeal Rules, the petitioners were dismissed from service by the appropriate Authority, which orders the writ petitioners had challenged by way of the abovesaid two writ petitions.
3.
The preliminary reports, which were the basis for charge-sheeting the delinquent officers (writ petitioners) were duly mentioned in the list of documents which were relied upon by the prosecution for proving the charges against the writ petitioners.
These preliminary enquiry reports have also been adverted to in the charge-sheets itself.
4.
The argument which prevailed with the learned Single Judge was that these preliminary enquiry reports which were mentioned in the list of reliance of documents by the prosecution and which reports were actually produced before the Enquiry Officer, the copies of the same had not been supplied to the delinquent officials, though the writ petitioners had been asking the officials for the supply of the copies of these reports as they needed them to defend themselves.
According to the learned Single Judge, the non-supply of these reports, had prejudiced the case of the delinquents in arranging their defence in the course of departmental enquiry.
Relying on various judgments of the Supreme Court in Madhya Pradesh v. Chintaman Sadashiva Waishampayan, A.I.R. 1961 SC 1623; The State of Punjab v. Bhagat Ram, 1975(1) S.L.R.
2 and Kashinath Dikshit v. Union of India and others, A.I.R. 1986 SC 2118 : 1986(2) SLR 620 (SC) the learned Single Judge held that there was violation of Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India as well as the rules of natural justice.
5.
Mr. SK Sayal, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the State, has not been able to persuade us to take a different view from the one which had been taken by the learned Single Judge.
We were taken through the enquiry report with the help of the learned counsel for the parties and we find that not only that the preliminary enquiry reports have been exhibited, but the Enquiry Officer even relied on these reports for coming to the conclusions against the writ-petitioners.
In these circumstances supply of these documents had obviously prejudiced the defence of the writ petitioners.
Since the enquiry was vitiated was being against the principles of natural justice as no proper opportunity was given to the delinquent officials to defend themselves, we find no fault with the order of the learned Single Judge.
6.
Mr. PS Patwalia, learned counsel for the respondents (writ petitioners) also pointed out from the enquiry report itself that the Enquiry Officer had during the course of the enquiry, collected some evidence by going to the spot, while the writ-petitioners were not present.
This is also obvious from the enquiry report.
Such a material could not have been used by the Enquiry Officer without putting the same to the writ petitioners.
7.
For the reasons recorded above, we find no merit in the appeals, which are dismissed.
There will be no order as to costs.
It will be open to the State Government (if it is so advised) to hold a fresh enquiry in accordance with law.
Appeals dismissed.