DP Wadhwa, J - Rule DB  2.
We have heard the arguments and proceed to decide the matter at this stage itself.
3.
In this petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution the petitioner seeks a direction to the first respondent to communicate to him the decision of the Staff Committee of the first respondent wherein a decision was taken by the Staff Committee on an appeal filed by the petitioner against an order of removal from service imposed by the third respondent, being the Director-General of the first respondent.
The petitioner seeks a further direction that the respondent should act upon the decision of the Staff Committee and put a restraint on the Staff Committee from reviewing its decision.
The impugned decision of the Staff Committee is dated 25th July, 1990 and was taken in its 34th meeting held at the office of the Textile Commissioner at Bombay.
4.
There are four respondents.
The first respondent is the Apparel Export Promotion Council, a company registered under Section 25 of the Companies Act.
It is not disputed that it is subject to writ jurisdiction of this Court, it being a Government company; second respondent is Union of India in the Ministry of Commerce, New Delhi the third respondent is a Director General of the first respondent; and the fourth respondent is the Staff Committee of the first respondent.
5.
The petitioner was Private Secretary to the Chairman of the first respondent.
He was pleaded under suspension in contemplation of certain disciplinary proceedings to be held against him.
The charge against him was that he had tried to molest a woman employee of the first respondent and tried to assault her physically.
Disciplinary proceedings were held against the petitioner and the inquiry officer held the charge against the petitioner to be proved.
By order dated 28 June, 1989, the Director General, the third respondent, imposed the penalty of removal from service on the petitioner.
The petitioner appealed to the Staff Council as per relevant Rules of the first respondent.
There is nothing on the record to tell us the composition of the Staff Committee but we were told that this comprises the Textile Commissioner, Director General of the first respondent, Additional Director General of the first respondent, Joint Secretary in the Department of Textiles and Chairman of the first respondent.
However, when we look at the minutes of certain meetings of the Staff Committee in these proceedings, we find that even Senior Vice-Chairman and Director (Personnel and Vigilance) and even Company Secretary of the first respondent have taken part in the proceedings of the Staff Committee.
There is, however, no challenge to the constitution of the Staff Committee and its deliberations, and also to the fact that the Staff Committee is the appellate authority to hear appeal against the imposition of penalty of removal on the petitioner by the Director General of the first respondent.
6.
The appeal of the petitioner was taken up in the 32nd meeting of the Staff Committee on 23 November, 1989 when the Staff Committee required certain documents.
The appeal was then taken up in the 33rd meeting on 12 March, 1990 where it was discussed at great length as recorded in the minutes.
The Chairman of the Staff Committee, however, desired to verify the corresponding record/rules being followed by the first respondent and some of the papers which were not readily available in the earlier meeting.
The matter was, therefore, deferred to the next meeting.
34th meeting of the Staff Committee was held on 25 July, 1990.
It was chaired by Mr. Arun Kumar, Textile Commissioner, and six other members participated.
The Director General was, however, not present in the meeting and as the minutes would show leave for absence was granted to the Vice-Chairman of the first respondent.
The Staff Committee resolved as under :  "Item No. 5  TO CONSIDER APPEAL OF MR. AK CHOPRA, EX-EMPLOYEE OF THE COUNCIL AGAINST HIS REMOVAL  The Committee considered the appeal of Mr. AK Chopra, ex-Private Secretary to the Chairman against Order No. AEPC/REG/AD/P/19 dated 28689 passed by the Director General of the Council.
The Committee had also carefully perused the Enquiry Report of the Enquiry Officer, order of removal and comments from the officer alongwith the other relevant material pertaining to this case.
Mr. Chopra had raised an important point that the DG was not vested with the powers to impose major penalty since he was holding the post of Secretary to the Chairman in the revised pay-scale having the maximum of not less than Rs. 4000 i.e. in the payment of Rs. 2200-4000 and thus he fell in Group in the cadres structure of AFPC.
The Committee also observed that in pursuance of Rule 3(a) of the AEPC Rules of Discipline, 1983, the `Disciplinary Authority, means the `authority empowered to impose penalty which applies to various grades as mentioned in the Annexure to these Rules'.
As per this annexure the Staff Committee has been designated as the Disciplinary Authority in respect of Group A employees for the purpose of major penalties and the order of removal from service is a major penalty vide Rule No. 9(b)(iii) of AEPC Rules of Discipline, 1983.
After detailed deliberations, the Committee came to the conclusion that Mr. Chopra was holding a Group A post being in the scale of Rs. 2200-4000 and that the powers to impose major penalty i.e. removal from service as defined in the relevant Rules of Discipline, 1983 of the Council, only vested with the Staff Committee and not with the Director General.
Accordingly, the Staff Committee decided to set aside the order dated 28689 passed by the DG dismissing Mr. Chopra from the services of the Council.
It also decided that Mr. Chopra be reinstated in the same post with immediate effect.
After setting aside the said order dated 28689 the Committee reconsidered the report as Disciplinary Authority and came to the conclusion that the evidence appearing on record is circumstantial and in all fairness the benefit of doubt should be given to Mr. Chopra and major penalty of removal from service in this case is considered rather harsh.
Accordingly, the Staff Committee decided as under :  (a) That the period of suspension i.e. with effect from the date of suspension to the date of removal from service i.e. 28689 shall remain as it was and that the subsistence allowance already paid during this period shall not be recovered from Mr. Chopra and the said period be treated as period "under suspension."
(b) That the intervening period i.e. 29689 till the date Mr. Chopra joins duty may be treated as "non-duty" and as such no pay and allowances shall be payable to him.
However, if Mr. Chopra so desires after joining duty he can get this intervening period converted into leave of any kind due and admissible to him at the time of termination or leave without pay.
(c) That he may be allowed to join duties immediately and posted in any office of the Council other than in Delhi.
The appropriate order on the above lines may be issued immediately by the Council to Mr.
Chopra."
7.
It is this decision of the Staff Committee which is subject-matter of controversy between the parties.
The respondents say that the minutes of the 34th meeting of the Staff Committee were not correctly recorded and the Staff Committee has power to review its decision.
On the first page of the minutes, the following note has been recorded on 7 February, 1991 and marked to ADG/D (Per) :-  "Reading item No. 5.
In this case DG after a due enquiry had dismissed this official on proving of a serious charge.
However, when this appeal came up before the SC, DG was on leave/transfer.
He was not present.
The discussion of the case with reference (to ?)
the record did not ( ?)
take place in absence of the DG who alone could justify his decision of dismissal.
Even the minutes do not mention if the merit of the case was considered.
Please write back to Chairman, Staff Committee, saying that this case, for abovestated reasons should be brought back before the SC again."
8.
35th meeting of the Staff Committee was held on 13th November, 1990.
It was presided over by the Textile Commissioner, Mr. Arun Kumar as Chairman and there were four other members.
After the recording of the presence of the members present in the Staff Committee the minutes record "at the outset, the Chairman pointed out that the minutes of the 34th meeting could not be issued since some substantive corrections were necessary.
The Committee briefly discussed the draft minutes and approved the same.
It was decided that the approved minutes may be circulated to the members for information."
Then only an item of gratuity scheme was mentioned as items deferred from the 34th meeting on which the discussion took place.
Again on the first page of these minutes of 35th meeting of the Staff Committee there are following hand-written notes :  "1.
Received today through our Bombay Office for perusal before issue.
Sd/-  DG" 7.2.91.
Then the DG on the same date marked to D(Per) but records :  "Please write to Tx C asking him if he has approved.
In that you write that since DG is a member of the Staff Committee but was not present in the meeting.
Please writ to Tx.
C. giving details how this was received and request him to confirm that minutes have been confirmed by him.
Sd/-  ADG".
7.2.91  9.
The minutes of the 34th and 35th meetings of the Staff Committee had been received in the office of the first respondent in New Delhi from its Bombay office addressed to Mrs. Neerja Rajkumar, Addl.
Director General by inter office memo dated 6th February, 1991 stating that at the minutes had been duly approved by the Chairman of the Staff Committee.
On 25th February, 1991 a letter is addressed to the Textile Commissioner, Mr. Arun Kumar by Mr. JN Chaubey, the then Director General of the first respondent wherein he draws the attention of the Chairman to an earlier letter dated 28 August 1990 addressed to him by the Company Secretary of the first respondent forwarding the draft minutes of the 34th meeting of the Staff Committee and other letter dated 13 December, 1990 addressed to the Textile Commissioner by the Additional Director General enclosing therewith draft minutes of 35th meeting of the Staff Committee.
Then this letter refers that the first respondent had since received draft minutes from its Bombay office which are signed by the Textile Commissioner.
A doubt is expressed that there is no indication of the approval of the minutes or the date of approval by the Textile Commissioner and further that no written communication had been received from the office of the Textile Commissioner about the same.
The Textile Commissioner replied on 11 March, 1991.
He expressed surprise as to how and when the minutes ad been signed by him there could be any doubt that these were approved by him or not.
These minutes of the Staff Committee had, therefore, been approved by the Textile Commissioner being the Chairman of the Staff Committee.
We may note that though minutes of 32nd, 33rd, 34th, 35th, 36th and 37th meetings and even 38th meeting of the Staff Committee have been brought on record as directed by us, the original draft minutes of 34th and 35th meetings have neither been shown to us nor filed.
Even on the letter dated 11 March, 1991 of Chairman, Staff Committee, there is a handwritten note for examining the item No. 5 which pertains to the petitioner.
It is again recorded at DG was not present in the meeting.
How the absence of DG in the meeting of the Staff Committee would result in any way invalidating the decision of the Staff Committee is not clear to us.
In the 32nd, 33rd, 34th and 35th meetings the Chairman is Mr. Arun Kumar, the Textile Commissioner, and we do not think we should at all refer to the minutes of those meetings where attempt seems to have been made to vary the decision taken in the 34th meeting.
In our opinion, the approach made by the Staff Committee in this respect is not correct.
The minutes of 34th meeting have been duly approved in 35th meeting of the Staff Committee.
As a matter of fact, there is nothing on record to show that till the minutes of a particular meeting are approved in a subsequent meeting those minutes could not be acted upon.
We have not been shown any such rule or regulation.
In fact the petitioner has pointed out that in various cases without awaiting confirmation of the minutes in the next meeting, the first respondent has taken action on the decision taken in Staff Committee meeting without the minutes having been approved or confirmed in any subsequent meeting.
As of today, the decision taken by the Staff Committee in its 34th meeting, therefore, stands.
Normally the minutes/decisions should have been signed by all the members of the Staff Committee present and deciding the matter.
But that does not seem to be practice being followed.
The minutes are taken to be approved or decision taken when the Chairman of the Staff Committee being the Textile Commissioner signifies his approval by signing the same.
10.
Then the question arose, if the Staff Committee could review a decision ?
Rule 21 of the Rules of Discipline, 1983, of the first respondent deals with review.
It says that notwithstanding anything contained in these Rules, the Staff Committee may at any time either on its own motion or otherwise call for the records of any enquiry and revise any order made under these rules from which an appeal is allowed but from which no appeal has been preferred or from which no appeal is allowed and may confirm, modify or set aside the order, etc. Of course, this rule uses the word "Committee" which as per clause (b) of Rule 3 of the Rules means "Executive Committee" as referred to in Para 9 of the Articles of Association of the first respondent or any "Sub-Committee" appointed by the Executive Committee.
It was submitted before us that Staff Committee is a Sub-Committee appointed by the Executive Committee.
A mere reading of Rule 21 would show that Staff Committee itself cannot review its own decision as the Rules stand.
In the present case, appeal lay against the order of removal and appeal was preferred.
There is no question of, therefore, review after appeal had been decided and decision taken by the Staff Committee in its 34th meeting.
No other point was pressed or argued.
11.
Accordingly, the writ petition is allowed.
Respondents 1 and 3 shall act upon the decision of the Staff Committee taken in its 34th meeting dated 25 July, 1990 deciding the appeal of the petitioner.
One month's time is granted for the purpose.
12.
Rule is made absolute.
There will be, however, no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.