Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - The petitioner, who was enlisted as Foot Constable in Ambala District on 3121949 was sent on deputation to C.I.D.
Railway Security Staff, Ambala in the capacity of Constable on 28.5.1963, where he continued to work till 27.7.1987.
The petitioner while working on deputation with C.I.D.
Railway Security Staff was promoted as Head Constable on 731974 against a vacancy.
Further he was promoted to the rank of Assistant Sub-Inspector on 7111979 against a vacancy and his promotion was on ad hoc basis.
The petitioner was also promoted to the rank of Sub Inspector C.I.D.
vide order dated 3121984, copy Annexure P-1, to the writ petition.
This promotion was purely temporary and fortuitous and in the promotion order it was stated that it would not confer on him any right to claim seniority and other benefits and he was liable to be reverted any time without any notice.
The petitioner in his parent department was promoted as upgraded constable against a vacancy in his parent District on 25.5.1979.
2.
The petitioner sought premature voluntary retirement and his request in this behalf was accepted by the Deputy Inspector General of Policy, C.I.D.
respondent No. 3 who repatriated him to his parent department vide wireless message dated 27.7.1987, copy of which is Annexure P-3 to the writ petition.
Accordingly the petitioner was permitted to retire from service w.e.f.
181987 by the Superintendent of Police, Ambala vide his order dated 181987 copy Annexure P-5 to the writ petition.
While calculating the pensionary benefits including D.C.R.G.
the average emoluments drawn by the petitioner during the last 10 months in the rank of Head Constable were taken into consideration by the respondents, and accordingly the pension was sanctioned by the Accountant General, Haryana, respondent No. 2 on the basis of calculation furnished vide Annexure P-6.
3.
The grievance of the petitioner is that he should have been granted pensionary benefits after taking into account the average emoluments of last 10 months of the post of Sub Inspector and not taking into account the pay which was drawn by him in the rank of Head Constable.
Aggrieved by this action, the petitioner filed this writ petition seeking quashing of order, Annexure P-6 whereby he was granted pension and other benefits on the notional pay of Head Constable.
He has further sought for issuance of a direction to the respondents to fix his pension on the pay drawn by him as Sub Inspector and to release the payment of arrears of pension and other pensionary benefits from 181987, the date of retirement till realisation with interest.
4.
It was contended for the petitioner that though leave encashment due to him was paid to him on the basis of pay drawn by him as Sub-Inspector, whereas the pension and D.C.R.G.
was calculated by taking into account the pay drawn by him in the rank of Head Constable.
The Haryana Government vide its circular letter dated 3111984, copy Annexure P-2 to the writ petition had taken a decision that the ad hoc service is to be treated as qualifying service.
In case of the petitioner, the service rendered by him as ad hoc in Inspector in the CID Department, though under the State Govt. from 3121984 to 3171987, was not counted.
Therefore, the action of the respondents granting him pension in the rank of Head Constable is against the policy decision as well as against rule 624 of Punjab Civil Services Rules Vol. II.
According to counsel the petitioner fulfilled the conditions as envisaged in Rule 3.12 of above said rules.
5.
The respondents, on the contrary, have taken a stand taken that the petitioner was on deputation with the CID Department upto 3171987, where he earned promotions to the rank of Asstt.
Sub Inspector and Sub Inspector on ad hoc basis against vacancies in that Department.
No promotion was given to him by his parent Department as he had not passed any of the Departmental Promotion Courses viz. Lower School Course, Intermediate School Course and Upper School Course.
As such he cannot claim the benefits nor any legal right of the petition has been violated.
6.
I have considered the submissions of the counsel for the parties and perused the paper-book.
7.
The counsel has drawn this Court's attention to para 2 of the reply to preliminary objection of the replication, which reads as under :-  "Para No. 2 of the preliminary objection is controverted both on facts and law.
The deponent was working as Constable in Ambala District and was transferred to CID Haryana where he remained till 30.7.1987 and retired the very next day i.. 3171987.
It is incorrect that the deponent was on deputation with the CID Haryana.
The organisation of police is given in Chapter I of the Punjab Police Rules, 1984, Vol.
I Rule 12 thereof states that the responsibility of the Command of the Police Force throughout will be of the Inspector General of Police, who is the Head of Police Department and is assisted by Deputy Inspector General and Assistant Inspector General as the Government may from time to time appoint.
Rule 13 further provides for the division of the General Police District into Training School (including any provincial Finger Print Bureau); Criminal Investigation Department and District Police Establishment.
The Railway as a General District divided into Central Investigation Agency and such number of Sub-Divisions as the Government may authorise from time to time.
Para 3 of Rule 1.4 places the Criminal Investigation Departmental i.e. C.I.D.
under the administration of Deputy Inspector General who also supervise the Finger Print Bureau.
Rule 15 further makes the Police Officers appointed or enrolled liable to police duty anywhere within the province.
The plain reading of the above Rule i.e. 12 to 15 makes it clear that the CID Haryana is part and parcel of the Haryana Police and, therefore, the petitioner was transferred intra-department from Ambala District to C.I.D., Haryana and not sent on deputation to C.I.D., Haryana as contended by the respondent No. 4.
In view of the submissions made above, the reliance by respondent No. 2 on Haryana Govt.
Memorandum dated 1811984, Annexure `R-1' is misplaced because it pertains to the Deputation of Haryana Government employees to the Govt. of India.
As submitted earlier, the deponent was not on deputation to Government of India or to any other State Government."
The bare perusal of the above part of replication shows that there is force in the submission of the counsel for the petitioner.
The Director General of Police is Head of the Police Department in the State of Haryana, which is bifurcated into General Police District and Railway Police District.
The General Police District is further bifurcated into a Training School, Criminal Investigation Department (CID) and District Police Establishment.
The Criminal Investigation Department (CID) is administered by Deputy Inspector General of Police.
The Director General of Police is the Head of Department of entire police force in the State of Haryana.
8.
Rule 15 of Punjab Police Rules, 1934, Vol.
I (for short the Rules) makes the position clear.
It states that "all police Officers appointed or enrolled in either of the two General Police Districts constitute one police force and are liable and legally empowered for police duty anywhere with in the province.
.......... ......... ........... ..........
The plea of the respondent that petitioner was on deputation from Ambala District Police to CID Haryana will constitute two Police Forces instead of one as stated in Rule 15 of the Rules.
9.
In view of the discussion above, I hold that the petitioner was not on deputation from Ambala District Police to CID Haryana, but it was a case of inter-department transfer.
10.
In the matter of grant of pension, rule 624 of Punjab Civil Services Rules, Vol. II, hereinafter referred to CSR as applicable to Haryana, provides that "the term `average emoluments' means the average calculated upon the last 10 months of the qualifying service."
Rule 6.19 C(1) of C.S.R.
envisages that in respect of Govt. employee retiring from service on or after 5th February, 1969, the term "emoluments" for these purpose shall mean, "pay" as defined in rule 244 of Punjab Civil Services Rules, Vol.
I Part-I.
Rule 244 aforesaid defines "pay" as under :-  "(a) pay means the amount drawn monthly by a Govt. employee as ... .. ..  (i) the pay, other than special pay or pay granted in view of his personal qualifications which has been sanctioned for a post held by him substantively or in an officiating capacity or to which he is entitled by reasons of his position in the cadre  ... ... ..." Rest of the rule is not relevant.
It is clear from the reading of these three Rules discussed above that average emoluments for the purpose of pension after 5th February, 1969, are to be calculated upon the monthly pay drawn and not upon notional pay.
The petitioner was drawing the pay of Sub Inspector and not the pay of Head Constable at the time of his retirement.
Therefore, it follows that the petitioner is entitled to pension upon the pay of Sub Inspector.
11.
In view of the above said discussion, the writ petition is allowed.
The orders, Annexures P-6, P-8 and P-9 granting pension to the petitioner on notional pay of Head Constable, are quashed.
The respondents are directed to prepare pension papers of the petitioner on the pay drawn as Sub Inspector in accordance with the Rules and release the arrears of pension within three months from the date of this judgment with 12% interest from the date of accrual of arrears till the date of actual payment.
The petitioner shall be entitled to costs which are quantified at Rs. 1000/-.
Petition allowed.