HS Brar, J - Admitted facts are that a copy the inquiry report before imposing the punishment of reversion on the petitioner was not supplied to him.
The learned counsel for the petitioner contends that non-furnishing of the copy of the inquiry report to the delinquent before imposing the major punishment of his reversion is in violation of rules of natural justice.
The learned counsel, in order to support the contention, relies upon Union of India and others v. Mohd.
Ramzan Khan, 1991(1) SLR 159 : 1991(1) SCT 111, wherein it has been observed as follows :-  "We may make it clear that wherever there has been an Inquiry Officer and he has furnished a report to the disciplinary authority at the conclusion of the inquiry holding the delinquent guilty of all or any of the charges with proposal or any particular punishment or not, the delinquent is entitled to a copy of such report and will also be entitled to make a representation against it, if he so desires, and no furnishing of the report would amount to violation of rules of natural justice and make the final order liable to challenge hereafter."
2.
The said authority squarely covers the facts and circumstances of the case in hand.
In Mohd.
Ramzan Khan's case (supra), the matter under consideration was whether the delinquent officer, with deletion of Article 311(2) by Forty-Second Amendment of the Constitution of India, by which the opportunity of showing cause against the proposed punishment was deleted, has right to the copy of the inquiry report in the disciplinary proceedings.
The principle of natural justice laid by Hon'ble Supreme Court has been invoked by the counsel for the petitioner.
The rule relied by the counsel for the respondent is par materia to Article 311 of the Constitution of India.
3.
It would be one of the principles of natural justice that the delinquent is furnished the copy of the inquiry report against which he may be able to give an effective reply to the punishing authority, as the findings are not of the punishing authority but by the Inquiry Officer, one has right to point out the errors in the findings arrived, which one could do only if the inquiry report is furnished.
Effective opportunity of hearing can be assumed if the delinquent is supplied with all the material against him, which is required to meet.
In the absence of furnishing of the inquiry report, petitioner is denied the effective hearing.
It would amount to violation of principle of natural justice.
4.
Nothing has been pointed out at the bar to take a contrary view.
5.
Keeping in view the observations made above and the fact that the rules of natural justice have been violated, the Writ Petition is allowed and the impugned order, Annexure P-3 is quashed.
However, the respondents will be at liberty to proceed afresh in accordance with law, if so advised.
Petition allowed.