VK Jhanji, J - The petitioner was appointed as Assistant District Attorney by the respondent on ad hoc basis for 89 days vide appointment letter dated 2591987 by Haryana Urban Development Authority (herein referred to as HUDA).
His ad hoc appointment was again renewed three times vide appointment letters dated 1511988, 2431988 and 2171988.
In all these letters, appointment was made for 89 days on purely ad hoc basis.
2.
Petitioner, by way of this writ petition is seeking a writ in the nature of mandamus for a direction to HUDA to regularise the services of the petitioner.
3.
Counsel for the petitioner has contended that in similar circumstances, Amarjeet Chaudhary, J allowed Civil Writ Petition No. 7937 of 1987 (Varinder Kumar Singla v. State of Haryana and others) and directed HUDA to appoint the petitioner therein as Additional District Attorney on purely ad hoc basis till regular appointments to the post of A.D.A.
are made.
He prays that the present writ petition be also allowed in the same terms.
4.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondent has submitted that the facts in Civil Writ Petition No. 7937 of 1987 were entirely different and the petitioner in the instant case is not entitled to be reinstated on ad hoc basis.
5.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I find no merit in the writ petition.
There is no dispute that the petitioner was an ad hoc and temporary employee and the terms and conditions of his employment were regulated by the contract of service as contained in the appointment letter which stipulated that the petitioner's services were liable to be terminated at any time without assigning any reason.
His appointment was only for 89 days.
The petitioner being ad hoc/temporary employee has no right to hold the post.
Moreover, as per the appointment letter, the respondent was entitled to put an end to his ad hoc appointment.
6.
In the written statement filed by the respondent, the action of non-renewing ad hoc appointment has been defended on the ground that the petitioner's work and conduct was not satisfactory and he was unsuitable for the service.
Even otherwise, writ, order or direction in the nature of mandamus can be issued only in case where there is a statutory duty imposed upon the authority and there is a failure of that authority to discharge the statutory obligation.
The petitioner has not been able to show that the respondent was under any legal obligation to regularise his ad hoc appointment.
In the absence of any legal right, the petitioner is not entitled to seek a writ of mandamus because existence of a right is the foundation of jurisdiction of a Court to issue a writ of mandamus.
The petitioner was employed on ad hoc basis and during his term of ad hoc employment, services rendered by him were not found upto the mark and accordingly the respondent put an end to ad hoc appointment by not extending his term any more.
The fact of Civil Writ Petition No. 7937 of 1987 have no bearing on the facts of the present case as in that case, the respondent could not show that the work and conduct of the petitioner therein was not satisfactory.
However, this is not the position in the instant case.
In my view, the petitioner is not entitled to the relief in terms of Civil Writ Petition No. 7937 of 1987 as contended by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
7.
Consequently, the writ petition is dismissed.
However, parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.