HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioners were recruited as Computers in the Economic and Statistical Organization of the State of Punjab during the years 1965 to 1968.
During the relevant period, the inter se seniority of the members of the service was to be determined separately for each of the sections shown in Appendix `A' to the Punjab Economic and Statistical Organisation (State Service Class III) Rules, 1963 (hereinafter referred to as 'the 1963 rules') and in the said appendix, Computers and Clerks were shown in the same section, i.e.
Section V It has also been averred that by virtue of Rule 10, ibid, Computers and Clerks formed one cadre, they had a common seniority and the posts were treated as inter-changeable by the department irrespective of the fact as to the post to which they had originally and actually been appointed.
It appears that despite these facts, the department promoted certain persons junior to the petitioners to the post of Assistant on the ground that they were working as Clerks.
This action of the respondents was challenged in Civil Writ Petition No. 4041 of 1979 which was disposed of on 20.12.1979 with the observation that as the amendment of the State Service Class III Rules of the department was under the consideration of the Government, a final decision of the promulgation of the amended rules was directed to be taken within four months from that date.
Subsequent to the aforesaid order of the Court, respondent No. 1 published the new rules on 24101980 called the Punjab Economic and Statistical Organisation (Class III Service) Rules, 1980, (hereinafter referred to as 'the 1980 Rules).
Rule 10 of the 1980 Rules prescribed that the inter se seniority of the members of the service in each cadre would be determined by the length of continuous service on a post in that cadre of the service.
The said Rules also provided for a separate cadre of Computers and Clerks.
Note 2 of Rule 10 of the 1980 Rules which is the subject matter of interpretation between the parties now, is reproduced below :  "Note-2 : The persons recruited as Clerks and Computers shall be allowed to exercise an option within a period of three months from the date of the commencement of these rules to have seniority either with Clerks or with Computers.
The option once exercised shall be final.
In case an employee fails to exercise the option within the said stipulated period, he shall be considered to have opted for the post against which he was originally recruited.
Separate seniority lists for Clerks and Computers shall be prepared keeping in view the options so exercised and the existing joint-seniority of Clerks and Computers.
In case of compose opting for the cadre of Clerks, their experience as Clerk shall be counted from the date of option and any experience gained by them as Clerk before exercising the said option shall also be counted.
In case of Clerks opting for the cadre of Computers, an experience gained by them as Clerks before exercising the said option shall also be counted for promotion to the post of Field Assistant Grade II.
It is clarified that after the option is exercised the experience shall be counted on the basis of option irrespective of the fact whether the employee is actually posted in the cadre of his option or not for want of vacancy in that cadre."
2.
As already stated, the petitioners who had been appointed as Computers, are aggrieved specifically with the portion of Note-2 which has been underlined and quoted above, on the ground that whereas in the case of Computers opting for the cadre of Clerks, their experience as Clerk was to be counted from the date of option and any experience gained by them as Clerk before exercising the said option was also to be counted and the period spent on the post of Computer was to be ignored, in the case of Clerks who opted for the post of Computers, the period of service as Clerks prior to the option was also to be taken into account for determining the inter se seniority in that cadre of the service.
The precise grievance of the petitioners is that as the Computers and Clerks constituted one cadre under the 1963 Rules, the 1980 Rules making distinction between the experience that was to be counted for inter se seniority, was invidious and hit by Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
In reply to the petition, the broad facts have been admitted.
It has been admitted that under the 1963 Rules, Computers and Clerks constituted one cadre and they were liable to be transferred from one post to the other on the principle of inter-changeability, either on request or on administrative grounds upto October, 1974, when it was decided in the interest of work not to make such transfers.
By way of justification it has been stated in para 15 of the reply to writ petition that Computers seldom performed the whole gamut of duties of clerical nature namely diarising, record keeping, typing etc, and as such, on practical considerations, they needed to be segregated.
3.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that the present writ petition deserves to succeed.
It is the admitted case of the parties that under the 1963 Rules, Clerks and Computers constituted one cadre and one seniority, and were subject to transfer from one position to another on the principle of inter-changeability on administrative grounds.
It is, therefore, apparent that transfers from a post of Clerk to that of Computer or vice-versa were in the hands of the Department which ordered such transfers upto the year 1974.
In this view of the matter, to deny the Computers the benefit of their service as Computers prior to October, 1980 for determination of their seniority, would in my opinion be hit by Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
4.
In view of what has been stated above, the present writ petition is allowed and Note 2 of Rule 10 of the 1980 Rules reading to the contrary, is to that extent struck down as being hit by Article 14 of the Constitution, and a direction is issued to the respondents that the entire experience gained by the petitioners as Computers or Clerks before exercising their option under the 1980 Rules shall also be counted for the purpose of further promotion.
A direction is also issued to the I respondents to give all consequential benefits to the petitioners within a period of six months from today.
However, there shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.