MR Agnihotri, J (Oral) - The petitioner Dinesh Kumar was enrolled as Constable in the Police Service of Haryana on 4th October, 1989.
A year later, on 18th December, 1990, while he was attending the Haryana Police Meet at Madhuban, where he participated in the Hockey team, a complaint was filed against him that he was found absent from the Stadium Guard duty from 5 P.M. to 8 P.M. and was found whistling and misbehaving with the passer by while the games were on.
Accordingly, on the very next day on 19th December, 1990, the Commandant, 5th Battalion, Haryana Armed Police, Madhuban, discharged him from service under Rule 1221 of the Punjab Police Rules, as applicable to Haryana, as he was found unlikely to prove an efficient police officer.
The petitioner challenged this order by way of revision petition but the same was rejected by the Deputy Inspector General, Haryana Armed Police, Madhuban, on 29th January, 1991.
In the present writ petition, the impugned order is challenged by the impugned petitioner on the ground that it is arbitrary and based on no material whatsoever against him.
The allegation levelled against the petitioner has been denied by him.
2.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, we find that no doubt under Rule 1221 of the Punjab Police Rules, "a Constable who is found unlikely to prove an efficient police officer may be discharged by the Superintendent, at any time within three years of enrolment", but the order of discharge cannot be based on some minor or trivial stray incident, as the language of the rule is clearly vindicative of the intention of the rule makers; that the Constable has to be found unlikely to prove an efficient police officer, which can only be on the basis of opinion formed by the authorities by consistent lapses or misbehavior on the part of the Constable which should be incompatible with his efficiency.
These tests are completely missing in the present case and we are satisfied that the impugned order is wholly arbitrary inasmuch as mere absence from duty for a few hours, although even that allegation is disputed by the petitioner, is not sufficient to be the basis of the order of discharge.
Despite all this, in order to ensure discipline in the service and with view to impress upon the Constable the necessity and the importance of the public duty assigned to him, we adjourned this case by directing the petitioner to appear before the Commandant, 5th Battalion, H.A.P., Madhuban as he wanted to appologise for the lapse attributed to him.
In response to that, petitioner appeared before the deputy Inspector General of Police, Rohtak Range, Rohtak, who directed him to meet the Commandant, 5th Battalion, H.A.P.
Madhuban.
Accordingly, on 4th December, 1991, the petitioner appeared before the Commandant (Superintendent of Police) and tendered an unconditional apology in writing assuring good performance in future.
An affidavit to that effect has been filed in the Court.
3.
Consequently, we find that the impugned order is wholly arbitrary as the provisions of Rule 1221, of the Punjab Police Rules could not be pressed into service for discharging the petitioner from service.
Resultantly, we quash the impugned order dated 19th December, 1990, by which the petitioner was discharged from service and order his reinstatement forthwith.
As a consequence thereof, he shall be entitled to all the arrears of salary and allowances etc., alongwith continuance in service, to which he would have been entitled under the Rules, had the impugned order discharging him from service not been passed.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.