Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner herein was working as Assistant Grade III(D) with the Food Corporation of India.
On December 13, 1983 he sent a telegram tendering his resignation "with immediate effect".
The position was reiterated by him in a letter which does not bear any date.
A copy of this letter has been produced as Annexure P-3 with the writ petition.
Vide letter dated February 12, 1985 the Corporation advised him to submit his resignation "in proper way and also deposit 3 months salary plus Rs. 79775, of which break up has already been intimated to him ....." On July 23, 1985 the petitioner submitted a representation to the District Manager, Food Corporation of India, Karnal informing him to treat the resignation as withdrawn and to permit him to join duty.
Vide letter dated January 8, 1986, the petitioner was informed that his resignation has been accepted w.e.f.
December 13, 1983.
A copy of the original order dated September 17, 1985 sent by the Senior Regional Manager granting approval to the resignation appears to have been forwarded along with this order.
Simultaneously the petitioner was called upon to deposit an amount of Rs. 3,6 (???)
which was alleged to be due from him.
Aggrieved by the acceptance of his resignation, the petitioner submitted various presentations, which were rejected vide order dated April 25, 1988.
The representations having been rejected, the petitioner has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
2.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it is pointed out that the petitioner proceeded on leave from May 9, 1983 to August 27, 1983.
The leave having not been sanctioned, he was required to join duty through telegrams dated July 19, 1983 and August 28, 1983.
The petitioner reported for duty only on August 29,1983 and submitted his resignation with effect from October 17, 1983.
He remained absent from duty after October 17, 1983 till on December 6, 1983.
He reported for duty on December 7, 1983 and applied for leave, though none was due to him.
Since the petitioner had remained absent from duty, he was called upon to explain his position.
Instead of submitting his explanation, the petitioner submitted his resignation w.e.f.
December 13, 1983.
It is further pointed out that an amount of Rs. 79775 is due from him on account of CPF advance, Festival advance etc.
Accordingly, he was required to deposit the amount before the acceptance of his resignation.
It is further averred that the petitioner was liable to deposit 3 months salary in lieu of notice period as required under the Food Corporation of India Staff Regulations.
Since the petitioner was absent from duty after December 13, 1983, it is averred that the resignation of the petitioner was accepted on September 16, 1985 with effect from that date, viz. December 13, 1983.
3.
I have heard Mr. Ashok Gupta, learned Counsel for the petitioner and Mr. Hemant Kumar for the respondents.
Mr. Ashok Gupta submits that the request for resignation made by the petitioner vide telegram dated December 13, 1983 having been withdrawn vide letter dated July 23, 1985, the action of the respondents in accepting his request vide order dated September 16, 1985 which was communicated to the petitioner on January 8, 1986, is wholly invalid.
On behalf of the respondents, the letter for withdrawal thereof was sent only to the District Manager, who was not the appointing authority.
No request for withdrawal of resignation had been sent to the appointing authority, viz. the Senior Regional Manager, who is the competent authority, to accept the resignation and to accept the request for withdrawal thereof.
Thus the contention raised by the petitioner is without any merit and deserves to be rejected.
4.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I find that the petitioner had withdrawn his request for being allowed to resign vide letter dated July 23, 1985.
This request had reached the respondents prior to the acceptance of his resignation.
It has not been averred that the Senior Regional Manager did not receive the letter dated July 23, 1985 or that the District Manager, to whom it was actually addressed, had not even forwarded it to the Senior Regional Manager.
Accordingly, the acceptance of the petitioner's resignation vide orders dated September 16, 1985 with effect from December 13, 1983 after the resignation had been withdrawn cannot be sustained.
Accordingly, the order dated September 16, 1985 (Annexure P-8) and the communication thereof vide letter dated January 8, 1986 (Annexure P-6) as also the order rejecting the petitioner's representation vide letter dated April 25, 1988 (Annexure P-13) have to be set aside.
I order accordingly.
5.
The petitioner had admittedly remained absent from duty after May 9, 1983 when he purported to proceed on leave which was never sanctioned.
He had joined duty for a day or two in between, but had actually not worked on the post after tendering his resignation on December 13, 1983.
Mr. Ashok Gupta submits that the acceptance of the resignation having been quashed, the petitioner is entitled to all arrears of salary etc. Mr. Hemant Gupta points out that the petitioner had not disclosed anything in the writ petition to show that he had remained unemployed ever since he tendered his resignation.
He further submits that even prior to the submission of the resignation, the petitioner had either sought leave or remained absent from duty.
In these circumstances, it appears reasonable to assume that the petitioner was gainfully employed.
In any event, the petitioner having not done any work, he is not entitled to any salary for the period from December 13, 1983 till today.
After tendering of resignation, its withdrawal after a couple of years may entitle the petitioner to get back the job, but if persons like him are permitted to earn arrears of salary without doing the work, it would totally, violate the principle of 'No work No Pay'.
Keeping in view the totality of circumstances of the case, I am not inclined to award any arrears of salary to the petitioner.
The tax payer cannot be burdened with the wages of a person, who chose to resign and thereafter decided to withdraw the resignation after a couple of years.
The petitioner is succeeding in the acceptance of the writ petition on a technical ground.
There is no equity in his favour which may entitle him to earn the arrears of pay in question.
However, the respondents may treat the petitioner in continuous service and the period of his absence may be treated as leave of the kind due.
6.
Accordingly the writ petition is allowed to the extent, indicated above.
In the circumstances of the case, I leave the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.