JL Gupta, J - The petitioner who was recruited as a Sepoy in the Indian Army on November 22, 1962 was invalided out of service on April 12, 1967.
His discharge from the Army was necessitated by the fact that during the year 1965, the petitioner had suffered Cerebral Thrombosis with Hemiplegia.
After his discharge from the service, the petitioner represented for the grant of disability pension.
His representations and appeals having been rejected on the ground that disability was neither attributable to nor aggravated by military service, the petitioner has approached this Court through the present petition.
2.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents in which it has been inter alia averred that the petition has been filed after 22 years of retirement and the same reserves to be dismissed on the ground of delay alone.
It has been further pointed out that the petitioner's claim for pension was declined in the year 1967 and the communication was sent to him vide letter May 18, 1967.
His appeal is also stated to have been rejected many years back.
On these premises, it is claimed that the petitioner is not entitled to the grant of disability pension.
3.
I have heard Mr. SB Sehgal, learned counsel for the petitioner.
4.
After hearing the learned counsel for the petitioner and perusing the record, I find that the disability pension is admissible to a person who is invalided out of service on his having suffered a disability of 20% or more and the disability is found to be attributable to or aggravated by the service conditions.
The attributability of the disability to the service has to be determined in accordance with the regulations which inter alia provide that "a disease which has led to an individual's discharge or death will ordinarily be deemed to have arisen in service if no note of it was made at the time of the individual's acceptance for military service, However, if medical opinion holds for reasons to be stated, that the disease could not have been detected on medical examination prior to acceptance for service the disease will not be deemed to have arisen during service."
In view of the above provisions a disease is normally deemed to be attributable to army service if no note of it was made at the time of enrolment of the individual in the Army.
Apparently none was made in the present case.
It is also not shown that the disease was such that could not have been noticed at the time of the petitioner's enrolment.
Accordingly under the rules and regulations, the petitioner was entitled to the grant of disability pension.
The action of the authority in rejecting his claim cannot be sustained.
5.
So far as the objection regarding delay is concerned, it may be mentioned that pension is no longer a bounty or a concession.
It is a statutory right conferred on an employee.
The failure of the respondent to grant this benefit to the petitioner only led to their keeping the money in the Government treasury.
The petitioner who was legitimately entitled to receive that money was illegally deprived of it.
However, no third party rights have accrued.
The grant of relief to the petitioner to receive pension which should have been actually disbursed to him in the year 1967 would not prejudice the rights of any body.
Even otherwise pension accrues every month and as such even today no triable issue of limitation can be said to have arisen.
Taking the totality of the circumstances into consideration as also the fact that the petitioner had suffered from a disability which may have well prevented him from pursuing the remedy, I am not inclined to dismiss the writ petition on the ground of delay alone.
6.
Accordingly this writ petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to pay the disability pension to the petitioner with effect from April 13, 1967 .
The arrears shall be calculated and disbursed to the petitioner within four months from the receipt of copy of this order.
Keeping in view the fact that the petition was filed along after his discharge from the army, the petition will not be entitled to the grant of any interest on the arrears of pension.
Under the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.