Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner is aggrieved by the order dated October 8, 1990 by which he has been reverted from the post of Horticulture Supervisor to that of Head Mali.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner was recruited as Beldar on June 1, 1981.
On August 1, 1982, he was sent for training to Punjab Agricultural University.
He completed this training on June 30, 1983 and, thereafter, he was posted as Head Mali with effect from July 1, 1983.
After he had worked for almost seven years in this capacity, he was promoted on ad hoc basis as Horticulture Supervisor vide order dated May 9, 1990.
This promotion was only for 89 days and could have been terminated on August 5, 1990.
Apprehending this, the Executive Engineer recommended the case of the petitioner for continuance on the post of Horticulture Supervisor.
Presumbaly as sequel to this recommendation, the petitioner was promoted as Supervisor vide order dated August 20, 1990.
While he was working as such, the Executive Engineer repeated his recommendation.
Dr. JS Sarkaria, Honorary Curator to the National Cactus, Succulent Botanical Gardens and Research Centre, Panchkula made a recommendation to the Chief Administrator, Haryana Urban Development Authority in inter alia the following terms :-  "I have already trained on Head Mali, Sushil Kumar and three other workers on whom I can depend for the maintenance of these difficult and precious plants.
Personnel trained in Cactus culture are rare and they are always in great demand by the nurseries all over India.
To keep these highly trained personnel here, it is very essential that they are absorbed as permanent personnel sooner or later.
As a first step, it was decided to promote Shri Sushil Kumar on ad hoc basis as Horticulture Supervisor and orders for his promotion were duly passed.
I understand he is the seniormost Head Mali working on daily basis since 1783 in this Horticulture Division.
So, in my opinion, it is just a small mercy bestowed on him for his outstanding devotion to duty, work and honesty.
I hope you will kindly look into his case and see that this promotion is continued further.
The cases of the other Malis can be taken up as and when the rules permit.
But it should be as early as possible so that we do not lose these trained personnel."
3.
In spite of the (sic) Administrator passed the order dated September 11, 1990 which appears to have been issued on October 8, 1990 (annexure P7) by which the petitioner was ordered to be reverted to the post of Head Mali.
Aggrieved by this order, the petitioner has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
4.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, the factual position has not been disputed.
It has been inter alia averred that the petitioner was appointed on ad hoc basis for 89 days and that "Chief Administrator, HUDA is competent to revert any ad hoc employee."
The written statement is singularly silent about the reason for the reversion of the petitioner.
5.
I have heard Mr. I.D.
Singla, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. A Mohunta, learned counsel for the respondents.
6.
It has been urged on behalf of the petitioner that the order of reversion has been passed in spite of the fact that his work and conduct were found to be satisfactory and his case has been duly recommended by all concerned including the Executive Engineer and the Curator.
On this premises, Mr. Singla has contended that the order is absolutely arbitrary and cannot be sustained.
On the other hand, Mr. A Mohunta has submitted that the petitioner had no right to the post and, therefore, the order of reversion is legal and valid.
7.
It is no doubt correct that the petitioner had been promoted purely on ad hoc basis.
It is also correct that in normal course of events, an ad hoc employed has no right to continue on the said post.
An employer has an almost absolute right to revert a person who has been promoted ad hoc basis at the expiry of the term of appointment or otherwise if the work and conduct are not found upto the mark.
However, in the present case, none of these circumstances exists.
The work and conduct of the petitioner have been described in highly complimentary terms by the person who is immediately incharge of the Horticulture Division.
The Executive Engineer has found the petitioner's performance to be good.
Dr. JS Sarkaria has recommended his case in the terms which have been noticed above.
In spite of that the order of reversion has been passed even though no body with a better right to the post was available.
It is also not the case of the respondents that some body had been selected and appointed in his place.
It has also not been suggested that the post of Horticulture Supervisor was not required or that the authorities did not want to fill it up.
In such a situation, it is apparent that the order has been passed absolutely arbitrarily and without any just and reasonable cause.
Inevitably, the order has to be quashed as being arbitrary and unfair.
8.
Accordingly, the impugned order of reversion Annexure P.7 is quashed.
It is declared that the petitioner shall be deemed to have continued on the post of Horticulture Supervisor and shall be entitled to all the consequently reliefs in the nature of arrears of salary etc.
The needful shall be done within two months from the date of receipt of the copy of this order.
In the event of the failure of the authorities to comply with this order, the petitioner shall be entitled to interest at the rate of 12% P.A.
on the arrears of salary with effect from the date of reversion till the date of actual payment.
In the circumstances of the case, I leave the parties to bear their own costs.
Order accordingly.