Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - In this writ petition, the petitioner has prayed for issuance of writ in the nature of certiorari quashing the order dated 1311981, copy Annexure P-1 to the writ petition, whereby respondent No. 4 was promoted to the post of Assistant Milk Commissioner on the basis of reservation.
The petitioner has also prayed for issuance of a direction to the respondents to promote him to the post of Assistant Milk Commissioner with effect from the date respondent No. 4 has been promoted.
2.
The case of the petitioner is that the post of Assistant Milk Commissioner being a post of single cadre, no reservation could be made and the respondent department was duty-bound to consider the incumbents of the feeder cadre per their seniority, eligibility and suitability, whereas the stand of the respondent-department is that the promotion of respondent No. 4 being against the second vacancy, it was required to be reserved by way of carry-forward formula as the first point which became available on 1421975, was given to general category incumbent.
The respondents have also raised the objection that the petitioner has filed the writ petition at a belated stage.
3.
I have considered these arguments of the learned Counsel for the parties and perused the paper-book.
4.
Undisputed facts of the case are that the cadre of Assistant Milk Commissioner is a single cadre post and the channel of promotion to the said post is from the post of Dairy Extension Officer, which is governed by the Punjab Dairy (State Service Class-I) Rules, 1981 published on 1321981.
The Post of Assistant Milk Commissioner was filled up for the first time on 1421975 by promotion from general category candidate and the vacancy against which respondent No. 4 was promoted has been filled up from amongst the candidates belonging to Scheduled Castes on 1311981 on its availability for the second time by treating the same as reserve.
5.
The facts of the case are undisputed.
The only question for consideration is whether in a single cadre post, reservation of the Scheduled Castes category is admissible or not.
Before answering the question, it may be added that the plea of delay and laches raised by the Counsel for the respondents is not available to them as the writ petition was admitted on 16.4.1985 after hearing the Counsel for the respondents.
Another plea raised by the respondent Department is that the post having fallen vacant on promulgation of the statutory rules will not be governed by the rules.
Whatever the position may be, the fact remains that in a single cadre post, there can be no reservation.
In case the vacancy occurred at the time when there were no rules, it will be governed by the executive instructions and if it occurs after promulgation of the rules, it will be governed by the said rules, but there can be no deviation from the legal proposition that a single post cannot be reserved.
This case is otherwise covered by the ratio of judgment of Apex Court in Dr. Chakradhar Paswan v. State of Bihar and others, 1988(2) S.L.R.
119, the relevant portion whereof reads as under :-  "It is quite clear after the decision in Devadasan's case that no reservation could be made under Article 16(4) so as to create a monopoly.
Otherwise, it would render the guarantee of equal opportunity contained in Articles 16(1) and 16(2) wholly meaningless and illusory.
These principles unmistakably lead us to the conclusion that if there is only one post in the cadre, there can be no reservation with reference to that post either for recruitment at the initial stage or for filling up a future vacancy in respect of that post.
A reservation which would come under Article 16(4) pre-supposes the availability of at least more than one posts in that cadre."
Since the case of the petitioner is squarely covered by the ratio of Dr. Chakradhar Paswan (supra), this writ petition is to be allowed.
Consequently, I allow the writ petition and quash the impugned order dated 1311981, Annexure P-1.
The respondents are directed to consider the case of the petitioner for promotion to the post of Assistant Milk Commissioner per eligibility and suitability treating the vacancy, which became available on 1311981, as non-reserved, within two months.
The parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.