Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner was working as Superintendent Grade-I in the Punjab P.W.D.
(Public Health Branch).
Vide orders dated April 4, 1979, he was sent on deputation as Assistant Secretary to the Punjab Water Supply and Sewerage Board (hereinafter referred to as 'the Board').
A copy of the order deputing the petitioner to the Board has been produced as Annexure 'A' with the replication.
The terms of deputation are given in detail in the order.
While the petitioner was working as Assistant Secretary, he attained the age of superannuation and consequently retired on May 31, 1981.
The petitioner claims that his pension and other retirement benefits have to be detetemined on the basis of the salary drawn by him at the time of retirement as Assistant Secretary.
On the other hand, it is claimed on behalf of the respondents that the petitioner was holding the post of Superintendent Grade-I in the department and that his pension and other retirement benefits have been rightly determined with reference to his salary as Superintendent Grade-I  2.
Mr. Ashok Sharma, learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that the petitioner's salary as Assistant Secretary had been determined by an order of the Chief Engineer passed on February 19, 1981.
A copy of this order has been produced as Annexure P.1.
He contends that the petitioner's pay was fixed at Rs. 1580/- on January 1, 1981 and the pension etc. have to be determined on that basis.
He further contends that the petitioner had in fact been promoted from the post of Superintendent Grade-I to that of Assistant Secretary and it is only the pay drawn by the petitioner in the promoted rank which is to be taken into account for the purpose of determining the retirement benefits.
It has also been pointed out that the allocations to the Board were finally decided on September 30, 1987 and the entire service rendered with the Board prior to the date shall count as service with the Government.
3.
The first question that arises for consideration is as to whether or not the petitioner had been promoted by order dated April 4, 1979.
A perusal of the order shows that the Government had granted sanction "to the deputation of Sardar Bidhi Singh, Superintendent, office of the Chief Engineer, Punjab, P.W.D.
(Public Health Branch) to work as Assistant Secretary with the Punjab Water Supply and Sewerage Board in the scale of Rs. 900-1150 on ..." It was further mentioned that "the officer will be on deputation for a period of one year from the date he takes over charge or .... whichever is earlier."
From a perusal of the order, it is apparent that the petitioner had not been promoted to the post of Assistant Secretary but had been merely sent on deputation.
It is no doubt correct that while on deputation the petitioner worked as Assistant Secretary in the scale of Rs. 900-1500.
However, there is no order showing that the petitioner had been actually promoted in the Department of the Government to the post of Assistant Secretary.
An order passed by the Chief Engineer (Public Health Branch) fixing the pay of the petitioner while the petitioner was on deputation to the Board as Secretary in the scale Rs. 1200-50-1400/60-1700 cannot be interpreted as an order granting promotion to the petitioner.
The actual order by which the petitioner was sent on deputation does not even remotely suggest that the respondents wanted to promote the petitioner.
As such, the claim made on behalf of the petitioner that he had been promoted vide order dated April 4, 1979 cannot be sustained.
4.
The next question that arises for consideration is as to how the petitioner's pension has to be determined.
Relying on the provisions of Rules 6.19-C and 624 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume-II, Mr. Ashok Sharma has contended that the pension of the petitioner has to be determined on the basis of the pay actually drawn by the petitioner.
The relevant provision contained in Rule 619 may be extracted as under :  "Rule 619-C : The term 'emoluments' when used for this purpose shall mean 'pay' as defined in Rule 2.44 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume I, Part 1, including dearness pay as determined by the orders of the Government issued from time to time, which the employee was receiving immediately before his retirement, or the date of his death."
"Note 3 :- There shall be no change in the existing principle of reckoning those emoluments for pension which are paid by Government.
In other words, the entire amount drawn as emoluments by a Government employee while on foreign service shall not count for pension and gratuity.
In such a case, the pay which the Government employee would have drawn under the Government had he not been sent on foreign service, shall alone be taken into account."
(emphasis supplied)  5.
Note 3, as extracted above, is useful in understanding the provision contained in Rule 619.
According to note "the entire amount drawn as emoluments by a Government employee while on foreign service shall not count for pension and gratuity.
In such a case, the pay which the Government employee would have drawn under the Government had he not been sent on foreign service, shall alone be taken into account."
The note which is a part of the rule specifically provides that it is only the emoluments which the Government employee would have drawn in case he had not been sent on foreign service that have to be taken into account.
Consequently even though the pension etc. has to be determined on the basis of the emoluments drawn by an employee immediately before his retirement, the provision in Note 3 completely excludes from consideration the emoluments drawn by an employee while on foreign service or on deputation.
The provisions contained in Rule 624 in the opinion have no relevance to the controversy in this case.
It is relevant to mention here that at my request Mr. Anand Swaroop had assisted the Court.
I am grateful to him for the assistance rendered.
Besides the provisions of Rule 619, he pointed out that Rule 1021, clause (9) of the Punjab Civil Services, Volume I, Part 1 is also relevant.
The said clause provides as under :-  "(9) The deputation allowance will be treated as 'Pay' for purposes of grant of dearness allowance, leave salary and for purpose of calculation of travelling and daily allowances.
The deputation allowance will not, however, count as emoluments for purposes of pension, unless it is mutually agreed upon between the two Governments, that it shall so count as emoluments for purposes of pension in an individual case and the sharing of additional pensionary liability is also settled beforehand."
6.
A perusal of the above provision shows that even the deputation allowance if drawn by an employee does not count as emoluments for purpose of pension unless it is mutually agreed upon that it shall so count and the sharing of additional pensionary liability is settled beforehand.
Nothing has been produced in record to show that there was any agreement between the Board and the Government providing for the sharing of additional liability towards pension.
7.
Mr. Ashok Sharma has further contended that the allocations to the service of the Board had been finalised only on September 13, 1987.
Till then all employees who had been deputed to serve the Board on different posts should be actually deemed to have been serving the Government and the pay drawn by them should be treated as emoluments within the meaning of the term in Rule 619-C. Indisputably, the Board was created under an Act of Legislature viz, the Punjab Water Supply & Sewerage Board Act, 1976.
It is a local authority independent of the Government.
It may have taken over a part of the work which was originally being executed by a department of the Government.
It is still not a department of the Government.
The employees of the Government could not be transferred to the Board.
They could be only sent on deputation.
The petitioner was not transferred from the department of the Government to the Board.
He was actually sent on deputation.
Further, some time may have been taken in the finalisation of the allocations to the Board.
The petitioner remained on deputation from a department of the Government to the Board.
The period of service rendered by the petitioner on a particular post in the Board cannot he treated as service on the higher post in the Government.
There is no room for induction of this fiction in view of the specific orders by which the petitioner was sent on deputation.
8.
Mr. Sharma pointed out that in the agenda for the meeting of the Board fixed for May 31, 1983, a specific Item No. 61.4 had been mentioned.
This item relates to the protection of pensionary rights of Public Health employees on deputation to the Board.
The minutes of the meeting have been placed on record with the writ petition.
The decision taken by the Board reads as under :-  "Item 61.4  Protection of pensionary rights of Public Health employees on deputation to the Punjab Water Supply & Sewerage Board :  The matter was discussed in detail.
The board agreed that the case of Public Health employees on deputation to the Board is quite different than the other employees, because no deputation allowance is being paid to them.
As the final allocation of staff from Public Health Deptt.
is still to be initiated and finalised it could be inferred that the staff has not yet been finally split and very large number of vacancies for all categories of employees in both sides are in practice filled up as if they exist and occur in the Public Health Department.
In view of the above, the Board approved the matter placed before it in the agenda for protection of pensionary rights of Pubic Health employees on deputation to the Punjab W/S & Sew.
Board with the Local Government Department and the PWD Department should sort out the matter at the Government level in a meeting to be convened, especially for this purpose immediately, so that the employees on deputation are not put to any disadvantage/loss after their retirement from their service.
9.
Relying on the above decision of the Board, the learned counsel has contended that the petitioner is entitled to the relief claimed by him.
I am unable to sustain this plea.
Firstly, this decision was taken almost two years after the retirement of the petitioner.
Secondly, it is not shown to have been accepted or adopted by the Government.
A unilateral decision of the Board cannot ipso facto bind the Government.
Thirdly, even this decision only postulates that the Board should sort out the matter at the Government level in a meeting to be convened for this purpose.
As such, no final and binding decision can be said to have arrived at.
10.
As a last resort, Mr. Sharma even referred to letter dated January 5, 1984 from the Managing Director of the Board to the Government in which it was inter alia mentioned that the promotions are ordered in the parent department and the employees do not get any out of turn promotion in the Board.
Relying on this, it was contended that the petitioner should be deemed to have been promoted in the Department.
I am afraid the contention is based on a total misreading of the contents of the letter.
One of the points, which the Managing Director was seeking to clarify was as to whether or not the officers/officials on deputation remain in the same ranks or get promotions in the Board.
It was in this context that the clarification was given by the Managing Director.
It did not give any right to the employees to claim that they had been actually granted promotion by the Department from which they had been sent on deputation.
11.
Accordingly, the writ petition is wholly lacking in merit.
It is, thus, dismissed.
In the circumstances of the case, I leave the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.