Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner herein is the father of one Jaswinder Singh, who was enrolled as Sapper in the Engineering Branch of the Indian Army in January, 1980.
On November 10, 1984, the petitioner received a telegram from the Commanding Officer informing him of the death of his son.
By a letter of the same date, a copy of which is at Annexure P.1 with the writ petition, the petitioner was informed that his son "was suffering from stomach pain and was admitted in Military Hospital, Allahabad on October 15, 1984.
He remained under treatment in Military Hospital, Allahabad upto November 1, 1984.
His disease was diagnosed as Messenric Lympho Circoma (Cancer).
On 02 November, 84 when he was being taken to Pune for specialist treatment, he expired at Military Hospital, Jabalpur en route to Pune.
His death is purely a natural death which is totally unfortunate and an act of God.
Sapper Jaswinder Singh was a fine soldier who displayed a keen sense of discipline, loyalty and courage during his service with this Unit.
His death leaves a void which will be difficult to fill.
May God help his departed soul in peace and may He also give you the strength to bear this loss bravely."
2.
The petitioner applied for the award of Special and Ordinary Family Pension on September 4, 1985.
No copy of this application has been produced.
Vide letter dated November 25, 1986, the petitioner was informed that "special family pension claim in your favour has been rejected by the CDA (P), Allahabad on the grounds that the cause of death of your son is neither attributable to nor aggravated by the military service."
It was further observed that "ordinary family pension under existing rules is also not sanctioned as the individual died as a bachelor."
The petitioner filed an appeal against this order to the Central Government.
The claim was rejected by the Government of India vide orders dated December 16, 1987.
An appeal against the order having been rejected vide orders dated January 18, 1988 the petitioner has approached this Court through the present petition.
3.
No written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents.
4.
Mr. RS Randhawa, learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that after the death of the son of the petitioner, he is entitled to the grant of pension under the rules and instructions governing the matter and that the action of the authorities in declining to give the requisite relief is totally arbitrary and unfair.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondents has contended that in view of Regulation 85, the widow alone is entitled to the award of pension.
5.
Vide letter dated August 7, 1987 the Government of India, Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pension, Department of Pension & Pensions' Welfare, issued instructions introducing liberalised pensionable awards.
These instructions were issued with reference to the Ministry of Finance letter dated November 9, 1984.
In paragraph 34, on which Mr. Randhawa has placed strong reliance, it has been provided as under :-  "34 : Where the Government servant dies as a bachelor or as a widower without children, pension will be admissible to parents without reference to their pecuniary circumstances at 3/4 of pay last drawn by the Government servant for both parents and at 3/4th of this rate for a single parent.
On the death of one parent dependent pension at the later rate will be admissible to the surviving parent."
Learned counsel has also referred to the Regulations governing the award of pension in the Army and pointed out that under Regulation 16, "the procedure to be followed for the submission and disposal of applications for various pensionary awards including commutation of pension shall be as laid down in Table 1."
With reference to the said table, the learned counsel has pointed out that the entry at Sr. No. 5 entitles the parents/brothers and sisters to get the dependent's pension.
This entry reads as under :-  Item No.
Nature of Claim Forms of application & supporting documents To whom, application should be submitted Remarks.
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) 1 to 4 xx xx xx 5.
Dependents pensions - Parents/Brothers & Sisters 1) Application for pension - MPB 510/pensions.
2) MPC - 60.
3) Medical & other documents same as at item 4 (a) above.
Forms at items (1) & (2) from the claimant to the Controller of Defence Accounts (Pen.).
Medical & other documents same as at item 4(a) above.
On receipt of copy of the Govt. orders communicating the decision that the death is due to or hastened by military service, the Controller of Def.
A/Cs (Pen.)
will submit an audit report to the Ministry of Defence.
6. xx xx xx  6.
Mr. Giani on the other hand has relied of Regulation 85.
This regulation appears in Chapter V, Section 2.
This section deals with the claims.
etc. of "officers and their families."
Regulation 85 opens with the words... "in the case of widows of Commissioned Officers ......."  7.
On a perusal of the above provision, I am satisfied that the parents, brothers and sisters are entitled to claim the dependents, pension.
The provision contained in Paragraph 34 clearly contemplate that the dependents, pension is available to a parent or parents.
Regulation 85 only deals with the cases of widows of Commissioned Officers and can by no stretch of imagination be read to exclude all other categories of dependents or relations.
In fact, I am clearly of the view that Regulation 85 has no application at all.
Furthermore, it is also clear that under the liberalised pension policy of the Government, a parent is entitled to the award of pension.
The action of the Government in rejecting the claim of the petitioner by its letters at Annexures P.3, P.5 and P.7 on the ground that family pension is not sanctioned "as the individual died as a bachelor" cannot be sustained.
Even if it is assumed that family pension cannot be granted, the claim for the award of dependents, pension as envisaged under Paragraph 3A was clearly admissible to the petitioner.
8.
It has also been observed that the cause of death was not attributable nor aggravated by military service.
So far as this aspect of the matter is concerned, the relevant background is contained in Paragraph 7(b) of the Pension Regulations for the Army, 1961. it reads as under :-  "7.
(b) A disease which has led to an individual's discharge or death will ordinarily be deemed to have arisen in service if no note of it was made at the time of the individual's acceptance for military service.
However, if medical opinion holds, for reasons to be stated, that the disease could not have been detected on Medical examination prior to acceptance for service, the disease will not be deemed to have arisen during service."
In view of the above provision, it has to be assumed that the disease had arisen while the soldier was in service of the Army.
No note regarding this disease was made at the time when Sappar Jaswinder Singh joined the Army.
It had also not been stated by any person that the disease could not have been detected on medical examination prior to his acceptance in service.
Accordingly, the observations in the order at Annexure P.3 that the cause of death was not attributable to nor aggravated by military service cannot be sustained.
By fiction law it is deemed to be attributable to and aggravated by the military service.
9.
In view of the above, I quash the orders at Annexures P.3, P.5 and P.7.
The respondents are directed to determine the dependents' pension admissible to the petitioner.
The payment shall be made with effect from the due date viz. the date of death of Sappar Jaswinder Singh.
The petitioner shall also be entitled for interest @ 12% per annum.
Necessary payment shall be made within a period of three months from the date of the receipt of a copy of this judgment.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to his costs, which are assessed at Rs. 2,000/-.
Order accordingly.