RS Mongia, J (Oral) - This judgment of mine will dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 7583 of 1991 and 7553 of 1991 as common questions of law and facts are involved in these writ petitions.
However, as far as facts are concerned the pleadings in writ petition No. 7553 of 1991 are being adverted to.
2.
The petitioner joined as a Clerk on 11th of January, 1967 in the office of the Labour Commissioner, Punjab.
He was confirmed as a Steno-Typist w.e.f.
4th of February, 1969 and consequently became a member of Punjab Labour Department Slate Service Class III).
He was further promoted as officiating Assistant on 17th of February, 1977 and thereafter was promoted to the rank of officiating Superintendent Grade II on 22nd of July, 1988.
3.
According to Rule 8 of the Punjab Labour Department (State Service Class III) Rules, 1969, (Hereinafter called the Rules) appointment to the post of Labour Inspector (now designated as Labour Inspector Grade I) is made by promotion from amongst Wage Inspectors and ministerial employees who are members of the Punjab Labour Department (State Service Class III) and have three years experience of working of labour laws as such.
Rule 8 (1)(a)(i) of the Rules is as under :  (a) In the case of Labour Inspector : (i) by promotion from amongst Wage Inspectors and ministerial employees who are members of the Punjab Labour Department (State Service Class III) having three years experience of working of Labour Laws as such :  Provided that 60 per cent of the vacancies shall be filled in by the method prescribed by Sub-Clause (i) [35 per cent out of Wage Inspectors and 25 per cent out of ministerial employees mentioned in Sub-Clause (i)] and 40 per cent of the vacancies shall be filled in by the methods prescribed by Sub-Clause (ii) and (iii) and the number of persons appointed by transfer shall not exceed 5 per cent of the total personnel recruited through the method of direct recruitment.
4.
Respondent Nos. 3 and 4 namely Shri Roshan Lal and Shri Tarsem Singh were also working in the same department, as the petitioner, as an Assistant and Stenographer respectively.
It is not disputed that petitioners in both the writ petitions were senior to respondent Nos. 3 and 4 as Assistants.
It is further not disputed that the pay scale of the post of Assistant/Stenographer is higher than the pay scale of Labour Inspector Grade I It is further not disputed that the petitioners as well as respondent Nos. 3 and 4 belong to the ministerial cadre of the Labour Department.
Respondent Nos. 3 and 4 were promoted as Labour Inspectors Grade I on 8th of May, 1991 (copy of the order has been attached Annexure P-7 to the writ petition).
Petitioners were ignored from consideration of promotion to Labour Inspector Grade I This led the petitioners to file the above stated two writ petitions.
Motion Bench while admitting the writ petition had stayed the operation of promotion order Annexure P-7.
5.
Petitioners made grievance that they were seniors to respondent Nos. 3 and 4 as Assistants and consequently they could not be ignored from consideration for promotion as Labour Inspectors Grade I A person of the rank of Assistant/Stenographer has two channels of promotion; (i) he can be considered for promotion to the rank of Superintendent Grade II and then to Grade I, and (ii) to the rank of Labour Inspector Grade II, Labour Inspector Grade I and then to still higher posts.
6.
It is not the case of the respondents that when petitioners were promoted to the rank of officiating Superintendent Grade II, they were ever asked to give their options whether they would forfeit their right of consideration for promotion to the post of Labour Inspectors Grade I It is further not disputed that in the rank of Superintendent Grade II no confirmation orders have been passed in favour of the petitioners confirming them to this post though it is the case of the private respondents that no such confirmation order is necessary as in the ministerial cadre confirmation is to be done only once.
7.
The case of the petitioners as put forth by the learned counsel for the petitioners is that according to the statutory rules quoted above petitioners had a right to be considered for promotion to the rank of Labour Inspector Grade I while holding the officiating rank of Superintendent Grade II in the ministerial cadre.
According to the learned counsel, the Instructions issued by the State Government on 9th of May, 1991 (Annexure P.5) are contrary to the Statutory Rule 8, which had already been quoted above.
The Instructions are to the effect that the promotion of Labour Inspector Grade II and Labour Inspector Grade I from the ministerial cadre has to be from amongst the incumbents holding the post of lower scale or the same scale and, therefore, persons officiating against post carrying higher scale may be deemed to have forfeited their rights to be considered for promotion to the rank of Labour Inspector Grade I According to the learned counsel there is no such limitation envisaged by Rule 8 of the Rules.
He further submitted that even respondent Nos. 3 and 4 were in the higher pay scale than that of Labour Inspector Grade I while they were holding the post of Assistant/Stenographer and if these Instructions were to be strictly applied even then they could not be promoted.
8.
On the other hand, the learned counsel for the respondents submitted that the ministerial cadre consists of Sub cadres of Superintendent Grade II, Assistants, Clerks, Stenographers etc. and it is up to the State Government to choose any of the source for being considered for promotion to the rank of Labour Inspector Grade I and if in the present case the Government thought of promoting Assistants/Stenographers and ignored the claim of the Superintendents Grade II there was nothing wrong.
In support of this contention the learned counsel for the private respondents has relied upon the judgment of a Single Bench of this Court in Shri Darshan Singh Pahija and another v. The State of Punjab, 1973(2) S.L.R.
29.
9.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties I find that there is considerable force in the argument of learned counsel for the petitioners.
Rule 8 of the Rules is unambiguous in terms that promotion to the rank of Labour Inspector Grade I (upto a certain percentage) would be from amongst the employees of ministerial cadre who are members of the Punjab Labour Department (State Service Class III).
The question to be answered is whether the petitioners belong to the ministerial cadre.
The answer obviously is in the affirmative as in the Appendix 'A' to the Rules the post of Superintendent finds mention in the ministerial cadre.
The State Government was not right in issuing Instructions, Annexure P.5 dated 951990 that only persons who were in the lower pay scale than that of Labour Inspector Grade I could be considered for promotion to the rank of Labour Inspector Grade I The position might have been different if the petitioners had been asked to give their options and if they had opted to be promoted in the line of Superintendent Grade II then perhaps they would not have been allowed to stake their claims for promotion to the rank of Labour inspector Grade I The instructions, Annexure P.5 run counter to the specific rule regarding promotion which is Rule 8(1)(a)(i).
Apart from this even State Government did not adhere to these Instructions while promoting respondent Nos. 3 and 4 to the rank of Labour Inspector Grade I, who were already in higher pay scale than that of Labour Inspector Grade I  10.
As far as the argument of the learned counsel for the private respondents is concerned that there are sub-cadres and, therefore, the Government was within its right to choose any of the source from amongst sub cadres and could promote only Assistant/Stenographer and ignore Superintendent Grade II, on the face it is wrong.
It cannot be denied that the post of Superintendent Grade II is a higher post than that of Assistant/Stenographer and all the posts i.e. Clerks, Assistants, Stenographer and Superintendent Grade II are the posts in the ministerial cadre.
Once all the posts are in the ministerial cadre then in absence of any quota having been fixed for either of the source the highest rank is first to be exhausted and if persons in that rank are not found suitable or they refuse to get promotion only then the respondents can go to the lower rank.
This would be in consonance with the spirit of Article 16 of the Constitution of India.
11.
It has been stated at the Bar by the learned counsel for the petitioners, on instructions from their clients, that petitioners if promoted to the rank of Labour Inspector Grade I would not claim any higher pay scale than that of the Labour Inspector Grade I and would not raise a plea that since they had already been in higher pay scale of Superintendent Grade II, they should be given the same pay scale in the rank of Labour Inspector Grade I  12.
For the foregoing reasons, this writ petition is allowed and the promotion of respondent Nos. 3 and 4 ordered on 8th of May, 1991 vide Annexure P.7 is hereby quashed and official respondents are directed to consider the case of the petitioners for promotion to the rank of Labour Inspector Grade I, considering them to be eligible, from the date respondent Nos. 3 and 4 were promoted.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.