RS Mongia, J - This judgment of mine will dispose of CWP Nos. 15441 of 1991, 15777 of 1991 and 14591 of 1991.
In all the three writ petitions the petitioners had applied for admission in the Law Department of the Panjab University for the L.L.B.
(First Semester) Course 1991-92 Session.
On the date which was fixed for their interview, they could not present themselves before the interview Board for one reason or the other.
It has been provided in the Prospectus for admission to the Law Department that "those applicants who are absent at the time of interview will have no claim for admission at any stage."
In view of this clause, candidates next to the petitioners were called for interview and were also admitted.
2.
In C.W.P.
No. 14591 of 1991, the petitioner passed his MA from Panjab University and obtained 6019% marks and according to the entitlement for admission, those candidate who have passed the qualifying examination from Panjab University are to be given 10% weightage.
Thus petitioner's marks would come to 6621%.
He was to appear for interview on 1791991.
It is alleged that he had fallen sick and therefore, could not appear for interview on that date and went to the Department on 1991991 and made a representation that since he was sick on the date of interview he could not appear and his case should be now considered.
It is further alleged that interviews were still going on and all the seats had not been filled up.
On the basis of the marks obtained by the petitioner, his merit would be at No. 231.
It may be observed here that the Motion Bench while admitting the writ petition had ordered that one seat should not be filled.
3.
In C.W.P.
No. 15777 of 1991 the contents are almost the same and the petitioner's merit was at Sr. No. 232.
4.
In the third writ petition i.e. Civil Writ Petition No. 15441 of 1991, the petitioner had obtained 5543% marks in B.Com.
(Honours) from Panjab University and with weightage it would come to 61% marks.
The petitioner was scheduled to appear for interview on 2691991 but it is alleged that while he was in Delhi on 2491991 he met with a road accident and got injuries and, therefore, he could not present himself for interview on 2691991.
It is furgther alleged that the candidate with lower marks in merit than him has been admitted and the petitioner has been left out simply on the basis that he could not present himself for interview on the stipulated date.
5.
It is contended by the learned counsel for the petitioners in all the cases that there are no marks for interview and interview was just a formality in the sense that only original certificates were seen and the merit list stood already prepared on the basis of the marks obtained in the qualifying examination.
It has been further argued that when the petitioners had submitted their representations mentioning as to why they could not appear on the stipulated dates for the interview, interviews were still going on and the admissions had not been finalised.
No waiting list of the candidates who had been finally selected after interview had been prepared.
It has been further argued that if the interviews were still going on and admissions had not been finalised, then the merit of the petitioners could not be ignored and they could still be interviewed, though lower in merit.
6.
It is not the case of the respondents that when the petitioners had approached the Authorities the entire admissions were over in the sense that if the petitioners were to be interviewed, there would be no seats available for them.
The position would have been different if by the time the petitioners had approached, the admissions were finalised and the candidates lower in merit had exhausted the entire number of seats.
But in the present case, as observed above, there is no dispute that the admissions were still going on when the petitioners approached the Authorities.
I may not be taken that I am laying down that the University must in all cases entertain applications of the candidates who do not appear on the stipulated date for interview and howsoever late they may come.
However, it would be in the interest of standards of education that more meritorious candidates are not left out.
The Authorities should evolve a procedure that if during the course of interview and before the finalisation of the admission, a candidate does approach the Authorities with some plausible reasons for not appearing on a particular date, the candidate should be given a chance to compete on the basis of his merit.
Admittedly, in the present case candidates with lower merit than the petitioners have been admitted.
The petitioners have approached the Authorities when admissions were still on.
7.
For the foregoing reasons I allow those writ petitions and direct the respondent-University to interview the petitioners and if candidates lower than them in merit have already been admitted, then the petitioners would be granted admission.
However, the persons already admitted may not disturbed even if it may entail creation of additional seats for the petitioners.
In fact, in C.W.P.
No. 14591 of 1991 a seat had been kept vacant by the order of this Court.
Even if no seat was kept vacant for other two candidates, they should not be treated differently.
Since this case relates to admissions, office is directed to send the directions immediately to the respondent for compliance.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.