Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner herein is aggrieved by the order dated March 16, 1988 by which she was given one month's notice to the effect that her services, shall come to an end with effect from April 16, 1988.
The order also stated that "you are given one month's pay as retrenchment compensation."
A copy of this order is at Annexure P-4.
Initially, the petitioner filed a suit for "Declaration and injunction in the Court of Senior Sub Judge, Patiala" which was dismissed as withdrawn vide orders dated April 9, 1988.
Thereafter, the present writ petition has been filed.
2.
A few facts may be noticed.
On June 24, 1985 an advertisement appeared in the paper by which four posts in the rank of Nurse-Dai were advertised.
These posts were in the scale of Rs. 350-600.
The petitioner avers that she was selected by the selection Committee and was offered appointment vide letter dated April 30, 1986, a copy of which has been produced on record as Annexure P-2 with the writ petition.
It has been further averred that she joined service at the Dispensary maintained by the Punjab State Electricity Board at Jalandhar on April 30, 1986.
On December 16, 1986, the petitioner was transferred to the Dispensary at Patiala.
A copy of the order of transfer has been placed on record as Annexure P-3.
As mentioned above, the notice of retrenchment was served on the petitioner vide letter dated March 16, 1988.
After having withdrawn the suit, she has filed the present petition to impugned the order of retrenchment.
The order has been challenged primarily on the ground that it has been passed on contravention of the terms and conditions of appointment.
It has also been averred that the vacancy against which the petitioner was working still exists and as such the retrenchment was wholly illegal and arbitrary.
3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondent, it has been averred that the "four vacancies, which were advertised vide Annexure P-1 were filled up by four candidates as per their order of merit and no vacancy to the post of Nurse-Dai remained and consequently the name of the petitioner was kept on the waiting list.
However, since no candidate was available for the post of Auxiliary Nurse Mid wife, which is a post higher to that of Nurse-Dai, the petitioner was appointed as Nurse-Dai against this post."
This appointment was purely "on a temporary basis and her services are liable to be terminated without any notice."
It has been further averred that the board "has abolished the dispensary at Jalandhar and consequently there is no vacancy of Nurse-Dai with the respondent Board and for that reason the petitioner has been served the retrenchment notice as she is the junior most Nurse-Dai."
4.
I have heard Mr. Ashok Sharma learned counsel for the petitioner.
None has appeared on behalf of the respondent.
Mr. Sharma contends that the petitioner was serving at Patiala and she could not be retrenched on account of the abolition of the post of Jalandhar.
On this premises, Mr. Sharma submits that the impugned order is wholly illegal and deserves to be set aside.
5.
A perusal of the petitioner's letter of appointment shows that she was appointed on a purely temporary basis and her services could be terminated without notice.
Even when she was transferred from Jalandhar to Patiala, it was observed in the order that "the salary of this employee shall be drawn and sanctioned against the vacancy at ANM Dispensary Jalandhar.
Her transfer is mainly done at Punjab State Electricity Board Dispensary, Patiala for the reasons that the Punjab State Electricity Board Dispensary, Jalandhar has not started functioning as yet."
It appears that the Board decided to abolish the Dispensary at Jalandhar.
As a result the post of Anxillary Nurse Midwife against which the petitioner had been appointed ceased to be available.
Consequently, there was no post against which she could be allowed to continue as a Nurse-Dai.
This left the respondent - Board with no alternative except to retrench the petitioner.
6.
The petitioner as emanating from the documents referred to above, has been reiterated in the written statement filed on behalf of the Board.
It has been explained that the petitioner was not one of the four candidates selected against the posts which had been advertised but was only on the waiting list.
She was appointed as a Nurse-Dai against the.
post of Auxiliary Nurse Midwife, which post is higher than that of a Nurse-Dai.
On account of the abolition, of Dispensary at Jalandhar, there was no vacancy against which the petitioner could be allowed to continue.
She, being the junior-most Nurse-Dai, was consequently retrenched.
The petitioner has not rebutted this position by filing any replication to the written statement.
7.
In view of the above factual position, I find no infirmity in the action of the respondent.
The writ petition is wholly lacking in merit and is consequently dismissed.
In the circumstances of the case, I leave the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.