MM Kumar, J - The short question which arises for determination in this petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution is whether this Court in exercise of jurisdiction under Article 226 could direct any change in date of birth in the service book of the petitioner in accordance with the amendment notified/issued by respondent State vide notification dated 2161994 (Annexure P-1) which has permitted a period of two years for making application for the purposes of effecting change in the date of birth ?
2.
Brief facts of the case are that the petitioner joined service of the State of Punjab as Naib Tehsildar in the year 1972.
He was thereafter promoted as Tehsildar, District Revenue Officer and ultimately nominated to Punjab Civil Service (Executive Branch) in the year 1989-90.
At the time of joining service by the petitioner, his date of birth recorded in the service book is 4.10.1950.
It is claimed that the petitioner had studied in a school at Samrala, District Ludhiana, thereafter, Nawanshahar and ultimately in Sultanpur Lodhi upto 8th Standard.
In all these institutions his date of birth was 4101952.
When he joined a school in Samrala in 9th Class in the year 1965-66 his date of birth was erroneously recorded as 4.10.1950 which deserves to be corrected.
3.
It is asserted that the respondent-State has issued notification dated 2161994 (Annexure P-1) incorporating the amendment in the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume 1, Part I substituting Note 3 below Rule 25.
According to the unamended note every person newly appointed to a service or post under Government was required to produce birth certificate or in the alternative matriculation certificate or an affidavit as a proof of correctness of his date of birth.
As such the date of birth was required to be recorded in the service record or any other record that was required to be maintained in respect of Government employee by the Government.
The most important stipulation was that once a date of birth is recorded in the afore-mentioned manner then it could not be altered except in case of clerical error and that too with prior approval of the Government.
Note 3 stipulates that date of birth given by an employee in his application form submitted to a recuriting agency like Punjab Service Commission or the Punjab Subordinate Services Selection Commission or the Punjab Subordinate Services Selection Board or the Departmental Selection Committee was to be treated as final and no change was permitted after entry into Government Service.
However, the amendment permitted a period of two years for an employee who was in service on 2161994 to apply for change of date of birth on the basis of conclusive documentary evidence such as matriculation certificate or Municipal Birth Certificate etc. No request after the expiry of period of two years was to be entertained.
4.
The Government issued instructions on 1811995 (Annexure P-2) laying down the procedure for effecting change in the date of birth.
It was provided that an enquiry should be conducted by the Commissioner for Enquiries before arriving at a decision regarding change of date of birth.
It was further stipulated that the competent authority could direct change of date of birth only after obtaining approval of the Finance Department though the Department of Personnel and Administrative Reforms irrespective of the fact whether the case relates to a gazetted or a non-gazetted employee.
These instructions were notified on 1811995 and instead of Commissioner the inquiry was required to be conducted by the Deputy Commissioner concerned of the District.
Another set of instructions issued on 1471995 (Annexure P-4) also dispensed with the requirement of seeking approval from the Department of Personnel and Administrative Reforms through the Finance Department.
It directed the deletion of para 3 from the instructions dated 1811995.
However, on 5101995 (Annexure P-5) instructions dated 1811995 were suspended and as a consequence it was provided that instead of the Deputy Commissioner, the Commissioner was to hold enquiry.
On 10.10.1995 (Annexure P-6) the Government through its Finance Department suspended the operation of instructions/Rules dated 2161994.
1811995 and 1471995.
On 13121995 the Department of Personnel and Administrative Reforms issued instructions to the effect that earlier instructions suspending the operation of instructions were withdrawn in toto.
On 7.10.1996 (Annexure P-8) on re-consideration it was decided that all applications received during the period the notification dated 2161994 remained in force were to be disposed of on merits and the procedure prescribed by the instructions dated 10.5.1995 was to be followed in letter and spirit.
The net result was that all applications filed after 2161994 (Annexure P-1) were to be considered in accordance with the procedure given in the instructions dated 1811995.
In other words, a special enquiry was required to be conducted by the Deputy Commissioner and approval by the Department of Personnel and Administrative Reforms in consultation with the Department of Finance was also required to be obtained.
5.
The petitioner is stated to have made an application to respondent No. 1 in April, 1991 for correction of his date of birth in his service record (Annexure P-10).
He was asked to supply a copy of the certificate from the Registrar of Births and Deaths.
The petitioner accordingly made an application before the Registrar of Births and Deaths, Ludhiana but the same was returned with the observation that there is no entry available in the record.
These documents were sent by the petitioner to the Government along with his affidavit (Annexure P-11).
After the amendment in the Rules/instructions on 2161994, the Government asked the petitioner to supply all the correspondence and documents as per instructions dated 2051995.
All the documents were submitted by the petitioner and accordingly as per instructions dated 10.5.1995 the Deputy Commissioner, Ludhiana was directed by the Government to enquire into the petitioner's request and report back.
Vide letter dated 6101995 Annexure P-12, the Deputy Commissioner without making any enquiry intimated the Government that change in date of birth could not be permitted.
Vide letter dated 1191997 (Annexure P13) the Government again asked the Deputy Commissioner to hold an enquiry as per the Government instructions and thereafter send his recommendations based on the said enquiry.
The said enquiry was entrusted to Sub-Divisional Magistrate, Ludhiana who granted full opportunity to the petitioner to bring on record all documents showing his correct date of birth.
He also recorded the statements of various persons.
He also examined the registers of various schools where the petitioner studied.
On 5111997 (Annexure P-14) a report was submitted by him observing that date of birth of the petitioner is 4101952.
The Deputy Commissioner forwarded this report to the Government vide letter dated 24.3.1998 (Annexure P15).
The Government intimated the petitioner on 182000 (Annexure P-18) that his request for change of date of birth was declined.
6.
In the written statement filed by respondent Nos. 1 and 2 and a separate written statement filed by respondent No. 3, a similar stand has been taken.
It has been asserted that the amendment in rules/instructions made vide notification dated 21.6.1998 (Annexure P-1) would not come to the rescue of the petitioner because he applied for correction of date of birth on 1841991.
It has been insisted that the change in date of birth as per the rules prevailing at that time could be sought within two years from the date of entry into service.
A reference in this regard has been made to Rule 73 of the Punjab Financial Rules Volume 1 and Rule 25 of Punjab Civil Services Rules Vol. 1 Part I read with Note 3 underneath that Rule.
It has further been claimed that no employee can claim correction in date of birth as a matter of right.
The petitioner is stated to have joined service as Naib Tehsildar in the year 1972 and his application for change of date of birth was made on 1841991 i.e. after a period of about 19 years.
It is claimed that the assertion made by the petitioner was time barred and could not be looked into.
However, the factual position on merit has not been disputed.
It is conceded that recommendations were made by the Deputy Commissioner, Ludhiana on 6101995.
According to the respondents, the date of birth could have been changed only in case of clerical mistake.
The petitioner is stated to be on the verge of his retirement and at the fag end of his career he cannot be permitted to apply for change of date of birth.
7.
Mr. PS Patwalia, learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that the order dated 182000 (Annexure P-18) rejecting representation of the petitioner is cryptic and is unsustainable in the eyes of law.
It is maintained that an order deciding the right of an employee is required to be speaking one.
He has further submitted that ground of delay raised by the respondent in the primary objections of written statement cannot constitute a basis for defeating his claim because he has filed an application for correction of his date of birth on 10.4.1991 (Annexure P-1).
The submission made by the learned counsel is that all judgments of this Court as well as by the Supreme Court would be inapplicable to the cases where change in date of birth has been permitted by amendment of rules granting time to file applications in that regard.
In support of his submission, learned counsel has placed reliance on paras 9 and 10 of the judgment in the case of Burn Standard Co Ltd and others v. Dinabandhu Majumdar and another, 1995(3) SCT 126 (SC) : AIR 1995 SC 1499.
8.
Shri Mansur Ali, learned State counsel has vehemently argued that no detailed order was required to be passed as the representation was beyond the period of two years.
According to the learned counsel an application filed on 1841991 for change of date of birth cannot be regarded as the one submitted in accordance with the amendment dated 2161994 because those instructions were not available to the petitioner on that day.
Moreover the instructions specifically require the submission of application complete in all respect accompanied by confirmatory or documentary proof in the form of matriculation certificate.
Such an incomplete representation could not be regarded as application in accordance with the Rules/Instructions dated 2161994.
Therefore, the application has to be considered under the then existing Rules and accordingly it was belated as the period of two years had expired in 1974 as the petitioner had joined as Naib Tehsildar in 1972.
With regard to various judgments on issue, learned State Counsel has pointed out that the rationale adopted by all the judgments of the Supreme Court is that no prejudice should be caused to the rights of other employees who are either waiting or are likely to be adversely affected because they are not party before this Court.
Learned counsel has substantiated his argument by submitting that if a person junior to the petitioner has consciously chosen to continue with the department as his career prospects get better in 2005 and he could go up the ladder of promotion then directing the change of date of birth would not be fair exercise of power.
In support of his submission, learned counsel has placed reliance on two judgments of the Supreme Court in the cases of Union of India v. Ram Sua Sharma, 1996(2) SLR 16 and Union of India and others v. Mrs. Saroj Bala, 1996(3) SCT 669 (SC) : 1996(2) SLR 898.
9.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, perusing the record, the amendment made by notification dated 2161994 (Annexure P-1) and other amendments, I am of the considered view that there is no merit in this petition.
It is well settled that correction in date of birth sets in motion a chain reaction inasmuch as many others, who are waiting in queue for years below the concerned employee would feel frustrated.
Moreover, such employees are not before the Court.
For the aforementioned proposition, reliance could be placed on a judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Secretary and Commissioner, Home Department and others v. R Kirubakaran, 1993(4) SCT 803 (SC) : 1994 Supp.
(1) Supreme Court Cases 155.
It would be appropriate to make a reference to a part of para 7 of the judgment, which reads as under :-  "An application for correction of the date of birth should not be dealt with by the tribunal or the High Court keeping in view only the public servant concerned.
It need not be pointed out that any such direction for correction of the date of birth of the public servant concerned has a chain reaction, inasmuch as others waiting for years, below him for their respective promotions are affected in this process.
Some are likely to suffer irreparable injury, inasmuch as, because of the correction of the date of birth, the officer concerned, continues in office, in some cases for years, within which time many officers who are below him in seniority waiting for their promotion, may lose their promotions for ever.
Cases are not unknown when a person accepts appointment keeping in view the date of retirement of his immediate senior.
According to us, this is an important aspect, which cannot be lost sight of by the Court or the tribunal while examining the grievance of a public servant in respect of correction of his date of birth.
As such, unless a clear case, on the basis of materials which can be held to be conclusive in nature, is made out by the respondent, the Court or the tribunal should not issue a direction, on the basis of materials which make such claim only plausible .........
The applicant has to produce the evidence in support of such claim, which may amount to irrefutable proof relating to his date of birth.
Whenever any such question arises, the onus is on the applicant, to prove the wrong recording of his date of birth, in his service book."
10.
It is also well settled that any belated claim with regard to change of date of birth could also not be accepted because principles in the nature of estoppel would come in play.
On the one hand, the employee by his non-action for a number of years has allowed the Department as well as others to believe that the entry in the service book with regard to date of birth is correct.
Such an employee might have obtained entry in service at an age younger than the age of his entitlement to enter service.
Even otherwise, as has been observed by the Supreme Court in R Kirubakaran's case (supra) acting on the date of birth given by such an employee, the others had adjusted their career prospects.
They might not have gone to other organisations where better prospects could be available in the hope that such better prospects like promotion etc. would be available in the department, where they have been working.
Such future prospects cannot be permitted to be frustrated by permitting a person like the petitioner to succeed in getting his date of birth changed.
11.
The question of delay was considered by the Supreme Court in the case of Union of India v. Harnam Singh, 1993(3) SCT 120 (SC) : 1993(2) Supreme Court Cases 162, emphasising that in a rare case if an employee is in possession of irrefutable proof relating to his date of birth, then may be the Court would interfere.
However, it has been emphasised that such an action has to be resorted to but without unreasonable delay.
The observation of the Supreme Court in this regard reads as under :-  "It could not be the intention of the rule-making authority to give unlimited time to seek correction of date of birth, after 1979, to those government servants who had joined the service prior to 1979 but restrict it to the five year period for those who enter service after 1979.
Indeed, if a government servant, already in service for a long time, had applied for correction of date of birth before 1979, it would not be permissible to non- suit him on the ground that he had not applied for correction within five years of his entry into service, but correction of date of birth only after 1979 stands on a different footing.
It would be appropriate and in tune with harmonious construction of the provision to hold that in the case of those government servants who were already in service before 1979, for a period of more than five years, and who intended to have their date of birth corrected after 1979, may seek the correction of date of birth within a reasonable time after 1979, but in any event later than five years after the coming into force of the amendment in 1979.
This view would be in consonance with the intention of the rule-making authority."
Similar view has been taken by the Supreme Court in the case of Cement Corporation of India Ltd v. Raghbir Singh and another, 2002(9) Supreme Court Cases 398 and Hindustan Lever Limited v. SM Jadhav and another, 2001(2) SCT 369 (SC) : 2001(4) Supreme Court Cases 52.
12.
It is also pertinent to mention that the judgment of the Supreme Court in Saroj Bala's case (supra) would explain what could be irrefutable proof of an error in recording of date of birth in service book.
In that case, the argument raised on behalf of the petitioner was that the certificate given by the Registrar of Births and Deaths indicated that the petitioner and her elder sister were born with a gap of six months.
It was contended that the petitioner could not have born within six months after the birth of her elder sister.
However, the Supreme Court rejected the aforementioned argument by observing as under:-  "We are wholly unable to appreciate the stand of the respondent.
The respondent's parents are not illiterate.
She is a well educated one.
She competed in All India Civil Services Examination.
Her date of birth was registered in the University to be April 4, 1949.
On that basis, she appeared for the examination, sought selection and accordingly she was selected.
The said date has been entered in the service record and remained undisputed for 18-1/2 years.
Subsequently it appears that she discovered in a talk with her sister that her date of birth is incorrect.
Then enquiries were made and obtained the birth certificate, which mentioned the birth of the child and the parentage of the respondent.
Horoscope was also sought to be set up to corroborate those circumstances."
The aforementioned judgments of the Supreme court have laid down some basic principles, which are required to be followed by the Courts, while issuing direction for correction of date of birth and the same may be summed up as under :-  1.
No unreasonably belated claim shall be entertained by the Courts.
2.
The rights of third parties like junior employees, who are waiting in queue with the shop of advancing their career prospects must be kept in view.
3.
There has to be irrefutable proof of error in recording the date of birth in the service book.
4.
The rules must be strictly complied with.
13.
When the aforementioned principles are applied to the facts of the present case, it becomes evident that the petitioner has no case.
At the first instance, his application for correction of date of birth was received by the Department on 1841991.
The rules/instructions, which were applicable at that time, namely, Rule 25 read with Note 3 of Punjab Civil Services Rules Vol.
I Part I and also Rule 73 of the Punjab Financial Rules Volume I, only permitted two years time for filing an application for correction of date of birth from the date of entry into service.
Admittedly, the petitioner had entered in service as Naib Tehsildar in 1972 and by applying Rule 25 read with Note 3 of Punjab Civil Services Rules Volume I, Part I and Rule 73 of the Punjab Financial Rules Volume I, the period of two years had expired in 1974.
It is evident that the claim was highly belated and the principle enunciated by the Supreme Court in Harnam Singh's case (supra) and other cases would apply with full force to the present case.
The case of the petitioner, if examined in the light of the amendment made in the Rules/Instructions on 2161994 can also not be accepted because there was no complete application before the respondents on 2161994 in terms of the amendment of the rules/instructions.
In other words, the application with confirmatory documentary evidence such as matriculation certificate or municipal birth certificate were not submitted by the expiry of two years on 2161996.
The case of the petitioner would fail because a number of persons junior to him are aspiring for promotion for the post on which he is working.
Their legitimate expectations would be completely frustrated if the petitioner is permitted to continue on the post for two years by permitting the change in his date of birth.
I am further of the view that there is no irrefutable proof on record warranting change of his date of birth.
It cannot be concluded with certainty whether the date of birth given earlier to the Schools upto the 8th standard was correct or the one which was given later at the time of taking admission in 9th class was correct.
In Saroj Bala's case (supra), the Supreme Court has rejected a claim where the petitioner had argued that the difference between her and her sister's date of birth could not be six months as per the certificate issued by the Registrar of Births and Deaths.
In the facts and circumstances of the present case the rules, which were applicable to the case of the petitioner on the date when the petitioner applied for change in date of birth i.e. 1841991 would govern the case.
Accordingly Note 3 appended to Rule 25 of Punjab Civil Services Rules Volume I, Part I and Rule 73 of the Punjab Financial Services Rules Volume I, would be applicable.
The aforementioned Note 3 appended to Rule 25 of Punjab Civil Services Rules Volume I Part I (as given in Annexure A) reads as under :-  "ANNEXURE (A) (Referred to in Rule 25 and note 3 thereunder) 1.
In regard to the date of birth a declaration of age made at the time or for the purpose of entry into Government service shall, as against the Government employee in question, be deemed to be conclusive unless he applies for correction of his age as recorded within two years from the date of his entry into Government service.
Government, however, reserves the right to make a correction in the recorded age of a Government employee at any time against the interest of the Government employee when it is satisfied that the age recorded in his service book or in the History of service of a Gazetted Government employee is incorrect and has been incorrectly recorded with the object that the Government employee may derive some unfair advantage therefrom.
2.
When a Government employee, within the period allowed, makes an application for the correction of his date of birth as recorded a special enquiry should be held to ascertain his correct age and reference should be made to all available sources of information such as Certified Copies of entries in the municipal birth register, University or School age certificate, Janam Patris or horoscopes.
It should, however, be remembered that it is entirely discretionary on the part of the sanctioning authority to refuse or grant such application and no alteration should be allowed unless it has satisfactorily been proved that the date of birth as originally given by the applicant was a bona fide mistake and that he has derived no unfair advantage therefrom.
3.
The result of every such enquiry should, in the case of gazetted, non- gazetted Government employees be briefly stated in their service cards, service books and if a correction is sanctioned, the fact should be reported to the Accountant-General."
Similar is the position envisaged by Rule 73 of the Punjab Financial Rules Volume I In fact, Rule 73 permits correction of clerical error that too if it is made expeditiously.
The said rule reads as under :-  "73.
Every person newly appointed to a service or a post under Government should at the time of appointment declare the date of his birth by the Christian era with confirmatory evidence as far as possible, confirmatory documentary evidence such as Matriculation Certificate, Municipal birth certificate and so on.
If the exact date is not known an approximate date may be given.
The actual date or the assumed date, determined under note I below should be recorded in the History of Service, Service Book, or any other record, that may be kept in respect of the Government employee's service under Government and once recorded, it cannot be altered except in the case of a clerical error, without the previous orders of Government."
The aforementioned Rules also come in the way of the petitioner.
Firstly, in terms of Note 3 of Rule 25 of Punjab Civil Services Rules, Vol.
I Part I, the application has been submitted after about 19 years and a plea in the nature of estoppel would operate against the petitioner.
Even under Rule 73 of the Punjab Financial Rules Vol.
I, only clerical error could be permitted to be corrected.
The error which is sought to be rectified can by no stretch of imagination be termed as clerical error.
14.
The question then is whether the petitioner could successfully get his date of birth changed on the basis of notification issued on 2161994 which provided for filing of application within two years.
As has already been noticed that the Supreme Court in numerous judgments has taken the view against any change in date of birth.
A casual glance at these judgments would reveal that date of birth has not been permitted to be changed after an inordinate delay by invoking the principles in the nature of estoppel.
In other words, once an employee has accepted his recorded date of birth for 20/30 years, he is not permitted to deny the correctness of the same on one ground or the other.
However, strong reliance has been placed by learned counsel for the petitioner on paragraphs 9 and 10 of the judgment of the Supreme Court in Burn Standard Company Limited's case (supra) to argue that where the rules permit the correction of date of birth within a specific period then in such cases all hindrances for correction of date of birth would stand removed.
In order to appreciate the submission made by learned counsel, it would be appropriate to make a reference to para 9 which read as under :-  "9.
No doubt, there may be special law or rules which permit a person appointed in the service of the government or its instrumentality to seek correction of his date of birth which might have been accepted by the Government or its instrumentality, as the case may be, as correct at the time of his appointment.
But, the special law or rules governing the service of an employee if forbids correction of such date of birth of employee after its acceptance by the Government or its instrumentality, its subsequent correction at the instance of such employee, becomes impermissible.
However, in the absence of such special law or rules it may be open to the employee concerned to seek correction from the Government or its instrumentality, of the date of birth declared by him and accepted the Government.
Even where such correction is sought, the Government or its instrumentality, as the case may be, would be entitled to refuse to correct the date of birth of its employee if the facts in the given case do not warrant such correction.
If that be the legal position, can it be said that it is open to a High Court in exercise of its extraordinary writ jurisdiction to entertain a writ application of an employee of the Government or its instrumentality, as the case may be, for correction of his date of birth entered in his Service and Leave Record at the time of his appointment and direct the Government or its instrumentality concerned to correct such date of his birth in his Service and Leave Record and continue hum in service beyond the date of his normal retirement, is the question.
It is true that the High Court in exercise of its discretionary jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution can even enter upon disputed questions of fact, if the case in which the extraordinary jurisdiction is invoked warrants adoption of such inevitable course and decide upon the same for giving relief to the concerned party.
But the question is that if any employee of the Government or its instrumentality, who is at the fag end of his service and due for retirement from his service shortly, according to his date of birth found in his "Service and Leave Record" files a writ application before the High Court and invokes its writ jurisdiction for correction of such date of birth with a view to continue in service beyond the normal period of his retirement, will it be appropriate for the High Court to entertain such application to enquire into disputed facts pertaining to his date of birth for correcting it and extend his period of service ?"
The aforementioned observations of the Supreme Court have to be analysed by keeping inview the various factors to which reference has been made by the Supreme Court itself.
It has been observed that the Government or its instrumentality would be entitled to refuse correction in date of birth of its employee if the facts do not warrant such correction.
It may be true that the Rules/instructions as amended by notification dated 2161994 have permitted corrections by inviting application for a period of two years.
However, the instructions as amended by the notification, firstly, fail to take into account a number of factors like the effect of directing change of date of birth on the employees who are immediate juniors or awaiting for promotion in the lower cadre.
Subsequently, the huge delay caused by the applicant for coming forward for correction of date of birth and thirdly whether the employee was eligible to enter the Government service on the basis of his changed date of birth in comparison to the declared date of birth.
By necessary implication, the notifications amending the rules have to be considered in the light of the aforementioned factors because in the absence of implying the aforementioned factors in the amended instructions, the instructions may not be constitutionally sustainable.
It is well settled that the Court should lean towards constitutionality of the Rules/instructions rather declaring the rules as ultra vires.
If the rules are read down in the aforementioned manner, no case is made out for directing the change of date of birth of the petitioner.
15.
Even otherwise, the rule is amended by notification dated 2161994 without incorporating the factors detailed in preceding paras.
The petitioner would not be able to take any benefit because the application which he submitted to respondent No. on 1841991 (Ex. P-10) cannot be considered to be complete because according to the notification, the application was required to be accompanied by confirmatory documentary evidence.
Therefore, the Rules/instructions amended would not on their plain reading be helpful to the petitioner.
On that account also, the argument raised on the basis of the observation made by the Supreme Court in Burn Standard Company Limited's case (supra) would not be available to the petitioner.
16.
I am further of the view that the Government while issuing instructions with regard to change in date of birth itself has been changing its stand.
Firstly, instructions were issued on 2161994, which were changed by a notification issued on 1811995.
The said enquiry was required to be held by the Commissioner for Enquiries.
Thereafter, another set of instructions dated 105995 was issued incorporating the requirement of seeking sanction of the Department of Personnel and Administrative Reforms.
However, on 1471995, the instructions dated 1811995, were withdrawn.
Then the instructions dated 10.5.1995 were also withdrawn on 5101995 (Annexure P-5).
It is interesting to note that on 10.10.1995 instructions dated 2161994 and the other instructions were also withdrawn (Annexure P-6).
As such a vacillating attitude of the Government in shifting the stand by issuing new instructions does not help in solving the controversy on principles.
The vacillating attitude of the Government does not deserve any appreciation by this Court.
Be that as it may, the petitioner has failed to show that he can claim change in date of birth as a matter of right.
For the reasons stated above, this petition fails and the same is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.