AL Bahri, J - In this writ petition, the grouse of the petitioner Satya Dev, Head Constable is that the persons junior to him have been deputed for Intermediate School Course whereas he has been ignored.
The petitioner was enrolled in the Police Force in the year 1979.
After he did the Lower School Course in the year 1983, he was brought on 'C-1' list and thereafter promoted as Head Constable in November, 1983.
He was confirmed as Head Constable on 3111983.
In para 3 of the writ petition, the petitioner has given the details of eight Head Constables who have been deputed for Intermediate School Course and out of them, six.
were confirmed on 31.1.1988 and the persons mentioned at Sr. Nos. (vii) and (viii), namely, Hari Parkash and Jai Singh were confirmed on 3181989 and 3111990, respectively.
This position regarding their confirmation on these dates is admitted in the reply filed to the writ petition on behalf of respondents 3 to 5.
It is not necessary to refer the relevant Police Rules.
Suffice it to say that a Full Bench of this Court in Surjit Singh v. State.
of Punjab etc., 1977 Current Law Journal 385 held that the persons to be deputed to attend the Intermediate School Course are to be sent in order of confirmation i.e. first the confirmed persons would be sent and thereafter others.
Since in the present case, Hari Parkash and Jai Singh, Head Constables who were junior to the petitioner were deputed to attend the Intermediate School Course while ignoring the case of the petitioner who was confirmed earlier, the case of the petitioner was discriminated.
Merely because some persons were sent on deputation and they were deputed to the Course against the seats reserved for the persons of that department will not entitle them to step over the seniors in the present department.
We, therefore, allow this writ petition and direct the official respondents to fortwith depute the petitioner Satya Dev Head Constable No. 3/106, 3rd Battalion, Haryana Armed Police, Hisar to attend the Intermediate School Course.
The petitioner will be entitled to cost which are quantified at Rs. 500/-.
Petition allowed.