RS Mongia, J - The question to be determined in the present writ petition is whether the age of retirement of the petitioner is 55 years or 57 years.
Vide order dated 4111988 (Annexure P-3) issued by the Army Headquarters it was intimated that the petitioner would retire from Army Service w.e.f.
31.10.1989 on attaining the age of 55 years.
It is this order which has been impugned in the present writ petition.
The case of the petitioner is that he, having attained the rank of Colonel in the Army, was to retire on attaining the age of 57 years but he was retired at the age 55 years.
2.
In brief the facts of the case are that the petitioner's date of birth is October 19, 1934.
He was commissioned in Indian Army on 10th October, 1960 in the Remount Veterinary Corps (RVC for short).
He was promoted to the rank of Captain on 10101963, as a Major on 10101969 and was made substantive La Colonel on 10101978.
He was given the rank of Acting Colonel with effect from 1871986.
As per the rules and regulations the promotion in the RVC upto the rank of Lt.
Colonel is a time scale promotion and thereafter the promotion depends upon selection which is done by a Board constituted by the Chief of Army Staff every year.
The substantive promotion to the rank of Colonel depends upon availability of a vacancy in the rank of Substantive Colonel.
However, all Lt. Colonels who are found suitable and selected for promotion to the rank of Colonels are given acting rank and are made substantive only as and when a vacancy becomes available.
3.
For showing that the age of retirement of the petitioner in the RVC is 57 years, petitioner relied upon paragraph 75 of the Regulations for the Army, 1962 and the relevant clause of a paragraph 75 of the Regulations is reproduced hereunder :-  "75.
AGE LIMITS FOR COMPULSORY RETIREMENT OF OFFICERS :-  Compulsory retirement will be on attaining the age limits given below, or, on completion of tenure (s) granted under para 74, whichever is earlier :-  (a) to (f) xx xx xx  REMOUNTS AND VETERINARY CORPS AND MILITARY FARMS CORPS :-  Brigadier and Colonel : 57 years.
Lt. Col. and below : 55 years.
(h) xx xx xx"  Rule 16-A was introduced in the Army Rules, 1954 vide SRO 188 of 461979 which is in the following terms :-  "16-A COMPULSORY RETIREMENT OF OFFICERS :  (1) (a) Officers shall be liable to be retired from service by order of the Central Govt. or the authorities specified in sub-rule 2 with effect from the afternoon of the last date of the month in which, they attain the age limit specified in sub-rule (5).
(b) The age limits shall be subject to the provisions contained in sub rule (5).
2.
The authorities referred to in sub-rule (1) shall be  a) the Director General Armed Forces Medical Services in respect of officers of the AMC or the Army Dental Corps.
b) The Director Remount and Veterinary Serivce in respect of officers of the Corps below the rank of Colonel.
c) The Director of Military Farms in respect of officers of the Military Farms below the rank of Colonel; d) the Military Secretary, Army Hqrs.
in respect of other officers.
3.
Orders of retirement shall specify the date from which retirement shall be effective and subject to the provisions of sub-rule (4), the officer shall be relieved of his duties on that date.
4.
An officer who has attained the age of compulsory retirement or has become due for such retirement by reason of completing the period of service or tenure allowed to him may be retained in service for a further period at the discretion of Central Government if exigencies of service so require.
5.
The following shall be the ages of retirement :-  (a) to (f) x x x x (g) For officers of Remount and Veterinary Services and Military Farms :- Minimum Maximum Brigadier 55 57 Colonel 55 57 Lt.
Colonel & below -  55 Provided that :-  (1) xx xx xx xx  (2) A Colonel shall normally be permitted to complete 26 years of qualifying service for pension.
The Central Govt. may retain him in service beyond this period but not beyond the maximum age limit for retirement."
Vide Govt. of India, Ministry of Defence letter dated 26.7.1984 (Annexure P-1) pertaining to Rules regarding ages of retirement and tenure of appointment for Army Officers from RVC, sanction of the President was conveyed regarding the rules governing the age of retirement of the RVC Officers holding permanent commissions.
It provided ages of retirement of the RVC officers as under :-  "1.
AGES OF RETIREMENT  Upto and including the rank of Colonel - 55 years  Brigadier - 56 years  Major General - 57 years  Lt. General - 58 years  This letter further provided that these ages of retirement would come into force from the date of issue of the letter.
However, in those cases where these ages of retirement were to the disadvantage of serving officers, such officers would continue to be governed by the ages of retirement prevalent prior to the issue of the said letter.
4.
It may be noticed here that vide notification dated 121991 there were some amendments in Rule 16-A quoted above and the same are reproduced for ready reference :-  "2.
In the Army Rules, 1954, in Rule 16-A in sub-rule (5), (a) in Sub-Clause (ii) of clause (g) the portion beginning with the words 'however', in those cases and figures ending with the words and "the Army (Third Amendment) Rules, 1985 shall be omitted".
(b) in clause (g) after sub-clause (ii), the following sub-clause shall be added, namely :-  (iii) All serving officers commissioned prior to 26.7.1984 will exercise an option as per format given below to come under the revised ages of retirement/tenure of appointment or continue to be governed by the ages of retirement prevalent prior to 26.7.1984.
The option will be exercised within a period of six months from the date of publication (Second Amendment) Rules, 1990.
Option once exercised shall be final and irrevocable.
Officers will continue to be governed by the terms and conditions opted for in the present rank as also in the higher ranks to which they may be promoted until they retire from service.
If no option is exercised within the stipulated period, the officer will automatically be governed by the revised ages of retirement with effect from 26.7.1984."
The case of the respondents is that the ages of retirement which have been quoted above in the Regulations or Rules pertain to the substantive ranks and according to the Rules and Regulations, an officer who was a Substantive Lt.
Colonel and only an Acting Colonel was to retire at the age of 55 years.
Since the petitioner was a substantive Lt.
Colonel and only an Acting Colonel, he was reghtly retired at the age of 55 years.
The case of the petitioner, on the other hand, is that there is no difference between an Acting rank and a substantive rank and an officer who is holding an acting rank enjoys all the powers of a substantive rank and gets the same pay which the officer in a substantive rank gets and, therefore, even a substantive Lt.
Colonel who is an acting Colonel would have the same age of retirement which is fixed for a Colonel.
According to the learned Counsel, the Rules and Regulations do not make any distinction between a substantive rank and an acting rank.
5.
Since there was some dispute on facts I had allowed the parties to file additional affidavits.
It has been stated in the additional affidavit on behalf of the respondents that no Acting Colonel in RVC has been allowed to go beyond 55 years and they were made to retire at that age.
Further it has been mentioned that after the introduction of Rule 16-A on 461979, even a substantive Colonel in the RVC was to retire at the age of 55 years.
However, his case for retention in service upto the age of 57 years was always considered and in case that substantive Colonel was found fit for retention in service, he was allowed to serve upto 57 years of age.
Though, according to the respondents, the cases for retention in service of Acting Colonels (who were substantive Lt. Colonels) were not required to be considered, yet due to oversight and mistake, the cases of some of the Acting Colonels including the petitioner were considered for retention in service by a duly constituted Board, but the Board did not recommend their retention in service beyond the age of 55 years.
6.
On the facts that have emerged it is not necessary for me to decide the point whether there is any distinction between the acting rank and a sub-stantive rank for the purpose of retirement and in the present case I would assume that there is no difference between an acting rank and a substantive rank and the petitioner was to be treated as a substantive Colonel.
The age of retirement of a Colonel as per Paragraph 75 of the 1962 Regulations, which have already been quoted above, is 57 years.
This was changed by Army Rule 16-A, which was introduced in the Army Rules, 1954 on 461979 by which the age of retirement of a Colonel in RVC was made 55 years and the maximum was 57 years.
There cannot be any dispute that the age of retirement of Govt. servants can be reduced.
Reference in this connection may be made to Supreme Court Judgments in K Nagaraj and others, etc. etc. v. State of Andhra Pradesh and another etc., AIR 1985 SC 551 and Bishnu Narain Misra v. The State of Uttar Pradesh and others, AIR 1965 (Vol. 52) SC 1567.
The case of a Colonel, who had attained the age of 55 years had to be considered for retention in service up to the age of 57 years.
Vide order dated 26.7.1984 (to which reference has already been made above) the age of retirement of a Colonel was kept at 55 years and thereafter he had no right to be considered for retention in service.
However, this was not to apply to those officers to whom this was disadvantageous.
It was perhaps keeping this in view that a notification dated 121991 was issued giving options to the officers either to have the age of retirement as prevalent prior to 26.7.1984 or to have the age of retirement as fixed by letter dated 26.7.1984.
Putting the case of the petitioner at the highest, it can be said that initially his age of retirement under the 1962 Regulations was 57 years, which was reduced by Rule 16-A to 55 years, with a right to be considered for retention in service upto 57 years.
In the present case, the case of the petitioner was considered for retention in service beyond the age of 55 years, but his case was not recommended for retention.
The relevant record regarding consideration of petitioner's case for retention was produced before me.
The only right the petitioner had was of consideration for retention in service beyond the age of 55 years.
The case of the petitioner has been duly considered.
That being so, I do not find any infirmity in the order retiring the petitioner at the age of 55 years.
Apart from this, no case has been brought to my notice where an Acting Colonel has been allowed to go beyond the age of 55 years in the RVC or ipso facto a substantive Colonel has been allowed to go upto the age of 57 years after introduction of Rule 16-A, without considering his case for retention in service after 55 years of age.
7.
For the foregoing reasons, I find no merit in this petition, which is dismissed.
However, there will be no order as to costs.
8.
Before parting with the judgment, I may observe that the petitioner was allowed to retain the Government accommodation.
If the petitioner files an undertaking with the RespondentAuthorities within a fortnight from today that he would vacate the Government accommodation on or before 30111991, then normal rent only be charged from him.
Petition dismissed.