Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - The petitioner having been sponsored by the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana, was appointed as a Driver, vide letter dated 1171989, copy Annexure P-1 to the writ petition issued by the General Manager, Haryana Roadwas, Faridabad.
As per condition No. 3 contained in the said appointment letter, the appointment was subject to his character verification and antecedents by the District Magistrate as well as by the Police Authorities concerned.
Subsequently, vide order dated 27.9.1989, the services of the petitioner were discontinued being no longer required on account of adverse report of character antecedents sent by the District Magistrate, Hissar and the concerned Police Authority in which it was highlighted that the petitioner was convicted under Section 294 IPC Feeling aggrieved by the impugned order of his termination, the petitioner has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for quashing the impugned order and issuance of a direction to the respondent to reinstate him in service from the date of termination.
The impugned order has been challenged on the ground that at the alleged offence committed by the petitioner did not constitute moral turpitude As such his services could not be terminated.
The counsel further contended that the Government of Haryana issued latter dated 221973 taking a policy decision to rehabilitate convicts who were not guilty of offences involving moral turpitude.
It has been further contended that there is no bar recruiting of convicts who were not guilty of serious offences.
Counsel invited this Court's attention to a list of offences which constitute moral turpitude under various provisions of the Indian Panel Code.
2.
The plea of the State is that appointment of the petitioner was subject to character and antecedents verification which on verification were not found to be good.
As such his services were terminated per terms of appointment letter.
3.
On consideration of the matter, I am of the view that there is no force in the stand of the State and the writ petition deserves to be accepted.
4.
I have perused the policy instructions contained in Annexure P-4.
In it finds mention a list of offences which constitute moral turpitude under various sections of the Indian Penal Code.
The Haryana Government has stressed the need of rehabilitation of convicts who are not involved in cases of serious nature.
The convicts who are not guilty of offences involving moral turpitude are to be rehabilitated and taken into government service.
5.
I find that the alleged offence committed by the petitioner does not fall within the purview of offences which constitute moral turpitude.
As such the action of the respondents in discontinuing the services of the petitioner cannot be said to be justified and the impugned order Annexure P-2 cannot be sustained being contrary to the said policy instructions of the Government.
6.
For the foregoing reasons, the writ petition is allowed and impugned order Annexure P-2 is quashed.
The petitioner is to be taken in service with continuity of service.
However, it is made clear that the petitioner will not be entitled to any back wages salary.
Parties to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.