Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner, a well qualified Naib Subedar in the Indian Army, is aggrieved by the order dated May 1, 1989 (Annexure P-3) and the order dated October 11, 1989 ordering his discharge from the army on completion of a tenure of 24 years w.e.f.
November 1, 1990.
His main grievance is that the Government of India vide its letter dated December 16, 1976 (Annexure P.6) had laid down the revised terms of service/tenure and age limits.
In terms of this letter, the petitioner was entitled to serve for a tenure of 26 years or upto the age of 50 years, whichever is earlier.
The petitioner submits that his discharge from the Army at an earlier stage when he had just crossed the age of 42 years was wholly arbitrary and contrary to law.
He further points out that on coming to know of the letter dated December 16, 1976, he had submitted his option which was recommended by his Commanding Officer vide letter dated December 20, 1989 (Annexure P.7).
This recommendation was turned down vide orders dated February 13, 1990 (Annexure P.8).
The, statutory complaints also having borne no fruit.
The petitioner had approached this Court through the present petition, the Motion Bench while admitting the writ petition had stayed the operation of the orders at Annexures P.5 and P.8.
2.
The respondents in the written statement have asserted that the Government had introduced enhanced service limit/age of retirement vide letter dated December 16, 976.
All serving NCOs and JCOs were required to exercise their option in favour of or against the provisions of the said government letter in writing by November 30, 1977.
However, the petitioner did not exercise his option.
As a consequence, the petitioner had to be retired on completion of 24 years pensionable service.
3.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties.
A perusal of the letter dated December 16, 1976 shows that the relevant provisions regarding option is contained in paragraph 2(a).
This para reads as under :-  "Para 2(a) : Consequent on issue of this letter, all serving JCOs and NCOs shall be asked to give their option in writing to accept the new terms or continue to be governed by the existing terms of service applicable to them, by 30 Apr 77."
According to the above instruction, a serving JCO or the NCO had to be asked to give his option.
This option had to be exercised in writing.
The person concerned was entitled to accept the new terms or had to clearly state that he wanted to be governed by the existing terms.
The requirement was not that in the absence of option the person was to be governed by the old terms.
On the contrary a clear option for either one or the other had to be exercised.
In the present case, the claim of the respondents is that the petitioner had not exercised his option either way, In such a situation, the authorities could not have concluded that the petitioner would continue to be governed by the old terms.
4.
The claim of the petitioner is that he had never been asked to exercise his option by any unit where he had served.
There is no specific denial of this averment made by the petitioner in paragraph 9 of the writ petition.
On the contrary, the Commanding Officer of the petitioner (and in my view rightly) had observed in his letter dated December 20, 1989 (Annexure P.7) that the JCO concerned has never been asked by any Unit which he had served earlier or the Signal Records to exercise his option in accordance with AO 13/77 3(c) of the Signal Records letter under reference till now.
He had recommended the retention of the petitioner.
Even though an effort was made to show that the recommendation of the Commanding Officer could not be accepted, nothing was produced before me to indicate that the petitioner had in fact been asked to exercise his option or that the letter dated December 16, 1976 had ever been got noted from him.
In this situation, I am led to conclude that the petitioner had not been conveyed the letter of December 16, 1976 at the relevant time.
Soon after coming to know of it he had exercised his option.
The said option was forwarded by his Commanding Officer along with his own recommendation vide letter dated December 20, 1989.
However, the request was turned down and the option certificates returned without any action.
It was observed that "these cannot be accepted at this belated stage."
In the circumstances of the case, I am satisfied that the petitioner's option should have been accepted.
5.
Keeping in view the totality of the circumstances, I am of the view that the interpretation placed by the respondents on the letter dated December 16, 1976 is not correct.
The view taken by the respondents that a person who did not opt for the extended terms of service was to be deemed to be governed by the old terms is contrary to the plain language of the order.
Further the petitioner had in any case not been given an opportunity to exercise option.
He had exercised his option on coming to know of the order.
Even if it is assumed that there was delay in the exercise of option, his request deserve to be considered.
It could not have been rejected on the ground of delay alone.
6.
I accordingly accept this writ petition and quash the impugned action of the respondents including the order at Annexure P.8.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to his costs, which are assessed at Rs. 1,000/-.
Consequential reliefs shall be granted within three months.
Petition accepted.