Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner is a retired Civil servant.
He.
was originally working in the State of Punjab but on reorganisation of State, he was allocated to the State of Haryana with effect from November 1, 1966.
On having attained the age of superannuation, he retired from service on October 12, 1971.
Vide orders dated December 2, 1988, the Haryana Govt. decided to withdraw "the facility of reimbursement of medical charges to its employees/pensioners/family pensioners for out-door medical treatment with immediate effect".
In order to compensate for the loss thus incurred by these categories of persons, it decided to pay Rs. 30/- per month.
It was further clarified that in-door and the hospitalisation charges will be reimbursable.
The petitioner is aggrieved by this order.
A copy of this order has been placed on record as Annexure P-5.
2.
Mr. GL Sadana, learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that the impugned order is violative of the provisions of the rules called the Punjab Services (Medical Attendants) Rules, 1940 (hereinafter referred to as 'the 1940-Rules') He further submits that vide orders dated October 16, 1986, the employees had been asked to give options for acceptance of a fixed amount or to claim reimbursement of the actual charges.
The petitioner having exercised the option in pursuance to the decision of the Govt., the action in withdrawing the facility was violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
He further contends that the option exercised by the petitioner amounted to a contract and thereafter, the benefit could not be unilaterally withdrawn by the State.
It has also been contended that the action was violative of the provisions of section 82(vi) of the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966 inasmuch as the conditions of service governing the petitioner had been changed without the prior approval of the Central Government.
Mr. Jaswant Singh, learned Assistant Advocate General appearing for the State of Haryana contested the validity of these submissions.
3.
A perusal of the rules shows that the benefits thereunder were available only to the serving employees.
The rules do not apply to the pensioners.
Benefits under the rules were extended to the pensioners by an executive order.
A perusal of Annexure P-1 which is a copy of the rules itself show that it was by an order of November 29, 1967 that the Punjab Government had extended the benefit to the retired persons as well.
Even by this order it was inter alia, provided that "the cost of medicines which are required to be purchased from the market for treatment outdoor as well as indoor will be borne by the Government pensioners themselves and no reimbursement is to be made."
On perusal of the rules, I am satisfied that these do not apply to the pensioners.
The statutory rules are applicable only to the serving employees.
The benefit was conferred by an executive order and has been modified by an executive order.
There is thus no question of the rules having been violated in the process.
4.
Nor am I satisfied that the action is violative of Articles 14 of the Constitution.
The Govt., at a given point of time, decided to allow reimbursement of expenses of medicines incurred by the pensioners for out-door treatment.
The persons concerned were asked to opt for a lump sum allowance or for reimbursement.
This option was sought vide letter dated October 16, 1986, a copy of which has been appended as Annexure P-4.
The petitioner claims that he had exercised his option or reimbursement of the actual expenses and not for the fixed allowance of Rs. 150/- per annum.
It is contended that after the petitioner had exercised this option, the action of the respondents in withdrawing the facility of reimbursement is arbitrary and violative of Articles 14 of the Constitution.
On the material as produced before me, I am not inclined to accept the contention raised on behalf of the petitioner.
The option was exercised in the year 1986 and the benefit has been drawn by the petitioner till the Govt. revised its order in December 1988.
Now a uniform allowance has been sanctioned to every person.
There is per se no discrimination.
There is no element of arbitrariness.
If the Govt. on examination of the matter considers it to be in public interest to grant a fixed allowance towards medical facility and the order is uniformly applied to every person, whether serving or retired, unless lack of bona fide is established, I am not persuaded to hold that the action is arbitrary.
It is not the case of the petitioner that the benefit has been withdrawn retrospectively.
It has been withdrawn only prospectively.
I do not find any unconstitutionality about the order.
5.
Mr. Sadana states that the exercise of option amounted to a contract which cannot be unilaterally superseded.
I do not think the exercise of option for one or the other alternative amounted to a contract binding on the parties for all times to come.
It was only a concession given by the Govt. to the pensioners.
Even otherwise, matters relating to conditions of service can be unilaterally altered by the State.
If conditions of service can be unilaterally altered, a concession given by an executive order can also be modified or superseded by the Govt.  6.
The next contention raised by the learned counsel is that the conditions of service could not be altered except in accordance with the provisions of section 82(6) of the Punjab Reorganisation Act.
He has relied upon the decision of the Supreme Court in Mohammed Bhakar v. Y Krishna Reddy and others, Reported as 1970-SLR-768.
In my view, the protection of section 82 (6) is applicable to the persons serving in connection with serving in con the affairs of the State.
The pensioners are not serving.
The provisions of clause (6) of section 82 are, therefore, not attracted.
Even the decision in Mohd.
Bhakar's case (supra) relied upon by the petitioner is thus of no assistance.
7.
In the view I have taken, the decision in Mohd.
Bhakar's case (supra) can have no application to the facts of the present case.
8.
I, therefore, find no merit in this writ petition which is dismissed.
Since the petitioner has already retired from Govt. service, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.