MM Kumar, J - The short question which arises for determination in this petition is whether this Court in exercise of jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution cold direct any change in date of birth in the service book of the petitioner in accordance with the amendment notified vide notification dated 2161994 (Annexure P-1) which has permitted a period of two years for making application for the purpose of effecting change in the date of birth ?
2.
Brief facts of the case are that the petitioner joined service in the Department of Excise and Taxation as a Clerk in 1973.
He was thereafter directly recruited as Assistant in 1980 while serving as Clerk.
He was promoted as Superintendent in 1988 and thereafter as an Excise and Taxation Officer in the year 1990.
He is continuing on the afore-mentioned post.
At the time of joining service in 1973 and 1980 his date of birth recorded in the service book is 2081947.
It is claimed that on the basis of given date of birth in the Bikrami Era the school authorities erroneously converted his date of birth to Christian Era.
Under the Indian Calendar his date of birth as given was 5th Bhadon 2005 BK when converted to Christian Era it comes to as 2081947.
It is asserted that infact the conversion to the Christian Era comes to as 20.8.1948 and on account of this error his date of birth recorded every where is 2081947 which deserves to be corrected.
3.
It is asserted that the respondent-State has issued notification dated 2161994 (Annexure P-1) incorporating the amendment in the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume 1, Part I substituting Note 3 (Annexure `A') below Rule 25.
According to the unamended note and Instructions at Annexure `A' every person newly appointed to a service or post under Government was required to produce birth certificate or in the alternative matriculation certificate or an affidavit in proof of correctness of the date of birth.
As such the date of birth was required to be recorded in the service record or any other record that was required to be maintained in respect of Government employee by the Government.
The most important stipulation was that once a date of birth is recorded in the afore-mentioned manner then it could not be altered except in case of clerical error and that too with the prior approval of the Government.
Note 3 stipulates that date of birth given by an employee in his application form submitted to a recruiting agency like Punjab Public Service Commission or the Punjab Subordinate Services Selection Board or the Departmental Selection Committee was to be treated as final and no change was permitted after entry into Government service.
However, the amendment permitted a period of two years for an employee who was in service on 2161994 to apply for change of date of birth on the basis of conclusive documentary evidence such as matriculation certificate or Municipal Birth Certificate etc. No request after the expiry of period of two years was to be entertained.
4.
To implement instructions/Rules as amended by Annexure P-1, the Government issued instructions on 1811995 (Annexure P-2) laying down the procedure for effecting change in the date of birth.
It was provided that an enquiry should be conducted by the Commissioner for Enquiries before arriving at a decision regarding change of date of birth.
It was further stipulated that the competent authority could direct change of date of birth only after obtaining approval of the Finance Department through the Department of Finance and Administrative Reforms irrespective of the fact whether the case relates to a gazetted or a non-gazetted employee.
These instructions were notified on 1811995 (Annexure P-2) and instead of Commissioner the inquiry was required to be conducted by the Deputy Commissioner concerned of the district.
Another set of instructions issued on 1471995 (Annexure P-4) dispensed with seeking approval from the Department of Personnel and Administrative Reforms through the Finance Department.
It directed the deletion of para 3 from the instructions dated 1811995 (Annexure P-2).
However, on 5101995 (Annexure P-5) instructions dated 1011995 (Annexure P-3) were suspended and as a consequence instead of the Deputy Commissioner, the Commissioner was to hold enquiry.
On 10.10.1995 (Annexure P-6) the Government through its Finance Department suspended the operation of instructions dated 2161994, 1811995 and 1471995.
On 13.2.1995 (Annexure P-7) the Department of Personnel and Administrative Reforms issued instructions to the effect that earlier instructions suspending the operation of instructions were withdrawn in toto.
On 7.10.1996 (Annexure P-8) on re-consideration it was decided that all applications received during the period the notification dated 2161994 remained in force were to be disposed of on merits and the procedure prescribed by the instructions dated 1051995 was to be followed in letter and spirit.
The net result was that all applications filed after 2161994 (Annexure P-1) were to be considered in accordance with the procedure given in the instructions dated 1811995 (Annexure P-2).
In other words, the special enquiry was required to be conducted by the Deputy Commissioner and approval by the Department of Personnel and Administrative Reforms in consultation with the Department of Finance was also required to be obtained.
5.
The petitioner is stated to have made an application on 2251995 (Annexure P-9) to the Excise and Taxation Commissioner, Punjab, Patiala for effecting change in his date of birth as recorded in his service record.
It is claimed that the Excise and Taxation Commissioner advised the petitioner that before any action could be taken for change of date of birth from 2081947 to 20.8.1948, the petitioner was to send his matriculation certificate showing his date of birth to be 20.8.1948.
On 251995, the petitioner wrote to the Registrar, Punjab University, Chandigarh for effecting change in his date of birth by claiming that the school authorities have erroneously converted the Bikrami Era of 5th Bhadon, 2005 BK to Christian Era to be read as 2081947 whereas it is required to be converted to 20.8.1948.
After some correspondence, the Registrar, Punjab University, Chandigarh vide his letter dated 2621998 (Annexure P-14) communicated to the petitioner that correction in his date of birth has been permitted from 2081947 to 20.8.1948.
The original certificate of the petitioner was cancelled and duplicate copy of the same with correct date of birth was supplied which is placed on record as Annexure P-15.
On the basis of the afore-mentioned certificate, the petitioner again applied on 431998 which is obviously after the period of two years.
6.
The Department of Excise and Taxation obtained authentication from the Punjab University with regard to the change of date of birth effected in the certificate of the petitioner who replied in the affirmative as is evident from the letter dated 1121998 (Annexure P-18).
The Excise and Taxation Commissioner also forwarded the representation of the petitioner to the Government vide letter dated 561998.
On 1181998, the Commissioner asked for further information and documents showing as to how the petitioner came to know that his date of birth in service record was wrong.
The reply was sought to be submitted along with birth certificate in original and both certificates of matriculation.
The petitioner sent his reply on 1491998 (Annexure P-21).
In his reply to the letter by the Government, the Commissioner Excise and Taxation has categorically stated that the petitioner had filed an application on 2251995 for change of his date of birth.
The enquiry conducted by the Deputy Commissioner, Sangrur (Annexure P-27) dated 1862001 also shows that the conversion made by the School from 5th Bhadon, 2005 BK was 20.8.1948 and not 2081947 as was wrongly recorded by the school authorities.
It is claimed that despite the glaring error committed by the school authorities and the order passed by the Deputy Commissioner the Government has rejected his claim without any detailed order which has been conveyed by the Commissioner, Excise and Taxation that his representation for change of date of birth was considered and the same was filed by the Government.
7.
The respondents have taken the stand that within two years of joining the service the date of birth as given in the service record could have been rectified and thereafter applications could be entertained only in cases of clerical mistakes.
The petitioner has applied for change in his date of birth after a period of 22 years.
He is at the verge of retirement.
It has further been pointed out that application sent on 2251995 for effecting the change was not accompanied with any confirmatory documentary evidence as is contemplated by instructions dated 2161994.
It has further been alleged that the representation with regard to change of date of birth of the petitioner was received on 861996 which is after the expiry of period of two years and no such request was to be entertained after 2061996.
The representation was time barred.
The factual position with regard to issuance and withdrawal of instructions has been admitted.
8.
Mr. PS Patwalia, learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that the order dated 2052002 (Annexure P-28) rejecting representation of the petitioner is cryptic and is unsustainable in the eyes of law.
It is maintained that an order deciding the right of an employee is required to be speaking one.
He has further submitted that ground of delay raised by the respondent in the preliminary objections of the written statement cannot constitute a basis for defeating his claim because he has filed an application for correction of his date of birth on 2251995 (Annexure P-9).
Learned counsel has maintained that the afore-mentioned factual position has also been supported by the Commission vide his letter dated 22101998 (Annexure P-23) observing that the representation made by the petitioner dated 2251995 (Annexure P-9) for effecting change in his date of birth was covered by instructions dated 2161994.
The submission made by the learned counsel that all judgments of this Court as well as by the Supreme Court would be inapplicable to the cases whereby change in date of birth has been permitted.
In support of his submission, learned counsel has placed reliance on paras 9 and 10 of the judgments in the case of Burn Standard Co Ltd and another v. Dinabandhu Majumdar and another, 1995(3) SCT 126 (SC) : AIR 1995 SC 1499.
9.
Shri Mansur Ali, learned State counsel has vehemently controverted the argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner by submitting that no detailed order was required to be passed as the representation was beyond the period of two years.
According to the learned counsel an application dated 2251995 for change of date of birth cannot be regarded as the one submitted in accordance by the instructions dated 2161994 because those instructions specifically require the submission of application complete in all respects accompanied by confirmatory documentary proof in the form of matriculation certificate.
Such an incomplete representation dated 2251995 could not be regarded as an application in accordance with the instructions dated 2161994.
Therefore, the application submitted on 431998 has to be considered as belated as the period of two years had expired on 2061996.
With regard to various judgments on the issue, learned State counsel has pointed out that the rationale adopted by all the judgments of the Supreme Court is that no prejudice should be caused to the right of other employees who are either waiting or are likely to be affected because they are not party before this Court.
Learned counsel has substantiated his argument by submitting that if a person junior to the petitioner has consciously chosen to continue with the department as his career prospects get better in 2005 and he could go up the ladder of promotion then directing the change of date of birth would not be a fair exercise of power.
In support of his submission, learned counsel has placed reliance on two judgments of the Supreme Court in the cases of Union of India v. Ram Sua Sharma, 1996(2) SLR 16 and Union of India and others v. Saroj Bala, 1996(3) SCT 669 (SC) : 1996(2) SLR 898.
10.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, perusing the record, the amendment made by notification dated 2161994 (Annexure P-1) and other amendments, I am of the considered view that there is no merit in this petition.
It is well settled that correction in date of birth sets in motion a chain reaction inasmuch as many others, who are waiting in queue for years below the concerned employee would feel frustrated.
Moreover, such employees are not before the Court.
For the aforementioned proposition, reliance could be placed on a judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Secretary and Commissioner, Home Department and others v. R Kirubakaran, 1993(4) SCT 803 (SC) : 1994 Supp.
(1) Supreme Court Cases 155.
It would be appropriate to make a reference to a part of para 7 of the judgment, which reads as under :-  "An application for correction of the date of birth should not be dealt with by the tribunal or the High Court keeping in view only the public servant concerned.
It need not be pointed out that any such direction for correction of the date of birth of the public servant concerned has a chain reaction, inasmuch as others waiting for years, below him for their respective promotions are affected in this process.
Some are likely to suffer irreparable injury, inasmuch as, because of the correction of the date of birth, the officer concerned, continues in office, in some cases for years, within which time many officers who are below him in seniority waiting for their promotion, may lose their promotions for ever.
Cases are not unknown when a person accepts appointment keeping in view the date of retirement of his immediate senior.
According to us, this is an important aspect, which cannot be lost sight of by the Court or the tribunal while examining the grievance of a public servant in respect of correction of his date of birth.
As such, unless a clear case, on the basis of materials which could be held to be conclusive in nature, is made out by the respondent, the Court or the tribunal should not issue a direction, on the basis of materials which make such claim only plausible .............
The applicant has to produce the evidence in support of such claim, which may amount to irrefutable proof relating to his date of birth.
Whenever any such question arises, the onus is on the applicant, to prove the wrong recording of his date of birth, in his service book."
11.
It is also well settled that any belated claim with regard to change of date of birth could also not be accepted because principles in the nature of estoppel would come in play.
On the one hand, the employee by his non-action for a number of years has allowed the Department as well as others to believe that the entry in the service book with regard to date of birth is correct.
Such an employee might have obtained entry in service at an age younger than the age of his entitlement to enter service.
Even otherwise, as has been observed by the Supreme Court in R Kirubakaran's case (supra) acting on the date of birth given by such an employee, the others had adjusted their career prospects.
They might not have gone to other organisations where better prospects could be available in the hope that such better prospects like promotion etc. would be available in the department, where they have been working.
Such future prospects cannot be permitted to be frustrated by permitting a person like the petitioner to succeed in getting his date of birth changed.
12.
The question of delay was considered by the Supreme Court in the case of Union of India v. Harnam Singh, 1993(3) SCT 120 (SC) : 1993(2) Supreme Court Cases 162, emphasising that in a rare case if an employee is in possession of irrefutable proof relating to his date of birth, then may be the Court would interfere.
However, it has been emphasised that such an action has to be resorted to without unreasonable delay.
The observation of the Supreme Court in this regard reads as under :-  "It could not be the intention of the rule-making authority to give unlimited time to seek correction of date of birth, after 1979, to those government servants who had joined the service prior to 1979 but restrict it to the five-year period for those who enter service after 1979.
Indeed, if a Government servant, already in service for a long time, had applied for correction of date of birth before 1979, it would not be permissible to non- suit him on the ground that he had not applied for correction within five years of his entry into service, but the case of government servant who applied for correction of date of birth only after 1979 stands on a different footing.
It would be appropriate and in tune with harmonious construction of the provisions to hold that in the case of those Government servants who were already in service before 1979, for a period of more than five years, and who intended to have their date of birth corrected after 1979, may seek the correction of date of birth within a reasonable time after 1979, but in any event later than five years after the coming into force of the amendment in 1979.
This view would be in consonance with the intention of the rule-making authority."
Similar view has been taken by the Supreme Court in the case of Cement Corporation of India Ltd v. Raghbir Singh and another, 2002(9) Supreme Court Cases 398 and Hindustan Lever Limited v. SM Jadhav and another, 2001(2) SCT 369 (SC) : 2001(4) Supreme Court Cases 52.
13.
It is also pertinent to mention that the judgment of the Supreme Court in Saroj Bala case (supra) would explain what could be irrefutable proof of an error in recording of date of birth in service book.
In that case, the argument raised on behalf of the petitioner was that the certificate given by the Registrar of Births and Deaths indicated that the petitioner and her elder sister were born with a gap of six months.
It was contended that the petitioner could not have born within six months after the birth of her elder sister.
However, the Supreme Court rejected the aforementioned argument by observing as under:-  "We are wholly unable to appreciate the stand of the respondent.
The respondent's parents are not illiterate.
She is a well educated one.
She competed in All India Civil Services Examination.
Her date of birth was registered in the University to be April 4, 1949.
On that basis, she appeared for the examination, sought selection and accordingly she was selected.
The said date has been entered in the service record and remained undisputed for 18-1/2 years.
Subsequently it appears that she discovered in a talk with her sister that her date of birth is incorrect.
Then enquiries were made and obtained the birth certificate, which mentioned the birth of the child and the parentage of the respondent.
Horoscope was also sought to be set up to corroborate those circumstances."
14.
The aforementioned judgments of the Supreme Court have laid down some basic principles, which are required to be followed by the Courts, while issuing direction for correction of date of birth and the same may be summed up as under :-  1.
No reasonably belated claim shall be entertained by the Courts.
2.
The rights of third parties like junior employees, who are waiting in queue with the hope of advancing their career prospects must be kept in view.
3.
There has to be irrefutable proof of error in recording the date of birth in the service book.
4.
The rules must be strictly complied with.
15.
When the aforementioned principles are applied to the facts of the present case, it becomes evident that the petitioner has no case.
It is admitted position that the petitioner filed his application for correction of his date of birth on 2251995 (Annexure P-9) which was not accompanied by any documentary evidence, such as matriculation certificate or municipal birth certificate.
Such an application according to the Rules/Instructions Annexures P-1 to P-7 could not be entertained as it was incomplete.
Thereafter, an application was filed on 431998, which is much beyond the period of two years as envisaged by the amendment dated 2161994.
It is well settled that the Rules stipulating the period for making such an application have to be strictly complied with.
In any case, law has to be construed to advance the ends of justice than the way which would defeat it.
It is, thus, evident that the claim was highly belated and the principles enunciated by the Supreme Court in Harnam Singh's case (supra) and other cases would apply with full force to the facts of the present case.
It can also not be concluded that the proof with regard to date of birth based on the date given in the language of Bikrami Calendar was first given or the date of birth was furnished to the School authorities in the Christian Era and it was then converted to Bikrami Era.
The aforementioned requirement of irrefutable proof, period of two years etc. becomes evident from a perusal of Note 3 appended to Rule 25 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules Volume I, Part 1, which reads as under :-  "1.
In regard to the date of birth, a declaration of age made at the time of or for the purpose of entry into government service shall, as against the Government employee in question, be deemed to be conclusive.
The employees already in the service of the Government of Punjab on the date of coming into force of the Punjab Civil Services (First Amendment) Rules, Volume-I, Part-I, 1994, may apply for the change of date of birth within a period of two years from the coming into force of these rules on the basis of confirmatory documentary evidence such as Matriculation Certificate or Municipal Birth Certificate, etc. No request for the change of date of birth shall be entertained after the expiry of the said period of two years.
Government, however, reserves the right to make a correction in the recorded age of a Government employee at any time against the interests of the Government employee when it is satisfied that the age recorded in his service book or in the History of service of a Gazetted Government employee is incorrect and has been incorrectly recorded with the object that the Government employee may derive some unfair advantage therefrom."
A perusal of the aforementioned paras as amended on 2161994, would show that a period of two years was fixed which came to an end on 2061996.
Another requirement was that documentary evidence such as matriculation certificate or municipal birth certificate was required to be submitted.
It is admitted position that firstly the petitioner submitted an incomplete application on 2291995, whereas the amendment required submission of application complete in all forms.
Therefore, the aforementioned application could not be considered as the one envisaged by the amendment dated 2161994 or the subsequent instructions Annexures P-2 to P-6.
The other application accompanied by the matriculation certificate was submitted on 431998, which is after a period of two years.
Therefore, the petitioner cannot be granted any benefit.
It is also well settled that the career prospects of the persons junior to an employee cannot be tarnished by permitting change in date of birth, as has been discussed in the preceding paragraphs.
Therefore, none of the principles extracted above, are found to be in favour of the petitioner and as such, no such is made out.
16.
The question then is whether the petitioner could successfully get his date of birth changed on the basis of notification issued on 2161994 which provided for filing of application within two years.
As has already been noticed that the Supreme Court in numerous judgments has taken the view against any change in date of birth.
A casual glance of these judgments would reveal that date of birth has not been permitted to be changed after an inordinate delay by invoking the principles in the nature of estoppel.
In other words, once an employee has accepted his recorded date of birth for 20/30 years, he is not permitted to deny the correctness of the same on one ground or the other.
However, strong reliance has been placed by learned counsel for the petitioner on paragraphs 9 and 10 of the judgment of the Supreme Court in Burn Standard Company Limited's case (supra) to argue that where the rules permit the correction of date of birth within a specific period then in such cases all hindrances for correction of date of birth would stand removed.
In other to appreciate the submission made by learned counsel, it would be appropriate to make a reference to paras 9 which read as under :-  "9.
No doubt, there may be special law or rules which permit a person appointed in the service of the government or its instrumentality to seek correction of his date of birth which might have been accepted by the Government or its instrumentality, as the case may be, as correct at the time of his appointment.
But, the special law or rules governing the service of an employee if forbids correction of such date of birth of employee after its acceptance by the Government or its instrumentality, its subsequent correction at the instance of such employee, becomes impermissible.
However, in the absence of such special law or rules it may be open to the employee concerned to seek correction from the Government or its instrumentality, of the date of birth declared by him and accepted (by) the Government.
Even where such correction is sought, the Government or its instrumentality, as the case may be, would be entitled to refuse to correct the date of birth of its employee if the facts in the given case do not warrant such correction.
If that be the legal position, can it be said that it is open to a High Court in exercise of its extraordinary writ jurisdiction to entertain a writ application of an employee of the Government or its instrumentality, as the case may be, for correction of his date of birth entered in his `Service and Leave Record' at the time of his appointment and direct the Government or its instrumentality concerned to correct such date of his birth in his `Service and Leave Record' and continue him in service beyond the date of his normal retirement, is the question.
It is true that the High Court in exercise of its discretionary jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution can even enter upon disputed questions of fact, if the case in which the extraordinary jurisdiction is invoked warrants adoption of such inevitable course and decide upon the same for giving relief to the concerned party.
But the question is that if an employee of the Government or its instrumentality, who is at the fag end of his service and due for retirement from his service shortly, according to his date of birth found in his "Service and Leave Record" files a writ application before the High Court and invokes its writ jurisdiction for correction of such date of birth with a view to continue in service beyond the normal period of his retirement, will it be appropriate for the High Court to entertain such application to enquire into disputed facts pertaining to his date of birth for correcting it and extend his period of service ?"
The aforementioned observations of the Supreme Court have to be analysed by keeping in view the various factors to which reference has been made by the Supreme Court itself.
It has been observed that the Government or its instrumentality would be entitled to refuse correction in date of birth of its employee if the facts do not warrant such correction.
It may be true that the Rules/instructions as amended by notification dated 2161994 have permitted corrections by inviting application for a period of two years.
However, the instructions as amended by the notification, firstly, fail to take into account a number of factors like the effect of directing change of date of birth on the employees who are immediate juniors or awaiting for promotion in the lower cadre.
Subsequently, the huge delay caused by the applicant for coming forward for correction of date of birth and thirdly whether the employee was eligible to enter the Government service on the basis of his changed date of birth in comparison to the declared date of birth.
By necessary implications, the notifications amending the rules has to be considered in the light of the aforementioned factors because in the absence of implying the aforementioned factors in the amended instructions, the instructions may not be constitutionally sustainable.
It is well settled that the Court should lean towards constitutionality of the Rules/instructions rather declaring the rule as ultra vires.
If the rules are read down in the aforementioned manner, no case is made out for directing the change of date of birth of the petitioner.
17.
Even otherwise, the rule is amended by notification dated 2161994 without incorporating the factors detailed in preceding paras.
The petitioner would not be able to take any benefit because the application which he submitted to respondent No. 1 on 2251995 (Annexure P-9) cannot be considered to be complete because according to the notification, the application was required to be accompanied by confirmatory documentary evidence.
18.
Therefore, the Rules/instructions amended would not on their plain reading be helpful to the petitioner.
On that account also, the argument raised on the basis of the observation made by the Supreme Court in Burn Standard Company Limited's case (supra) would not be available to the petitioner.
19.
I am further of the view that the Government while issuing instructions with regard to change in date of birth itself has been changing its stand.
Firstly, instructions were issued on 2161994, which were changed by a notification issued on 1811995.
The said enquiry was required to be held by the Commissioner for Enquiries.
Thereafter, another set of instructions dated 1051995 was issued incorporating the requirement of seeking sanction of the Department of Personnel and Administrative Reforms.
However, on 1471995, the instructions dated 1811995, were withdrawn.
Then the instructions dated 1051995 were also withdrawn on 5101995 (Annexure P-5).
It is interesting to note that on 10.10.1995 instructions dated 2161994 and the other instructions were also withdrawn (Annexure P-6).
As such a vacillating attitude of the Government in shifting the stand by issuing new instructions does not help in solving the controversy on principles.
The vacillating attitude of the Government does not deserve any appreciation by this Court.
Be that as it may, the petitioner has failed to show that he can claim change in date of birth as a matter of right.
For the reasons stated above, this petition fails and the same is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.