Ashok Bhan, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was appointed as J.B.T.
teacher in DB Primary School, Muradgarh, district Karnal.
He joined his post on 3rd January, 1956.
Since the petitioner was on Provincialised Cadre, he was governed by Punjab Educational Service (Provincialised Cadre) Class III Rules, 1961.
The petitioner was transferred from district Karnal to Mohindergarh district on his own request.
2.
On 27th February, 19175, the State of Haryana accorded sanction to the grant of selection grade w.e.f.
1st October, 1974 to those masters, J.B.T.
and C & V cadre (both men and women) borne on provincialised cadre who have completed 18 years of service on the aforesaid date.
In future, selection grade was to be made available to the remaining incumbents borne on the provincialised cadre as and when the incumbents completed 18 years of service.
3.
The petitioner completed 18 years service on 2nd January, 1974.
In 1977, the petitioner filed an application for the grant of selection grade in terms of the notification (Annexure P-4) issued by the State of Haryana referred to in the foregoing paragraph.
This representation was rejected on the ground that since the petitioner had been transferred to Mohindergarh district at his own request, he did not hold on to his old cadre and his seniority should be determined in the State Cadre as per Rules.
It is not disputed that the State has maintained the identity of the teachers who are working in the District Board Schools and are governed by Punjab Education Service, (Provincialised Cadre) Class III Rules, 1961.
There is further no dispute that there is another set of teachers who are borne on the State Cadre and are governed by Punjab Educational State Service, Class III (School Cadre).
The former is designated as provincialised cadre and the latter is State Cadre.
4.
The claim of the petitioner is that he was in the provincialised cadre at the time of his transfer from Karnal to Mohindergarh in the year 1961.
His further claim is that on his transfer from Karnal to Mohindergarh, he could be placed as juniormost in the seniority list of Mohindergarh district amongst provincialised cadre but he could not be taken out of the provinciliised cadre and put in the State Cadre.
He has claimed the benefit of selection grade in terms of the notification dated 27.2.1975 Annexure P/4 to the writ petition issued by the State of Haryana.
The stand taken by the State of Haryana is that since the petitioner had been transferred from Karnal to Mohindergarh at his own request, he does not hold on to his old cadre and that his seniority is to be determined in State Cadre.
5.
I find force in the submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
So long as Government has maintained the provincialised cadre list of each of the districts, the petitioner being in that service, shall have to be shown in the provincialised cadre service only and not in the State Cadre Service list.
I find support for this proposition from a Division Bench judgment of this Court reported in 1990(1) SLR 123 : Naginder Singh & others v. State of Punjab & others, where in somewhat similar circumstances, it was held that a person could not be taken to the State Cadre simply because he has been transferred from one district to other district and further that he is to be treated as provincialised cadre teacher.
6.
Since I have held that the petitioner is to be treated on the cadre of the provincialised teachers, he would be entitled to the relief, prayed for in this writ petition.
7.
In the result, this writ petition is allowed and a writ of mandamus is issued directing the respondents to treat the petitioner as J.B.T.
teacher on provincialised cadre and grant him the selection grade in terms of the Government letter dated 27th February, 1975 (Annexure P-4).
The petitioner would be entitled to all other benefits and arrears with interest at the rate of 12%.
Arrears and other benefits arising thereof be given to the petitioner within 4 months from today.
No costs.
Petition allowed.