MM Kumar, J - This petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution prays for issuance of a writ of certiorari for quashing award dated 521986 (Annexure P-5) passed by the Labour Court, Rohtak.
It has been held that the workman-petitioner has no right to approach the Labour Court because he had earlier filed CWP No. 764 of 1977 on the same cause of action which was dismissed in limine (Ex W/3).
Holding that the Labour Court was not competent to go behind the single word order of this Court "dismissed" it has been held that still it would bar the jurisdiction of the Labour Court to grant any relief to the workman-petitioner.
On merits also, the Labour Court has found that the workman-petitioner who was working as Conductor had been found guilty of pocketing the fare collected from the passengers on 24111971.
The afore- mentioned mis-appropriation and embezzlement was found by the Inspector Shri Gurditta Mal who has appeared as MW-2.
The Inspector has found that the workman-petitioner had realized a sum of Rs. 550 from 10 passengers without issuing them travelling vouchers.
Placing reliance on a judgment of the Court in the case of State of Punjab v. Surat Singh, 1984(3) SLR 514, the Labour Court held that in case of misappropriation of government money by the Conductor of the State Transport such a person cannot be reinstated because reinstatement of such conductor would provide him another opportunity to repeat his conduct.
2.
Brief facts of the case are that the workman-petitioner was employed as a Conductor with the Transport Department of the respondent-State on 141970.
His services were terminated on 361972 after holding a domestic inquiry.
It has been alleged that the workman-petitioner has not been granted any opportunity for participation in the inquiry and punishment of dismissal awarded in that inquiry is dis-proportionate to the alleged mis-conduct.
The respondent-department took the stand that the workman-petitioner had already filed CWP No. 764 of 1977 which was dismissed and inquiry conducted was consistent with the principles of natural justice in which the workman- petitioner was given full opportunity to defend himself.
The Labour Court also framed two principal issues namely as to whether the dismissal of the writ petition No. 764 of 1977 would be a bar to maintain a reference under Section 10 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 and whether the inquiry proceedings conducted by the respondent-department were fair and proper and in accordance with the principles of natural justice.
3.
On the issue of maintainability of the reference the Labour Court has opined that there was a bar to seek reference under Section 10 of the Act after the dismissal of CWP No. 764 of 1977 by this Court.
The views of the Labour Court in this regard read as under :  "The workman had placed on record a copy of the order Ex. W3 passed by the Court of Punjab and Haryana in Writ Petition No. 764 of 1977.
In this petition also, the petitioner had challenged his order of termination and had prayed that he be reinstated with benefits of previous service and full back wages.
The said writ petition was dismissed by a Division Bench of the Hon'ble High Court of Punjab and Haryana.
On behalf of the respondent, it was contended that since the issues raised before the Hon'ble High Court in the writ petition mentioned above are the same as before this Court, the only remedy available to the petitioner was to file an appeal before the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India and not to raise the present industrial dispute.
I am inclined to go with him.
Findings of the Hon'ble High Court of Punjab and Haryana have got a binding effect on this Court and though the Hon'ble High Court in its vast did not choose to pass any speaking order, even then this Court cannot go behind the reasoning of the same.
So, the order of the Hon'ble High Court mentioned above bars the jurisdiction of this Court to grant any relief to the petitioner in this case and as such this issue goes against the petitioner."
4.
On the other issue the management did not lead any evidence despite various opportunities granted by the Labour Court which led to the closing of their evidence on 1311981.
Only one witness Gurditta Mal, Inspector had appeared before the Inquiry Officer.
On the afore-mentioned issue it was held by the Labour Court that the inquiry conducted in this case was not in accordance with the principles of natural justice and there are numerous procedural irregularities in the holding of inquiry proceedings by the Inquiry Officer.
The domestic enquiry on that account was held to be vitiated.
5.
Another issue framed was whether the termination of the workman-petitioner was justified.
On the afore-mentioned issue it was held that after it has been proved that the workman-petitioner had pocketed the fare collected from the passengers on 24111971 without issuing them travelling vouchers as was stated by the Inspector Shri Gurditta Mal then there was no room for taking any sympathetic view.
Therefore, the termination order was considered as valid.
6.
Mr. Munish Bansal, learned counsel for the workman-petitioner has argued that no principle of res judicata would be attracted to the case of the present nature because CWP No. 764 of 1977 was dismissed by one word "dismissed".
In support of his submission, learned counsel has placed reliance on a judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Hoshnak Singh v UOI, AIR 1979 SC 1328 and argued that principles of res judicata would not be attracted once the petition has been dismissed by one word "dismissed" without any speaking order.
Another submission made by the learned counsel is that after the recording of finding that enquiry proceedings are vitiated then the workman-petitioner deserved to be reinstated in service.
According to him there is no power with the Labour Court to record a finding separately under issue No. 2 that the reinstatement of the workman-petitioner would result into putting a premium on the misconduct of mis-appropriation and embezzlement.
7.
Mr. Suresh Monga, learned State Counsel has submitted that principles of res judicata would squarely apply as has been interpreted by this Court in the case of Teja Singh v. UT Chandigarh, 1981(1) SLR 274.
He has also drawn my attention to a Division Bench judgment of this Court in the case of Punjab Co-operative Bank Ltd v. Presiding Officer, Labour Court, 1992(4) SLR 388 and argued that the facts prevailing in the present case were more or less similar before the Division Bench in the later case.
8.
Having heard the learned counsel at a considerable length I am of the considered view that this petition lacks merit and deserved to be dismissed.
It has come on record that the Inspector Gurditta Mal on checking has found on 24111971 at Lohan Bus Stand that the conductor-petitioner had charged fare from 10 passengers without issuing them travelling vouchers.
In other words, he had pocked the whole amount.
Shri Gurditta Mal was examined on 1011972 in the presence of the workman-petitioner before the Enquiry Officer.
It is well settled that rules of evidence are not strictly applicable either to the proceedings of the Labour Court or to the domestic enquiry.
In case concerning embezzlement by the Conductor of passengers even hear-say evidence has been made admissible.
Once the statement of MW-1 Gurditta Mal is accepted then it is not unreasonable to assume that the charge of mis-appropriation and embezzlement levelled against the workman-petitioner stood proved.
In this regard a reference may be made to the view taken by the Supreme Court in the case of State of Haryana v. Rattan Singh, AIR 1977 SC 1512.
In that case the termination of conductor was declared to be bad by the Courts below by taking the view that none of the 11 passengers who were not issued travelling vouchers were examined at the domestic enquiry.
Some reliance was also placed by the Courts below on the departmental instructions which provides for recording of statement by the checking inspector.
On these two grounds the order of termination was declared illegal.
However, the Supreme Court in para 4 of the judgment rejected those two grounds by observing that in the case of Conductor even hear-say evidence would be relevant as long as it inspires confidence.
The afore-mentioned view of the Supreme Court reads as under :  "It is well settled that in a domestic inquiry the strict and sophisticated rules of evidence under the Indian Evidence Act may not apply.
All materials which are logically probative for a prudent mind are permissible.
There is no allergy to hearsay evidence provided it has reasonable nexus and credibility.
It is true that departmental authorities and administrative tribunals must be careful in evaluating such material and should not glibly swallow what is strictly speaking not relevant under the Indian Evidence Act.
For this proposition it is not necessary to cite decisions nor text books, although we have been taken through case law and other authorities by counsel on both sides.
The essence of a judicial approach is objectivity, exclusion of extraneous materials or considerations and observance of rules of natural justice.
Of course, fair play is the basis and if perversity or arbitrariness, bias or surrender of independence of judgment vitiate the conclusions reached, such finding, even though of a domestic tribunal, cannot be held good.
However, the Courts below misdirected themselves, perhaps in insisting that passengers who had come in and gone out should be chased and brought before the tribunal before a valid finding could be recorded.
The `residuum' rule to which counsel for the respondent referred, based upon certain passages from American Jurisprudence does not go to that extent nor does the passage from Halsbury insist on such rigid requirement.
The simple point is, was there some evidence or was there no evidence - not in the sense of the technical rules governing regular Court proceedings but in a fair commonsense way as men of understanding and wordly wisdom will accept.
Viewed in this way, sufficiency of evidence in proof of the finding by a domestic tribunal is beyond scrutiny.
Absence of any evidence in support of a finding is certainly available for the Court to look into because it amounts to an error of law apparent on the record."
9.
The principles laid down by the Supreme Court in Rattan Singh's case (supra) are applied (applicable ?)
to the facts of the present case.
It is evident that Gurditta Mal, Inspector had made a statement before the Inquiry Officer stating that the petitioner had charged fare from the bus passengers without issuing them travel vouchers.
The statement of the passengers or anyone else is not required to be recorded because the statement of Gurditta Mal, Inspector is considered sufficient according to the views of the Supreme Court in Rattan Singh's case (supra).
Therefore, I do not find any legal infirmity in the findings recorded by the Labour Court on the aforementioned issue.
On principle as well as on precedent the position is clear and there is no merit in this petition.
10.
The argument that principle of res judicata would be attracted to the facts of the present case has also failed to impress me because this Court in Teja Singh's case (supra) has taken the view that a second petition on similar facts and in respect of the same cause of action by the same party would not be maintainable even his earlier petition has been dismissed by one word `dismissed'.
The afore-mentioned view is explicit from the proposition No. (vii) of para 28 of the judgment.
It is also pertinent to mention that the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Hoshnak Singh (supra) on which reliance has been placed by the learned counsel for the petitioner was also considered by the five Judges Bench in Teja Singh's case (supra).
Therefore, the bar created by filing of earlier writ petition would operate against petitioner.
In view of the above, this petition fails and the same is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.