MR Agnihotri, J - Five petitioners, Sarvshri JPS Dhillon, MS Pannu, KN Manchanda, Jagdish Singh and Ms. Madhu, Manager/Deputy Managers/Assistant Managers of the Punjab Tourism and Development Corporation Limited, Chandigarh (hereafter referred to as 'the Corporation'), invoked the writ jurisdiction of this Court in 1981, challenging the appointment of respondent No. 3 - Shri SS Tewari, to the post of General Manager (Headquarters) of the Corporation, in the pay scale of Rs. 1,300 - 1,800 (unrevised), made on 9th April, 1981.
At the time of the aforesaid appointment, Mr. Tewari was already working in the Punjab Dairy Development Corporation and he was appointed in the Punjab Tourism and Development Corporation Limited on probation for a period of six months in the first instance, subject to other usual terms and conditions of service.
This appointment is continuing for the last more than ten years.
2.
During the pendency of this writ petition for the last more than a decade, out of the five petitioners, four of them namely, J.P.S.
Dhillon, KN Manchanda, Jagdish Singh and Ms. Madhu, have already withdrawn their names from the array of parties and the writ petition has been dismissed as withdrawn qua them.
At present, it is surviving only on behalf of petitioner No. 2 - MS Pannu.
3.
The appointment of respondent No. 3 - Shri SS Tewari, as General Manager (Headquarters), has been challenged on the following three grounds :  (1) According to the Memorandum and Articles of Association of the Corporation and the Service Bye-Laws made thereunder, the Board of Directors of the Corporation was the only competent authority to make the appointment of respondent No. 3 and the Managing Director alone was not competent to do so.
In the absence of approval of the Board of Directors, the appointment made by the Managing Director was illegal.
(2) The approval of the Board of Directors could not be accorded with retrospective effects, AND (3) Since no advertisement for filling up the post was made and applications from other candidates were not invited, the appointment of respondent No. 3 was violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution, inasmuch as it denied to the other employees equality of opportunity in the matter of employment.
Separate written statements have been filed by the Corporation and respondent No. 3 - SS Tewari, in which it has been repeatedly stated that it was not a case of appointment by direct recruitment or internal promotion at all.
On the other hand, the Corporation had offered the post of General Manager (Headquarters) to respondent No. 3 by bringing him to the Corporation on transfer.
It was an inherent right of the Corporation to fill up a post in its employment by bringing an officer on transfer.
Further, the matter regarding creation of the post of General Manager (Headquarters) and the appointment of Mr. SS Tiwari thereon was duly considered in a meeting of the Board of Directors and it was after interviewing Mr. Tewari that the Board of Directors approved the proposal for the creation of the post of General Manager (Headquarters) and appointment of Mr. Tewari thereon.
In these circumstances, especially when there was no appointment of Mr. Tewari by direct recruitment, as the same was only by transfer of an employee already in the service of another Corporation, there was no question of violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution, inasmuch as the Board of Directors of the Corporation, keeping in view the public interest, had an inherent right to create or fill up a post under its employment by transfer.
4.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and having gone through their pleadings, I find that the writ petition is without any basis and deserves to be dismissed.
In fact, it was based on wrong premises and the very foundation of the writ petition stands slipped away.
5.
Mr. Amrit Lal Behal, learned counsel for petitioner No. 2, on whose behalf the writ petition is surviving, has vehemently argued to salvage the petitioner by contending that the resolution of the Board of Directors regarding creation of the post of General Manager (Headquarters) and appointment of respondent No. 3 thereon, should have preceded the offer of appointment made by the Corporation.
6.
With respect, the distinction sought to be made by the learned counsel is fine and hypertechnical that it cannot invalidate the decision of the Board of Directors of the Corporation.
In fact, it is not a case of ratification of an earlier action with retrospective effect; rather it is a recognition of the fact that every thing was done by the Board of Directors of the Corporation itself by taking a conscious decision and that too after interviewing Mr. Tewari personally.
Otherwise also, the appointment by transfer having been made more than a decade back, it would be too late in the day to hold it illegal.
7.
Consequently, I do not find any merit in the petition and the same is dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.