Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was appointed as a Jeep Driver vide orders dated February 4, 1983.
This appointment was on ad hoc basis and could be terminated at any time without assigning any reason.
Vide orders at Annexure P.3 the petitioner was informed that his services are not required w.e.f.
September 11, 1987.
Aggrieved by the action of the respondents, this Court through the present writ petition.
2.
The primary ground of challenge to the order is that the services of the petitioner could not have been terminated to make room for Chanda Ram, who had been appointed vide orders dated September 13, 1987 and a copy of which has been placed on record.
It has been further asserted that the petitioner had worked for more than 4 years when his services were unceremoniously terminated.
3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents it has been pointed out that the petitioner had been appointed as a Jeep Driver in the District Sainik Board.
The financial burden of running the Board is borne by the Union of India and the State of Haryana on an equal basis.
The Union of India being not a party, the petitioner cannot claim a relief in the present proceedings.
It has been further pointed out that according to the instructions issued vide letter dated January 29, 1964, a copy of which has been placed on record as Annexure R1, only ex-servicemen were entitled to be considered for appointment in the District Sainik Board.
The petitioner's initial appointment itself was against these instructions and his mere continuance in the post on purely ad hoc basis can confer no right to him in service.
4.
A persusal of the letter dated January 29, 1964 shows that as a matter of policy, the Government had decided to appoint only exservicemen in the District Soldiers, Sailors and Airmen Boards.
The petitioner admittedly did not belong to that category.
Furthermore, irrespective of averment, the fact remains that the petitioner had been appointed on purely ad hoc basis and his services have been terminated on the eve of the selection of an ex-serviceman, viz., respondent No. 5 to man the post.
The petitioner's services were terminated in September, 1987.
If the empugned order is now set aside', respondent No. 5 would be rendered jobless.
Consequently, I do not consider it to be equitable to set aside the termination of the services of the petitioner, nor the order of appointment of respondent No. 5.
However, in the circumstances of the case, it is directed that in case a post of Jeep Driver becomes available in future, the vacancy shall be offered to the petitioner before its being offered to any other person.
This would, of course, be subject to the petitioner's physical and professional fitness.
In the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Order accordingly.