MR Agnihotri, J - In this petition under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution, the short prayer of the petitioner is for ante-dating his date of promotion, that is, to be deemed to have been promoted on the post of Private Secretary with effect from 22nd October, 1981, the date when his juniors were promoted without considering the petitioner for such promotion, instead of 6th May, 1985, the date when the petitioner was actually promoted.
2.
Briefly stated, the petitioner joined service in the Punjab Civil Secretariat as Junior Scale Stenographer in December, 1960, and was later on promoted as Personal Assistant on 11th January, 1967.
Respondent Nos. (sic) namely, Tarsem Lal Thapar and Ajit Singh Pahwa were promoted as Personal Assistants a couple of years later.
On 24th November, 1980, some posts of Private Secretaries fell vacant and the petitioner was also promoted as Private Secretary in an officiating capacity for a period not exceeding six months.
Later on, the petitioner was reverted from the post of Private Secretary to that of Personal Assistant on 13th October, 1983 and was again promoted as Private Secretary on 6th May, 1985.
In the meantime, on 22nd October, 1981, respondents Tarsem Lal Thapar and Ajit Singh Pahwa were promoted as Private Secretaries, but the petitioner was not considered for promotion, obviously because he had already been working as Private Secretary with effect from 24th November, 1980, which promotion was for a period of six months.
Since the petitioner was later on reverted on 13th October, 1983, he represented against the same by bringing to the notice of the authorities that the petitioner had been allowed to cross the Efficiency Bar by order dated 31st October, 1980, with effect from 1st October, 1980 hence, his reversion on the basis of any earlier reports, if any, was wholly untenable.
The representation was, however, rejected on 16th August, 1990, whereupon the petitioner has invoked the writ jurisdiction of this Court.
3.
In the separate written statements filed by the State Government as well as respondent Nos. 2 to 10, though the factual position has been admitted, yet it has been emphasised that the reversion of the petitioner ordered on 13th October, 1983, could be justified on the ground that he had been awarded adverse remarks for the year 1975-76 and that there was considerable delay in filing the writ petition by the petitioner.
4.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and having gone through the material on the record, I am of the considered view that the writ petition deserves to be allowed.
The petitioner, who had been allowed to cross the Efficiency Bar in 1980, had a right to continue as Private Secretary and his reversion by taking into account the adverse annual confidential report for the year 1975-76 (??)
was wholly arbitrary, being violative of Article 16 of the Constitution.
The mere fact that the order had been passed after consulting the Punjab Public Service Commission could not add any legal force to the order of reversion.
5.
Consequently, I allow this writ petition, quash the impugned order of reversion of the petitioner dated 13th October, 1983 (Annexure P.2) and restore to the petitioner his seniority position in the rank of Private Secretary, on the basis of his continuous appointment on that post ignoring the effect of reversion.
Resultantly, he shall be deemed to have been promoted as Private Secretary with effect from 22nd October, 1981, the date when his juniors were promoted and not with effect from 6th May, 1985, from which date he has actually been promoted.
As a necessary consequence of the acceptance of this writ petition, arrears of salary, etc. to which he would have been entitled, had he not been reverted by the impugned order.
However, in the circumstances of the case, there shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.