RS Mongia, J (Oral) - The post of Assistant Advocate General in the State of Punjab was advertised in August, 1987.
Petitioner before me was one of the candidates for the said post.
Interviews for selecting the candidates for the said post were held on 13101987 by a Committee consisting of Home Secretary of the State of Punjab, Advocate General of the State of Punjab and Legal Remembrancer of the State of Punjab.
The said Committee made a panel of three candidates for the post and placed them in order of merit.
Mr. ML Agnihotri was placed at serial No. 1, Mr. Baldev Singh Bhalur was placed at No. 2, whereas the petitioner was placed at Sr. No. 3 in order of merit.
It has been averred in the petition and which is not disputed that Mr. Agnihotri who was offered the appointment to the post of Assistant Advocate General, Punjab joined the post on 16.10.1987.
However, he resigned from the job and was relieved on 13111987.
The said post which had fallen vacant because of the resignation of Mr. Agnihotri was offered to the candidate at serial No. 2 i.e. Mr. BS Bhalur, but he had given in writing that he was not interested in job.
The post was then not offered to the petitioner but to Mr. Harbhajan Singh, who was working as Assistant Registrar at that time in the office of Advocate General Punjab, was given the additional charge of the post of Assistant Advocate General, who continued to hold the additional charge upto 3171988.
Since the post had not been offered to the petitioner, he made various representations but to no effect.
This led to the filing of the present writ petition in which prayer has been made that respondents be directed to appoint the petitioner as Assistant Advocate General.
2.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the petitioner's name was kept at Sr. No. 3 by the Selection Committees, which had been approved by the Governor of the State of Punjab and since vacancy had arisen because of the resignation of Mr. ML Agnihotri who had joined as Assistant Advocate General and the candidate at No. 2 having refused to accept the offer of appointment as Assistant Advocate General, the petitioner should have been offered the appointment.
Learned counsel drew my attention to the instructions of the State Government issued on 2231957 (Annexure P-5) in which it had been proved that the waiting list should last at least six months and if any additional vacancy arises after the date of selection, then the additional vacancy should be filled up from the waiting list.
Further it had been provided in the said instructions that if a candidate declines to accept the post offered to him against the vacancy which is intimated to the P.S.C.
then such a vacancy can be filled up even after the expiry of six months out of the approved list of the candidates.
Reliance was placed on a judgment of learned Single Judge of this Court in Rohtash Singh Kharub v. State of Haryana C.W.P.
No. 8300 of 1987 decided on 1891989 where similar instructions came up for consideration.
In that case also two posts fell vacant.
One person had declined to accept the offer and the other had resigned after accepting the offer.
Under those circumstances the learned Judge held that the persons on the waiting list had a right to be appointed against those vacancies.
3.
Mr. SS Dhaliwal, DAG, Punjab appearing on behalf of respondents, however, contended that these instructions would be only applicable if a person who is on the select list declines the offer of appointment and the vacancy remains unfilled.
It is only in those circumstances, according to the learned counsel, that the candidate on the waiting list would be offered the vacancy.
In other words the argument was that if a candidate has joined the post and then the same becomes vacant by any process (by resignation or by death etc.) then the candidate on the waiting list has no right to claim that vacancy and a fresh selection would have to be made.
4.
After hearing counsel for the parties I find considerable force in the argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
The whole idea of keeping the waiting list for a particular period is that if a vacancy arises during that period for any reason the whole process of selection has not to be undergone once again and the process of selection which has already taken place holds good for that period.
In the present case it has been provided in the instructions that approved list would hold good for a period of six months and if any additional vacancy arises during the said period, the same would be filled out of the candidates on that approved list/waiting list.
The instructions rather go a step further that if a candidate declines the offer of appointment and the post remains vacant the same can be filled from the approved list even after the period of six months.
The view I am taking finds support from the judgment of the learned Single Judge in Rohtash Singh's case (supra).
The matter can be viewed from another angle also.
Once the post is filled in by a particular candidate and he resigns, in a way it would be a additional vacancy in the sense that the earlier vacancy stood filled but becomes available on the resignation of the person who had been offered the appointment earlier.
The case of the petitioner, according to me, is fully covered by the instructions (Annexure P-5).
He had a right to be appointed against the post which had fallen vacant because of the resignation of Mr. ML Agnihotri and the refusal of the candidate at serial No. 2 to join the post.
5.
It is not a case where the respondents did not wish to fill the post at all.
Additional charge of the post was given to respondent No. 2 upto the date of his retirement i.e. 3171988.
Moreover, even thereafter many more appointments to the post of Assistant Advocate General have been made.
In this view of the matter, it cannot be said that the respondents had no plans to appoint anybody to the post.
No reasons have been given in the written statement as to why petitioner was not offered the appointment except the reason which has already been noticed above.
6.
For the foregoing reasons the writ petition is allowed and it is held that the petitioner was entitled to the appointment to the post of Assistant Advocate General when additional charge of the said post was given to respondent No. 2.
The petitioner would be entitled to reckon that date as his date of appointment as Assistant Advocate General for all purposes.
However, he will not be entitled to any salary for the said period.
Respondents are directed to issue appointment letter to the petitioner in accordance with the observations made above within 10 days from the receipt of this order.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.