MR Agnihotri, J - The petitioner was appointed as Sectional Officer (Junior Engineer) in the Haryana Public Works Department (Buildings and Roads Branch) on 15th March, 1972.
Since then he has been continuing in service.
At the time of joining service, the petitioner was a diploma holder, but later on, during service, he passed Sections A and B of the Institution Examinations in Mechanical Engineering Branch in Summer 1975 and Summer 1980, respectively.
By acquiring this qualification from the Institution of Engineers (AMIE), the professional qualifications of the petitioner became at par with a full-fledged degree-holder in Engineering in 1980.
Since the petitioner was the only qualified Junior Engineer who was to be considered for promotion to the next rank of Sub Divisional Engineer against the quota of AMIE qualified Junior Engineers, a regular Departmental Promotion Committee was constituted in 1981 for considering the case of the petitioner for promotion.
After the necessary screening, as required by the statutory service rules the petitioner was promoted on 11th December, 1981, as Sub Divisional Engineer (Mechanical).
This promotion was made in pursuance of Rule 6(4) of the Punjab Service of Engineers, Public Works Department (Buildings and Roads Branch) Class II Rules, 1965, as applicable to the State of Haryana, on ad hoc basis for a period of six months.
The petitioner joined in the promoted rank on the post of Sub Divisional Engineer (Mechanical) on 30th January, 1982, and the period of his promotion was extended from time to time till 3rd September, 1985.
Though according to the averments made by the petitioner his work and conduct during this period were wholly satisfactory, yet he was reverted from the post of Sub Divisional Engineer even when, according to the petitioner, a post of Sub Divisional Engineer was still lying vacant at roster point No. 40 meant for the AMIE qualified Junior Engineer.
The petitioner represented against his reversion but when his grievance was not redressed, he approached this Court for being promoted retrospectively with effect from 4th September, 1985, as he was the seniormost qualified and eligible AMIE Junior Engineer in the Department and also for regularisation of his services as such, with effect from 8th April, 1988, when a permanent post for AMIE quota became available.
2.
In reply to the writ petition, the respondents in their written statement have almost admitted the factual position but have sought to justify the impugned action by pleading that since the appointment of the petitioner, to start with, was under rule 6(4) of the Service Rules ibid it was a short term vacancy in the exigencies of public service for a period of six months starting from December, 1981, which, of course, continued upto 3rd September, 1985.
Since, according to the respondents, the permanent vacancy for AMIE quota became available only on 8th April, 1988, the petitioner could be adjusted against the same from that date only.
3.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and having gone through their pleadings, I am of the considered view that the writ petition deserves to be allowed, as the impugned action of the respondents in not considering the petitioner for promotion as Sub-Divisional Engineer with effect from 4th Sep, 1985, was wholly arbitrary and untenable in law.
According to Rule 6 of the Punjab Service of Engineers, Public Works Dept.
(Buildings & Roads Branch) Class II Rules, 1965 recruitment to Service is provided as under :  "6.
Recruitment to service :(1) Recruitment to the service for cadre and ex-cadre post shall be made in the following manner only the source listed below in the proportions and the orders indicated against a lot of every 40 vacancies :- Method of Recruitment Proportion Allocation of each source in lot of 40 Vacancies.
1.
Direct appointment 26 5 6 5 5 2.
Promotion from the members of the Haryana PWD B&R Sectional Officer (Engineering) Service.
3.
Promotion from Draftsman members of the Draftsman and Tracers Service 2 1 - - 1 4.
Promotion from members of the Haryana PWD B&R Sectional Officers (Engineering) Service and the Draftsmen and Tracers Service, possessing qualifications prescribed in Appendix 'B' 4 - 1 1 1  Total 40 8 8 8 8 8 (2) In case suitable candidates are not available from source No. (4) the vacancies shall be filled by direct recruitment.
(3) In case, a candidate is not available from source Nos. 1 and 3 and a person has to be appointed in public interest a stop gap arrangement from other than the allotted source, such a person shall be liable to be reverted to his original cadre when a candidate from the allotted source is available and the period of service rendered by such person will not be reckoned for the purpose of seniority.
(4) The Government may fill a short term vacancy, in the exigencies of public service, after recording specific reasons for a period of not exceeding six months in each case by local arrangement from among members of the Haryana PWD B and R Branch Sectional Officers (Engineering) Service, without resorting to the select list prepared under rule 9.
(5) No person, except to the extent provided under sub-rule-4.
a) Who is not a substantive member of the PWD (Buildings and Roads Branch) Class-II Service or a member of HSE (B&R) Class I Service in a Junior Scale on the date of enforcement of these rules, or b) who is not considered suitable for appointment to the service as provided in rule 7 read with Appendix 'G' shall hold the post of Sub Divisional Engineer even in an officiating capacity unless he is declared, within a period of 6 months from the date of enforcement of these rules as suitable for appointment to the service under the provisions of these rules.
Since the petitioner by acquiring the qualifications of AMIE came to possess the qualification prescribed in Appendix 'B' of the Rules, while being a member of the Haryana Public Works Department (Buildings and Roads Branch) Sectional Officer (Engineering) Service, for whom four posts out of a lot of 40 vacancies stood earmarked under the statutory rules, he was entitled to be considered against the same.
The mere fact that, to start with, promotion of the petitioner was made under Rule 6(4) ibid, in a short term vacancy in December, 1981, but later on it was continued right upto 3rd September, 1985, there was no occasion to revert the petitioner with effect from 4th September, 1985, when he was entitled to be considered against the post earmarked for his quota.
Apart from this, having been promoted by the order dated 11th December, 1981 (actually with effect from 30th January, 1982) and having continued to serve as Sub-Divisional Engineer upto 3rd September, 1985, even if the petitioner was to be reverted due to some administrative exigency, he had a prior right to be considered for promotion immediately thereafter as and when the vacancy arose.
According to the policy instructions of the State Government issued by the Chief Secretary to Government, Punjab, vide letter No. 8401-4GS-61/33127, dated 8th/11th September, 1961, which are also applicable to the State of Haryana, it was clarified by the State Government that if an employee had to be reverted for want of a vacancy, at the time of fresh promotion the claim of that employee for promotion will have to be considered first whose claim has already been established by his earlier promotion.
Therefore, considering any other Junior Engineer for promotion, the petitioner, who was a qualified AMIE Junior Engineer, was to be considered on priority.
The action of the respondents by not considering the petitioner for promotion with effect from 4th September, 1985, and by promoting other Junior Engineers, is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
4.
To be fair to the respondents, it may be noticed that faced with the aforesaid factual and legal position, the respondents have relied upon letter dated 12th August, 1988 (Annexure R-II with the written statement), in which it has been mentioned that the Government have evolved a principle of reviewing the cases of promotion of junior officers if senior officers have become eligible for promotion having acquired higher qualifications, after the promotion of junior officers.
It is on the authority of this letter that the impugned action of 3rd September, 1985, is sought to be justified.
Firstly, neither the impugned letter nor the principle, evolved was in existence at the time when the petitioner was promoted or even reverted on 3rd September, 1985.
Therefore, as this letter has come into existence after the filing of the present writ petition on 6th June, 1988, the legality of the impugned action cannot be justified by taking shelter behind this letter.
5.
Consequently, I allow this petition and by issuing a writ of mandamus, direct the respondents to treat the petitioner already promoted as Sub-Divisional Engineer with effect from 4th September, 1985, that is, the date of reversion of the petitioner.
Since on that date he happened to be the senior-most qualified AMIE Junior Engineer and his record of service had been good, he was entitled to be promoted as Sub-Divisional Engineer from that date automatically.
It is further directed that the respondents shall regularise the services of the petitioner as, Sub-Divisional Engineer with effect from 8th April, 1988, that is, the date on which, according to the respondents themselves, a permanent post of Sub-Divisional Engineer falling to the quota of AMIE Junior Engineer became available.
Resultantly, the petitioner shall also be entitled to all the arrears of salary, allowances, and other benefits of promotion as Sub-Divisional Engineer with effect from 4th September, 1985, to which he would have been entitled, had he not been reverted with effect from that date.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to the costs of this petition which are quantified at Rs. 1,000/-.
Petition allowed.