Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - The petitioners who are working as Supervisors in the offices of Child Development Project Officers (for short 'C.D.P.Os.)
under the Department of Social Welfare, Punjab, have filed present writ petition for issuance of writ of certiorari, mandamus, prohibition or any other order or directions quashing the promotions of Respondent Nos. 4 to 17 as C.D.P.Os., and for issuance of directions to the official respondents for filling in the remaining 16 posts in accordance with promotion quota etc. etc.  2.
The case of the petitioners is that their service conditions are governed by the Punjab Civil Service Rules and the authorities of the department are following the departmental instructions for the purpose of promotion from the post of Supervisor to the post of CDPO Further case of the petitioner is that Integrated Child Development Scheme is a Centrally- sponsored scheme expenditure of which is met by Government of India and the promotions etc. of the staff are made under the instructions issued by the Government of India and duly adopted by the State Government.
The petitioners have relied upon the instructions of Government of India dated 111975 as per which the CDPO should be preferable and as far as possible be lady officer.
The supervisor (Mukhya Sewika) should be the Lady Officer.
It is also the case of the petitioners that they are supervisors (Mukhya Sewikas) and possess all the prescribed qualifications for the post of supervisors.
They have also relied upon the seniority list of the supervisors upto April, 1985, and claimed that they being senior most supervisors are eligible for promotion to the post of C.D.P.Os.
The seniority list is Annexure P-1.
3.
It is also the case of the petitioners that one Mrs. Daljit Kaur at Sr. No. 1 of the seniority list was promoted as CDPO vide order dated 2961987 (Annexure P-2) illegally.
However, the petitioners are not challenging the said orders as it pertains to the year 1987.
It is further averred by the petitioners that they filed representations but to no effect.
Their claim is that supervisors are to be given promotion as per quota prescribed.
They have relied upon letter dated 921984 (Annexure P-5) vide which the directions were issued that post of CDPO should be filled in by way of quota.
As per petitioners, quota was fixed for promotees as 33% and for direct recruitment as 66%.
They have relied upon the various instructions contained in the booklet issued by the Government of India.
4.
The petitioners further averred that cadre strength of the C.D.P.Os is 48 as per Annexure P-10, out of which 32 posts have been filled in (27 through direct recruitment and 5 through promotion).
Hence the backlog of the promotion quota as well as the future vacancies have to be filled in through promotion.
It is also the case of the petitioners that instead of making promotions, the official respondents have made direct appointment.
One such appointment order is Annexure P-11 dated 1251989 and appointment letters in respect of other direct recruits are in the same form.
Hence there is violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
The petitioners have also admitted that they had earlier filed similar writ petition No. 6659 of 1989 which was dismissed by the Division Bench of this Court on 1951989 as promotion orders of the Juniors pertained to July, 1987.
The present petition is against the subsequent orders.
5.
The official respondents have contested the claim of the petitioners and raised preliminary objection that the second petition is not maintainable as the earlier petition filed by the petitioners was dismissed on 1951989.
On merits also it is averred by the official respondents that as per instructions issued by Government of India on 181975 (Annexure R-1) the Child Development Project Officer possessing the prescribed qualifications can be promoted from amongst the officers of State cadre as such it was not compulsory to recruit the lady officer to the post of CDPO However, preference could be given from amongst the ladies who were possessing the prescribed qualifications as far as possible.
It is also the stand of the respondents that tentative seniority list of the Supervisors hat not been finalised by the Department and the prescribed qualifications given by the petitioners is wrong.
The private respondents were appointed on 1251989 and the instructions, copy (Annexure R-2) were issued on 1461989.
There were no rules formulated by the Punjab Government for promotion from the post of supervisors to that of C.D.P.Os.
Hence no quota was prescribed.
It was only vide instructions dated 1461989 (Annexure R-2) that 34% of the posts should be filled in from amongst the Assistant Child Development Project Officers and in case of non-availability of A.C.D.P.Os, from amongst the supervisors who are Graduate and having 5 years experience as such on one or both the posts.
Since the private respondents were appointed on 1251989 prior to issuance of instructions dated 1461989 (Annexure R2) so the instructions, Annexure R-2, are not to be applied in their cases.
It is the stand of the respondents that the case of the petitioners would be considered according to Annexure R-2 in future and that the instructions of the Government are being complied with.
The respondents have given total strength of the cadre as 48 out of which 21 posts were filled in by the direct recruitment and 27 by promotion from D.S.W.S./ Superintendent (Home) Supervisors etc.  6.
The petitioners by way of miscellaneous application placed on record letters dated 1461989 and 11.7.1989 (Annexures P-12 and P-13) in support of their claim which have also been taken into consideration.
7.
I have considered the arguments advanced at the Bar and pursued the pleadings of the parties.
It is the common case of the parties that it was after 1461989 that quota for promotees to the extent of 34% was prescribed and prior thereto there was no separate quota for promotion.
However, Child Development and Project Officer could be selected and appointed out of the suitable and eligible officers from the State Cadre in accordance with instructions dated 181975 (Copy Annexure R-1) and quota for promotees was fixed only w.e.f.
1461989  8.
It is also admitted fact that the appointment of private respondents Nos. 4 to 17 was made prior to 1461989, i.e. 1251989.
When there was no separate quota, for promotees, so the petitioners can lodge no grievance against the selection and appointment of the said respondents particularly in view of the fact that except for ground of quota for promotees no other allegation in the selection and appointment of the private respondents has been levelled.
The official respondents by way of written statement have submitted that out of the total cadre strength of 48, 27 posts are manned by promotee officers from different State cadres and 21 from direct quota.
Hence from this angle also, the strength of the promotee being more than 50% there remains no cause of action for the petitioners to challenge the selection and appointment of the private respondent Nos. 4 to 17.
Furthermore, the official respondents have categorically averred in para No. 8 of the written statement that in future the case of the petitioners would be considered according to the instructions of the Government.
9.
Under these circumstances, I am of the considered view that there is no illegality in the selection and appointment of private respondent Nos. 4 to 17 as C.D.P.Os.
which was done before fixing of quota for promotees, secondly, the quota of the promottees is already oversubsribed as per details given in para 11 of the written statement filed by the official respondents and the official respondents also having given an undertaking that the case of the petitioners would be considered according to the instructions of the Government in future, I find no merit in the writ petition and dismiss the same being the parties to bear their own costs.
10.
It is, however, directed that as per averments of the respondents, the petitioners would be considered against the existing and future vacancies of C.D.P.Os.
in accordance with the instructions dated 1461989 (Copy Annexure P-2), in any other subsequent instructions rules on the subject per eligibility and suitability.