NK Sodhi, J - This judgment will dispose of two Writ Petition Nos. 2584 and 2585 of 1980, as the learned counsel for the parties are agreed that common questions of law and fact arise in both of them.
To appreciate the points in controversy, facts are being taken from Civil Writ Petition No. 2584 of 1980.
2.
The Punjab Subordinate Service Selection Board (hereinafter called the Board) advertised some posts of Punjabi Typists/Clerks in the year 1975-76, and a test was held from September, 1975 to February, 1976 to select eligible candidates.
The petitioner who was a candidate was selected and was placed in order of merit at serial No. 216 of the select list and the Board recommended his name on 391976 for being posted in the office of Deputy Commissioner, Patiala.
However, the petitioner who claimed to have had some experience in the department of Food and Supplies requested the Board that he be recommended for appointment in the said department where the posts of Typists/Clerks were available.
This request of the petitioner was acceded to and the Board recommended him for appointment in the said department as per letter dated 30111976.
The Director, Food & Supplies, Punjab issued appointment letter dated 2771977 for the post of a clerk in the scale of Rs. 110-250 and the petitioner was posted in the office of District Food and Supplies Controller, Sangrur.
He joined on regular basis on 2971977.
3.
Respondent Nos. 3 to 25 were also selected by the Board in the same selection and their names were directly recommended for being appointed in the Food and Supplies Department vide letter dated 1711977.
The case of the petitioner is that he was placed by the Board higher in the order of merit in the select list than respondent No. 3 to 25 and on this basis he claimed to be senior to them in service.
The petitioner has mentioned in the writ petition his seniority No. 216 in the order of merit as prepared by the Board but has not given the serial numbers of respondents 3 to 25.
Since the decision of this case largely depends on this fact, I directed respondents 1 and 2 through their counsel to place before this Court the original select list as prepared by the Board and I adjourned the case for a day.
The said list has not been produced.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has, however, produced a list showing the names of respondents 3 to 25 along with their merit number as determined by the Board at the time of selection.
A copy of this list has been placed on the file and is marked as Annexure-X The learned counsel for the respondents did not challenge the correctness of this list and I am, therefore, proceeding on the basis that the petitioner was placed by the Board higher in merit than respondent Nos. 3 to 25.
4.
It was strenuously urged by Mr. CM Chopra learned counsel for the petitioner that the petitioner is senior to respondent Nos. 3 to 25 as they were all recruited by direct appointment in the same selection made by the Board in the year 1975-76 and that his client having been placed higher in the order of merit by the Board at the time of selection must necessarily rank senior to respondents who were placed much lower in the order of merit.
5.
The learned counsel for the respondents on the other hand contend that respondent Nos. 3 to 25 are senior to the petitioner as their names were recommended by the Board much earlier than the recommendation made in the case of the petitioner.
The stand taken by respondent Nos. 1 to 2 in para 8 of their written statement is as under :-  "Para 8.
Denied.
The names of the respondent Nos. 3 to 25 were recommended by the Subordinate Service Selection Board on 17.1.77 much earlier than the recommendation of the petitioner's name on 11.7.77.
According to the Chief Secretary Punjab's instructions No. 946-4GS-62/8282, dated 1531962 the seniority is to be determined from the date of recommendation of the Subordinate Service Selection Board."
6.
Having given my thoughtful consideration to the respective contentions advanced by the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that the contention of the petitioner must prevail.
7.
It is the admitted case of the parties that the service of the petitioner and respondent Nos. 3 to 25 is governed by the Punjab Food and Supplies (State Service Class III) Rules, 1968 (hereinafter called the Rules).
The relevant part of Rule 11 which determines that fixation of seniority of member of the service reads as under :  "11.
Seniority of Members of Service - The seniority inter se of members of the service shall be determined by the date of their continuous appointment in the service : Provided that in the case of members recruited by direct appointment the order of merit determined by the Commission or the Board, shall not be disturbed and persons appointed as a result of an earlier selection shall be senior to those appointed as a result of a subsequent selection."
8.
A bare perusal of Rule 11 of the Rules shows that the seniority of the members of the service inter se is determined by the date of their continuous appointment in the service, but in the case of members recruited by direct appointment, the seniority of the members shall be determined in accordance with the order of merit in which they are placed by the Board at the time of selection and persons appointed as a result of an earlier selection must rank senior to those selected as a result of a subsequent selection.
This rule makes no reference to the date of recommendation by the Board and the instructions dated 1531962 referred to in para 8 of the written statement cannot override the statutory rules governing the fixation of seniority.
Even otherwise the learned counsel for the petitioner has brought to my notice a subsequent letter dated 891986 clarifying the earlier Government instructions dated 1531962.
This subsequent clarification has been allowed to be placed as Annexure X/T on the file of C.W.P.
No. 872/1981 which has also been disposed of separately.
The letter makes it clear that whenever a candidate is recommended by the Board for regular absorption in the service of a department but he is retained in his parent department either in the interest of work or on the request of the employee, the seniority of such employee has to be determined from the date of original recommendation by the Board and in such circumstances, the seniority of the employees of the same selection appointed in one office/department will be according to the merit prepared by the Board.
In the fight of this further clarification issued by the State Government itself, there is no force in the contention advanced by the learned counsel for the respondents.
9.
For the reasons recorded above, both the Writ Petitions are allowed with costs which are assessed at Rs. 500/- in each case.
Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 are directed to re-determine the seniority of the member of the service keeping in view the observations made above and the petitioners shall be entitled to all consequential reliefs and benefits to which they may be found entitled on the re-fixation of their seniority.
The petitioners shall also be considered for promotion from the date their juniors were promoted.
Petition allowed.