Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner herein was enrolled in the Army on February 28, 1979 and was discharged on December 14, 1983 on account of medical reasons.
He claimed disability pension.
Having failed to get relief from the respondents in spite of a number of representations, he has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
2.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, besides a preliminary objection is raised, it has been averred that the petitioner's claim for the grant of disability pension was considered and rejected on the ground that the disability was not attributable to or aggravated by military service.
It has been further averred that till his entire tenure the petitioner never served in the field area and was not subject to any strenuous duty throughout.
Accordingly, it is claimed that the petitioner is not entitled to the grant of disability pension.
3.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties.
The claim for disability pension is covered by the Regulation 173 of the Pension Regulations for the Army, 1961.
It reads as under :-  "173.
Unless otherwise specifically provided, a disability pension may be granted to an individual who is invalid from service on account of a disability which is attributable to or aggravated by military service and is assessed at 20 per cent or over.
The question whether a disability is attributable to or aggravated by military service shall be determined under the rules in Appendix II."
4.
Now the question whether a disability is attributable to or aggravated by military service has to be determined in accordance with the provision in Appendix-II.
Para 7(b) of appendix-II provides as under :-  "7 (b) : A disease which has led to an individual's discharge or death will ordinarily be deemed to have arisen in service if no note of it was made at the time of the individual's acceptance for military service.
However, if medical opinion holds, for reasons to be stated, that the disease could not have been detected on medical examination prior to acceptance for service the disease will not be deemed to have arisen during service."
5.
In my view, the petitioner's claim is squarely covered under the above provision.
When a disease leaded to an individual's discharge, it is deemed to have arisen in the course of his service.
No note was made at the time of the petitioner's acceptance for military service that he was suffering from a disease like the one on account of which he was discharged from service.
It has also not been shown on the basis of any material that the disease could not have been detected on medical examination prior to his acceptance for the service.
In these circumstances, the action of the respondents in declining the petitioner's claim for disability pension cannot be sustained.
6.
The writ petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to pay the disability pension to the petitioner with effect from the date of his discharge.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to interest at the rate of 12%.
In the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.