Amarjeet Chaudhary, J (Oral) - The petitioners, who are MA BEd.
Teachers, have filed this writ petition seeking direction to the respondents to fix their pay after giving the benefits of advance increments and higher starting pay in accordance with the Punjab Government instructions.
2.
At the outset of hearing of the case, the learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that he is not pressing writ petition qua petitioners No. 1.
3.
The relevant facts of the case are that petitioner Nos. 2 and 3 were appointed as ad hoc Masters on 5101976 and 20.10.1977 respectively and their services were regularised on 1101980.
They are governed by the Punjab Education Services Class-III School Cadre Rules, 1955 with regard to pay and allowances and other conlitions of service.
The Government envisage that the masters working in the Punjab Education Department, who improve/have improved their educational qualification are to be given the benefit of advance increments.
To claim the benefit of advance increments, the Counsel for the petitioners has relied upon the Govt. instructions contained in circular letter dated 1921979.
4.
The State has controverted the stand taken by the petitioners.
According to the learned Counsel for the respondents, the benefit of advance increments was admissible to those Masters, who were regular and had acquired the Post-Graduate qualification before 1921980.
Since the services of petitioner Nos. 2 and 3 were regularised on 1101980, they were not entitled to the benefit of advance increments.
5.
I have considered the respective submissions of the learned Counsel of the parties and perused the paper-book.
6.
In the case in hand, the sole question that arises for consideration is whether petitioner Nos. 2 and 3 who were originally appointed as ad hoc Teachers on attaining higher qualification during the tenure of their service and their services having been regularised after 1921979, are entitled to the benefit of advance increments on the basis of Govt. instructions issued from time to time.
In Rajinder Kumari v. State of Punjab and others, 1988(4) S.L.R.
297 it was held by the Division Bench of this Court that the benefit of higher pay/grade payable to Teachers placed under Group II on attaining the requisite qualification shall also be available to ad hoc Teachers provided the ad hoc employment was continuous and ultimately regularised.
While allowing the writ petition in that case, the petitioner was given the benefit of higher pay scale from the date of her ad hoc employment as Teacher i.e. May 16, 1977.
Applying the ratio of the aforesaid decision, the petitioners in the present case are entitled to the benefit of advance increments from the date of their ad hoc employment as Teachers i.e. 5101976 and 20.10.1977 respectively on the basis of the Punjab Government instructions issued from time to time.
In my view, there is no justification on the part of the respondent-department to deny the said benefit to them.
7.
In view of the foregoing discussion, the petition is allowed and the respondents are directed to give the benefit of advance increments to petitioner Nos. 2 and 3 from the date of their ad hoc appointment as Teachers.
Arrears of salary etc. be paid to the petitioners within three months from today.
However, writ petition qua petitioner No. 1 is dismissed being not pressed.
However, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.