BL Hansaria, CJ - The petitioner has challenged the appointment of opposite party No. 5 Shri Ajit Kishore Kanungo, as Reader in English in Upendranath College, Soro.
This appointment was given to Shri Kanungo vide the resolution of the Governing Body adopted in its meeting held on 28th June, 1981.
The appointment was made retrospective from 781980.
Subsequently, by another resolution of the Governing Body adopted on 9101983, the promotion was made effective from 191977.
As the petitioner himself came to be appointed subsequently to the post of Reader, the grievance also relates to his seniority vis-a-vis Shri Kanungo.
2.
The challenge to the appointment of Shri Kanungo to the post of Reader is founded on two alleged defects : (i) the appointment of Shri Kanungo as lecturer itself with effect from 881967 was invalid as he had obtained 3rd class in Master's Degree Examination whereas the Government of Orissa vide GO No. 19408/E dated 6.8.1968 had fixed the minimum educational qualification for the post of Lecturer as second class Master's Degree; (ii) vide Government of Orissa letter No. 4.C.
26-C5-52304 dated 23111983, the minimum qualification for the post of Reader was first class or second class Master's Degree.
3.
From the averments made in the petition it transpires that the deficiency in the qualification of Shri Kanungo had been condoned by the authorities on 16.3.1973.
It is, therefore, contended by the petitioner that Shri Kanungo's date of valid appointment as lecturer should be counted from this date, and if it is so done, he would be senior to Shri Kanungo as lecturer inasmuch as he had been appointed to that post on 21.10.1971 because of which he ought to have been appointed as Reader in the place of Shri Kanungo.
In this connection Shri Palit has referred to Shitala Prasad v. State of UP, AIR 1986 SC 1859 in which it was held that where an exemption is granted regarding the requirement of holding the minimum qualifications, the exemption does not operate retrospectively.
4.
Shri Khuntia appearing for Shri Kanungo first contends that Shitala Prasad cannot stand in the way of his client inasmuch as that was a case where, at the time of the initial appointment itself, the incumbent was disqualified which qualification was imposed by a statute which was subsequently relaxed.
But in so far as the present case is concerned, the learned counsel contends that when Shri Kanungo had been appointed as a Lecturer which was on 881967, the qualification prescribed by the Government had not come into existence.
It is, therefore, urged that a right which has come to be vested in Shri Kanungo could not be taken away retrospectively by the aforesaid Government Order.
We have found sufficient force in this submission of Shri Khuntia.
It is then submitted by the learned counsel that as the deficiency in the qualification had been condoned permanently by a resolution of the Syndicate adopted in its meeting held on 16.3.1973, as stated in Annexure C/3, the condonation has to relate back to the date of the very first appointment.
5.
In this connection, our attention has been invited to the dictionary meaning of the word 'condone' as given in Chambers Twentieth Century Dictionary, which defines this word to mean" to forgive : to pass over without blame, overlook : to excuse....".
We have also noted the meaning of this word as given in the Oxford English Dictionary which is "to give up, remit, forgive, pardon".
In Websters Third New International Dictionary, the meaning of 'condone' given is "to pardon, forgive (an offence or fault)."
6.
From the meaning of the word 'condone' as given in these dictionaries, it appears that once deficiency attached gets washed away.
This apart, in the present case the resolution of the Syndicate has stated that the deficiency has been condoned permanently.
Because of all these, we are of the view that Shri Kanungo's appointment as lecturer was valid with effect from 881967.
7.
If Shri Kanungo was validly appointed as Lecturer with effect from 881967, as we hold to be so, it is apparent that he was in the college for more than four years before the petitioner came in as a lecturer which was on 21.10.1971.
The Governing Body in is meeting held on 2861981, therefore, rightly regarded Shri Kanungo as the seniormost of the existing teachers in the Department of English because of which he was promoted to the rank of Reader retrospectively with effect from 781980 as a vacancy in the post of Reader had accrued from that date following the resignation of one BK Satpathy.
Of course, as to why Shri Kanungo was given retrospective promotion with effect from 191977 vide the resolution adopted in the meeting held on 9th October, 1983 is not clear to us from the materials on record.
This, however, is not very material for the case at hand.
8.
The second grievance relating to the promotion of Shri Kanungo to the post of Reader is founded on a letter of even number dated 23111983 of the Government of Orissa noted above which has provided that the minimum qualification for the post of Reader is first class or second class Master's Degree.
It is contended by the petitioner that condonation of deficiency in the qualification as regards Shri Kanungo was for the post of Lecturer and the same cannot enure to his benefit so far as the post of Reader is concerned.
As to this, we would like to observe that qualification was prescribed for the first time on 23111983 whereas Shri Kanungo had come to be promoted to the post of Reader by the resolution of the Governing Body passed on 2861981.
The qualification prescribed in November, 1983 could not have therefore, stood in the way of the promotion of Shri Kanungo to the post of Reader in June, 1981.
9.
As to the inter se seniority between the petitioner and Shri Kanungo, it is urged by Shri Khuntia that in the absence of any rule in this regard, the same has to be determined from the date of appointment to the post.
This is well established principle and has been reiterated recently by a Constitution Bench in the Direct Recruit Class II Engineering Officers' Association v. State of Maharashtra, A.I.R. 1990 SC 1607 (See also Ananda Sahu v. State of Orissa, 32 OJD 60 (S & L).
On this yardstick Shri Kanungo has to be regarded as senior to the petitioner as the latter came to be appointed as Reader later than 1981.
10.
Shri Khuntia has raised objection to the grant of relief to the petitioner on two other grounds.
The first is that the seniority of Shri Kanungo vis-a-vis the petitioner in the post of Lecturer having been determined as early as 1975 vide Annexure B/2, the approach to this Court by the petitioner in 1985 was too belated.
There is sufficient force in this submission of the learned counsel.
Another point raised is that as Shri Kanungo has since been promoted to the rank of Reader, vide office order No. 40924 dated 20th July, 1988 of the Director of Higher Education as at Annexure A/1 issued under the provisions of the Orissa Aided Educational Institutions Employees Common Cadre and Intertransferability Rules, 1979 whereas the petitioner has not been so considered, the seniority of Shri Kanungo in the post of Reader cannot be assailed by the petitioner in view of what has been stated in rule 4 of these rules, according to which inter se seniority shall be confined to the particular cadre.
The strength of this submission also cannot be denied  11.
For the reasons aforesaid, we are of the view that the petitioner is not entitled to any relief and the petition is, therefore, dismissed.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.