VK Bali, J - Petitioner who is presently holding the post of Assistant Registrar-cum-Managing Officer, Land Claims Organization, Rehabilitation Department vide present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India claims parity in pay scales with his counterparts working on the post of Tehsildar/Tehsildar (Sales).
The facts which have not been controverted and in fact have been candidly admitted go to show that prior to the reorganisation of Punjab and Haryana, the post of Assistant Registrar and Tehsildar/Tehsildar (Sales) was equal and identical in respect of pay scales.
A point on the aforesaid posts also was on the basis of same qualifications and nature of duties and responsibilities were also the same.
The pay scale prior to reorganisation of the above-said posts was Rs. 350-800 plus Rs. 50/- as special pay.
With effect from April 1, 1979 and far after the reorganisation of the States, the Government of Haryana revised the pay scale of the post of Tehsildar/Tehsildar (Sales) from the one mentioned above to Rs. 800-1600 plus Rs. 50/- as special pay whereas the person holding the post of Assistant Registrar was to draw the pay scale of Rs. 700-1250/-.
In connection with the implementation of 4th Pay Commission, respondent No. 3 is said to have recommended parity in pay scales, mention of which posts has been made above, vide his letter dated February 6, 1987 copy whereof has been placed on the record of the petition as Annexure P2 .
The pay scales were once again revised by the State of Haryana with effect from January 1, 1986 vide notification No. GSR/39/Constitution/Articles 309/86 dated April 29, 1987.
The pay scale of Tehsildar/Tehsildar (Sales) was revised to Rs. 2000-3200 plus Rs. 100/- as special pay whereas for the post of Assistant Registrar two different pay scales were given i.e. Rs. 1600-2660/- for others and Rs. 2000-3200 plus Rs. 100/- as special pay for Tehsildars.
The disparity in the pay scales was not obviously to the liking of the petitioner and after revision of pay scales in the year 1986 as indicated above, the petitioner made a representation to the State Government for removing the anomalies created in the revised pay scales.
On the representation filed by the petitioner and other equally situate persons the matter was referred to the Secretary Anomaly Committee, Finance Department, Haryana, Chandigarh vide letter dated July 15, 1987.
The matter was dismissed threadbare before, the Anomaly Committee and thereafter Secretary, Rehabilitation Department i.e. respondent No. 2 recommended that the pay scale of Assistant Registrar cannot be lower than that of post of Tehsildar/Tehsildar (Sales).
It is the positive case of the petitioner which has not been refuted, rather has been admitted in the written statement that the aforesaid recommendation was made by respondent No. 2 in spite of the fact that a competent body was convinced that the two posts involved equal responsibilities and same qualifications for appointment to the posts in question and were even equated for the purpose of pay scales by the Secretary, Rehabilitation Department under whom both Assistant Registrar and Tehsildar/Tehsildar (Sales) work when notification dated August 23, 1990 revised pay scales of various categories inclusive of the posts referred to above, the disparity in the pay scale of two posts was still not rectified.
The pay scale of Tehsildar/Tehsildar (Sales) was revised with effect from May 1, 1990 as Rs. 2000-3500 plus Rs. 100/- as special pay and the pay scale of naib Tehsildar/Naib Tehsildar (Sales) was also revised to Rs. 1640-2990 plus Rs. 90/- as special pay.
However, the petitioner and other equally situated persons kept on drawing the earlier pay scale of Rs. 1600-2600 which happened to be less than even to the pay scale of Naib Tehsildar/Naib Tehsildar (Sales) which was a post lower than that of Assistant Registrar which the petitioner is holding.
2.
As has been mentioned above, on facts there is no dispute whatsoever and it has been admitted in the written statement that the pay scale of Tehsildar (Sales) was revised from April 1, 1979 to Rs. 800-1600 plus Rs. 50/- as special pay and that of Assistant Registrar to Rs. 800-1600 plus Rs. 50/- as special pay and if a Tehsildar (Sales) is posted on that post to Rs. 700-1250 i.e. for Assistant Registrar-cum-Managing Officer.
It is further admitted that respondent No. 3 Joint Secretary Rehabilitation requested the Finance Department on February 6, 1987 in response to letter dated January 9, 1987 to bring to post of Assistant Registrar at par with that of Tehsildar (Sales) in the pay scale of Rs. 800-1600 plus Rs. 50/- as special pay but the Finance Department did not agree.
It is further admitted that after revision of pay scales with effect from January 1, 1986 the Government in Finance Department called for the representation regarding removal of anomalies vide letter dated July 6, 1987 and in response thereto it was recommended by the Rehabilitation Department vide letter dated July 15, 1987 to allow the pay scales of Tehsildar (Sales) to Assistant Registrar also.
The only discordant view shown by the respondents is that even though competent bodies like Anomaly Committee as also the Rehabilitation Department were of clear view that the two posts, reference of which has been given above, were equated and had same nature of duties and responsibilities and same qualifications for appointment to the said posts, it is the Finance Department which had turned down equation in the pay scales of the two posts and, therefore, nothing at all could be done in the matter.
3.
The learned counsel appearing for the petitioner contends that the decision of Finance Department to turn down equation in the pay scales even though there was complete justification for the same and the matter for such equation was held genuine by the Competent bodies and was recommended by the department itself, the action of the Government based upon comments of the Finance Department which comments were not even available was wholly unjustified and arbitrary.
For the aforesaid contention, the learned counsel squarely relies upon two judgments of this Court in Dr. Gautam Mahajan v. State of Punjab, 1989(2) SLR 70 & Kirpal Jeet v. State of Punjab, 1987(4) SLR 594.
4.
Mr. DD Vasudava, Assistant Advocate General, Haryana appearing for the respondents initially wanted to defend the action of Finance Department but having been confronted with the impressive array of facts which have been given above and in particular the recommendation of the Revenue Department itself based upon recommendations of Anomaly Committee and the rule of law enunciated in Dr. Gautam Mahajan's case (supra) where same objection of declining the relief based upon the comments of Finance Department was raised practically gave in.
5.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the considered view that the present petition is meritorious and deserves to succeed.
It is true that the employer has a right to provide various pay scales to different categories of employees, the decision of the employer based upon recommendations of competent bodies like Pay Commission, Anomaly Committee etc. has to be given weight but in the present case the rejection of genuine claim of the petitioner based upon recommendations by competent bodies, recommendations by competent bodies, recommendations of Anomaly Committee as also the recommendations of the department itself for considering the two posts as equal in all respects is absolutely arbitrary and discriminatory.
For the equation of pay scales and in particular equation of two posts, it is the decision of the bodies constituted to do so which is relevant and not the opinion of the Finance Department.
The said department at the most can feel difficulty in sanctioning a higher pay scale for want of funds and even if in the present case the reason was stringency of funds, although nothing has been brought on the record to show so, yet the same would not be a justifiable ground to reject equatioin in the pay scales of the posts reference of which has been given above.
The objection that the Finance Department was not agreeing to the recommendations of the relevant department was also raised in the case of Dr. Gautam Mahajan and others (supra).
In the said case even though the department of the petitioners had held equation of posts involved therein and recommended equal pay scales, the same were not granted for the main reason that the Finance Department had not agreed and the same was not found to be a good reason and it was held that since the equation of two posts was not specifically denied in the written statement, the same shall be treated to be admitted and the persons posted on the equated posts would be entitled to the same pay and the revision of pay scales.
In the present case, the equation of two posts having been admitted, I find no justification whatsoever to deny the relief to the petitioner.
The action of the respondents in denying the same pay scale to the petitioner is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
The only question that survives for determination is as to from which date the petitioner should be awarded the pay scale of the post of Tehsildar/Tehsildar (Sales) and after giving a thoughtful consideration to the matter, I am of the view that it should be from the date when the Anomaly Committee recommended the matter to the department which in turn, held justification in the clamour of the petitioner.
The said date as per return happens to be January 9, 1987.
6.
For the reasons aforesaid the petition succeeds.
A direction is issued to the respondents to grant same pay scale to the petitioner from January 9, 1987 as was admissible to the person holding the post of Tehsildar/Tehsildar (Sales).
The arrears of pay i.e. the difference in the pay scale of the petitioner and that of post of Tehsildar/Tehsildar (Sales) carrying higher pay must be paid to the petitioner within three months from today in so far as his future pay is concerned, the same must be given to the petitioner at the same rate which is being paid to the Tehsildar/Tehsildar (Sales) forthwith.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs in this petition.
Petition allowed.