Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - Vide orders dated January 18, 1982, respondent No. 4, Mr. RK Kundra, who was working as Senior Scale Stenographer in the office of Principal, Medical College, Amritsar, was posted as Superintendent Grade-III in his own scale of pay against a vacant post.
In the order of promotion it was mentioned that he is being posted "in his own pay scale till the case regarding amendment in the Punjab Civil Service (Promotions of Stenographers and Steno-typists) Rules, 1961 (hereinafter referred to as "the 1961 Rules") is made by the Government and their inter se seniority in the clerical cadre is finalised and fulfils requisite experience."
In the order it was also mentioned that the promotees "shall be on probation for a period of one year......" Vide orders dated December 13, 1984, the Government decided that "Shri RK Kundra be appointed as Superintendent Grade III in accordance with the instructions issued by Punjab Government vide Memo No. 9715-5HBII-75/18650 dated 19/2081975 and he may be allowed pay scale increments as Superintendent Grade III w.e.f.
January, 1982 i.e. the date of promotion order issued by your office.
This promotion will, however, be on provisional basis till the joint seniority list of Senior Scale Stenographers and Head Assistants is finalised by your office and it will not affect the claim of any other official found senior to him subsequently."
Aggrieved by these orders, the petitioner who-claims to be senior-to-respondent No. 4, submitted representations to the Government.
Copies of some of those representations have been appended as Annexures P.5 to P.10 with the writ petition vide orders dated June 18, 1985 (Annexure P.11) the petitioner was informed that his representation has been examined in detail by the Government and has been "rejected."
Aggrieved by the action of respondent Nos. 1 to 3 in promoting respondent No. 4 to the post of Superintendent Grade-III and in rejecting his representation the petitioner has approached this Court through the present writ petition.
2.
In a nutshell the petitioner claims that the promotion of respondent No. 4 was wholly illegal and contrary to the statutory rules governing the promotions of Senior Scale Stenographers to the post of Superintendent Grade-III.
It has been averred that the respondent was wholly ineligible for this promotion as he had not passed the Assistant Grade Examination nor had he ever worked on the post of Assistant as required under the rules.
On these premises, it is claimed that the promotion was violative of the rules and the guarantee enshrined in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
It is also averred that according to the seniority list issued by the Government vide letter dated April 17, 1979, the petitioner was placed at Sr. No. 28 while respondent No. 4 had been placed at Sr. No. 106.
However, in the seniority list issued vide letter dated April 1, 1985, respondent No. 4 had been shown senior to the petitioner on the ground of promotion to the post of Superintendent Grade-III.
It is averred that the change in seniority was wholly violative of principles of natural justice.
On these premises, it has been claimed that the appointment of respondent No. 4 to the post of Superintendent Grade-III prior to the petitioner be quashed.
It has also been claimed that a writ of mandamus be issued directing the respondents to consider and promote the petitioner w.e.f.
a date earlier to the one on which respondent No. 4 had been promoted.
3.
Written statements have been filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 to 3 and respondent No. 4.
It has been inter alia averred that respondent No. 4 was promoted as Senior Scale Stenographer in the pay scale of Rs. 150-300 in August, 1966.
At that time the petitioner was working as Assistant/Accountant in the pay scale Rs. 106-200.
It has been pointed out that respondent No. 4 was promoted to the post of Superintendent Grade-III in accordance with the advice tendered by the Government vide Memorandum dated August 19/20, 1975, according to which, a Senior Scale Stenographer became eligible for promotion to the post of Superintendent Grade-III after completion of five years of service.
It has also been averred that the provisions of the 1961 Rules do not apply in this case.
The respondent have further pointed out that the requirement of passing the Assistant Grade Examination was introduced w.e.f.
April 12, 1984 when the rules called The Punjab State Assistant Grade Examination Rules, 1984 (hereinafter referred to as 'the 1984 Rules') were implemented.
The promotion of respondent No. 4 having been made prior to the promulgation of these rules, he was not required to pass the Assistant Grade Examination.
A copy of the letter dated August 19/20, 1975 has been produced alongwith the written statement.
This conveys the decision of the Government of Punjab by which it has been laid down that in the subordinate offices of the Punjab Government, Head Assistants with five years of experience in the Sub-offices of the Punjab Health Directorate or Senior Scale Stenographer with five years of experience as Stenographer will be eligible for promotion to the post of Superintendent in the scale of Rs. 300-550.
4.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondent No. 4, it has been averred that the petition is liable to be dismissed on the ground of delay as the promotion of the respondent was made in January, 1982 and has been challenged through the present writ petition in August, 1985.
Furthermore, the petitioner's claim of seniority has also been contested on the ground that the respondent had been promoted to the post of Senior Scale Stenographer in the scale of Rs. 150-300 vide orders dated July 30, 1966 (Annexure R/4/1) after passing a competitive departmental examination.
As against this, it is averred that the petitioner was working in the pay scale of Rs. 106-200 in August, 1966.
The respondent avers that the seniority has to be determined according to the pay scale.
Since he was throughout in the higher scale, he ranks senior to the petitioner.
It has been further averred that the post of Senior Scale Stenographer for Medical Colleges in the State of Punjab had been created vide orders dated December 10, 1964.
As such the provisions of the rules were not attracted.
It has also been averred that the order of inter se seniority was wholly illegal and the representations had been submitted by the respondent for correction thereof.
It has been further averred that the rules of 1961 and 1984 are not attracted in the present case.
On these premises, the respondent maintains that there is no merit in the writ petition and deserves to be dismissed.
5.
I have heard Mr. SS Nijjar, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. Arihant Jain, learned Assistant Advocate General for the respondent-State and Mr. Girish Agnihotri, learned counsel for respondent No. 4.
6.
Mr. Nijjar appearing for the petitioner has raised a two fold contention.
He submits that under the statutory rules governing promotion of Stenographers to various posts in the ministerial cadre, viz., Assistant, Head Assistant, Deputy Superintendent and Superintendent, it is necessary that the incumbent should have qualified the Assistant Grade Examination and should have worked as an Assistant for a period of two years.
He has relied on the provisions of Rules 2 and 3 of the 1961 rules in this behalf.
Mr. Girish Agnihotri on the order hand points out that the provisions of 1961 Rules are not at all applicable in the present case.
7.
It is useful to notice the provisions of Rules 2 and 3 of 1961 Rules, which are reproduced as under :-  "Rule 2 : Stenographers and Steno-typists shall be eligible for promotion to the post of Assistant, Head Assitant, Deputy Superintendent or Superintendent, as the case may be, in accordance with the provisions hereunder appearing."
"Rule 3 : (1) In offices where the scale of pay of Stenographers is identical to that of Assistants, the Stenographers shall, before becoming eligible for promotion to higher post of the clerical side, have to :- (i) qualify in the departmental test prescribed for the post of Assistant, and (ii) work as Assitant for a period of two years on some existing vacancy or by sharing the work of an Assistant : Provided that :-  (a) no Stenographer shall be allowed to take the test unless he had put in one year's service as Stenographer; (b) nothing in this sub-rule shall be deemed to require the Stenographers, who stand exempted from passing the test by virtue of the instructions already issued by the Government from time to time to pass the Assistant's test prescribed in this sub-rule.
(c) no Stenographer will be put to work as an Assitant for the required period of two years unless he has qualified in the test.
Explanation 1 :- The period during which a Stenographer has, before the date of issue of these rules, performed the duties of Assistant whether in addition to his own duties or otherwise will be taken into consideration in computing the period of his training as Assistant.
Explanation 2 :- Where there is no available vacancy of the post of Assistant for imparting training to the Stenographer he shall be given at least one-third of the work of some Assistant in addition to his own duties.
The Assistant who is thus relieved of some of his work will in turn help the Stenographer in his routine duties.
(2) The seniority of the Stenographers, who successfully complete the period of two years training specified in sub-rule (i), vis-a-vis Assitant, shall be determined by the dates of their continuous appointment against the post of Stenographer or Assistant, as the case may be and if the dates of their appointment be the same, the one drawing higher pay shall be senior to the other and if the rates of pay drawn by them be also same the older shall be senior to the younger."
8.
According to Rule 2, Stenographers are eligible for promotion to the post of Assistant, Head Assistant, Deputy Superintendent and Superintendent in accordance with the provisions of Rule 3.
Rule 3 is attracted in case where "the scale of pay of Stenographers is identical to that of Assistant."
In the present case, it has been categorically averred that the petitioner was working as Assistant in the pay scale of Rs. 106-200 while the respondent had been appointed as Senior Scale Stenographer in the pay scale of Rs. 150-300 in August, 1966.
Furthermore, a reference to the letters dated March 4, 1974 (Annexure R/4/2) and August 20, 1975 (Annexure R/4/3) shows that the posts of the Senior Scale Stenographer in the Health Department were sanctioned in a scale higher than that usually permitted in case of 'B' class offices.
In fact, in the letter of March, 1974, it has been specifically observed that "the two posts of Senior Scale Stenographers in the higher scale of Rs. 225-500 than that usually sanctioned in 'B' Class offices were created...The Administrative department may, therefore, please consider the matter in the context of the relevant rules, the conditions/principles contemplated at the time of creation of the posts of Senior Scale Stenographers in unusually higher scale of pay and the requirement of experience for the post.
After having examined the case on the above lines and in full background, the advice of services department on any point having bearing on general conditions of service can be sought.
In the alternative if the administrative department wish to determine some principles of promotion of Senior Scale Stenographers to that of Superintendent, they may do so in consultation with the PPSC in terms of Article 320 of the Constitution and Service Department in accordance with Government Instructions contained in circular No. 6029-GS-60, dated June 21, 1960."
Thereafter the administrative department appears to have consulted PPSC and conveyed decision vide order dated August 20, 1975.
By this order, it was prescribed that a Senior Scale Stenographer with five years experience as Stenographer shall be eligible for promotion to the post of Superintendent.
This decision of the Government clearly shows that the scale of pay sanctioned for the post of Senior Scale Stenographer in the Health Department was higher than the scale of pay for the post of Assitant.
In this situation, I am of the view that the provisions of Rule 3 are not attracted to the facts of the present case.
Consequently, the conditions of passing the departmental test or working as an Assistant for a period of two years before a Senior Scale Stenographers could become eligible for promotion to the post of Assistant was not attracted to the facts of the present case.
In my view, the respondent No. 4 was not ineligible for promotion to the post of Superintendent Grade-III on ground that he had not qualified the test or that he had not shared the work of an Assistant for a period of two years.
9.
Mr. Nijjar submits that the higher pay scale for the Senior Scale Stenographers had been wrongly sanctioned.
He has produced a letter of August 11, 1986, which shows that the Government had already decided to downgrade these posts.
A photostat copy of this letter is placed on record as "Mark A".
This letter had been issued by the Department of Finance to the various Heads of Departments, which reads as under :-  "I am directed to address you on the subject cited above and to say that as a matter of policy, it has been decided that only the heads of Departments shall be entitled to the posts of Senior Scale Stenographers.
In case any officer below the rank of a Head of the Department is having a senior scale stenographer with him, the post of Senior Scale Stenographer so attached may be downgraded immediately.
However, to avoid hardship to the present incumbent of such a post requiring down-gradation, he may be allowed to continue to draw pay and allowances in the scale of pay of senior scale stenographer as a measure personal to him till he continues in the post.
2.
Kindly acknowledge receipt."
It conveys a policy decision of the Government that only the Heads of the Departments shall be entitled to the post of Senior Scale Stenographer.
An officer below the rank of the Head of the Department is not entitled to the post of Senior Scale Stenographer.
It has been further pointed out that "to avoid hardship to the present incumbent of such a post requiring down-gradation, he may be allowed to continue to draw pay and allowances in the scale of pay of Senior Scale Stenographer as a measure personal to him till he continues in the post."
10.
This letter is not at all attracted in the present case.
Firstly, this executive order is prospective in operation.
It has not retrospective operation.
Secondly, the respondent No. 4 had ceased to be a Senior Scale Stenographer on this promotion in the year 1982.
The question of down-gradation of his post does not arise.
Thirdly, even according to this letter, if the petitioner was still working as Senior Scale Stenographer, he would have continued to draw pay and allowances in the higher scale of pay as a measure personal to him.
In my view, the contents of this letter do not held the petitioner in any manner whatsoever.
11.
Mr. Nijjar then argues that orders of promotion had been issued on provisional basis "till the joint seniority list of Senior Scale Stenographers and Head Assistants is finalised......" He submits that the inter se seniority of Senior Scale Stenographers and Head Assistants has not been finalised till today.
He further points out that even by the order of February 20, 1985 (Annexure R-4/4) it had been clearly postulated that the promotion was on provisional basis and that the incumbent shall be liable to be reverted in case there is a change in the seniority list.
Learned counsel contends that the Government has not finalised the seniority list till today and as a result the provisional promotion is being continued.
Learned counsel for the respondents is not in a position to state as to whether or not the seniority list has been finalised.
12.
Keeping in view the facts and circumstances of the case, it appears necessary that the competent authority should finalise the inter se seniority of person holding various categories or posts.
As stated by the learned counsel for the petitioner, a tentative seniority list was issued in the year 1979.
This was followed by another tentative seniority list of 1985.
Even though a period of more than 11 years has elapsed since the tentative list was originally issued, the Government has not finalised the inter se seniority.
This state of affairs is mostunsatisfactory.
Seniority has a vital importance for the officials working in the services under the State.
It is only fair that the inter se position of members of service is finalised.
In the circumstances of the case it would be just and fair for the Department to finalise the inter se seniority within six months after hearing all concerned.
In case the Department ultimately finds that respondent No. 4 is junior to the petitioner, his claim for promotion to the post of Supdt.
Grade-III shall be considered w.e.f.
the date from which Respondent No. 4 was promoted.
13.
Subject to the above, I find no infirmity in the promotion of respondent No. 4 from the post of Senior Scale Stenographer to that of Superintendent Grade-III.
The writ petition is accordingly disposed of with no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.