Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner who admittedly earned 33 commendation certificates, mostly with cash rewards, was awarded the punishment of stoppage of one increment without cumulative effect.
His appeal having failed, his petition for revision to the Director-General of Police resulted in a show cause notice for enhancement of punishment.
Besides submitting his reply to the show cause notice, the petitioner sought premature retirement.
While the Superintendent of Police had forwarded this application to the Deputy Inspector General, Ambala Range on April 20, 1988, the Director General of Police passed an order on April 20, 1988 reverting the petitioner from the post of Sub-Inspector to that of Assistant Sub-Inspector.
Aggrieved by the orders of punishment, the petitioner has filed the present petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
2.
The petitioner was enrolled as a Constable on November 8, 1950.
He was promoted as Head Constable in the year 1963 and as Assistant Sub Inspector in the year 1975.
On July 1, 1979, he was promoted to the rank of Sub Inspector.
His name was also included in promotion list F in the year 1985.
During the period of his service, the petitioner claims to have been awarded as many as 33 commendation certificates mostly with cash rewards.
Copies of the two certificates given to him in the year 1983-84 and again in 1985 have been appended to the petition as Annexures P1 and P2.
3.
In the year 1984, departmental proceedings were initiated against the petitioner on the allegation that while working as Station House Officer, Pehowa, he had failed to establish police barrier on November 16, 1984 to apprehend the suspected culprits who had committed the offence of robbery at Ambala.
Another allegation levelled against the petitioner was that although he had shown his departure in the daily diary for patrolling purposes, he was, in fact, present in the police station.
The allegations having been denied as totally false, a departmental enquiry was held.
The charge relating to the failure of the petitioner to set up the barrier was found to be untenable.
Though a copy of the enquiry report is not on the file, this fact finds mention in the order passed by the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Ambala Range (Annexure P-6).
Even the averment made by the petitioner in paragraph 12(v) in this behalf has not been rebutted by filing any reply.
It has, therefore, to be accepted as correct.
4.
Ultimately, a show cause notice dated July 27, 1985 was issued to the petitioner calling upon him to explain as to why a penalty of reversion to the rank of Assistant Sub-Inspector should not be inflicted upon him.
The petitioner filed a detailed reply to show cause notice.
Besides explaining the actual position to show his innocence he raised various other points regarding the validity of the proceedings to show cause notice.
By an order dated March 6, 1986, Superintendent of Police, Kurukshetra imposed the punishment of stoppage of one future annual increment with temporary effect.
The relevant portion of the order reads as under :-  "After going through the entire prosecution, defence evidence, written defence statement of the defaulter and proceedings on the file, I issued a show cause notice proposing provisionally a penalty of reversion to the rank of ASI the defaulter submitted the reply of show cause notice.
Thereafter I offered him an opportunity to appear before me personally and he appeared before me, but stated nothing fresh and also pleaded for forgiveness.
Keeping in view the length of service and his previous service record I take a lenient view in this case.
The punishment of stoppage of one future annual increment with temporary effect will meet the ends of justice in this case, which I order accordingly.
A copy of this order should be supplied to the defaulter (SI Ajmer Singh) free of costs."
The petitioner filed an appeal against this order which was rejected by respondent No. 3.
Aggrieved, the petitioner filed a revision petition before the Director General of Police, Haryana.
This resulted in the issue of show cause notice by which the petitioner was called upon to explain as to why the penalty of reversion to the rank of Assistant Sub Inspector be not imposed upon him.
A copy of the notice has been placed on record as Annexure P-7.
The petitioner submitted his reply.
Finally, vide order dated April 20, 1988, the petitioner was ordered to be reverted from the rank of Sub Inspector to that of Assistant Sub Inspector.
5.
The respondents have not filed any written statement in the case.
6.
Mr. HS Gill, learned counsel for the petitioner stated before me at the outset that the petitioner was so upset by the order of his reversion that he sought premature retirement.
This request of the petitioner is stated to have already been accepted by the Department.
This fact was not rebutted by the learned counsel appearing for the respondents.
Be that as it may, the learned counsel for the petitioner contended that the impugned orders were vitiated on account of non-compliance with the provisions of rule 1624(ix) of the Punjab Police Rules as also non-application of mind.
Mr. Verma on the other hand submitted that the orders were absolutely legal and valid.
Rule 1624(ix) provides as under :-  "1624(ix) : No order of dismissal or reduction in rank shall be passed by an officer empowered to dismiss police officer or reduce him in rank until that officer has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken in regard to him, provided that this shall not apply-  (a) where a police officer is dismissed or reduced in rank on the ground of conduct which led to his conviction on a criminal charge; or (b) where the officer empowered to dismiss him or reduce him in rank is satisfied that for some reason to be recorded by that officer in writing it is not reasonably practicable to give to that police officer an opportunity of showing cause.
Before an order of dismissal or reduction in rank is passed, the officer to be punished shall be produced before the officer empowered to punish him, and shall be informed of the charges proved against him, and called upon to show cause why an order of dismissal or reduction in rank should not be passed.
Any representation that he may make shall be recorded, shall form part of the record of the case, and shall be taken into consideration by the officer empowered to punish him before the final order is passed :  Provided that if, owning to the complicated nature of the case or other sufficient reason to be recorded, the officer empowered to impose the punishment considers this procedure inappropriate, he may inform the officer to be punished in writing of the charges proved against him, and call upon him to show cause in writing why an order of dismissal or reduction in rank should not be passed.
Any written representation received shall be placed on the record of the case and taken into consideration before the final order is passed."
7.
Mr. Gill contends that in view of the above provision, it was incumbent upon the Director General of Police to have sent for the petitioner and heard him before passing the impugned orders.
He has placed reliance on a Division Bench judgment of this Court in Siri Ram v. The State of Punjab, 1967 SLR 678.
Mr. Gill's attention was drawn to a notification dated March 21, 1985 whereby the provision in sub-clause (ix) of rule 1624(1) had been deleted.
Mr. Gill, however, contended that the proceedings had been initiated and the charge-sheet had been issued to the petitioner well before March 21, 1985.
He consequently contended that the proceedings are to be completed in accordance with the provision as it existed prior to notification amending the rule.
8.
In my view, this contention has to be upheld.
Once the proceedings are initiated under a particular set of rules, it is incumbent upon the authority to conclude those proceedings under those rules.
An amendment of the rules during the proceedings does not affect the course of proceedings which have already been initiated.
Sub-clause (ix) of rule 1624(1), as it originally existed, conferred a right on the employee and imposed a duty on the employer.
It was not merely procedural.
The substantive right to be called and heard was not only in consonance with the principles of natural justice but was statutorily recognised in sub-clause (ix).
It was incumbent upon the Director General of Police to have called the petitioner and heard him before passing the impugned order.
This opportunity which deserved to be granted was actually not granted.
The order is consequently vitiated.
9.
In view of my finding on the first contention, it is not necessary to go into the second point raised by Mr. Gill.
10.
The order at Annexure P-9 is consequently quashed.
The petitioner shall be deemed to have continued in the rank of Sub Inspector.
He will be entitled to all consequential reliefs in the nature of arrears of salary etc.
The petitioner is also entitled to his costs which are assessed at Rs. 2000/-.
Order accordingly.