JL Gupta, J - A case of bureaucratic indifference.
The petitioner joined as a JBT teacher on 671957.
He was later on transferred to another district.
In the seniority list issued in the year 1964, the petitioner's name was not initially included.
However, on his representation, he was assigned his seniority list at No. 126-A.
The short grievance of the petitioner is that though the persons who were in this seniority list upto 125 were given selection grade with effect from 1.10.1962, he was not.
Thereafter, the selection grade was again released in the year 1980.
The petitioner was again not granted the selection grade.
In the meantime, the petitioner was promoted to the rank of a Master on 5.8.1969 and has since retired from service.
Numerous representations having failed, he has approached this Court by way of the present petition.
2.
The respondents have filed a return.
Their case is contained in paragraph 5 which reads as under :-  "Para No. 5 : That the contents of the para are admitted to the extent that the post of selection grade were again released in the year 1980.
But it is pointed out that the petitioner had represented to the Department only in the year 1982 as is clear from his representation of Annexure P.1 and not in the year 1980.
It is further stated that the selection grade posts released in the year 1980 were only the resultant post which had fallen vacant due to various reasons.
The plaintiff's seniority was not fixed in the District Seniority List of Ferozepur District.
Neither he had applied to the competent authority for the fixation of his seniority after his transfer from Patiala Division.
The resultant selection grade posts which had fallen vacant were released by the District Education Officer Ferozepur to the next senior most JBT teachers who were eligible at that moment.
The petitioner remained silent for continuously two years and never represented to the Department for the consideration of his name for the award of selection grade.
The petitioner only represented in the year 1982 that he is entitled for the award of selection grade.
Had the petitioner applied to the Department for fixation of his seniority in the District Cadre, one post should have been reserved for him before releasing the selection grade posts.
The petitioner did not do so with the result that all the resultant vacant selection grade posts were released to all the eligible candidates on the basis of their seniority Nos.
It is further pointed out that the petitioner was awarded master grade w.e.f.
5.8.69 and was transferred from JBT cadre to master grade cadre under the establishment of DPI (Schools)."
The petitioner has filed a rejoinder in which he has pointed out that he was appointed as a Master on 19.6.1978 with effect from 5.8.1969.
He has also rebutted the other averments.
The District Education Officer, Ferozepur has filed a reply to the rejoinder in which it has been, inter alia mentioned that-  "The petitioner who was working as a Master in the higher grade and cadre under the D.E.O.
Secondary/DPI, Secondary did not bother to get his seniority fixed in the JBT cadre of Ferozepur District upto the date of representation.
The DEO has released all the available resultant selection grade posts without keeping any reserve vacancy to the teachers whose names come accordingly to the posts.
If the name of the petitioner had been in the seniority lists of JBT teachers he would also had been awarded selection grade, if he was found eligible but the silence of the petitioner for not including his name in the seniority list has excluded him from the award of selection grade."
(reproduced as it exists in the original).
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties.
The duty to fix seniority, to consider the claims for promotion and to grant the resultant relief is of the employer.
It is not only the requirement of the statutory rules governing the respective services but also the mandate of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
The duty to ensure equality of treatment is imposed on the employer and the employee cannot even by his negligence or indifference absolve the employer of this duty.
In the present case it was accordingly incumbent on the department to fix the seniority of the petitioner.
The failure to do so at the appropriate time cannot be a reason for denying the petitioner the benefits which any of his juniors may have got.
In fact, after fixing the seniority of the petitioner, it was incumbent on the department to consider the claim of the petitioner with effect from the date any of his juniors had been promoted or granted the selection grade.
The fact that the petitioner did not represent or that he had been promoted to a higher grade did not absolve the department of their duty to fix his seniority or to consider his claim.
The department failed to perform a duty imposed on it by law.
Can they now be permitted to take advantage of their own wrong ?
I think, not.
3.
I, accordingly allow this petition and direct the respondents to consider the claim of the petitioner for the award of selection grade with effect from the date a person junior to the petitioner was placed in the selection grade.
The pay of the petitioner would be refixed even in the Master's grade on the basis of the revised pay in the selection grade.
Since the petitioner has retired from service, his pension etc. would also be revised in accordance with the changed situation.
Arrears of salary and pension shall be paid to the petitioner along with interest at the rate of 12 per cent per annum within three months of the date of the receipt of this order by the Director of Public Instruction.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to his costs.
which are qualified at Rs. 1000/-  Petition allowed.