VK Bali, J - The petitioners who are working as Workshop Attendants in various government secondary Schools of Punjab lament discriminatory treatment meted out to them of the question of their pay as compared to Laboratory Attendants.
The claim of the petitioners is sought to be made out form the following facts :-  2.
The petitioners as referred to above are Workshop Attendants and are matriculates with Science.
Some of the petitioners have even obtained ITI diploma in addition to their qualification with matric with Science.
The Punjab Government decided to vocationalise education and for that purposes schools were selected and various vocational trades were introduced as part of curriculum in them.
The government also sanctioned huge funds for the construction of Workshops and for the purchase of various instruments, apparatus and appliances and other material for giving training in various vocational trades.
Petitioners were recruited as Workshop Attendants for such schools where vocational education was to be imparted and the said decision was quite in lines with the existing system of providing Laboratory Attendants to man laboratories for the teaching of science.
It is the case of the petitioners that the government prescribes same qualifications for Workshop Attendants as were provided for Laboratory Attendants inasmuch as most of the Laboratory Attendants who are recruited and were matric with Science, the government decided to convert the post of Laboratory Attendants from Class-IV to Class-III and they were given the grades of Rs. 400-600 provided that they were matriculates as is evident from the letter Annexure P-1.
Petitioners further contend that the duties of Workshop Attendants are to keep the workshop clean, the grease the workshop instruments and to keep them in a systematic position before the period of practical, to arrange the instruments on the tables and after the period to assemble the instruments and to arrange its demonstration for the vocational teachers and to impart necessary assistance to them.
These are the duties of Workshop Attendants and also the Laboratory Attendants.
The claim of the petitioners is thus based upon the principle of equal pay for equal work and inasmuch as the petitioners' pay has not been enhanced commensurate to that of Laboratory Attendants, they have sought for the necessary relief through the present petition.
3.
Before, however, filing the present petition the petitioners also demanded conversion of their post from Class-IV to Class-III at the same pay as in the case of Laboratory Attendant at least for those Workshop Attendants who had passed matric with Science.
The case was espoused through Union ie Government Vocational School Attendants Union, to the State Government and as a result of negotiations, it was decided that the Workshop Attendants would be given the grades of Rs., 400-600 i.e. equivalent to Laboratory Attendants, the representation of the petitioners ultimately came for decision by the Director, Public Instructions, Punjab, who vide letter No. 5/30-80 dated March 18, 1980, a copy of which has been Annexure P-3, came to the conclusion that duties of Workshop Attendants were the same as that of the Laboratory Attendants and in the letter aforesaid, a suggestion was made that the Workshop Attendants who had passed matric with ITI certificate or matric with Science should be given the grade of Rs. 400-600 by equating them to the Laboratory Attendants.
Even though the Director, Public Instructions had equated the posts of the petitioners with that of Laboratory Attendants, no final decision was rendered leading thus to various petitions filed from time to time culminating into a final representation sent through Union vide letter dated February 7, 1986.
The petitioners through Union received a reply from the Director, Public Instructions conveying that the government vide order dated February 19, 1986 has refused to accept the demand.
4.
The claim of the petitioners is refuted and all out effort to defeat the claim is based upon averments supported by submissions made by counsel for the respondents that the main criteria proposed in the letter of Director, Public Instructions and of qualifications and not of duties because the duties could be changed and the government rejected the proposal made by the Director, Public Instructions.
It is further stated that any correspondence between respondent Nos. 1 and 2 could not take the shape of a legal document, particularly when the same was not endorsed to the petitioners.
It is further stated that any communication between respondent Nos. 1 and 2 could not be taken advantage of by the petitioners and the same were not legal documents.
5.
Shri GK Chatrath, learned counsel appearing for the petitioners vehemently contends that the stand of the respondents deserves to be rejected as the authorities could not take up the plea i.e. proposals made by the Director, Public Instructions were not legal documents and that the duties of the petitioners and Laboratory Attendants could change at any time.
The fact remains that throughout the duties of Workshop Attendants and Laboratory Attendants were the same and continue to be same even now.
Learned counsel further contends that once the competent authority i.e. Director, Public Instructions has equated two posts i.e. Workshop Attendants and Laboratory Attendants, it shall not be open to the authorities to discriminate between the two and not to enhance the pay of one post when a boost has been given in the pay of other post.
The counsel further contends that the stand of the authorities would be discriminatory and would violate Articles 14 and 16 the Constitution of India.
Mr. Chatrath further contends that once the government equates two posts and the equation of the two posts is not specifically denied or is sought to be denied on wholly untenable grounds, then it should not be open to government to discriminate between the incumbents of the two posts for the grant of pay scales at the time of revision in pay scales of one post.
He squarely rules upon for the aforesaid propositions on ratio of three judgments of this court.
The judgments are cited as KK Mehta v. State of Punjab, 1983(3) S.L.R.
732, Harsaran Singh v. State of Punjab, 1984(2) S.L.R.
384 and Kirpaljit v. State of Punjab, 1987(4) S.L.R.
594.
6.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties and gone through the records.
Perusal of Annexure P-3 would manifest that the qualifications prescribed for vocational attendants was Middle with the ITI trade but a large number of such Workshop Attendants were recruited who were matriculates or matric with ITI training certificate.
Inasmuch as their qualifications were fixed as Middle with ITI, so their pay scale was fixed as Rs. 325-495 when the pay scales of the class-IV employees were fixed as Rs. 300-400.
The duties of Workshop Attendants were the same as that of Laboratory Attendants.
It is true, that in order Annexure P-3 a suggestion has been made that the Workshop Attendants who had passed matric with ITI or matric with subject of Science should be given the grade of Rs. 400-600 by equating them with the grade of Rs. 400-600 by equating them with the Laboratory Attendants, the fact.
remains that the work and duties of the two posts continue to be the same.
The equation of the posts spelled out from Annexure P-3 is a post based upon qualifications and nature of work and duties carried out by the incumbents of the two posts mentioned above.
It is clearly mentioned in Annexure P-3 that those Workshop Attendants who had not passed matriculation should continue to draw their own pay scales of Rs. 325-495.
When no distinction is made between the two posts and the equation of two posts spelled out in Annexure P-3 is based both upon nature and duties of work and qualifications, I do not find any reason that the petitioner be not granted the same pay scales as are being drawn by Laboratory Attendants.
The authorities cannot be permitted to discriminate between Workshop Attendants and Laboratory Attendants.
The claim of the petitioners is thus justified.
7.
The petition thus deserves to succeed.
The respondents are directed to grant same pay scales to the petitioners as are being given to Laboratory Attendants.
Further, it is made absolutely clear that only those Workshop Attendants would get pay scales equivalent to Laboratory Attendants who are matriculates with Science or matric with ITI training certificates and this would be from the date when even the authorities held the two posts to be equated i.e. March 18, 1983.
The arrears of pay shall be given to the petitioners within three months from today.
The petition succeeds and is allowed in the manner indicated above.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.