GR Majithia, J - This judgment will dispose of Regular First Appeal No. 1910 of 1978 and Cross Objection Nos. 225-CI of 1979.
2.
The facts :-  The plaintiff-appellant was in the employment of defendant-respondent No. 1 as Development Officer and was posted in its Branch Office at Abohar.
He submitted an application dated August 20, 1961 to defendant No. 1 for permission to contest municipal elections at Abohar scheduled to be held on September 24, 1961.
Nomination papers were to be filed on or before August 20, 1961.
The plaintiff-appellant was a Class III employee and his application for permission to contest the municipal elections was to be dealt with by defendant No. 4.
Decision, if any, on the application for permission to contest the municipal elections was not intimated to the plaintiff-appellant.
The plaintiff successfully contested the election and was also elected Vice President of the Municipal Committee by the elected members.
Defendant No. 4 charge-sheeted the plaintiff for having contested the municipal election in violation of regulation 25(4) of the Staff Regulations, 1960 (for short, the Regulations).
The plaintiff submitted a detailed reply to the charge-sheet.
He also submitted a detailed representation to the Chairman of defendant No. 1 pointing out that he had applied much in advance for permission to contest the election, but no dicision was taken on that application and none was conveyed to him.
He presumed that defendant No. 1 had no objection against his contesting the election since permission had been accorded to various employees to contest elections of elected bodies.
After enquiry, defendant No. 3, vide order dated December 3, 1964, removed the plaintiff from the service of defendant No. 1.
The plaintiff preferred an appeal against the order dated December 3, 1964, which was dismissed vide order dated June 8, 1965.
The order of removal and the appellate order dated December 3, 1964 and June 8, 1965, respectively, were challenged in civil suit.
The principal ground of attack was that the order of removal from service was passed in violation of Regulation 339(2) of the Regulations.
The defendants controverted the allegations made in the plaint and, inter alia, pleaded that the order of removal from service was valid.
3.
The trial Judge found that the order of removal was passed in contravention of regulation 39(2) of the Regulations.
The plaintiff was not afforded adequate opportunity to lead evidence in defence for which he had been making persistent requests to the punishing authority.
The punishing authority violated the principle of natural justice contained in regulation 39(2).
Although the trial Judge held that the order of removal from service was bad in law, yet he refused to grant him declaration that he was entitled to be reinstated in service.
He, however, granted him damages in the sum of Rs. 2000/-.
4.
The plaintiff is aggrieved against the order of the trial Judge to the extent to which the relief of reinstatement was declined to him.
Defendant No. 1, aggrieved against the decision of the trial Judge holding that the order or removal from service was passed in violation of regulation 39(2) of the Regulations, has assailed it by filing cross objections.
5.
The finding recorded by the trial Judge that the order of removal from service was passed in violation of the statutory regulations is unexceptional.
The trial Judge, on evidence, found that the plaintiff was not given adequate opportunity to lead evidence in defence by the disciplinary authority before passing the order of removal from service.
Regulation 39(2) of the Regulations is mandatory in terms and enjoins a duty on the disciplinary authority to afford adequate opportunity to delinquent officer/official before passing the order of dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement.
Regulation 39(2) reads thus :-  "No employee shall be dismissed or removed or compulsorily retired or reduced to a lower service or post or to a lower time scale or to a lower stage in a time scale and no order imposing on an employee any of the penalties specified in clauses (b) to (g) of sub-regulation (1) supra, shall be passed by the disciplinary authority specified in Schedule I without the charge or charges being communicated to him in writing and without his having been given a reasonable opportunity of defending himself against such charge or charges and of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken against him."
The regulation enjoins upon the disciplinary authority to give a reasonable opportunity to defend himself against whom an order of dismissal or removal or compulsory retirement was intended to be passed.
The plaintiff's request for leading his defence evidence was rejected without any justification.
The plaintiff is entitled to establish his bona fides.
Denial of opportunity to him to lead evidence in his defence amounts to denying him an opportunity to establish his bona fides.
The order of removal having been found to have been passed in violation of statutory provisions, the plaintiff is entitled to an order for his reinstatement.
Concededly, defendant No. 1 is a statutory body and falls within the definition of 'other authorities' within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution.
The employees of the statutory bodies have statutory status and they are entitled to declaration of being in employment when their dismissal or removal is in contravention of statutory provisions.
The order of removal having been found to have been passed in contravention of the statutory provisions, the plaintiff was entitled to an order of reinstatement.
The decision to the contrary taken by the trial judge cannot be sustained.
The view taken by me finds ample support from the decision rendered by the apex Court in Sukhdev Singh and others v. Sardar Singh Raghuvasnshi and another, AIR 1975 SC 1331, wherein it was held as under :-  "For the foregoing reasons, we hold that the rules and regulations framed by the Oil and Natural Gas Commission, Life Insurance Corporation and the Industrial Finance Corporation have the force of law.
The employees of these statutory bodies have a statutory status and they are entitled to declaration of being in employment when their dismissal or removal is in contravention of statutory provisions.
By way of abundant caution we state that these employees are not servants of the Union or the State.
These statutory bodies are "authorities" within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution."
The plaintiff is, thus, entitled to reinstatement and the judgment of the trial Judge is modified accordingly.
6.
The appeal filed by the plaintiff-appellant succeeds to the extent indicated above.
7.
In the Cross Objections, the defendants have tried to justify the stand on the ground that the order of removal was justified since the plaintiff contested the municipal election without the permission of the competent authority and thus no opportunity need to have been afforded to him before taking the decision for removal from service.
The objection taken is devoid of any merit.
The disciplinary authority is fully competent to award the punishment of dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement against the delinquent officer/official, but the order can only be passed after affording a reasonable opportunity of hearing to the officer/official charge-sheeted.
As observed supra, the disciplinary authority did not afford reasonable opportunity to the plaintiff to defend himself before passing an order or removal from service.
The plaintiff could establish that permission to contest election to elected bodies had been granted to others.
The cross-objections are, thus, dismissed being devoid of merit.
8.
For the reasons mentioned supra, the appeal succeeds to the extent that the plaintiff is entitled to a direction that he be reinstated in service.
He may be deemed to be continuing in service till superannuation.
Defendant No. 4 will determine the exact emoluments to be paid to him keeping in view the fact if the plaintiff was in gainful employment during the aforesaid period.
There will be no orders as to costs.
Order accordingly.