Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner herein was downgraded to Medical Category 'BEE' (Permanent) by Medical Board on account of the amputation of his right thumb in March, 1987.
In June, 1988, he was sent as a member of the Indian Peace Keeping Force to Sri Lanka.
He was promoted from the post of Subedar to that of Subedar Major on August 1, 1988.
About two months later while the petitioner was still in Sri Lanka, he was discharged from service vide orders dated September 30, 1988.
Having failed to get any relief in response to his representations/notice etc. the petitioner has approached this Court through the present wit petition.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner was enrolled as Sepoy on August 8, 1960.
He was appointed as a Lance Naik on December 10, 1966.
He got his promotions to the rank of Naik, Havildar and Naib Subedar on July 12, 1969, July 15, 1973 and June 1, 1980 respectively.
On May 14, 1982, the petitioner was promoted to the rank of Subedar.
During his service career the petitioner passed different courses at Army Training Schools and served at different places.
In the year 1985 the petitioner was attached to the instructional and administrative staff of the 3rd Punjab Battalion (NCC and posted at Ludhiana).
During his service in N.C.C.
he met with an accident while on duty.
As a result, his right thumb was amputated.
In March, 1987, he was downgraded to Medical Category 'BEE' (Permanent) by a Medical Board at Military Hospital, Jullundur Contonment.
He was sent before a Release Medical Board on April 4, 1988.
However, instead of discharging him from the Army, the petitioner was posted back to his original Battalion, viz., 16 Sikh Battalion by the Regimental authorities.
He was then deputed to Sri Lanka.
3.
On May 19, 1988, when the petitioner's case for the grant of honorary commission as Lieutenant waas pending he was asked to opt for promotion to the rank of Subedar Major w.e.f.
August 1, 1988, or to forgo the promotion as submit the papers for grant of honorary commission on Independence Day 1988 and Republic Day 1989.
The petitioner opted for his promotion to the rank of Subedar Major.
This was, as averred by the petitioner, on account of the fact that a Subedar Major is entitled to continue in service upto the age of 52 years while a Subedar retires on attaining the age of 50 years.
On the petitioner's option for promotion to the rank of Subedar Major, the papers for grant of honorary commission were withdrawn on June 4, 1988.
Thereafter, the petitioner was actually promoted to the rank of Subedar Major on August 1, 1988.
Two months later on September 30, 1988, he was discharged from the service.
4.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondent, it has been inter alia averred that since the petitioner had been placed in low medical category, he could not be retained till the age of 52 years.
5.
I have heard Brig.
KS Gill, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. Ashutosh Mohunta for the respondents.
6.
A persual of the record shows that the petitioner had been downgraded to Medical Category 'BEE' (Permanent) in the year 1987.
He was, however, not discharged from service.
He was deputed to Sri Lanka in June, 1988.
He was asked his option for promotion to the rank of Subedar Major, which would have resulted in his forgoing the grant of honorary rank of Lieutenant.
He had exercised that option in May, 1988.
Thereafter he was promoted to the rank of Subedar Major on August 1, 1988.
At the time of asking for option as well as the time of promotion the authorities were aware of the fact that the petitioner had been downgraded as Medical Category 'BEE'.
In spite of these facts he was actually promoted on August 1, 1988.
As a result the petitioner had to forgo the honorary rank of Lieutenant, which would have earned him a substantially higher pension.
According to Mr. Gill, if the petitioner had got the honorary rank of Lieutenant Colonel, the difference in pension would have been to the extent of Rs. 500/- per mensum.
In this situation the learned counsel submitted that grant of discharge was wholly illegal.
According to the learned counsel the authorities were fully aware of the petitioner's physical disability.
In spite of that he had been deputed to Sri Lanka.
He had also been promoted.
Thereafter, there was no justification for the respondents to discharge the petitioner before he had reached the age of 52 years.
7.
The contention raised by the learned counsel is well merited.
In spite of the petitioner's medical condition, the respondents had called upon him to either opt for promotion or to be considered for the award of honorary rank.
The petitioner had opted for promotion.
As a result he had to forgo his claim for honorary rank.
The petitioner was actually promoted.
Since the petition er had been considered fit for promotion in spite of his disability, the respondents in my view were estopped from cutting short his tenure and discharging him from the Army till he reached the age of 52 years.
On the representation of the respondents, the petitioner had acted to his disadvantage.
He had agreed to forgo his claim for the award or honorary rank.
This has admittedly resulted in monetary loss to the petitioner.
In such a situation, the action of the respondents was clearly barred by the principle of equitable estoppel.
8.
Furthermore, the medical disability of the petitioner was already known to the authorities.
In spite of that he was considered for the active service and was sent to Sri Lanka.
He was also considered fit for promotion.
The order promotion was actually passed.
It was wholly arbitrary to have reverted the petitioner thereafter.
As a Subedar Major, according to the instructions issued by the respondents themselves, a copy of which has been appended as Annexure P2 with the written statement, the petitioner was entitled to serve till he completed "32 years of pensionable service or 4 years tenure or 52 years of age, whichever is earlier".
The petitioner having been born on September 2, 1938, had a right to continue in service till he completed the age 52 years.
After his promotion, he could not have been discharged before attaining the age of 52 years.
The action in discharging him prior to his attaining the age of superannuation, viz. 52 years, was in my view wholly illegal.
He had a right which was arbitrarily denied to him.
Even an opportunity of hearing which deserved to be given was not afforded to him.
The action is consequently vitiated.
9.
The Indian Army consists of human-beings.
They are not merely gun-fodder.
The petitioner was sent to Sri Lanka to face the bullet.
Later, he was repatriated and discharged.
He was entitled to a more human treatment.
This was unfairly denied to him.
10.
In the circumstances, the writ petition is allowed.
The order of discharge (Annexure P2) is quashed.
It is declared that the petitioner shall be deemed to have continued in service till he attained the age of 52 years viz., September 19, 1990.
He will be entitled to the grant of all consequential reliefs in the matter of arrears of salary etc. alongwith interest at the rate of 12% from the date of accrual till the date of actual payment.
Since even on his discharge in the year 1990, the petitioner would have been entitled to be considered for the grant of honorary rank, his claim shall be considered by the respondents irrespective of any delay that has occurred in the decision of the case.
If found suitable, the honorary rank shall be conferred on him with all consequential benefits in the matter of pension etc.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to his costs, which are assessed at Rs. 3000/-.
Petition allowed.