GR Majithia, J - The petitioners, who are employees of respondent No. 2, have sought a mandate from this Court to the respondents to release 20 per cent of the Selection Grade of Rs. 700-1250 attached to the posts of Junior Accountant/Junior Assistant/Store-Keeper/sub-Depot Manager/Sales Assistant/Assistant/Accounts Assistant/Export Assistant/Purchase Assistant, etc. etc., who are already in the pay scale of Rs. 525-1050.
2.
It is not necessary to state the facts in detail.
Suffice it is to state that no final decision has been taken on the representation filed by the petitioners for grant of selection grade.
3.
Respondent No. 2 has admitted in the written statement that for implementation of the new pay scales to the staff of respondent No. 2 a Committee was constituted and the Committee recommended that the pay scale of all the Assistants/Accounts Assistants/Junior Assistants/Junior Accountants, etc. be revised to Rs. 525-1050 with 20% selection grade of Rs. 600-1100.
It is further averred by way of clarification that though the State Government allowed the Selection Grade of Rs. 700-1250 for 20% posts of Assistant only for two departments, namely, the Chief Secretary and Financial Commissioner, but the Committee recommended the selection grade of Rs. 600-1100 for 20% posts in the Corporation.
Respondent No. 2 did take decision to revise the pay scale of the employees like the petitioners.
4.
I do think it apt to express any opinion on the claim of the petitioners.
Respondent No. 2 is directed to treat the writ petition with its enclosures as representation for and on behalf of the petitioners for grant of selection grade in view of the policy adopted by it.
Respondent No. 2 will take a final decision on the representation within six months from the date of receipt of copy of this judgment along with the copy of the writ petition with its enclosures.
The registry is directed to send a copy of the writ petition with the enclosures along with the copy of this judgment to respondent No. 2 for taking actions indicated above.
I have no doubt that respondent No. 2 will take final decision objectively in ignoring the defence taken in the written statement.
With these observations, the petition is disposed of with no order as to costs.
Petition deposed of.