NK Sodhi, J - RS Sharma and two others who are working as Legal Assistants in the Transport Department of the State of Punjab claim through this petition the higher scale of pay of Rs. 800-1400 with effect from the date when this scale was given to their counterparts working in the Department of Law and Legislation.
2.
The petitioners joined the Transport Department as Legal Advisers quite a few years back in the pay scale of Rs. 350-650 but later they were redesignated as Legal Assistants and have been working since then.
The minimum qualifications for appointment as a Legal Assistant in the Transport Department are that the candidate should be a Law Graduate with 3 years experience at the Bar or three years experience in any Law Office of a recognised institution whereas in the case of other Departments particularly the Law and Legislative Department, the requirement is that the candidate should be a Ist Class Law graduate or should possess a Law degree with two years experience in any legal department.
The petitioners in the Transport Department have been notified as 'Government Pleaders' in terms of clause (7) of Section 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure and are also Law Officers under clause (d) of sub-section (2) of section 28 read with clause (c) of sub-section (1) section 24 of the Advocates Act, 1961 and they appear before Civil Courts, Labour Tribunals, State Transport Appellate Tribunal and assist the inquiry officers in departmental proceedings besides appearing before Arbitrators.
Most of these duties, according to the petitioners, are not performed by their counterparts in the Law and Legislative Department nor in other State Government Departments where the posts of Legal Assistants exits.
State Government by a notification dated 21.1.1969 equated the posts of Legal Assistants in the Transport Department with the posts of Legal Assistants in the Law and Legislative Department and it is not disputed that these officials in these two Departments continued to draw the same scale of pay i.e. Rs. 350-650.
In the year 1979, the Second Pay Commission recommended the revision of pay scales of different categories of State Government employees including the Legal Assistants and recommended to the State Government a uniform pay scale of Rs. 750-1300 for Legal Assistants in all the departments throughout the State.
The recommendation of the Pay Commission in the case of Legal Assistants was not accepted in toto but their scale of pay was, however, revised to Rs. 700-1200 with effect from 111978 the date from which the recommendations of the Pay Commission were made effective.
It is common case of the parties that the Legal Assistants throughout the State of Punjab including those in the Transport Department as well as in the Law and Legislative Department continued to draw the revised pay scale of Rs. 700-1200 thereafter.
By a letter dated August 1, 1983, addressed by the State of Punjab, Department of Finance to the Secretary to Government of Punjab, Department of Home Affairs and Justice, the State Government revised the pay scales of the Legal Assistants working in the Department of Law and Legislation and enhanced their scale of pay to Rs. 800-1400 w.e.f.
111978, the date when the recommendations of the Second Pay Commission had become effective.
The grouse of the petitioners is that their posts having been equated with their counterparts in the Department of Law and Legislation as far back as in January, 1969, they were also entitled to the higher scale of pay of Rs. 800-1400 w.e.f.
the same date.
It is for the redressal of this grievance that the present writ petition has been filed.
3.
The stand of the writ petitioners has been controverted by the State and it is denied that the qualifications and experience prescribed for the post of Legal Assistants in the Department of Law and Legislation are same as those in the Transport Department.
According to the respondent-State, the Legal Assistants in The Department of Law & Legislation who directly recruited are Ist Class Law Graduates whereas there is no such requirement in the case of the Transport Department and that the Legal Assistants in the former Department are performing duties of highly technical nature relating to vetting of Notifications, Orders, Ordinances, Rules, Acts and Bills and deal with cases where the said Department has to give information/advice in various complicated legal matters relating to different Departments of the State Government.
The contention is that the duties performed by the Legal Assistants in the Transport Department are not at par with those of the Legal Assistants in the Department of Law and Legislation.
According to the reply filed on behalf of the State, the 3rd Pay Commission in its report after noticing the highly technical nature of duties of the Legal Assistants in the Law and Legislative Department, recommended for them higher scale of Rs. 1800-3200 whereas a slightly lower grade of Rs. 1640-2925 had been recommended for the Legal Assistants working in other departments including the Transport department.
On the basis of these averments, it is contended on behalf of the State that there being a qualitative difference in the nature of duties performed by the Legal Assistants of the Law and Legislative Department, they stand apart from the Legal Assistants working in other Departments and the difference in the scales of their pay is thus justified.
4.
The contention advanced on behalf of the writ petitioners is that their posts having been equated with their counterparts in the Law and Legislative Department in the year 1969 they cannot be subsequently discriminated in the matter of pay scale.
The argument is that even with effect from 111978 on the recommendations of the Second Pay Commission the State Government continued to give them the same scale of pay and it is only now for the first time in the year 1983 that the Government chose to give the higher scale of Rs. 800-1400 to the Legal Assistants in the Department of Law and Legislation and that too with effect from 111978.
The petitioners also claim that the nature of duties performed by them in the Transport Department are identical if not more onerous and that there was no justification for the Government to enhance the pay scales of the Legal Assistants in the said Department but denying the same scale of pay to the them in the Transport Department.
I find force in the contentions of the learned counsel for the petitioners.
It is not in dispute that the posts of the petitioners in the Transport Department were equated with those of their counterparts in the Department of Law and Legislation as early as in the year 1969 and they continued to draw the same scale of pay till the year 1983 when the Legal Assistants in the Department of Law and Legislation were given the higher grade of Rs. 800-1400 with effect from 111978.
Once the State Government decided to equate the posts of Legal Assistants in the Transport Department with those in the Department of Law and Legislation, I fail to see how it could afterwards justifiably discriminate between the incumbents of the two departments in matter of pay scales.
The nature of work performed by the Legal Assistants in the two departments is almost identical though the petitioners contend that their duties both quantatively and qualitatively are higher than those of their counterparts in the Department of Law and Legislation.
The Second Pay Commission in its recommendation had noticed the different types of duties performed by the Legal Assistants both in the Transport Department as well as in the Department of Law and Legislation and other departments where these posts exist and finding them almost similar recommended a uniform scale of pay for all the Legal Assistants throughout the State.
It cannot be said that the Government while equating the posts of Legal Assistants in the two departments was not aware of the nature of duties performed by them.
On partly accepting the recommendations of Pay Commission a uniform pay scale of Rs. 700-1200 was given to all the Legal Assistants in every department wherever these posts existed.
Now when the pay scale of the Legal Assistants in the Department of Law and Legislation has been enhanced to Rs. 800-1400 with effect from 111978.
In my opinion, the petitioners in the Transport Department are also entitled to this higher grade with effect from the same date when this grade was given to the Legal Assistants in the Department of Law and Legislation.
The action of State in denying to the petitioners the higher grade of Rs. 800-1400 is both arbitrary and discriminatory and thus violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
In KK Mehta and another v. State of Punjab and another, 1983(3) S.L.R.
732, SP Goyal, J took the view that as long as the posts for Field Inspectors and Agricultural Inspectors in the Agriculture Department of the State of Punjab continued to be equated, there was hardly any reason to deny to one of them the same pay scales merely on the qualifications and duties of one being different to the other.
I am in agreement with that view.
In the present case, the educational qualifications and the nature of duties, as already observed earlier, are almost identical in the case of Legal Assistants in both the departments.
The same view was taken by MM Punchhi, J in Harsaran Singh v. State of Punjab and others.
Their Lordships of the Supreme Court as well in Employees of Tannery and Footwear Corporation of India Limited and another v. Union of India and others, 1991(2) S.C.T.
339 : 1991(2) S.L.R.
131 while granting the same scales of pay to the employee of the Tannery and Footwear Corporation which their counterparts were drawing in the Cotton Corporation of India observed as under :-  "Here we are not concerned with the equation of posts because the posts falling in the above-mentioned four categories of employees in the respondent-Corporation as well as the Cotton Corporation of India are of the same level and the employees working on these posts were having the same pay scales in 1970.
There is nothing on the record to show that after 1970 there has been any change in the duties and functions of the persons holding these posts in the two Corporations which may justify fixation of different pay scales for these posts in the two Corporations."
5.
In the case before me, it is not even suggested by the respondent-State that there has been any change in the duties performed by the Legal Assistants of either of the two departments subsequent to their equalisation which could justify the fixation of different pay scales for them.
The mere fact that the third pay commission had recommended a higher pay scale for the Legal Assistants in the department of Law and Justice, is hardly relevant because the posts had already been equated by the State Government and having equated them, it was in 1983 that they were again sought to be unequated creating a discrimination between the Legal Assistants of the two departments and it is this discrimination that has been challenged before me.
A discriminatory act of 1983 cannot be defended on the basis of a recommendation made in 1984 more so when such a recommendation is not binding on the State government.
6.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed and the respondent-State directed to revise the pay scales of the petitioners so as to equate them with those of the Legal Assistants in the Departments of Law and Legislation with effect from 111978.
The petitioners shall also be entitled to the arrears of pay and other benefits which may accrue as a result of this revision.
The State is further directed to calculate the arrears of pay and other benefits due to the petitioners and pay the same within three months from the date of receipt of this order.
In the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.