GR Majithia, J - In this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioners have impugned the decision taken in the meeting of the Board of Directors of respondent No. 1 on March 10, 1986 ; the order dated December 31, 1986 promoting Godown Keepers/Accounts Clerks as Manager Grade-III ; the administrative order dated February 6, 1986 calling for options for promotion to the post of Manager Grade-III/Assistant (Accounts and General) and the promotion order dated March 4, 1986 promoting Accounts Clerks, Godown Keepers, Steno-typists as Assistants (Accounts and General).
2.
Facts as emerging from the pleading, briefly, are :-  The petitioners are working as Godown Keepers with respondent No. 1.
At the time of their initial appointment, the minimum qualification prescribed for appointment as Godown Keeper was Matric and the petitioner fulfilled the qualification.
Their terms and conditions of service were regulated by Warehousing Corporation (Staff) Regulations, 1981 (for short, the 1981 Regulations).
Respondent No. 2 in their 75th Meeting held on March 10, 1986, vide resolution No. 98 changed the qualification for promotion from the post of Godown Keeper to the post of Manager Grade-III/Assistant (Accounts/General) as under :-  Manager Grade-III.
Godown Keepers/Clerks/Steno-typists/Record Keepers with 7 years experience in the respective posts, out of which 3 years experience as Godown Keeper at one of the Warehouses.
In addition to the existing qualifications for promotion purposes only those Godown Keeper, Accounts Clerks who are graduate in any field like Public Administration or Sociology or having Diploma in Business Management, Industrial Relations will be considered for promotion.
Assistant/Accounts Assistant.
For promotion purposes only those Godown Keepers/Accounts Clerks/Steno-typists/Typists who are Graduate in any field will be considered."
After prescribing new qualification for promotion as Manager Grade-III/Assistant (Accounts and General), the private respondents were given promotion.
The principal challenge to the changing of qualification is that the statutory regulations cannot be amended by respondent No. 2.
Respondent No. 2 by an executive fiat could not amend the statutory regulations under which the minimum qualification prescribed was Matric and the Godown Keepers were eligible for promotion to the post of Manager Grade-III of Assistant (Accounts/General).
3.
Written statement has been filed on behalf of respondents No. 1 and 2.
It was not denied that the 1981 Regulations were issued.
However, it was stated that under Section 42(1) of the Warehousing Corporation Act 1962 for short, the Act), the Regulations can be framed by respondent No. 1 with the previous sanction of the appropriate Government.
The Board of Directors of respondent No. 1 approved the Regulations and referred the same to the appropriate Government for approval, but no approval has yet been granted and as such, the 1981 Regulations only remained draft Regulations, and these are followed as guidelines.
Respondent No. 2 can amend or modify the draft Regulations on administrative exigencies.
In order to achieve overall efficiency in the cadre of Manager Grade-III, it was decided to amend the draft Regulations and prescribe higher education qualification.
The posts of Managers Grade-III and Assistant/Accounts Assistant are of higher responsibility and to achieve efficiency.
The Board prescribed higher academic qualifications.
These qualifications are to be applicable to all the Godown Keepers/Clerks/Steno-typists/Record Keepers prospectively and those who have already been promoted were not to be affected.
In future, only those Godown Keepers, Accounts Clerks, Steno-typists, Record Keepers will be considered for promotion as Manager Grade-III and Assistant/Accounts Assistant who possess the higher qualification mentioned in the Draft Regulations.
The promotions made on March 4, 1986 were in accordance with the Draft Regulations as existed on that date after notifying options and the promotions after March 10, 1986 were made keeping in view the amendments in the qualification embodies in the Draft Regulations introduced and approved by the Board of Directors in its meeting.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that 1981 Regulations had been framed with the previous sanction of the appropriate Government and are, thus, statutory.
He also submitted that prior to the enforcement of these Regulations, respondent No. 1 had framed Haryana Warehousing Corporation (Staff) Regulations, 1969 (for short, the 1969 Regulations).
If 1981 Regulations were not statutory, then the 1969 Regulations will govern the terms and conditions of service of the employees of respondent No. 1.
The qualifications for promotion to various posts either by direct recruitment or by promotion are mentioned in the Appendix added to the 1969 Regulations.
The 1969 Regulations are not statutory, as has been observed by this Court in one of its judgments.
Even if the 1981 Regulations are not statutory, the 1969 Regulations being statutory the terms and conditions of service therein cannot be amended by administrative orders.
5.
Learned counsel for respondent Nos. 1 and 2 refuting the factual submission of the petitioners' counsel vehemently urged that the 1969 and 1981 Regulations are not statutory.
Under sub-section (1) of Section 42 of the Act, respondent No. 1 is empowered to frame regulations for its staff with the previous sanction of the appropriate Government.
He submitted that the 1969 and 1981 Regulations were sent to the appropriate Government for approval, but the same was not accorded.
To resolve the disputed question raised at the bar whether the 1969 and 1981 Regulations were framed with the previous approval of the appropriate Government, I summoned the record from respondent No. 1.
A persual thereof reveals that the draft regulations of 1969 and 1981 were submitted to the State Government for approval, but final decision was not taken by it.
The fact remains that the draft regulations of 1969 and 1981 were not approved by the appropriate Government and till approval is granted, these Regulations do not attain statutory character and are only draft regulations.
There is no embargo on respondent No. 1 to amend the draft regulations.
Respondent No. 1 is enjoined by sub-section (1) of Section 23 of the Act to appoint such officers and other employees as it considers necessary for the efficient performance of its functions.
Respondent No. 2 found that the posts of Manager Grade-III and Assistant/Accounts Assistant are of higher responsibility and thus prescribed higher qualifications for these posts.
The decision was taken to bring about efficiency in the administration land it was resolved that the decision will operate prospectively and not retrospectively.
Promotions made prior to the introduction of higher qualifications were to be made as per the 1981 draft regulations and promotions after the decision taken by the Board of Directors in its meeting held on March 10, 1986 were to be made as per the amended qualification.
The decision appears to be just and in the best interest of the administration and no fault can be found with it.
6.
For the reasons aforementioned, the writ petition is devoid of merits and is dismissed with no order as to costs.
7.
However, respondent No. 1 is directed to submit the draft regulations, after making necessary amendments brought about by the various resolutions of the Board of Directors, for approval to the appropriate Government within three months.
The appropriate Government, on receipt of the draft regulations from respondent No. 1 containing all the amendments, shall take necessary steps in this behalf expeditiously and after proper consideration will take final decision within six months from the date of receipt of the draft regulations.
Petition dismissed.