RS Mongia, J - Petitioner joined the Indian Army on July 11, 1966 as a Non-Commissioned Officer in one of the 'other Ranks'.
He was discharged from the Army on July 31, 1975 while he was still working as a Non-commissioned Officer.
The Punjab Panchayati Raj Khed Parishad (hereinafter called as Khed Parishad) came into being on October 21, 1969.
Khed Parishad advertised posts for recruitment to the posts of Coaches in different disciplines of games on 9th January, 1976.
20% of the posts were reserved for released Indian Armed Forces Personnel under Demobilized Armed Forces Personnel (Reservation of Vacancies in Punjab State Non-Technical Services) Rules, 1968 (hereinafter called 1968 Rules).
2.
The petitioner applied for the post of Wrestling Coach in response to the above referred to advertisement.
Interview for the said post took place on 23rd April, 1976 and the petitioner was selected on 29th July, 1976.
The joined the post on 4th August, 1976.
Petitioner applied to the Khed Parishad that he be given the benefit of Military Service for the purpose of Seniority and increments in pay under the 1968 Rules.
Vide order dated 28th April, 1991 (copy Annexure P 1/A), Khed Parishad decided to give benefit to the petitioner of his Military service and the date of appointment for the purpose of seniority and increments was given as 1651970, but it was ordered that the petitioner would not be paid any arrears.
3.
The petitioner applied for the post of Wrestling Coach in the Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana and sought the permission of Khed Parishad for appearing in the interview.
Permission was granted by the Khed Parishad vide its letter dated 1021989.
The petitioner was selected by the Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana and was relieved by the Khed Parishad on 7th February, 1989.
As per the terms of appointment of the Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana, it was agreed that the petitioner's salary will be fixed at the last pay drawn by the petitioner while working with the Khed Parishad.
Though the petitioner had resigned from Khed Parishad on 17th February, 1989 but last pay certificate had not been issued and one of the reliefs sought in this writ petition is that the Khed Parishad should be directed to issue to the petitioner the last pay certificate so that he could get his pay fixed with the Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana.
4.
It may be observed that according to 1968 Rules, 20% of the posts of the non-technical services are reserved for the released Indian Armed Forces Personnel i.e. Demobilized Emergency Commissioned Officers, short services Regular Commissioned Officers, Junior Commissioned Officers and 'other Ranks' of the Armed Forces of the Indian Union.
Rule 5 of the 1968 Rules, when these were initially framed, reads as under :-  (5)"1.
Seniority and pay of the candidated who are appointed against the vacancies reserved under rule 3 shall be determined on the assumption that they joined the service or the post, as the case may be under the State Government at the first opportunity they had after they joined the military service or training prior to the Commission.
2.
Seniority inter se of candidate who are appointed against the vacancies reserved under rule 3 and allotted to a particular year shall be determined on the basis of their date of birth, the candidate older in age to be placed senior to the one younger in age : Provided that in case of candidates having the same date of birth, seniority shall be determined according to the merit list prepared by the recruiting authority on the basis of the result of the test or examination.
3.
All candidates appointed against the reserved vacancies under rule shall rank below the candidates appointed by direct recruitment in the year to which the former candidates are allotted."
With effect from May 3, 1976, the above quoted rule was substituted and the following rule was introduced :-  "In rule 5 of the Demobilized Armed Forces Personnel (Reservation of Vacancies in the Punjab State Non-Technical Services), Rules, 1968, for sub-rule (1) the following sub-rule shall be substituted, namely :- "(1) seniority and pay of the candidates who are appointed against the vacancies reserved under rule 3 and who- (i) in the case of Emergency Commissioned Officers, are released accordingly to a phased programme ; or (ii) in the case of Short Service Commissioned Officers, are released on the expiry of the tenure of their services ; or (iii) are invalidated owing to a disability attributable to or aggravated by military service, shall be determined on the assumption that they joined the service or the post, as the case may be, under the State Government at the first opportunity they had after they joined the military service or training prior to the Commission."
5.
Vide notice dated 4th April, 1989, the Director Rural Development and Panchayat-cum-Chairman of the Khed Parishad called upon the petitioner as to why the benefits towards increments and seniority in the cadre of Coaches and the subsequent benefits arising therefrom be not withdrawn which were inadvertantly given on the basis of the military service rendered by the petitioner.
The main thrust in the notice was that in view of the amendment of 1968 Rules, regarding seniority and pay, the petitioner's case was not covered by the 1968 Rules as amended.
In other words according to Khed Parishad, the benefit of Rule 5 of the 1968 Rules could only be given to Emergency Commissioned Officers, Short Service Commissioned Officers or those who were invalidated owing to disability.
Since the petitioner belonged to 'Other Ranks' and did not fall in any of the three categories referred to above, he was not entitled to the benefits under the 1968 Rules.
6.
The petitioner showed cause and stated that the amended Rules could not be made applicable to the case of the petitioner.
However, Khed Parishad by an order dated 24th September, 1989 (Annexure P.11) held that the petitioner was not entitled to any benefit of military service.
It was further ordered that a sum of Rs. 53,716.17 be recovered from the petitioner.
This order has also been challenged in present writ petition.
7.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that amendment to rule 5 of the 1968 Rules was brought in w.e.f.
3rd May, 1976; the advertisement for the post of Coaches was issued on 9th January, 1976 and the interview was also held on April 23, 1976.
Though the appointment letter was issued later on, therefore, the amended Rule could not be applied in case of the petitioner.
The argument of the petitioner's counsel was that since the vacancy which was sought to be filled, had occurred prior to the amendment of 1968 Rules, and in fact process of filling the vacancies had started prior to the amendment of 1968 Rules, the amendment could not be made applicable in the case of the petitioner and his case was covered by Rule 5 of the 1968 Rules, as it existed prior to May 3, 1976.
The counsel further submitted that in case the above-mentioned submission does not find favour with this Court then substituted Rule 5 of the 1968 Rules, which has already been quoted above, was ultra vires Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India, inasmuch as it discriminated between released Indian Armed Forces Personnel.
The benefits of military service could not only be confined to the Emergency Commissioned Officers, Short Service Commissioned Officers, but it had to be given to all released Indian Armed Forces Personnel including 'Other Ranks'.
He further argued that Rule 3 and the preamble of 1968 Rules had not been amended and 'Other Ranks' were entitled to be considered for appointment against 20% reserved vacancies for the released Indian Armed Forces Personnel.
That being so, the 'Other Ranks' could not be deprived of the benefits of military service.
8.
It is not necessary for me to go into the vires of the substituted Rule 5 of the 1968 Rules because I am of the view that the petitioner's case would be covered by the original Rule 5 of the 1968 Rules quoted above.
The substituted Rule 5 came into being on May 3, 1976 whereas, the process for selection and appointments had started much prior to that as indicated above.
9.
Consequently, the benefit of military service towards seniority and pay etc. under the original Rule 5 of the 1968 Rules had rightly been given to the petitioner initially.
10.
For the foregoing reasons, this petition is allowed.
Order (Annexure P.11) dated September 24, 1989, passed by the Advisor to the Governor of Punjab and Senior Vice-President of the Khed Parishad, is hereby quashed.
Respondent No. 4 is directed to issue last pay certificate to the petitioner within 2 months of the receipt of this order.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.