MS Liberban, J - This appeal arise out of a judgment and decree of the learned Additional District Judge, dated May 3, 1988, whereby the Market Committee, Khmanon respondent No. 2 was directed to count the period of ad hoc service rendered by the plaintiff-respondent towards his seniority, increment, etc.  2.
The undisputed facts which have emerged on the record and even on which the findings have been returned to that effect, are that the plaintiff-respondent was appointed on April 23, 1976 on ad hoc basis for three months and his services were regularised on July 21, 1976.
3.
The plaintiff was appointed on July 19, 1976 on his being regularly selected.
The Market Committee further passed Resolution, Exhibit P2, to the effect that the services of the plaintiff-respondent were regularised and the he was confirmed against the post from the date of his appointment.
Other benefits were also granted.
4.
The only contention raised by the counsel for the appellants is that it was a fresh appointment of the respondent and it was not a case of regularisation of his services.
Consequently, the services rendered by him his during his tenure as an ad hoc employee for three months cannot be counted.
I find no force in the submission made by the learned counsel.
There is no gain saying that the plaintiff was appointed against a regular post and though he was regularly selected later but the regular selection was much before the period of ad hoc appointment expired.
It was observed in Ashok Gulati and others v. BS Jain and others, A.I.R. 1987 SC 424 that it involved a claim by persons who had been in employment in the Government service on a purely adhoc basis de hors the rules, that they were entitled upon their absorption to the post on a regular basis, to the benefit of the period of their continuous officiation as temporary employees on ad hoc basis for determining their eligibility for promotion to the higher grade post.
5.
It was further observed that usually in the absence of any rule to the contrary the length of continuous officiation should be counted in reckoning seniority as between direct recruits and promotees.
6.
It has been observed in GP Goyal and others v. Chief Secretary, Government of UP and others, 1984(2) S.L.R.
555, as under :-  "It is thus well settled that where officiating appointment is followed by confirmation unless a contrary rule is shown, the service rendered as officiation appointment cannot be ignored for reckoning length of continuous officiation for determining the place in the seniority list.
Admittedly, that has not been done and the seniority list is drawn up from the date on which the approval/selection was made by the Public Service Commission in respect of each member of the service which is clearly violative of Article 16, and any seniority list drawn up on this invalid basis must be quashed."
7.
In view of the authoritative pronouncement of the Supreme Court, I am of the considered view that ad hoc service rendered by the plaintiff-respondent has to be counted towards seniority.
The distinction pointed out in the Grounds of Appeal is not relevant in the facts and circumstances of this case.
8.
In view of the observations made above, I find no force in the appeal.
The same is dismissed, with no order as to costs.
9.
Since the appeal has been finally disposed of the Civil Miscellaneous Application for vacation of stay has been rendered infructuous.
Order accordingly.