RS Mongia, J (Oral) - Petitioner, Shri MN Bhagat, who was working as a Superintending Engineer (Civil), with the Haryana State Electricity Board (hereinafter called the Board), was served with the charge-sheet by the Board levelling four charges, which are reproduced below :-  "CHARGE No. 1.
That he failed to take notice of the likely lowering of full supply level inspite of the objections taken by Irrigation Authorities even before the start of the Bridge.
CHARGE No. 2.
Instead of repeated suggestions from the Design Cell, he did not agree to stop the construction work, which could result in infructuous expenditure of Rs. one lac if dismantlement was resorted to.
CHARGE No. 3.
That he ignored the suggestion of caution from the Design Cell in the matter of further construction of the Bridge and allowed the deck slab of the Bridge to be laid even after June, 1982.
CHARGE No. 4.
In spite of repeated reference to the consultants, he was unable to secure any fruitful suggestion regarding the safety of the Bridge and continued its construction with the ulterior motive."
A regular departmental enquiry was held against the petitioner and the Enquiry Officer found him guilty of all the charges.
The Board agreeing with the enquiry report, issued show cause notice to the petitioner on 24th March, 1988 (Annexure P-27) tentatively proposing the punishment of removal from service.
The petitioner showed cause and gave a detailed reply to the show cause notice.
Vide order dated 22nd June, 1989 (Annexure P-33), the Board after considering the reply to the show cause notice imposed punishment of stoppage of one increment with cumulative effect.
It is this order that has been impugned by the petitioner in the present writ petition.
2.
The learned counsel for the petitioner, inter alia, argued that apart from other grounds of attack, the impugned order was liable to be set aside on the short ground that it was not a speaking order.
He submitted that the petitioner had given a detailed reply to the show cause notice and the impugned order does not deal with the points raised by him in the reply to the show cause notice.
He has argued that from the proposed punishment of removal from service, the Board thought it proper to impose punishment only of stoppage of one increment with cumulative effect.
From this fact, it could not be ruled out that some of the charges were ultimately held to be not proved after the consideration of the petitioner's reply to the show cause notice.
He submitted that no reasons have been given as to why the punishment of stoppage of one increment with cumulative effect was called for in spite of his reply to the show cause notice.
In support of his contention, he relied upon a Single Bench Judgment of this Court in TN Bansal v. State of Haryana, 1986(3) S.L.J.
101 and drew my pointed attention to paragraph 2 of the judgment, which reads as under :-  "The learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that the order impugning penalty Annexure P-6 is not a speaking order.
It does not set out the process of reasoning by which the punishing authority reached the conclusion that the penalty of stoppage of two annual increments with cumulative effect should be imposed on the petitioner.
No doubt the order extends to over two pages but it simply sets out the details of the charges levelled against him, the fact that the enquiry report had been received, he had been served with a show-cause notice to which he had submitted a reply, but no punishment should be inflicted upon him.
Likewise the learned counsel contented that the orders Annexures P.8 and P10 passed on his appeal and memorial are also non-speaking orders.
It is well settled that an order imposing even a minor penalty entails civil consequences and it should be a speaking order.
The impugned orders are, therefore, violative of the rules of natural justice and cannot be sustained."
3.
On the other hand, the learned counsel for the respondents did not dispute the proposition that the order imposing punishment had to be a speaking order, but maintained that the impugned order was speaking order.
According to him, the matter had been considered by the Board and detailed reasons have been given in the minutes of the meeting as to why the punishment of stoppage of one increment with cumulative effect was being imposed.
He referred to the pleadings in paragraphs 40 and 41 of the written statement, as also the pleadings in paragraphs 46 to 49 of the written statement.
As far as the pleadings in paragraphs 40 and 41 are concerned, these are the reproduction of the minutes of the Board's meeting prior to the issuance of the show cause notice when the Board was considering report of the Enquiry Officer, as to whether the Board was agreeing with the enquiry report and if so, what punishment was to be proposed.
The minutes show that after agreeing with the enquiry report, the Board was of the tentative view that punishment of removal from service should be imposed on the petitioner, and, therefore, a decision was taken to issue a show cause notice to that effect.
As far as the pleadings in paragraphs 46 and 49 are concerned, these are the minutes of the meeting of the Board after the reply to show cause notice, had been considered.
The minutes are reproduced for ready reference :-  "The position contained the memorandum was seen.
After considering the facts contained in the reply to the show cause notice and oral submission made before the Chairman during the course of personal hearing by Sh. MN Bhagat, it was observed that Shri Bhagat has not been able to explain satisfactorily his position to the allegations levelled against him.
As such, it was decided to impose upon him a punishment of stoppage of one increment with cumulative effect.
Order be issued accordingly".
The persual of the minutes shows that no reasoning has been given as to why the reply of the petitioner to show cause notice was not found to be satisfactory; to what extent it was being accepted to come to a conclusion that lesser punishment than the one proposed was justified.
No process of reasoning is present in the minutes as reproduced above nor the same is contained in the impugned order.
4.
It is by now well settled that process of reasoning should be indicated either in the impugned order or even they can be supplemented by the reasons which are recorded on the file, but have to be communicated to the delinquent officer.
I find that the impugned order as well as the minutes reproduced above, cannot be termed as speaking order.
5.
For the foregoing reasons, this writ petition is allowed, the impugned order dated 22nd June, 1989 (Annexure P-33), imposing stoppage of one increment is quashed.
It will, however, be open to the respondents to pass an order afresh after taking into consideration the reply to the show cause notice already submitted by the petitioner, keeping in view the observations made above.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.