JL Gupta, J - The petitioner was appointed as chowkidar in February, 1963, in the pay scale of Rs. 30-1/2-35.
Copy of the appointment order is Annexure P-1 vide orders dated the 5th June, 1967, the increments, which fell due on February 1, 1965; February 1, 1966 and February 1, 1967, were allowed.
The petitioner continued to draw increments till 1971 when the department started paying him fixed wages as prescribed by the Deputy Commissioner under the Minimum Wages Act.
In March, 1986, the petitioner was directed to submit an application for temporary appointment to he post of chowkidar.
This was done in spite of the fact that the petitioner had been working as such since the year 1963.
The petitioner protested and despite that a fresh letter of appointment was issued to him on 11th March, 1987.
The terms of appointment as laid down in this letter are similar to those prescribed in the letter of original appointment issued to him on 11th March, 1987.
The terms of appointment as laid down in this letter are similar to those prescribed in the original appointment issued on 1st February, 1963.
Vide letter dated 27th of March, 1987, he was informed that the order of appointment issued vide letter dated 11th March, 1987, was for regular and fresh post of chowkidar as per instructions conveyed by the Head Office vide memo dated 16th February, 1987.
It was also indicated that this was fresh entry into Government service.
Learned counsel for the petitioner stated at the bar that the petitioner has actually retired in May 1989, on attaining the age of superannuation.
2.
In the petition two fold grievances has been made.
Firstly it has been averred that action in not paying the petitioner his salary in the pay scale prescribed for the post of chowkidar (as revised from time to time) and in giving him only fixed wages from 1971 to 1987 was wholly illegal.
Secondly, it has been averred that action in giving him fresh appointment from 11th March, 1987, and not treating his service as continuous and regular from 1st of February, 1963, was totally arbitrary.
3.
Written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondent.
It has been averred that in 1971 the petitioner was given salary as fixed by the Deputy Commissioner.
The petitioner continued receiving fixed wages upto 2331987.
He having accepted the wages was debarred from challenging it after a lapse of so many years.
It has also been averred that in March, 1986, the post of chowkidar was sanctioned in the budget for the year 1986-87 and accordingly the petitioner was offered post in the pay scale of Rs. 300-430 on regular basis and was paid out of the Head "309-Food Administration".
Prior to this, it is averred that the petitioner was paid at the rate fixed by the Deputy Commissioner out of Scheme Head i.e. 124- Capital Outlay.
4.
I have heard Mr. Ram Kumar malik, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. jaswant singh, Assistant Advocate General for the State of Haryana.
5.
Sequence of events clearly shows hat the petitioner was appointed as a peon in regular scale of pay of Rs. 30-1/2-35 on the 1st of February, 1963.
He had continued to draw his salary in this scale of pay till 1971 when without any reasonable explanation on record, the department started paying him fixed wages at the rate fixed by the Deputy Commissioner.
This appears to have continued till March, 1987.
Mr. Ram Kumar Malik, learned counsel for the petitioner, urges vehemently that action was totally arbitrary.
I think the learned counsel is absolutely right in his contention.
The petitioner was employed on the post which carried regular scale of pay.
The post was never abolished.
No decision by the appointing authority to reduce scale of pay etc. has been produced before this court.
No administrative exigency justifying action of the department has been disclosed in the written - statement.
Even at the hearing no reasonable explanation for the aforesaid action was forthcoming.
In such a situation, I cannot help but conclude that the action was totally arbitrary.
6.
Mere stoppage of increment is penalty under the rules.
Stoppage of increment with cumulative effect is now accepted to be a major penalty.
In this case whole action was taken without even giving an opportunity to the petitioner.
The action besides being arbitrary was also violative of principles of natural justice.
It was totally against notices of fair play.
It was nullity.
7.
Secondly it has been argued by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the petitioner had been appointed as chowkidar on February 1, 1963.
He had continued to hold this post without any break till the year 1987 when vide letter dated march 11, 1987, a fresh letter of appointment was given to him.
Even though the terms of appointment in both the letters are almost identical, in the written-statement, appointment in the year 1987 has been described as regular.
Learned counsel submits that action of the department was in fact calculated to defeat the petitioner's right to benefit of continuous service of more than 24 years from 1963 to 1987.
Such an action was wholly illegal, arbitrary and even against law.
I think the learned counsel for the petitioner is absolutely right in his submission.
Once the petitioner had been appointed to the post and he had held it continuously for a period of 24 years, I find no justification whatsoever for the action taken by the department.
8.
One cannot but lament absolutely heartless and callous attitude exhibited by the departmental authorities in the present case.
In a country governed by the rule of law actions such as those taken in the present case cannot be justified by any standard whatsoever.
All norms of administrative, propriety and judicious approach to the claims of civil servants have been thrown to winds.
The actions are totally arbitrary and the reliefs claimed by the petitioner deserve to be granted.
9.
Mr. Jaswant Singh was vehement in his contention that the petitioner had remained silent for a long time from 1971 to 1986 and as such the relief should be declined to him.
Poverty stalks our land and a poor chowkidar like the petitioner who may even be illiterate, is neither conscious of his right nor is he in a position to launch effective protest.
The manner in which the authorities have functioned in the present case could have well created fear in his mind that he might lose his job.
If he continued to accept wages given to him, I do not think the administration can be permitted to take advantage of his helplessness.
10.
I accordingly allow this petition.
It is held that the petitioner's salary would be fixed after giving him benefit of increments in the scale of pay in which he was originally appointed as also in the scale/scales of pay which may have been sanctioned on account of periodic revision by the State.
His Service would also be treated as continuous with effect from 1st of February, 1963.
He having retired in May, 1989, would be given all consequential benefits including pension, gratuity etc. as may be admissible to him under the rules.
The arrears of pay, pension and gratuity shall be calculated and paid to the petitioner within three months from the date of the receipt of this order by the respondent.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to interest at the rate of 12% per annum from the date the amounts fell due till the date of actual payment.
He will also have his costs which are assessed at Rs. 5000/  Petition allowed.