Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner, a peon in the Education Department who had entered service when he was not even a Matriculate but has passed BA and BEd.
examinations during the course of his service seeks consideration for the post of a Social Studies Master in the Punjab Education Service Class III.
His efforts to persuade the Government having failed, he has filed the present writ petition.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as a peon in the Department of Education on April 28, 1975.
At that time, he had not even passed the Matriculation examination.
He worked hard and passed the Matriculation, the BA and then in the year 1985, the BEd.
examination.
He claims to be the only class-IV employee throughout the State of Punjab who has acquired the qualification of BA BEd.
3.
The State of Punjab has issued instructions from time to time for the suitable avenues of promotion to the class-IV employees.
The first of these instructions were issued vide letter of April 25, 1972 making the class-IV employees eligible for promotion to class-II posts.
However, since these instructions were not being properly followed, the petitioner along with certain other persons filed C.W.P.
No. 4242 of 1986 claiming a right to be considered against the newly sanctioned 338 posts of Laboratory Attendants against the quota of 10 per cent which had been reserved for the class-IV employees.
In the written statement filed in that writ petition, it was, inter alia, stated that on account of the ban on fresh recruitment, no appointments against the newly sanctioned 338 posts of Laboratory Attendants has been made.
It was further averred that the "petitioners will be considered" according to 10 per cent quota.
On this basis, the writ petition was dismissed as premature vide orders dated December 10, 1986.
The petitioner avers that after acquiring the BA BEd.
degrees, he made a representation to the District Education Officer, Hoashiarpur that he be considered for the post of Social Studies Master which is a class-III post.
It is claimed that the District Education Officer recommended the case of the petitioner.
Thereafter, vide letter dated April 15, 1987 the Director of Public Instructions (Schools), Punjab recommended the case of the petitioner and sought the approval of the State Government for promotion the petitioner to the post of Social Studies Master.
A copy of this letter has been placed on record as Annexure P-4.
In December 1987 the petitioner was informed vide letter dated July 27, 1987 that the instructions contemplated promotion of class-IV employees to the posts of clerks only and the employee could not be promoted to the post of Master.
Copy of this order is at Annexure P-6.
Aggrieved by this order, the petitioner has approached this Court through the present petition.
4.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents by the District Education Officer, Hoshiarpur even though he is not impleaded as a respondent in the petition.
No reply as been filed either by the State of Punjab or by the Director of Public Instructions (Schools).
It has been, inter alia, averred that the petitioner had been permitted to improve his qualifications subject to the condition that he will not be entitled for any kind of benefit of his improved qualification.
It has been further averred that he was required to appear in the examination/test under the instructions dated April 25, 1972.
Since he did not appear in the said test, he could not be considered for promotion.
It is categorically stated that the instructions did in the case of Social Studies Masters.
5.
Mr. Jasbir Singh, learned counsel for the petitioner has raised a two-fold contention.
His first contention is that the instructions of April 25, 1972 contemplate the promotion of class-IV employees "working in various Punjab Government offices who hold the Matriculation or such other qualifications as are prescribed for direct recruitment to class-III posts, have no independent source of appointment to these posts and they are considered only for temporary appointment on ad hoc basis for short intervals till the candidates selected on regular basis by the Subordinate Services Selection Board or any alternative Selection Authority, for class-III posts, join.
Obviously, this avenue of promotion is not adequate and does not satisfy the genuine aspirations of such class-IV employees, who shown initiative and diligence in improving their qualifications with a view to bettering their chances for future promotion."
He submits that it was on account of these considerations that the Government had decided to provide for promotion of class-IV employees to the class-III posts and a reservation of 10 per cent against the vacancies occurring in a particular year had been made.
He further points out that this promotion was not restricted to the posts of Clerks only, but had to be made against all the class-III posts provided the employees fulfil the educational qualifications for the posts.
It is useful to reproduce paragraph 3 of the instructions :-  "3.
At the moment when SSS Board is no functioning and there is no regular centralised agency for recruitment to the common categories of posts, the Department apart from making ad hoc appointment in terms of item () mentioned in para 2 above may make regular appointment of eligible and suitable class-IV employees against class-III posts through their respective Departmental Selection Committees within the ambit of the above Scheme so that there is no stalemate in the implementation of the Scheme.
As far as practicable the Departments should provide an opportunity of making application for regular appointment to class IV employees working in other Departments as well, because the intention is not to restrict the state-wide feature of the scheme to a particular Department.
This would enable the class IV employees working in A or B Class Departments/offices as the case may be to avail themselves of the opportunity of appointment against class III posts according to the standard of qualifications possessed by them."
On the basis of the above, the learned counsel submits that the action of the Government in rejecting the petitioners's claim on the ground that the promotion was contemplated only to the post of clerk was wrong.
He submits that the use of the expression "clerks etc." did not exclude other posts.
He further points out that even in the written statement filed in C.W.P.
No. 4242 of 1986, it had been conceded that the claim of the petitioners would be considered for the 10 per cent posts of Laboratory Attendants.
On the other hand, Mr. TS Dhindsa, appearing for the respondents submits that the instructions contemplated promotion of the peons only to the posts of clerks and since the petitioner had not passed the typing test, his claim was rightly rejected by the respondents.
6.
A perusal of the instructions of April 25, 1972 clearly shows that the Government had authorised the respective Heads of Departments to make "regular appointment of eligible and suitable class IV employees against class III posts through their respective Departmental Selection Committees within the ambit of the above Scheme so that there is no stalemate in the implementation of the scheme."
It was further stated that "this would enable the class IV employees working in A or B Class Departments/offices as the case may be to avail themselves of the opportunity of appointment against class III posts according to the standard of qualifications possessed by them."
(emphasis supplied).
Even though in the earlier part of the instructions the expression "clerks etc." has been used, a perusal of the instructions in totality shows that the appointments are not restricted to the posts of clerks only but contemplate appointment to all class-Ill posts provided the employer, concerned acquires the standard of qualifications required for the post.
7.
It would not be fair or equitable to unduly restrict the scope of the instructions.
Firstly, the use of the expression "clerks etc." shows that the appointment by promotion of class-IV employees is not restricted to the posts of clerks only.
It comprehends posts other than those of clerks also.
Secondly, there is no rationale behind restricting the promotion to the posts of clerks alone it a person is qualified for some other class III post, there is no reason as to why he should not be considered therefor.
I am of the considered view that the Government has unduly restricted the meaning of class III posts and has wrongly rejected the claim of the petitioner.
8.
I allow this petition and direct the respondents to consider the claim of the petitioner for appointment to the post of Social Studies Master for which he is qualified.
In fact, the Director of Public Instructions (Schools) who is the competent authority should have decided the matter at his own level.
Under the rules governing the service he is the appointing authority and should have taken a decision in the exercise of his own judgment.
No reference to the State Government was necessary.
In any case, since I have found the petitioner eligible and the order of the Government as untenable, the order at Annexure P-6 is consequently quashed.
The Director of Public Instructions (Schools) is directed to consider the claim of the petitioner for appointment to the post of Social Studies Master.
In case the petitioner is found suitable, he will be appointed to the post of Social Studies Master.
The needful shall be done within a period of three months from today.
The petitioner is also held entitled to his costs which are assessed at Rs. 2,000/-.