VK Jhanji, J - The petitioners who are under graduates, joined Public Relations Department in the erstwhile State of Punjab, as Clerks in the year 1962, 1961 and 1962 and were promoted to the rank of Accountant/ICA on 2551970, 2551970 and 1771970 respectively.
Petitioners No. 1 and 2 were promoted as Superintendents in the year 1978 and 1982 respectively and they have been officiating as Deputy Public Relations Officer (for short DPRO)/Public Relations Officers (for short PRO) from time to time.
Petitioner No. 1 is still, officiating as DPRO for over one year whereas petitioner No. 3 is officiating as Assistant Public Relations Officer (for short APRO) since April, 1980.
It has been stated in the petition that petitioner No. 3 also officiated as DPRO on one occasion.
Rules applicable in the erstwhile State of Punjab in regard to promotion of the petitioners were Punjab Public Relations Department Service Rules, 1958 (hereinafter referred to as the 1958 Rules).
As per Rule 9(h) of the 1958 Rules, promotion to the posts of DPRO and APRO was to be made by selection from amongst Head Assistants, Assistants, APRO, Article Writers, Assistants and Sales Manager or by transfer or deputation of a person already in the service of the Government of the State or Union or by direct appointment.
2.
At the time of reorganisation of States in 1966, petitioners were members of Class-III Service of Punjab Public Relations Department and 1958 Rules were applicable to them with regard to their promotion.
On reorganisation of the States, petitioners were allocated to the State of Haryana.
In the year 1975, the 1958 Rules were amended and Haryana Public Relations (State Service Class II) Rules, 1975 (hereinafter referred to as 1975 Rules) came into being.
As per Rule 13 of 1975 Rules, all promotions from one grade to another were to be made on the basis of seniority-cum-merit.
With the amendment of 1975 Rules, more categories were added for being promoted to the posts of DPRO/PRO and the ratio between direct recruits and the promotees was to 2 : 1 respectively.
Even under the 1975 Rules, petitioners were eligible for being considered for promotion to the posts of DPRO/PRO.
Under the 1975 Rules, before the petitioners could be considered for promotion to the posts of DPRO/PRO, had to have 10 years' experience as Assistants/ICAs and Accountants at District Headquarters.
Admittedly, petitioners became eligible to be promoted as DPRO/PRO on 2551980, 2551980 and 17.7.1980 respectively.
Six posts of DPRO/PRO out of the promotion quota became vacant by May, 1987 and the petitioners were eligible for being promoted to these posts.
However, these posts were not filled up on regular basis and the petitioners and some other persons worked on these posts on officiating basis in their own pay scales.
Haryana Government (Public Relations Department) vide, notification dated 28th November, 1988 amended 1975 Rules and the Haryana (Public Relations (State Service Class II ) First Amendment Rules, 1988 (hereinafter referred to as the 1988 Rules) were framed.
With the amendment, the petitioners were rendered ineligible for the post of DPRO/PRO.
As per 1975 Rules 15 categories were eligible for being promoted to the post of DPRO/PRO but by the 1988 Rules, out of the 15 categories,- 9 were deleted.
No academic qualification was necessary for being promoted to the post of DPRO/PRO under the 1958 Rules and 1975 Rules but by the 1988 Rules, minimum qualification was raised from graduation but experience of APRO was reduced from 5 years to 3 years.
Under the 1988 Rules besides being a graduate, the Superintendents were further required to hold a degree or diploma in journalism or one year's course from the Institute of Mass Communication.
The ratio between the promotees and direct recruits was also reduced to 1 : 1.
3.
The petitioners have challenged the 1988 Rules by way of present writ petition.
The grievance of the petitioners is that the Rules cannot be amended to the disadvantage of the petitioners in view of Section 82(6) of the Punjab Reorganisation Act as no prior approval of the Central Government was obtained before amending the 1975 Rules.
It has also been agitated that the petitioners had already acquired a right for being considered for promotion to the post of DPRO/PRO and the same cannot be taken away by amendment of the 1975 Rules as the same has retrospective operation.
4.
Originally respondents No. 1 and 2 were made parties to the writ petition but later, on an application of respondents No. 3 and 4, they were allowed to be impleaded as respondents in the writ petition.
5.
On the other hand the case of the respondents is that Section 82(6) of the Punjab Reorganisation Act will not apply in the case of the petitioners as the 1975 Rules have been amended which were amended by the Government of Haryana and as such no prior approval of the Central Government was necessary.
It has also been stated that 1988 Rules nowhere take away the vested rights of the petitioners as they had not been promoted when the 1988 Rules were made applicable.
6.
It is now settled that the rules which affected the rights of the persons concerned for being promoted is a condition of service although mere chance of promotion is not a condition of service.
It is also not disputed that authority competent to lay down qualification for promotion is also competent to change the qualification.
The rules defining the qualification and suitability for promotion are conditions of service and they can be changed retrospectively.
However, benefits acquired under the existing rules cannot be taken away by an amendment with retrospective effect i.e. to say :-  (i) there is no bar to make such rules under Article 309 of the Constitution which affects or impairs the vested right.
Therefore, unless it is specifically provided in the rules, the employees who were already promoted before the amendment of the rules, cannot be reverted and their promotion cannot be recalled.
Rules laying down the qualification for promotion made with retrospective effect must satisfy the requirement of Articles 14 and 16(1) of the Constitution.
In the present case, 1975 Rules were amended by the 1988 Rules, but the amendment has not been made applicable retrospectively.
Before the application of 1988 Rules, petitioners were not promoted to the post of DPRO/PRO but they were only eligible for being considered and there was a chance of their being promoted to the post of DPRO/PRO.
Thus, the petitioners had acquired to vested right and as such the 1988 Rules cannot be said to be violative of Articles 14 and 16(1) of the Constitution.
7.
The petitioners, in the erstwhile State of Punjab, under the 1958 Rules were eligible for being considered for promotion to the post of DPRO/PRO and the same situation continued under the 1975 Rules.
However, more categories were added for being considered for promotion but the petitioners were not rendered ineligible.
But under the 1988 Rules the petitioners have been totally made ineligible for promotion to the post of DPRO/PRO.
Now the question remains whether the 1988 Rules by which the petitioners have been made totally ineligible for being considered for promotion is violative of section 82(6) of the Punjab Reorganisation Act or not.
Sub-section (6) of Section 82 of the Punjab Reorganisation Act provides thus :-  "Nothing in this section shall be deemed to effect on or after the appointed day the operation of the provisions of Chapter I of Part XIV of the Constitution in relation to the determination of the conditions of service of the persons serving in connection with the affairs of the Union or any State : Provided that the conditions of service applicable immediately before the appointed day to the case of any person referred to in sub-section 1 or sub-section 2 shall not be varied to his disadvantage except with the previous approval of the Central Government."
8.
A reading of Section 82(6) of Punjab Reorganisation Act makes it clear that the conditions of service of any person who immediately before the appointed day, was serving in connection with the affairs of the Union or any State cannot be varied to his disadvantage except with the previous approval of the Central Government.
Admittedly, in the present case no prior approval of the Central Government was obtained when the impugned notification dated 28th November, 1988 (Annexure P-2) was issued amending 1975 Rules.
The stand of the respondents that no prior approval was necessary as the amendment was made in 1975 Rules which were framed by the Government of Haryana and were not in force at the time when the petitioners were allocated to the State of Haryana, is of no substance.
Admittedly, the petitioners were not made totally ineligible under the 1975 Rules.
However, more categories were added along with the category of petitioners for being considered for promotion to the post of DPRO/PRO.
The petitioner thus at that stage had no cause of action to make any grievance to challenge the 1975 Rules as their promotional avenues were not totally obstructed.
However, the impugned notification does change the conditions of service of the petitioners as they have been made totally ineligible for being considered for promotion and thus is violative of Section 82(6) of the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966.
9.
The other contention of learned counsel for the respondents that no prior approval was necessary because of a circular of Government of India dated May 11, 1957 addressed to all State Governments pointing out that so far as departmental promotion is concerned, they might, if they so desire, change the conditions of service and for this purpose they might assume the previous approval of the Central Government as required by the proviso to Section 115, sub-section (7) of States Reorganisation Act, 1956 is also devoid of any merit because this contention of learned counsel for the respondents stands concluded by the judgment of Supreme Court in TR Kapur and others v. State of Haryana and others, 1986(4) S.L.R.
155, the operative part of which reads as under :-  "It is not suggested that the State Government ever moved the Central Government seeking its prior approval to the proposed amendment of Rule 6(b) of the Class I Rules.
In that connection, it is necessary to recall that prior to the reorganisation of the States under the States Reorganisation Act, 1956, a conference of the Chief Secretaries of the States that were to be affected was held at Delhi on May 18 and 19, 1956 for the purpose of formulation of the principles upon which integration of services was to be effected.
The Government of India by its circular dated May 11, 1957 to all the State Governments stated inter alia that it agreed with the views expressed on behalf of the States' representatives that it would not be appropriate to provide any protection in the matter of departmental promotion.
This circular has been interpreted as a prior approval of the Central Government in terms of the proviso to sub-section (7) of Section 115 of the Act in the matter of change of the conditions of service relating to departmental promotions.
These considerations however do not arise in the present case.
Admittedly, there was no Chief Secretaries Conference as was held prior to the reorganisation of the States under the States Reorganisation Act, 1956.
Nor was there any communication issued by the Central Government conveying its previous approval of the changes in the service conditions which the States of Punjab and Haryana might make in terms of the proviso to section 82(6) of the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966.
Under the States Reorganisation Act, 1956 so also under the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966, the power of the Governor to make rules under the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution had been controlled by the proviso to Section 115(7) of the former Act and Section 82(6) of the latter.
It follows that the conditions of service applicable immediately before the appointed day to the case of any person referred to in sub-sections (1) or (2) of Section 82 of the Act could not be varied to his disadvantage except with the previous approval of the Central Government."
10.
In view of this, the impugned notification dated 28th November, 1988 (Annexure P-2) issued by the State Government of Haryana amending clause (c) of rule 9 of the 1975 Rules which rendered the petitioners ineligible for promotion to the Post of DPRO/PRO, must be struck down being violative of Section 82(6) of the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966.
As a result thereof, the writ petition is allowed and the impugned notification dated 28th November, 1988 (Annexure P-2) is quashed.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.