GC Mittal J - The petitioner was entitled to get increments after passing Departmental Professional Examination (DPE) and Departmental Revenue Examination (DRE).
The petitioner appeared in DPE in 1978 and the result of that examination was not declared as he was charged of using unfair means in that examination.
While that matter was pending, the petitioner appeared in DRE in 1981 wad was declared successful.
2.
The allegation of unfair means in DPE was decided by the Government in August, 1987 in favour of the petitioner and the charge was withdrawn.
Thereafter the petitioner's result of DPE was declared in which he failed.
3.
When the petitioner came to know that he was short of one mark to clear that examination, he made representation to the State Government to give him one grace mark on the basis of instructions, Annexure P/2 and declare him pass.
The Government sat over the matter.
Since the matter was being delayed, he came to this Court in this writ petition.
4.
After notice of motion was issued, the State Government considered the matter and by order dated 411991 declared the petitioner pass by giving him one grace mark in DPE.
However, a condition was imposed that he will not be entitled to arrears of pay for the earlier period and would be entitled to increments with effect from the date of issue of the order i.e. 411991.
Copy of the order and a communication have been placed on record.
5.
Counsel for the petitioner says that the petitioner is satisfied so far as his result in DPE is concerned but it was the respondents who were in the wrong in not declaring the result of the petitioner in 1978 or till 1981 when he cleared DRE.
6.
We accept the argument raised by counsel for the petitioner that the passing of the examination would relate back to 1978 examination and since he passed the DRE examination in 1981, under the service rules, the petitioner will become entitled to increments from the date he passed both the examinations.
Since he passed one examination in 1978 and the other in 1981, he would be entitled to increments with effect from 1981 onwards.
The order of the Government that the petitioner will not be entitled to arrears is hereby quashed.
7.
For the reasons recorded above, the writ petition is allowed and a direction is issued to the respondents to grant increments to the petitioner according to the Service Rules with effect from 1981 when he passed the second examination.
The arrears be paid within six months from today.
No costs.
Petition allowed.