Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - Even though the order of termination of services of the petitioner was set aside by the Sub-Registrar-Co-operative Societies, Faridkot, he was not allowed the arrears of salary for the period he had not worked.
Aggrieved by this order the petitioner has approached this Court.
2.
The petitioner was working as a Secretary of the Co-operative Agriculture Service Society.
His services were terminated on November 5, 1985.
The petitioner made a representation to the Managing Committee of the Society, who vide resolution dated 5, 1985 ordered the reinstatement of the petitioner.
In spite of the order of the Managing Committee, the petitioner was not allowed to join duty and the Administrator of the Society vide his order dated December 18, 1985 set aside the order of the Managing Committee.
This order was challenged by the petitioner before the Sub-Registrar, Co-operative Societies, Faridkot.
The petition was accepted by the "Sub-Registrar and the order of the Administrator passed on December 18, 1985 was set aside.
However, while accepting the petition the authority took the view that the petitioner "will be paid wages only for the period he has worked".
Aggrieved by this order the petitioner has filed the present petition.
3.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the Society.
In the written statement three preliminary objections have been raised.
It has been firstly suggested that the petition is highly belated.
It is further averred that the petitioner was estopped from filing the writ petition by his own act and conduct.
It has been further pleaded that the order of the Administrator of December 18, 1985 was challenged by the petitioner in a Revision Petition before the Deputy Secretary to Government of Punjab.
This revision petition had been dismissed on March 2, 1987.
On the basis of these preliminary objections it has been suggested that the writ petition deserves to be dismissed.
On merits an effort has been made to challenge the order passed by the Deputy/Sub-Registrar (Annexure P.1)  4.
I have heard Mrs. Sabina, learned Counsel for the petitioner and Mr. JR Mittal, learned Counsel for respondent No. 2.
The first preliminary objection raised on behalf of respondents reates to delay.
The order challenged in this petition had been passed on April 7, 1989.
The writ petition was filed on January 29, 1990.
It was held within less than one year.
Some time must have been spent in obtaining the copy of the order.
In such a situation, I do not think that the petition is liable to be dismissed on the ground of delay.
The objection is consequently rejected.
So far as the second preliminary objection regarding estoppel is concerned, no facts have been brought out on the basis of which it may be inferred that the petitioner had disentitled himself from filing the petition.
Yet another objection has been raised.
It has been averred that the order of the Administrator passed on December 18, 1985 had been challenged by the petitioner before the Deputy Secretary to Government, Punjab.
The petition filed by the petitioner had been rejected by the Deputy Secretary by his order of March 2, 1987.
Copy of this order has been produced as Annexure R. 4 with the written statement.
It has been contended that since the petitioner had failed to challenge this order, the present petition was not maintainable.
5.
As against this the submission of Mrs. Sabina is two-fold.
Firstly she submits that the Deputy Secretary had merely found that the revision petition was not competent before him.
She thus submits that the petitioner was entitled to approach the Registrar and the order as Annexure P.1 was ultimately passed by the competent authority.
I think she is right in her submission.
The Deputy Secretary had not rejected the claim of the petitioner on merits.
He had only held that the revision petition was no maintainable.
This did not preclude the petitioner from pursuing the other remedy available to him.
Mrs. Sabina has further argued that no objection, as now sought to be raised, had been raised before the Deputy/Sub-Registarar, who decided the petitioner's case.
A perusal of the order clearly bears out this petition.
Accordingly, I find that there is no merit even in the third preliminary objection.
6.
Coming to the merits of the controversy, the short question for consideration is as to whether or not the petitioner was entitled to the payment of arrears of salary when the order of termination had been found to be wholly illegal, Mrs. Sabina submits that once the termination is set aside, payment of arrears follow as a natural consequence.
Mr. Mittal on the other hand has argued that the order of the Deputy Registrar was wholly illegal even inasmuch as it ordered the reinstatement of the petitioner.
I am unable to accept the contention raised on behalf of the respondents.
It is not a petition by the Society against the order of the Deputy Registrar.
Had a petition been filed, the question regarding the validity of the order could have been gone into.
The only question to be determined in this case relates to the payment of the arrears of salary to the petitioner.
This order of termination had been found to be illegal.
No reason has been assigned for declining the payment of arrears of salary.
In my view once termination has been held to be illegal, payment of arrears must follow as a consequence no rule or principle has been brought to my notice which may persuade me to take a contrary view.
Mr. Mittal had stated that the arrears had been declined as the petitioner had himself made a submission to that effect before the Deputy Registrar.
Nothing has been produced before me to support this contention.
There is not even an averment to that effect in the written statement.
7.
I, therefore, allow this petition and hold that the petitioner is entitled to the payment of arrears of salary from December 18, 1985 to April 7, 1989.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.