VK Bali, J - The petitioners seek direction for finalising their case of regularisation which is pending before the respondents for a long time.
It is an admitted position that vide order dated January 10, 1980 petitioners Harbans Singh and Lachhman Singh were promoted as Sub-Divisional Officers in the scale of Rs. 400-30-700/40-1100 with immediate effect.
However, this promotion was on ad hoc basis for six months with effect from the dates they were to take over their respective charges or till approval of the Punjab Public Service Commission.
Vide another order March 2, 1987 annexure P-2 the Government ante dated promotion of Harbans Singh and Lachhman Singh along with others w.e.f.
June 24, 1977.
The aforesaid order too was passed subject to the approval of the Punjab Public Service Commission, Patiala, on the basis of their service record.
It is the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners that in so far as Sarvshri Harbans Singh and Lachhman Singh petitioners are concerned, no decision has so far been taken by the Government nor the Punjab Public Service Commission has passed any orders basing upon the service record.
It is further contended by the learned counsel that the service record of the aforesaid two petitioners is good or very good and so much-so that vide order dated June 22, 1990 copy of which is placed on record at the time of arguments these two petitioners have been allowed senior grade of Rs. 3000-4500, which was permissible only if their record was good and there was nothing against them.
2.
The State of Punjab has not filed any written statement.
However the Punjab Public Service Commission has filed a reply and all that is made out from the same is that the case of promotion of petitioners along with the case of other officers was received for regularisation vide letter dated June 10, 1981, but the cases were found to be incomplete in various respects.
A number of letters were written to the government for completion of the cases and furnish the information asked for and the last such letter was written to the Irrigation Department on April 27, 1989, but the requisite information has not been received.
The facts disclose a very sorry state of affairs and complete inaction on the part of the Government of Punjab.
There is absolutely no explanation as to why the service record of the petitioners has not been sent till date to the Punjab Public Service Commission, Patiala, Mr. H.S.
Biar Additional Advocate General, appearing for the State of Punjab, infact, straightaway suggested that the case requires direction from this Court so as to do the needful within the stipulated time.
3.
In the facts and circumstances fully detailed above, a direction is hereby issued to the State of Punjab to complete the records of Sarvshri Harbans Singh and Lachhman Singh and send the same to the Punjab Public Service Commission, Patiala positively within two months from today.
A direction is also issued to the Public Service Commission to pass an appropriate order with regard to regularisation of Sarvshri Harbans Singh and Lachhman Singh within one month from the receipt of service records of the aforesaid two petitioners.
This Writ Petition is disposed of in the aforesaid terms.
The petitioners shall be entitled to the costs of this petition which are quantified at Rs. 1000/-.
Petition allowed.