VK Bali, J - The petitioner takes exceptions to orders dated 12th May 1981, Annexure P-12, vide which he was dismissed from service of the respondents and order dated 3rd September, 1981, annexure P-14, dismissing the appeal of the petitioner.
Before the contentions of the petitioner sought to be established by the learned counsel are noticed, it shall be useful to give a brief resume of the facts.
2.
The petitioner was appointed in service of the Corporation as manager, Grade III, in July 1972, which post was later re-designated as godown Assistant.
In the year 1975, he was posted at a place known as ' Gehri Mandi Warehouse' as Manager with additional charge of Warehouse at Jandiala Guru.
A theft is stated to have occurred on the intervening night of 14/1571975 at the Warehouse at Gehri Mandi.
In the theft aforesaid 35 bags of wheat were stated to have been stolen.
Likewise in a theft that occurred during the intervening night of 11/1291975 in the Warehouse at Jandiala guru, 55 bags of wheat are stated to have been stole.
It is the petitioner only who lodged the GIRs.
with the police on the morning of 1571975 in case of theft at Gehri mandi and on 1291975 in the case of theft at Jandiala Guru.
The police, on the first information having been lodged, investigated the matter and came up with the report that it was not a case of theft.
report of the police when it came to the notice of the petitioner, he is stated to have protested against inapt handling of the matter by the police.
According to the case of the petitioner, aforesaid report of the police was actuated on entirely mala fide and ulterior motive.
It appears the respondents either on account of the protest shown by the petitioner or otherwise at its own end, deputed one Chaman Lal, Inspection Officer, to hold on the spot enquiry and report the matter to the Corporation.
Chaman Lal, aforesaid, in compliance of the orders aforesaid did go in for a thorough enquiry and after recording statements of the witnesses on th spot and after satisfying himself, submitted a report, copy whereof is annexure P-2.
It shall be useful to extract the relevant portion of the report aforesaid, which is as under :-  "The fact is that there had been a theft of 35 bags of wheat on the night between 14/1571975 and the report of the police authorities does not seem to be correct."
There appears to have been some correspondence between the respondents and the police and finally the police reported in its wisdom and according to its own judgment, the details of which are not forthcoming from the perusal of the record that 55 bags of wheat were defalcated by the employees of the Corporation.
On the aforesaid information on having come to the notice of the respondents, the Managing Director of the Corporation vide his letter dated 2671977 requested the Senior Superintendent of Police, Amritsar, to register a case against the petitioner or any other employee of the Corporation and to proceed according to law.
In spite of this, the police did not register any case against any one.
It is the positive case of the petitioner that even he requested the police for registration of the case.
It appears that the respondents gave more credence to the theory of theft propounded by the Police and therefore, the petitioner was charge-sheeted.
The charge also accompanied the copy of the statement of allegations.
On receipt of aforesaid charge-sheet, as referred to above, the petitioner requested the respondents by a letter sent through registered post that copy of the investigation report be supplied to him so that he was n a position to prepare his defence which was so very essential to defend him in the ensuing departmental enquiry.
This request was repeated and again by a registered post wherein specific mention of the copies of the letters written by the Senior Superintendent of Police, dated 891975 and 12th December, 1975, was made and it was prayed that the same be supplied to the petitioner.
The positive case of the petitioner which has not been specifically denied is that his request for supply of aforesaid documents was cold shouldered and in ultimate analysis, he was not supplied with the details of the investigation made by the police.
However, he submitted a reply to the charge-sheet on 10.1.1979, which did not satisfy the respondents and therefore, one Shri SS Oberoi, District Manager, was appointed as enquiry officer by the order dated 21.7.1979.
The petitioner was summoned by the enquiry officer on 29121980 and in compliance of the said summons, he did appear on the date fixed.
However, no witness was examined by the enquiry officer and the matter was concluded on the very date fixed i.e. on 29121980.
The enquire officer in his report returned a finding of guilt against the petitioner.
On the basis of the he enquiry report, a show-cause notice regarding dismissal was served upon the petitioner, to which a reply was given on 421981.
Even this reply did not satisfy the authorities and as mentioned above, the petitioner was removed from service of the Corporation by order dated 3041981. the appeal carried against the order aforesaid did not find favour with the Chairman, Punjab State Warehousing Corporation and the same was, therefore, dismissed.
It may be mentioned here that the order passed by the appellate authority which is annexure P-14, has not considered any contention of the petitioner and the same contains three lines which are reproduce below :-  "Your appeal dated 1061981 on the subject noted above has been considered by the Chairman, Punjab State Warehousing Corporation, and rejected."
It is in these circumstance that the petitioner has come up in this Court and has prayed for setting aside/quashing of the orders passed by the Punishing as well as appellate Authorities.
3.
Mr. Paramjit singh Patwalia, learned counsel for the petitioner, mainly contends that the report of the enquiry officer and the order of the Punishing authority is based upon no evidence whatsoever.
No evidence whatsoever was recorded by the enquiry officer and finding of guilt was returned on the basis of the report dated 891975 by which Senior superintendent of Police, amritsar, had concluded that the bricks removed from the wall and kept outside and inside the godown were in such a proper fashion that it was a case of defalcation and not of theft.
This report, as per the contention of the learned counsel did not constitute a legal and admissible evidence against the petitioner and in any case from the report aforesaid at the most it could be made out to be a case of defalcation and not of a theft which by no stretch of imagination, can be considered sufficient evidence to pin-point the responsibility of the petitioner for the alleged defalcation.
Further, the contention of the learned counsel is that the appellate Authority while deciding the appeal of the petitioner did nothing in the matter but for concurring with the Punishing authority without discussing and by process of reasoning coming to a conclusion of involvement of the petitioner in the alleged defalcation.
4.
Mr. Balram gupta, learned counsel for the respondents, on the other hand, wishes to sustain the impugned orders by contending that the report of the police officer was good evidence to prove the guilt of the petitioner and there was no necessity to record any evidence in the matter to independently prove the charge against the petitioner.
5.
I have given my thoughtful consideration to the entire matter and am of the considered view that this petition deserves to succeed.
The report of the Senior superintendent of Police, Amritsar, did not go beyond holding that the present was not a case of theft but the same was a case of defalcation wherein either the petitioner or some other employee of the Corporation might have had a hand.
Admittedly, whatever investigation the police had done, the petitioner was neither joined nor even questioned and therefore, without any further proof, the report of the Senior superintendent of Police, Amritsar, could not be taken on its face value and believed as such.
Besides report of the senior superintendent of Police, at the most, returned a finding of defalcation and ruled out possibility of theft.
The said report would be wholly inadmissible to be used against he petitioner n departmental enquiry and therefore, could not form the sole basis of finding of guilt against the petitioner.
It is admitted position that the petitioner was not joined during investigation which culminated into a report subject matter of reliance by the enquiry officer in the departmental proceedings.
He was not even questioned by the police.
The report, per be, therefore was wholly inadmissible in evidence.
It appears that the enquiry officer, the Punishing authority and the Punishing Authority and the appellate authority were of the view that the moment the theory of theft is ruled out, it would be only a case of defalcation and that too, the person responsible for declaration would be the petitioner alone.
To say the least, it was absolutely presumptive and was based upon conjectures and surmises.
The guilt of the petitioner had necessarily to be proved by leading positive evidence of defalcation and further for the said defalcation the petitioner alone was responsible.
This evidence had to be led during the course of enquiry.
Admittedly, nothing of the kind was done and the entire matter was concluded on the very first date without recording any evidence whatsoever.
The view of the Punishing Authority and the Appellate Authority is totally erroneous.
As mentioned above, finding of defalcation alone would not be sufficient to visit the petitioner with any evil consequence and therefore, some legal and admissible evidence pointing towards the defalcation and the same being at the end of the petitioner had to be examined, the failure to do so, has vitiated the entire proceedings.
Once the entire enquiry proceedings are vitiated, there is no necessity to go into other points but it may be mentioned in the passing that even the order of the Appellate authority which is cryptic and nonspeaking also could not be sustained.
The Appellate authority had necessarily to apply his mind to all the points raised by the petitioner and by a process of reasoning, it had necessarily to give finding on all the points so raised before him.
6.
For all what has been stated above, this petition shall succeed.
The orders passed by the punishing Authority and the Appellate Authority, annexure P12 and P14 respectively, are hereby quashed.
The petitioner shall be deemed to be in service and shall be paid arrears of his salary and other emoluments that he may be entitled to.
He shall also be entitled to all the consequential reliefs that may be permissible under the law.
The petition is allowed with costs.
Petition allowed.