VK Bali, J - Petitioner claims a direction to be issued to the respondents to treat him as a regular and confirmed teacher.
He styles action of the respondent-authorities in putting the lock on his room and making the alleged entry of "Relieved" against his name as patently illegal, arbitrary, mala fide and without jurisdiction.
The circumstances under which he has approached this Court under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India may first be noticed.
2.
Petitioner was appointed as Social Studies Master on August 11, 1980 by the management of respondent No. 1.
This appointment was for a specific period and he was to continue in service upto February 28, 1981.
Later, however, the management itself extended the period upto March 28, 1981.
He was thereafter granted extension for one year upto March 28, 1982 and further upto August 10, 1982.
While further extending the appointment of petitioner, the management of respondent No. 1 put the petitioner on probation for the extended period.
However, on August 10, 1983 just before one day of the completion of the probation period, he was relieved from his services without even giving him one month's notice as required under the Rules.
However, after a short break of 11 days, vide order dated August 22, 1983 he was re-appointed on the same post by the management and was again put on probation for two years.
This period of probation, the petitioner claims to have completed successfully on August 21, 1985.
However, just on the heels of the completion of probation period of the petitioner, he received a letter from the respondent-management on October 24, 1985 vide which the period of Probation of petitioner was further extended upto November 30, 1985.
Although as per case of the petitioner, further extension was of no meaning and consequence after he had completed two years probation yet he successfully completed even the extended period of probation.
It is on July 18, 1986 when the petitioner after attending his school went to his residential room which is in the school building he found that the same was locked and on the next day when the petitioner came to attend his duties, he was not allowed to enter the school premises by the school Chowkidar.
The petitioner came to know from his colleagues that in the attendance register of the school against his name it was mentioned that he had been relieved.
As mentioned above, the petitioner takes exception to the way and manner in which word "Relieved" was written against his name in the attendance register as also way and manner in which period of his probation was being extended from time to time which, according to his contention, could not go beyond three years as per statutory rules.
3.
The relief claimed by the petitioner is resisted on the ground that he was a mere probationer and as per Rule 8(2)(3) of the Haryana Aided Schools (Security of Service) Rules, 1974, if, in the opinion of the Appointing Authority, work or conduct of a person during the period of probation was not satisfactory, the services of such person could be dispensed with.
The assertion that the petitioner was a probationer and continued to be so when his services were dispensed with is sought to be made out from various orders passed from time to time.
In order to find out as to whether the petitioner was a probationer or not, it shall be useful to reproduce the said orders.
4.
After admitting that the petitioner was appointed on August 11, 1980 as Social Studies Master on temporary and ad hoc basis upto February 28, 1981, the order extending his period for one year on March 24, 1981 is as follows -  "Your service period in the school has been further extended upto 3131982 which please note, i.e. for one year at present.
This refers to your application on the subject."
5.
Further the period of service of the petitioner was extended on March 8, 1982 upto August 11, 1982.
Thereafter an order was passed to extend the period of service of petitioner upto August 10, 1983.
However, a few days before the expiry of the said extended period yet another was passed on July 18, 1983 which runs as under :-  "You are hereby informed that, according to the Managing Committee resolution No. 4 dated 10783, your work and conduct during the probation period is not satisfactory.
Therefore, your services shall be terminated on the expiry of your probation period on 10883."
On August 10, 1983, the petitioner was relieved from his duty and the relieving order runs as under :-  "This is in reference to this office letter dated 18783, you are hereby relieved of your duties today on 10883 afternoon."
6.
The petitioner was thereafter given a fresh appointment on August 22, 1983 ie just after few days when he was relieved by specifically mentioning that his work and conduct during the probation period was not satisfactory.
This fresh appointment is reflected in Annexure P1 dated August 22, 1983.
A perusal of fresh letter of appointment dated August 22, 1983 would show that on the recommendations of the Selection Committee, petitioner was appointed as Social Studies Master in the school with effect from the date he was to join duty and under the terms and conditions mentioned therein, it is recited that the petitioner shall be on probation for a period of two years in accordance with the Rule which can be extended for such further period as the competent authority under the Rules may determine.
Rule 8(2)(3) of the Haryana Aided Schools (Security of Service) Rules, 1974 (hereinafter to be referred as the Rules of 1974) would go to show that if the work or conduct of an employee was not found satisfactory, the Appointing Authority can dispense with his services or extend his period of probation and thereafter pass such order as it could have been passed on the expiry of the first period of probation provided that the total period of probation, including extension, if any, shall not exceed three years.
7.
On the facts fully detailed above, as also on the force of Rule 8(2)(3)(b), the learned counsel for the petitioner contends that once the petitioner had gone through maximum period of probation permissible under Rules, he was deemed to be a confirmed employee and, therefore, he could not be thrown out of service in such unceremonious manner as has been done in the present case.
In any case, contends the counsel that once there was no order of further extending the period of probation prior to the expiry of period of probation earlier fixed, the authorities had no jurisdiction whatsoever to extend the period of probation after the expiry of the period mentioned in the order of appointment.
8.
Mr. Sareen, the learned senior Advocate appearing for contesting respondents maintains that the order passed in the present case is strictly in accordance with the Rules of 1974 and in any case if the petitioner has any grouse, he has remedy provided under the Rules of 1974 itself  9.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties and am of the considered view that this petition deserves to succeed.
10.
The facts fully given above would go to show that even when the petitioner was given fresh appointment on August 22, 1983, he was put on probation for a period of two years.
The said period of probation would come to an end on August 22, 1985.
It was only October 24, 1985 ie nearly two months thereafter that the period of probation was extended upto November 30, 1985.
At this stage, it will be useful to reproduce Rule 8 of 1974 and the same runs as under :-  "8(2) If, in the opinion of the appointing authority, the work or conduct of a person during the period of probation is not satisfactory, it may :-  (a) If such person is appointed by direct recruitment, dispense with his services, and (b) If such person is appointed otherwise than by direct recruitment - (i) revert him to his former post; or (ii) deal with him in such other manner as the terms and conditions of previous appointment permit.
(3) On the completion of the period of probation of a person, the appointing authority may, - (a) If his work or conduct has, in its opinion, been satisfactory, - (i) confirm such person from the date of his appointment, if appointed against a permanent vacancy; or (ii) confirm such person from the date from which a permanent vacancy occurs, if appointed against a temporary vacancy, or (iii) declare that he has completed his probation satisfactorily, if there is no permanent vacancy; or (b) if his work or conduct has, in its opinion, been not satisfactory :  (i) dispense with his services, if appointed by direct recruitment, or if appointed otherwise, revert him to his former post or deal with him in such other manner as the terms and conditions of his previous appointment permit; or (ii) extend his period of probation and thereafter pass such order, as it could have passed on the expiry of the first period of probation : Provided that the total period of probation, including extension, if any shall not exceed three years."
A perusal of proviso attached to Rule 8(2)(3)(b) would to show that if the period of Probation was to be extended, an order had to be passed in that behalf on the expiry of first period of probation.
In the present case such an order was passed after about two months.
In any case petitioner continued to be in service upto October 24, 1985 upto which time his period of probation was extended.
Petitioner even continued to be in service upto July 1987 which would make total period of his service on probation for more than three years.
As is squarely spelt out from the proviso to Rule 8(2)(3)(b), reference to which has been given above, the period of probation could not go beyond three years.
After thoroughly going through the facts of the present case, I am convinced that the school authorities, in fact, have been extending the period of probation of petitioner even initially simply with a view to throw him out of service at their whims and fancies.
There was no question for them to have offered him fresh job just a few days after holding that his work and conduct was not satisfactory during the first two periods of his appointment when he was initially appointed in the year 1980.
The intention of the school authorities is clearly made out from the facts stated above that they wanted to keep the petitioner on probation simply with a view to take advantage of the Rules and, thus, to outwit the law.
Mr. Sareen, learned counsel for respondents No. 4 to 6 contends that on account of availability of remedy under the Rules of 1974 itself, the Writ Petition deserves to be dismissed but no such plea has been taken in the written statement.
Even otherwise too the petitioner cannot be relegated to an alternative remedy at this stage.
It is a case of clear violation of law and the facts have not been disputed.
In those circumstances, I am of the considered view that it will be unjust and iniquitous to relegate the petitioner to seek his remedy under the Rules of 1974.
11.
For the reasons stated above, this Writ Petition is allowed.
The order of termination of services of petitioner said to have been conveyed to the District Education Officer dated July 19, 1986 is quashed.
The petitioner shall be deemed to be in continuous service from the date of fresh appointment reflected in Annexure P-1 and shall also be deemed to be confirmed on the post of Master with effect from August 22, 1986.
He shall also be entitled to his salary that he would have earned had he been in continuous service with all consequential benefits.
The petition is allowed with costs quantified at Rs. 2,000/-.