Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner who is blind is aggrieved by the order of his reversion from P.E.S.
Class-I to P.E.S.
Class II.
2.
A few facts may be noticed.
The petitioner who belongs to one the weaker sections and is a member of the Scheduled Caste, is totally blind since childhood.
He possesses the qualification of MA in Music, from Panjab University and was awarded a gold medal.
He also passed the test in Punjabi conducted by the Punjab Government.
He possesses a degree of Sangeet Alankar.
He was selected and appointed as a Lecturer in Music through the Punjab Public Service Commission in P.E.S.
Class III in the year 1963.
He was confirmed as a Lecturer with effect from March 23, 1971.
He was promoted to P.E.S.
Class-II with effect from July 25, 1974.
Vide orders dated May 29, 1981 the petitioner was promoted to P.E.S.
Class-I for a period of 6 months along with a number of other persons.
In this order, a copy of which has been placed on record as Annexure P-1, the following note was also recorded :  "Note; Shri LD Pardesi is given proforma promotion and is allowed to stay at Hoshiarpur to work as lecturer in Music."
The petitioner avers that in pursuance to the order he assumed the charge of office of the Lecturer in Music in P.E.S.
Class-I in Govt. College, Hoshiarpur on June 1, 1981.
This period of promotion was extended from time to time.
The petitioner earned his increments.
It is further averred that after his promotion, the petitioner has worked as Head of Department of Music and performed all the administrative duties including purchases and financial transactions.
It has been further averred that the Principal of the College under whom the petitioner was working gave a certificate dated February 22, 1984 regarding efficient running of the department.
A copy of the certificate has been produced as Annexure P-2.
In spite of these facts, it is alleged that vide orders dated December 16, 1983, the petitioner has been ordered to be reverted to the post of Lecturer in Music in P.E.S.
Class-Il (College Cadre).
This was done in spite of the fact that other persons who were promoted along with the petitioner were allowed to continue and some of them had even retired while working in P.E.S.
Class-I.
It has also been averred that a number of persons junior to the petitioner have been promoted to P.E.S.
Class-I.
The petitioner has further averred that he fulfilled all the conditions prescribed in Punjab Education Service (College Cadre) Class-I, Rules, 1976.
He avers that the rules prescribed an experience of 8 years as Lecturer for promotion to P.E.S.
Class-I.
Since he fulfilled the requisite experience, the petitioner claim that his promotion was in strict conformity with the rules and the action in reverting him while persons junior to him were continuing in P.E.S.
Class-I was wholly arbitrary and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
The petitioner claims to have represented but having failed to get a favorable reply, has approached this Court through the present petition.
3.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 to 3.
It has been inter alia averred that the petitioner had to be reverted "being unable to perform the duties of Principal/Drawing and Disbursing Officer.
The post kept vacant at Guru Teg Bahadur, Bahadurgarh for drawing the pay of the petitioner could not remain as such for a long time."
It has been maintained that the action is not violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
4.
Mr. PS Kang, learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that the petitioner has been blind since childhood.
This fact was known to the authorities at the time of the petitioner's promotion to P.E.S.
Class-I.
His work and conduct have been continuously satisfactory.
Even after his promotion to P.E.S.
Class-I, the petitioner had not been conveyed any adverse report.
In fact, the two increments earned by him in Class-I were symbolic of the satisfactory performance of duties.
In this situation, the learned counsel contends that the petitioner's reversion while his juniors were allowed to continue was violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
Mr. TS Dhind appearing for the respondents has contended that on account of the unfortunate handicap, the petitioner has not been considered suitable for continuance in Class-I.
The Govt. had been very sympathetic and did every thing possible to accommodate the petitioner.
In the circumstances, he contends that the action of the State could not be terms as arbitrary and unfair :  The Impugned order as under;  "Shri LD Pardesi.
Lecturer in Music P.E.S.
Class11 (College Cadre) was given proforma promotion in P.E.S.
Class-I in the scale of Rs. 1200-1900, on ad hoc basis for period of six months vide Punjab Govt. order issued vide Endst.
No. 1874IEDI81/6094-98 dated 2951981 and his ad hoc appointments were extended from time to time, being blind he was allowed to work as lecturer.
In order to pay him in the pay scale admissible to P.E.S.
Class-I Officer, the Government considered the matter to upgrade the post of lecturer to that of Principal and did not find justification to this effect.
He has been considered to be unfit to perform the duties and functions of Principal of Govt College.
2.
Under the circumstances, the President of India is pleased to revert him from P.E.S.
Class-I (College Cadre) to P.E.S.
Class-II (College Cadre) with immediate effect."
A perusal of order shows that the petitioner even after his promotion to Class-I was never posted as Principal.
He was never tried on the post.
In spite of that it has been observed that he has been considered" to be unfit to perform the duties and functions of Principal of Govt College".
Admittedly, his record of service is good.
In the very nature of things, he could not have been promoted to Class-I unless his record of service was good.
Even after his promotion to Class-I, nothing adverse is alleged to have come on his record.
No adverse report is alleged to have been recorded.
He has in fact earned his two increments.
In such a situation, when no adverse comments regarding the petitioner's work and conduct has come on record, and he has not even been tried on the post of the Principal, it could not be said that the petitioner was unfit to perform the duties and function of the post of Principal.
It is only if on trial his work and conduct were found to be unsatisfactory, that such a conclusion could have been arrived at Existence of a handicap could not have by itself led to the conclusion which has been arrived at.
The petitioner is eligible and his record of service being good, the order of reversion could not have been passed till his performance had been found to be unsatisfactory.
That has not happened.
In such a situation, the impugned order cannot be sustained and has to be quashed.
5.
The order at Annexure P-3 is consequently quashed.
The writ petition is allowed.
The petitioner shall be entitled to all the consequential relief, arrears of salary, etc.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to his costs which are assessed at Rs. 2000/-.