Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - In this writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioners, have prayed for issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari, mandamus or any other writ order or direction for quashing the instructions dated 3031979, copy Annexure P4, whereby the Punjab Government created reservations in Promotion courses for the scheduled caste and backward classes candidates.
2.
The petitioners are aggrieved by the action of the respondent-authorities in deputing the private respondents 4 to 20 to the intermediate course prior to the petitioners.
The case of the petitioners is that most of them were recruited in the Punjab Police Department as Constables prior to the private respondent.
The names of the petitioners were also included in list 'C' earlier to that of the private respondents.
The respondents 1 to 3 are believed to have sent the names of private respondents 4 to 20 for the intermediate course prior to the petitioners acting on the instructions dated 3031979 whereby the Government created reservations for scheduled castes.
3.
Mr. JL Gupta, learned Senior Advocate appearing with Mr. Neeraj Jain Advocate has contend that Government can create reservation for Scheduled Castes under Article 16(4) of the Constitution of India only in case of fresh appointment or in the matter of promotion.
As far as the selection for intermediate course is concerned it is neither a fresh appointment nor it is a art of promotion to the next higher rank i.e. of a Police Sub Inspector.
Counsel in support of his submission cited Sajjan Singh v. State of Punjab, 1978 SLR 489, Ram Kumar v. State of Haryana, 1983(1) SLR 435, and Ashok Kumar v. State of Punjab, 1989(3) SLR 539 : 1989(1) R.R.R.
280.
4.
The learned counsel for respondent has not disputed that the matter involved in this writ petition is covered by the judgments aforesaid.
5.
I have perused these judgments and find that this Court had taken consistent view that no reservation can be made for candidates of Scheduled Castes for overriding the merit of other candidates.
6.
In Sajjan Singh's case (supra) it was held that since the promotion starts when name of a person is brought on list 'C' it would not apply for the purposes of admission course.
In Ram Kumar's case (supra) it was held that process of selection for being sent to Lower School Course cannot be held or equated to be a case for promotion.
As such reservation at the stage of selection for lower school course in terms of Rule 1337 Punjab Police Rules, 1924 cannot be made.
In Ashok Kumar's case (supra) it was held that no reservation for Scheduled Caste can be made at the stage of selection for lower school course.
This view was subsequently followed in CWP No. 6797 of 1989 and 4717 of 1986.
7.
After going through the judgment I am of the view that this matter is squarely covered by the ratio of the aforesaid judgments.
Consequently, this petition is allowed.
Since respondents 4 to 20 have already been deputed for the course, I do not consider it fit to quash their deputation to the intermediate course.
However, a direction issued to respondent 1 to 3 to depute the petitioners to the Intermediate School Course commencing in April, 1991.
8.
In the facts and circumstances of the case, I make no order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.