Amarjeet Chaudhary, J (Oral) - The Haryana Subordinate Services Selection Board, Chandigarh, respondent No. 2, advertised 11 posts of Assistant Food and Supplies Officers.
The petitioner also applied for the same and was interviewed by respondent No. 2.
A merit list of 28 candidates was prepared in which the name of petitioner per merit figured at serial No. 10.
Appointment orders were issued to candidates shown at serial Nos. 19 and 25 in the merit list.
To the great dismay of the petitioner, though he was higher in merit, no appointment order was issued to him.
The petitioner has consequently filed this writ petition seeking mandamus to the respondents to appoint him as Assistant Food and Supplies Officer.
2.
The case of the petitioner is that Ramesh Singh respondent No. 3 and Narinder Kumar respondent No. 4 who were at serial Nos. 25 and 19 respectively in the merit list, were selected in the General Category along with the petitioner who was at serial No. 10 in the merit list.
The action of the respondents in not issuing appointment letter to him is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
3.
The State of Haryana in para 2 of the written statement has admitted that the petitioner was higher in merit in comparison to respondents 3 and 4 but at the same time has stated that the petitioner was not given appointment as vacancy in the general category was not available and respondents 3 and 4 have been appointed against the reserved vacancies for backward classes and dependents of ex-servicemen category.
Learned counsel for the State has further stated that Secretary, Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana, had intimated to the Director, Food and Supplies, Haryana, that respondent No. 3 belonged to backward category, and that said correction in the record be made.
It was in view of this correction made in the record that the appointments to respondent Nos. 3 and 4 were given.
4.
I have considered the submissions of the learned counsel for the parties.
From the perusal of the record it cannot be disputed that the petitioner was at serial No. 10 in the merit list prepared by the Board and respondents 3 and 4 were at serial Nos. 25 and 19 respectively.
Both of them have been shown to be belonging to the general category in the original merit list.
It is also seen that the candidates at serial Nos. 11, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 21 and 28 were Schedule Caste/Ex-servicemen/dependents of ex-servicemen and backward class category and the candidates at Serial Nos. 19 and 25, i.e., respondents 3 and 4 were not recommended being reserved category candidates.
They were recommended being general category candidates.
The explanation put forward by the State that these vacancies were converted into reserved category is not at all convincing.
It appears that it is only an after-thought simply to accommodate the said respondents who are junior to the petitioner in the merit list prepared by the Haryana Subordinate Services Selection Board.
5.
In view of the above-said discussion, the writ petition is allowed and respondent Nos. 1 and 2 are directed to issue appointment letter/order to the petitioner against the vacancy which was got reserved vide this Court's order dated 211989, expeditiously preferably within one month.
It is also made clear that the petitioner shall be entitled to all the service benefits per eligibility in accordance with law.
It will be in the interest of the State itself to implement the judgment.
No costs.
Petition allowed.