GR Majithia, J - The petitioners have impugned the selection of the candidates for one year Basic Training Programme of the Health Workers (Males) in this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
Facts first :-  2.
Respondent No. 2 invited application for admission to Multipurpose Health Workers (Males) Training Course through advertisement dated 20/2111989.
Addendum to the advertisement dated January 20/21, 1989, was issued in which it was provided that selection of the candidates will be made according to the following methods :-  (i) At Training School in Amritsar candidates from Amritsar, Gurdaspur, Ferozepur and Kapurthala will be admitted.
(ii) At Training School in Kharar, candidates from Ropar, Ludhiana, Jalandhar and Hoshiarpur will be admitted.
(iii) At Training School om Nabha, candidates from Patiala, Sangrur, Bhatinda and Faridkot will be admitted.
After the interview, merit list of selected candidates was prepared in each institution on district-wise basis.
The selection is challenged on the ground that it is arbitrary, discriminatory and violative of Articles 14 and 15 of the Constitution of India.
3.
Written statement has been filed on behalf of respondent No. 1.
Factual averments in the writ petition were not controverted.
It was admitted that a single merit-list of selected candidates was not prepared.
Merit-lists were prepared school-wise and not district-wise and that the selection was made as per the advertisement.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that the petitioners had better merits than the selected candidates, if a single merit-list had been prepared, they would have been selected.
By making school-wise selection, less meritorious candidates have been selected over meritorious candidates.
5.
The submission apparently looks to be attractive but on deeper scrutiny, it has no merit.
In the Civil Surgeons Conference held on March 5, 1984, under the Chairmanship of the Secretary Health, it was decided that in regard to admission to ANMs/Health Workers (F) Training Schools, two districts be allocated/attached to each school.
The decision was taken with a view that a candidate admitted for training from the same/adjoining district will like to serve in those areas and thus there would be no pressure for transfer toa particular district in which the ANMs were already available according to the sanctioned strength.
The same procedure was adopted for admission to the MPW(F) Training Schools in the State.
There are three MPW (M) Training Schools in the State of Punjab, namely, at Kharar, Nabha and Amritsar respectively.
Various districts have been allocated to the schools for administrative reasons.
The purpose of allocating the districts for various schools is that after completion of the training the trainees may be selected for posting in the same or adjoining district to avoid any hardship to them.
The criteria adopted does not suffer from arbitrariness.
Somewhat identical matter came up for consideration in Gurmeet Singh and others v. The State of Punjab and others, (1989-1) 95 Punjab Law Reporter 515 and the question arose in the following circumstances :-  "421 vacancies for Patwari candidates were advertised.
A number of persons who were eligible for appointment applied for being selected as Patwari candidate.
Regular appointments in response to the advertisement could not be made due to non-functioning of the Punjab Subordinate Services Selection Board.
Departmental Selection Committees were constituted in each district for making the selection.
The selection made by this committee was assailed inter alia on the ground that district-wise selection could not be made.
Repelling the contention the Bench held thus :- "5.
In Dr. Jagdish Sarn's case (supra) the apex Court has held that the University-wise selection is a perfectly valid criterion.
Accordingly, we hold that even if the Departmental Selection Committee has made selection for each district separately, it is valid.
It is not necessary to select candidates for the whole State and then allocate for each district.
It is open to the State to take note of the vacancies in a district, constitute a Committee for selection to fill up those posts provided there is no restriction for residents of other districts also applying.
Thus, to call the present case a district-wise selection may even be considered as a misnomer.
It is a selection for filling up of the posts in that district.
There being no restriction based on residence for applying to that post no constitutional guarantee has been violated."
No fault can be found with regard to the criteria adopted by respondent No. 1 for making the selection school-wise.
The school-wise selection was made in the larger interest of the society.
The challenge to the selection is bereft of any merit.
6.
For the reasons stated above, the writ petition is devoid of merit and is dismissed but there will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.