GR Majithia, J - This judgment will dispose of civil writ petition Nos. 7025 of 1987 and 4804 of 1988 as common questions of law and facts are involved therein.
2.
The petitioners who were employed as Building Inspectors with the respondents have sought a mandate from this Court to the respondents to grant them the same scales of pay as were being given to the Sectional Officer of the respondent.
3.
Facts first :-  The petitioners were appointed as Building Inspectors by the respondent in 1981.
The qualifications prescribed for these posts are the same as were laid down for the posts of Sectional Officers, i.e., Diploma in Civil Engineering.
The respondent also passed order dated August 2, 1982, redesignating the posts of Building Inspectors as Sectional Officers (Building).
Five Sectional Officers and five Sectional Officers (Building) are working in the Town Planning Dpartment of the respondent.
They possess the same qualification as are possessed by the petitioners and perform similar duties.
Sectional Officers are drawing salary in the pay scale of Rs. 700-1200.
The Building Inspectors are drawing salary in the pay scale of Rs. 570-1080.
The Director, Local Bodies, Punjab Government, while approving the budget estimate of the respondent for the year 1977-78 stated that the posts of Building Inspectors should be redesignated as Sectional Officers as they possess the same qualifications.
The respondent designated qualified Building Inspectors as Sectional Officers (Building).
The petitioners made representation to the respondent that they be allowed the same pay scale permissible to Sectional Officers but no action was taken thereon.
The inaction of the respondent led to the filing of these writ petitions.
4.
The respondent did not choose to file written statement to controvert the pleas taken by the petitioners in the petitions.
The defence of the respondent is struck off under Order VIII Rule 10 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
The averments made in the petitions have to be treated as correct.
There is no denying the fact that the minimum qualifications prescribed for the post of Building Inspectors are the same as are prescribed for the posts of Sectional Officers.
Building Inspectors and the Secitonal Officers perform similar type of duties.
The posts are interchangeable.
The respondent did pass an order that the qualified Building Inspectors be designated as Sectional Officers.
The pay scale for the post of Building Inspectors is different than those of Sectional Officers.
The petitioners are justified in their demand for the grant of same pay scale permissible to the Sectional Officers.
Reference may usefully be made to Kirpal Jeet v. The State of Punjab, 1987(4), S.L.R.
594, wherein it was held thus :-  "At the cost of repetition, it is held that once the State Government decided to equate the pay scale of a certain post with that another post, it is not open to it to discriminate between the incumbents of the two posts for the grant of pay scale at the time of subsequent revision of pay scales.
Such an action would be wholly violative of Article 16 of the Constitution of India inasmuch as it would be denying the equality of opportunity in the matter of employment."
For the reasons stated above, writ of mandamus is issued to the respondent to grant the petitioners the same pay scale as allowed to the Sectional Officers from the date of the order.
The respondent will finally dispose of the matter within three months from the date of receipt of copy of this order.
Order accordingly.