RS Mongia, J - Dr A Shyamal, appellant, who is a Professor of Chemistry, Regional Engineering College, Kurukshetra, had filed a writ petition in this Court, challenging the order of the Vice-Chancellor of the Kurukshetra University (hereinafter called the University) dated 15th April, 1987, debarring him for a period of three years from any University examination work, exercising powers under clause 5 of the Ordinance Paper Setting and Evaluation printed at page 421 of the University Calendar, Volume II, 1986 Edition.
2.
The petitioner (now appellant) has averred in his writ petition that he is not only PhD in Chemistry, but also obtained degree in Doctor of Science (D.Sc.)
and claims to be the only serving teacher in the State of Haryana who has obtained the degree of D.Sc.
in Chemistry.
He has also highlighted his achievements in the subject of Chemistry.
3.
In July, 1985, B.Sc.
Engineering IInd Semester (Chemistry Practical) examination was held.
Dr. A Shyamal was one of the examiners for the said examination.
One of the students made a complaint to the University that on account of mala fide action of the petitioner-appellant, he was made to fail in the examination.
The University got the matter examined from different Professors as well as from the Experts outside the University and on the basis of the reports which were in favour of the student, he was allowed to be re-admitted to the examination.
A show-cause notice dated 27th May, 1986 (Annexure P-6) was issued to the petitioner-appellant to show cause as to why he should not be debarred from all kinds of examination work of the University in future in terms of clause 5 of the Ordinance for such a violation.
4.
The petitioner-appellant attended the meeting in the office of the Pro-Vice-Chancellor on 14th November, 1985 to explain his position.
After considering the matter, order dated 15th April, 1987 was passed by the Chancellor of the University debarring the petitioner for a period of three years from any University examination work.
5.
It will be appropriate here to reproduce the relevant Clause 5 of the Ordinance :-  "Notwithstanding contained in any other order with the Chairman for the time being in force, the Vice-Chancellor in consultation with the Chairman of the Board of Studies, concerned, shall have the power to remove permanently or for a specified period any paper setter/Head Examiner/Examiner in any faculty for any examination, if his work was found unsatisfactory as to standard of marking or who was found to have committed irregularities or caused inordinate delay in the submission of Awards/Question paper etc. or there was some doubt with regard to his integrity or was otherwise unable to perform the work or to conform to directions of the University."
The learned Single Judge after opinion that there was no right much less fundamental right vested in the petitioner to get paper setting work of the University, held that the principles of natural justice were duly complied with in the present case when a show-cause notice was issued to the petitioner and his explanation whatsoever was considered and consequently dismissed the writ petition.
That is how the present appeal was preferred against the judgment of the learned Single Judge by the Petitioner-appellant.
6.
The learned counsel for the appellant reiterated the same submissions which were made by him before the learned Single Judge.
The learned counsel for the appellant submitted that there were civil consequences which had flowed from the impugned order and the order was stigmatic in nature and since regular enquiry ws held, the impugned order debarring the appellant from University examination work was bad in law and liable to be quashed.
We find no merit in the submission of the learned counsel.
The learned Single Judge rightly held that there was no vested or any other fundamental or statutory right in the appellant to get University examination work.
It is entirely the prerogative of the University to allot such work to the different Professors working in the University.
There was no necessity of any full fledged enquiry in the matter and the rules of natural justice were amply complied with the issuing of a show cause notice to the appellant, and duly considered his explanation.
Clause of the Ordinance, quoted above, was fully complied with.
As the Chairman of the Board of Studies had recommended the action to be taken against the appellant and the Vice-Chancellor had accepted that, which would go to show that there was consultation between the Vice-Chancellor and the Chairman of the Board of Studies.
We further find from the impugned order that no stigma has been attached in the order itself.
There is no stigma even in the order in the files of the University.
7.
For the reasons recorded above, the appeal fails and is dismissed.
However, there will be no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.