Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - The Director, Health and Family Welfare, Punjab-respondent No. 2, by an advertisement which appeared in the Daily Jagbani dated 351989, invited applications for 116 posts of the Laboratory Assistants from the eligible candidates possessing the following qualifications :-  (i) Matriculation from a recognised University/Board with the subjects of Physics and Chemistry; (ii) Diploma in Medical Laboratory Technology from any recognised institution; and (iii) Qualification of Punjabi upto Matriculation standard; The petitioner claiming to have possessed the aforesaid qualification applied for the said post in response to the said advertisement but his claim was not considered by the respondents on the ground that he has not obtained professional qualifications from a recognised institution.
Copies of Diploma/detailed marks certificates are Annexures P-1 and P-2 to the writ petition.
2.
The case of the petitioner is that he obtained Medical Laboratory Technology (Diploma) from the Teravncore Institute of Medical Technology (Regd.)
Alwaye, Kerala, which was duly recognised by the State of Punjab and the State of Punjab had been giving appointments to the candidates who had obtained Diplomas from the Institute.
In order to highlight this, the petitioner has cited 14 examples, to show that earlier the respondent-Deptt.
had considered and appointed persons who had obtained Diplomas from Kerala Institute.
On the contrary, the respondents' case is that earlier the candidates who obtained diplomas from the Kerala Institute were given appointment as at that time the said institute was registered under DRDA and later on the Kerala Institute was de-recognised by the Director Health Services, Trivandrum because of the fact the said Institute was not working as per the rules and regulations of the Government of Kerala.
3.
I have considered the submission made at the Bar.
4.
It is not in dispute that the petitioner obtained diploma certificate from the Tranvancore Institute of Medical Technology (Regd.
), Alwaye, Kerala.
Further, it is also not disputed that the petitioner applied for the post of Laboratory Assistant in pursuance of advertisement dated 351989 on the basis of the aforesaid qualification.
As per the stand of the respondents, the petitioner was not called for interview as the institute from which he obtained the professional qualification was not recognised by the Government.
To support this action, the respondents have placed on record copies of communications between the Director, Health and Family Welfare of the two States i.e. Punjab and Kerala and copies are Annexures R-I to R-IV.
A scrutiny of Annexure R-II discloses that Directors, Health and Family Welfare Punjab vide his letter wrote to his counter-part that it be communicated whether the institution mentioned in the list enclosed to said letter were recognised by their State.
The name of Travancore Institute of Medical Technology, Kumarpuram, Kerala was mentioned in the list sent alongwith the letter.
The Director of Health and Family Welfare, Kerala vide his letter dated 25.1.1988 conveyed to his counter-part in the State of Punjab that none of the institution mentioned in the list was recognised.
By another letter dated 471989 it was further communicated by him that the Government of Kerala had decided to cancel the registration of Travancore Institute of Medical Technology as this institution was not working as per rules and regulations of Government of Kerala and the candidates possessing diploma from that institution were not eligible for government service.
In the light of the aforesaid communications between the two Governments, the respondents have endeavoured to justify their action for not considering the petitioner eligible to the post of Laboratory Assistant.
But it has come on record by means of replications filed by the petitioner that the Director of health Services Kerala State had sent a letter dated 1321988 to respondent No. 2 which reads as under :-  "In continuation of this letter No. (L Dis.)
EF 2.147521/87 dated 25.1.1988, I inform you that matter regarding recognisation of the diploma in Medical Lab.
Technology has been reconsidered after consultation with the Principles of the concerned institutions and the old office record which was not available at the time when the reply was sent to you.
After going through these facts that only Travancore Institution of Medical Technology is recognised by DRDA (Technical Education Board) of Kerala.
Candidates possessing diploma from the above institution are eligible for Government Service."
The factum of sending the letter is established from another letter dated 471989, Annexure R-IV to the Director to make the position more explicit.
The relevant portion of letter Annexure R-IV is as below :-  "Ref : Your letter No.E7(3)-Pb-87/4298/4301, 24.11.87 and 91287 and this office letter No. (L Dis.)
EF2-147521/87 dated 25.1.1988 and (L.Dis.)
EF 2-147612/87 dated 1321988."
There is no rebuttal to these averments made in the replication from the side of the respondents and rather it is very significant to notice that letter dated 1321988 Annexure P-3 has been with held by the respondents for the reasons best known to them or probably to conceal this fact relevant for effective adjudication of the matter.
5.
From the above position, it is clear that though the State of Kerala had communicated letter dated 25.1.1988 Annexure R-III to the Director, Health and Family Welfare, Punjab, that institution from where the petitioner obtained professional diploma was not recognised but immediately after three weeks, vide letter dated 1321988, Annexure P-3, it was communicated by the Kerala Government to respondent No. 2 that Travancore Institution of Medical Technology Kerala was recongised by DRDA and the candidates possessing diploma from the institution were eligible for government job.
It is also made clear from letter dated 471989 Annexure R-IV that the institution was recognised in 1989 because this institution was not working as per rules and regulations of Kerala Government whereas the petitioner had obtained his diploma in April, 1989 and applied for the advertised post in May, 1989.
The diploma held by the petitioner, therefore, was valid for all intents and purposes.
It was held by the Supreme Court in Suresh Pal and others v. The State of Haryana and others, AIR 1987 SC 2027 as under :-  "It would be unjust to tell the students that though at the time of their joining the course it was recognised, yet they cannot be given benefit of such recognition and the certificates obtained by them would be futile, because during the pendency of the course, it was de-recognised by the State Government.
Govt. of Haryana is directed to recognise certificates issued to students joining course before de-recognition."
6.
For the foregoing reasons, the writ petition is allowed and the respondents are directed to consider the case of the petitioner for the existing vacancy(s) of Laboratory Assistant per Rules as if he possessed recognised Diploma.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no orders as to costs.
Petition allowed.