RS Mongia, J - The present Letters Parent Appeal has arisen under the following facts and circumstances.
2.
Sarvshri Nar Singh, Ramesh Chand and Ram Kishan filed a writ petition in this Court, inter alia praying for the issuance of Writ in the nature of Mandamus, directing respondent Municipality to comply with the order of the Government contained in Annexure P-7 to the writ petition, which, in turn, directed the respondent Municipality to implement the earlier order of the Government dated 18th September, 1979, contained in Annexure P-5 to the writ petition.
The grievances of the petitioners was that they were senior to respondents Sarvshri Siri Chand, Hans Raj and Gautam Singh (Respondents 5 to 7 in the writ petition), as Fireman and they were wrongly ignored for promotion to the post of Leading Fireman.
In spite of the direction contained in the Government letter dated 18th September, 1979 (Annexure P-5) and the letter dated 19th March, 1980 (Annexure P-7), directing the Municipality to consider and promot the petitioners on the basis of seniority-cum-merit, the Municipality had refused to consider their cases for promotion.
3.
The case as put forth by the Private respondents and the Municipality before the learned Single Judge was that as per the qualifications laid down by the Punjab Government vide Gazette Notification dated 17th August, 1962, which had incorporated amendments to the Rules with regard to the Fireman and working of Fire Brigades, which were earlier published in 1925, the petitioners were not qualified for being considered for promotion to the post of Leading Fireman inasmuch as according to the Gazette Notification, no Non-Matriculate could be promoted to the post of Leading Fireman and since the petitioners were not Matriculate, they could not claim promotion to the post of Leading Fireman.
It will be relevant to notice the qualifications for the Leading Fireman as laid down in the 1962 Gazette :-  Rule 15.
No Committee shall appoint fire brigade personnel holding qualifications less than those prescribed in Annexure except with the approval of Government.
Annexure E-III is in the following terms :-  Schedule of qualifications for the recruitment of fire brigade staff for Class III towns having population of 50,000 to 1,00,000.
Leading Firemen.
(i) Matric Minimum.
(ii) Leading fireman may be promoted from fireman in order of seniority and merit, preference being given to those who have got training in first-aid and water supply distribution system and possess motor driving licence/."
4.
It will be apposite at this stage to reproduce the Government directions contained in letter dated 18th September, 1979 (Annexure P-5) and letter dated 19th March, 1980 (Annexure P-7) :-  Annexure P-5  --------------  Subject : Representation of Sarvshri Nar Singh, Ramesh Chand and Ram Kishan Firemen Municipality, Yamuna Nagar in respect of their promotion to the post of Leading Fireman.
In reference to your letter No. nil dated 5779 on the above mentioned subject.
2.
After considering this matter thoroughly the Government gives this direction and order you that promotion to the post of Leading Fireman on the basis of Seniority-cum-Merit, because post of Leading Fireman as for clause No. 2 is, can be filled from Fireman on the basis of Seniority, as given in sub-clause (2) of their qualification.
Under the circumstances, if Sarvshri Nar Singh, Ramesh Chand and Ram Kishan are the senior most and if their record is also good, they may be promoted to the post of Leading Fireman and the Government may be informed about the action taken in this matter."
Annexure P-7  ----------  From The Commissioner and Secretary to Government of Haryana, Local Self Government Department.
To The Administrator, Municipality, Yamunanagar.
Reference Number 20/68/79-5(2) dated 19.3.80.
Subject : Representation of Sarvshri Nar Singh, Ramesh Chand and Ram Kishan Fireman Municipality Yamuna Nagar in respect of their promotion to the post of Leading Fireman.
In reference to your letter No. 3204 dated 71179, on the above mentioned subject.
2.
You are hereby ordered that the order reference No. 20/68/79-5K(2) dated 18979, of the Government should be implemented at once.
There is no need of giving relaxation in the academic qualification of the workers because the post of Leading Fireman ought to have been filled by promotion.
3.
Kindly Government may be informed, of the action after complying with the orders."
5.
The learned Single Judge came to the conclusion that in view of the clarification and direction issued by the Government, which it could issue under Sections 250 and 252 of the Haryana Municipality Act, the matter was quite clear that it was not necessary that a Fireman must be Matriculate before he could be considered for promotion to the post of Leading Fireman.
The learned Judge further held that it was in 1982 that by the Haryana Municipal Service (Integration, Recruitment and Conditions of Service) Rules, 1982, it was laid down that a Fireman to be promoted as a Leading Fireman had to be Matriculate.
Consequently, the learned Single Judge issued directions that the petitioners would be considered for promotion to the post of the Leading Fireman from the day any one of their juniors was promoted earlier to 15th February, 1982.
Dissatisfied with the judgment, the private respondents as well as the Municipality Yamuna Nagar have filed the present appeal.
6.
The learned counsel for the appellants has submitted that the learned Single Judge was in error when he held that it was not a necessary condition that a Fireman hat to be a Matriculate before he could be considered for promotion to the post of Leading Fireman.
According to the learned counsel, apart from the fact that it was quite evident from Rule 15 read with Annexure E-III, quoted in the earlier part of the judgment, that the Fireman had to be a Matriculate before he could be promoted as a Leading Fireman.
The State of Haryana vide Annexure R-2/2 dated 11th January, 1971, had refused to grant relaxation to Sarvshri Ved Parkash and Baldev Raj regarding their qualifications for being promoted as Leading Fireman and vide another letter dated 16th August, 1972 (Annexure R-2/3), the Government accorded relaxation for appointment to some of the Firemen to the posts of Leading Firemen as far as their qualifications were concerned.
From this the learned counsel wanted to raise an argument that if Matriculation was not an essential qualification, then there was no question of relaxation of the qualifications, as was done vide above said two letters.
He further referred to another letter dated 12th February, 1969, which was a communication from Fire Officer, Haryana, signing for Deputy Secretary, Haryana Government to the effect that even for promotion of a Fireman to the post of Leading Fireman, Matriculation qualification was necessary.
7.
On the other hand, the learned counsel for the respondents (writ-petitioners) submitted that Matriculation qualification was necessary only for Leading Fireman who was to be directly recruited as such and a Fireman who was to be promoted as a Leading Fireman, could be promoted on the basis of seniority-cum-merit, preference being given to those who had got training in First Aid and Water Supply Distribution System and possessed Motor Driving Licence.
According to the learned counsel, even the Government had clarified this matter vide Annexure P-5, which has been quoted in the earlier part of the judgment.
8.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, we are of the view that there is no force in the arguments of the learned counsel for the appellants.
From a bare reading of Rule 15 and Annexure E-III, laying down qualifications for the post of Leading Fireman, it is apparent that it is only in the case of a fresh appointee as a Leading Fireman that qualification of Matriculation is necessary and it is not required for a Fireman who is to be promoted as a Leading Fireman.
He is to be promoted on the basis of seniority-cum-merit.
Apart from the interpretation we are giving, it is also evident from the clarification and the directions given by the State Government vide Annexures P-5 and P-7 that it was not necessary for a Fireman to have Matriculation qualification for the purpose of promotion to the post of Leading Fireman.
It is only with effect from 15th February, 1982, under Haryana Municipal Service (Integration, Recruitment and Conditions of Service) Rules, 1982, that it was laid down that even for promotion as Fireman one has to be Matriculate.
So the promotions of Fireman who are non-matriculates are barred after 15th February, 1982.
Therefore, the learned Single Judge was right in giving a direction to the respondents to consider the case of promotion of the writ petitioners (now respondents) as Leading Fireman from the date any one of their junior was promoted prior to 15th February, 1982.
If all or any of the writ petitioners (now respondents) are found suitable for promotion as Leading Fireman, they would be entitled to all consequential benefits from the date they are promoted.
9.
There is no merit in this appeal and the same is dismissed.
No. costs.
Appeal dismissed.