KP Bhandari, J - The petitioner has filed the present writ petition challenging the order of his reversion from the post of Deputy Superintendent in the Archaeology Department to which post he was posted by transfer, to his parent department that is Director of Secondary Education, Haryana, Chandigarh, vide order dated 1461989, Annexure P.6.
2.
The facts of the case are not in dispute.
The petitioner is the permanent employee of the Secondary Education Department, Haryana.
The petitioner is a permanent Head Clerk in Government College, Kalka.
He holds a lien against that post.
3.
The petitioner was appointed by transfer as Deputy Superintendent in the pay scale of Rs. 700-30-850/900-40-1100-EB-50-1250 in the Directorate of Archaeology, Haryana, Chandigarh, against newly created post.
This appointment was by transfer.
The appointment was approved by the Subordinate Selection Board vide order dated 931987, Annexure P 2.
Vide order dated 1851983, Director of Archaeology certified that the petitioner had completed the period of probation successfully on 891981.
The Director of Archaeology vide order dated 1461989, Annexure P. 6 reverted the petitioner to his parent department i.e. Director Secondary Education, Haryana.
The order stated that the petitioner's services are no longer required.
The petitioner was relieved of his duties vide order dated 1461989, Annexure P. 7.
The petitioner represented against the order of reversion the petitioner has filed the present writ petition on the ground that the order of reversion to the DPI vide his representation, Annexure P 9.
Feeling aggrieved against the order of revision, the petitioner has filed the present writ petition on the ground that the order or revision is by way of punishment and, therefore, it could not be passed without complying with the provisions of Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India.
Written statement has been field by Shri DN Gupta, Administrative Officer, Office of Director Archaeology, Chandigarh, on behalf of respondents Nos. 1 and 2.
In the written statement the stand taken is that the petitioner is confirmed employee of he Education Department as Head Clerk and his lien stands in the said department.
He was appointed as Deputy Superintendent by way of transfer and has not yet been confirmed in the Archaeology Department and the Archaeology Department to as competent to sent the petitioner back to his parent department i.e. Education Department where the petitioner holds a lien.
It has also been stated in the written statement that the reversion of the petitioner to his parent department is not by way of punishment and it was not necessary to give him an opportunity of hearing.
The State has also filed order dated 1121982, Annexure A passed by the Director of School Education Haryana, whereby petitioner was made substantive in the education department.
The name of the petitioner appears at Sr. No. 15 of the order.
It is also stated in the written statement that petitioner has only been repatriated to his parent department vide Annexure 'B' dated 1461989.
4.
Mr. PS Patwalia has vehemently argued that the petitioner held the post of Deputy Superintendent in the Archaeology Department for a period of 8 years and he has been suddenly reverted to the education department without affording an opportunity of hearing as contemplated by Article 311 of the Constitution and, therefore, the order of reversion was liable to be set aide.
Mr. PC Wadhwa, counsel for Respondent Nos. 3, 4 and 5 has submitted that the petitioner was a permanent employee of the education department and he holds a lien on that post.
He has invited my attention to the order passed by the Director School Education appointing the petitioner against substantive post.
He has further submitted that the order of reversion to the parent department is not by way of punishment.
Appointment Authority is always competent to repatriate an officiating employee who is appointed by way of transfer to his parent department.
The impugned order is not by way of punishment and as such the provisions of Article 311 of the Constitution are not attracted to the facts of the present case.
5.
I have gone through the record of the case and have given deep consideration to the arguments of the learned counsel for the parties.
It is the admitted case that the petitioner was appointed in the Archaeology Department as Deputy Superintendent.
The Petitioner has not been confirmed in the Archaeology Department.
The Petitioner still holds the lien in the education department.
The order passed in this case is a simple order of reversion.
It does not carry any penal consequences.
It is authoritatively laid down by the Supreme Court in Parshotam Lal Dhingra v. Union of India, AIR 1958 S.C. 36 that the reversion from an officiating post to the substantive post is not per se punishment.
The appointing authority is always competent to revert an officiating government servant to the parent department.
As the pots in the Archaeology Department are limited, the Director in order to give promotional opportunity to the employees of the Archaeology department has though fit to repatriete the petitioner to his parent department i.e. education department.
The order of reversion does not cast any stigma nor it carries any penal consequences.
In this view of the matter, the provisions of Articles 311(2) of the Constitution are not at all attracted to the facts of the present case.
6.
In view of the above discussion, this petition fails and is dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.