Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - The petitioner took admission to the Course of Bachelor of Dental Surgery in the Budha Institute of Dental Sciences, Patna in the first professional for the Session 1988-1989.
He successfully cleared all the subjects in first professional securing 389 marks out of 600 marks and was promoted to the second professional for the year 1989-90.
He applied for migration from Budha Dental Institute of Sciences, Patna to Dental College, Patiala alongwith 5 to 10 candidates from the same Institution as the Institute had issued 'No Objection Certificates' to all the students.
The petitioner, through this writ petition, prays that a direction be issued to the respondents to allow him migration to Dental College, Patiala.
2.
Mr. MK Tiwari, Advocate, the learned Counsel for the petitioner, has contended that the respondents had allowed migration to the students, who were closely related to highly influential person and the petitioner has been ignored for migration to Dental College, Patiala.
3.
On the other hand, the stand of the respondents is that the case of the petitioner, alongwith other candidates was considered for migration of 12.2.1990 and at that time all the pending cases of migration received after 2511990 were considered and finalised.
As per Punjab Government order dated 12.2.1990, petitioner's application was approved for migration to Dental College, Amritsar against vacant seat as he did apply for migration to that College.
It was also pleaded that the name of Preetinder Singh Dang was included for migration both at Dental College, Amritsar, as well as Patiala as the respondents were not sure that Dental Council of India would accord approval for creation of an additional seat to accommodate the said Mr. Dang.
4.
Mr. RL Sharma, Advocate, the learned Counsel for the respondents, contended that no seat is available in the current sessions at Dental College, Patiala, which is to expire in January, 1991.
As such, the petitioner would not be able to complete the prescribed number of lecturers/course.
However, Mr. Sharma sought time to seek instructions in the matter.
Now Mr. Sharma has informed the Court that the petitioner shall be allowed migration to Dental College, Patiala in the next ensuing academic Session 1991-92 to be commenced from July, 1991, provided he applies for the same.
5.
I have given my thoughtful consideration to the entire matter.
I am of the view that the respondents have taken a reasonable view of the matter that the petitioner shall be allowed migration in the next ensuing academic Session.
Earlier the petitioner was not allowed migration to Dental College, Patiala as he did not apply for the same.
6.
Under the facts and circumstances of the case, a direction is issued to the respondent that the petitioner be allowed migration to Dental College, Patiala in the next ensuing academic Session 1991-92 commencing from July, 1991, provided he applies for the same.
The writ petition stands disposed of accordingly.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.