MR Agnihotri, J - This judgment will dispose of four Civil Writ Petitions Nos. 5693, 9021, 10628 and 12141 of 1990, as common questions of fact and law are involved in all these petitions.
2.
The petitioners, who are 63 in number, are members of Scheduled Castes recognised in the State of Punjab.
All of them applied for recruitment to the rank of Constable in response to the advertisement dated 15th October, 1989.
A couple of months before this advertisement, the Director General of Police, Punjab, vide instructions dated 8th September, 1989, impressed upon the Inspector General, Punjab Armed Police, Jalandhar, all Range Deputy Inspectors General of Police, all District Senior Superintendents of Police in Punjab, etc. the necessity of filling up of the quota of Scheduled Castes candidates in the constabulary, even by granting general relaxation in height and chest measurements by one inch and two inches, respectively, in case of otherwise eligible Scheduled Caste candidates.
Since the earlier instructions issued in this regard on 25th August, 1988, had not attracted the attention of the concerned officers, it was "reiterated that where there is a backlog in the constabulary and eligible candidates fulfilling the prescribed physically standard are not available among Scheduled Castes, the reserved posts of members of Scheduled Castes may be filled up after granting relaxation in height and chest measurements upto 1" and 2" respectively, by the competent recruitment officers at their own level."
Two months later, on 8th November, 1989, the Director General of Police, Punjab, once again reiterated the matter and directed the concerned authorities that, - "the backlog of Scheduled Castes in the rank of constable still exists in your unit and immediate necessary steps are required to be taken to complete the backlog".
"You are, therefore, requested to make it clear in the advertisements in the newspaper advertising the posts that relaxation in height by 1" and in chest measurement by 2" will be granted to Scheduled Castes candidates to fill the backlog if such eligible candidates are not available."
Despite this, the petitioners who were otherwise found eligible and qualified for recruitment to the rank of Constable on the basis of their performance in the written examination, interview, etc. were not selected for appointment as in the absence of the aforesaid relaxation, they did not fulfill the physical standard regarding height and chest measurements prescribed for the general category candidates.
Aggrieved against this, the petitioners have invoked the writ jurisdiction of this Court for directing the respondents to consider the candidature of the petitioners by granting them the relaxation in height and chest measurements in pursuance of the instructions issued by the Director General of Police, Punjab, on 8th September, 1989, and 8th November, 1989 (Annexures P1 and P2, respectively, with the writ petition).
3.
In the written statement, though the factual position has been admitted by the respondents, yet frivolous and non-existent plea has been taken by the respondents to non-suit the petitioners by shifting the burden on the petitioners themselves, that is, ".....the Scheduled Caste candidates including the petitioners have not applied for relaxation in height and chest in advance, so they cannot be considered eligible at the time of recruitment in light of the instructions issued by the Director General of Police, Punjab, vide memo.
No. 30081-105/E-3, dated 4.12.86 attached R-I".
4.
I have gone through the instructions attached as Annexure R-I and find that they do not relate to candidates belonging to Scheduled Castes, the subject-matter of the instructions issued by the Director General of Police, Punjab, on 8th September, 1989 (Annexure P1) and 8th November, 1989 (Annexure P2).
Further, assuming it for the sake of argument that the relaxation of measurements of height and chest in the case of Scheduled Castes candidates could also be stretched to bring it within the purview of the instruction, then the same stood overridden and modified by the subsequent instructions of the Director General of Police, Punjab, issued on 8th September, 1989, Annexure P1, and 8th November, 1989, Annexure P2.
The respondents cannot shift the burden on the petitioners for the lapse and remissness on their part.
5.
Consequently, I allow these petitions and direct that the respondents shall grant the necessary relaxation in the height and chest measurements to the petitioners who belong to Scheduled Castes, and then consider them for recruitment to the rank of constable on the basis of their overall performance in the written test, interview, etc. in order of merit, within a period of three months.
The petitioners shall also be entitled to the costs of these petitions which are quantified at Rs. 500/- in each case.
Petition allowed.