MR Agnihotri, J - By this order we dispose of two Civil Writ Petition Nos. 10035 of 1990 (Davender Bansal v Board of School Education, Haryana, etc.) and 10036 of 1990 (Randhir Singh v. Board of School Education, Haryana, etc.) as the facts involved in both the writ petitions are almost common and the question of law is also identical.
2.
Both the petitioners before us in these cases are employees of the Board of School Education, Haryana.
Randhir Singh petitioner is M.Sc.
B.Ed.
with Diploma in Computer Sciences and was appointed by the Board as System Executive in its Computer Cell on 16th October, 1987, and was confirmed after one year on 16th December, 1988, whereas petitioner Davendar Bansal is a graduate with Mathematics and Economics with Diploma in Computer Programming.
He was appointed to the post of Computer Operator, on 12th February, 1987.
On 24th November, 1989, Randhir Singh was promoted to the post of Senior System Executive whereas Davender Bansal was promoted on the same day as Senior Computer Operator.
They were placed on one year's probation which was to expire on 23rd November, 1990.
Both the petitioners continued to work on the aforesaid posts right till 19th July, 1990, when they were reverted to their original posts with immediate effect on the ground that their work and conduct had not been found satisfactory during the probation period.
It is this order of reversion dated 19th July, 1990, passed by the Chairman, Board of School Education, Haryana, which has been challenged before us on the grounds of mala fides, arbitrariness, discrimination and being violative of the principles of natural justice, inasmuch as no opportunity was afforded to the petitioners before passing the impugned order of reversion.
3.
In the written statement filed by the Chairman, Board of School Education, Haryana, the allegations of mala fides have been denied.
It has been stated that the petitioners proved to be incompetent and their work was not upto the mark.
It has further been pleaded by the respondent in both the cases in identical terms that the petitioners "committed such misdeed by which the Board has to face a sorry figure before the public", and that "a person can be reverted at any time during probation if his work and conduct is unsatisfactory and if he commits wrong, there is no fun to approve his wrongs and to await the end of the probation; he can be reverted at any time even during the period of probation.
4.
At the time of hearing, the learned counsel for the petitioners dropped all the allegations of mala fides levelled against the learned chairman of the respondent Board which we also found were unfounded.
However, after hearing the learned counsel for the parties, we find that the impugned order of reversion is not wholly innocuous and unstigmatic.
If the petitioners had committed any misdeeds and wrongs, it was essentially the requirement of the principles of natural justice that an opportunity of hearing should have been afforded to them before the orders of their reversion were passed.
It was settled by Hon'ble the Supreme Court of India long ago, that the motive of the authorities behind reversion of an employee even during the probation period due to unsatisfactory work or conduct may not be penal and no opportunity need be afforded before passing the order of reversion, but if some demeanoor, misconduct or misdeed is the foundation of the order of reversion, then the reversion becomes penal and punitive in character and, as such, an opportunity of being heard is necessary to be afforded to the employee before ordering his reversion even during the period of probation.
5.
Consequently, we allow these petitions, quash the impugned orders of reversion dated 19th July, 1990, and direct the respondents to permit the petitioners to work on their promoted posts, ignoring the order of reversion, and to pay to them their arrears of salary and other allowances to which they would have been entitled, had the impugned orders of reversion not been passed.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.