Amarjeet Chaudhary, J (Oral) - The petitioner, who is a Lecturer, through this writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, has prayed for quashing the selection of respondent No. 3 made on the basis of interview held by respondent No. 2 on 6111989.
2.
In brief, the petitioner's case is that respondent No. 2 issued an advertisement in May, 1989 for various posts to be filled in by the University including the post of Lecturer.
In response to the said advertisement, the petitioner submitted an application for the post of Lecturer and he was called for interview which was held on 6111989.
However, the petitioner was not selected.
3.
The petitioner contends that the respondent No. 3 was not eligible to hold the post of Lecturer as he was not fulfilling the requisite qualifications.
It has been urged by the petitioner that respondent Nos. 1 and 2 have prescribed the qualification which were contrary to the qualifications laid down by the Statute and Act of the Punjabi University Calender, Vol.
I.
The petitioner has also challenged the validity of the Selection Committee constituted for the purpose of making selection.
4.
The respondents have filed a detailed written statement and the stand taken by the respondents is that the petitioner has intentionally quoted unrevised qualifications, which amounts to concealment of acts and as such the writ petition is liable to be dismissed.
5.
I have perused the paper-book and find that once the petitioner had appeared before the Selection Committee along with others without any reservation he cannot challenge the constitution of Selection Committee.
More so, the petitioner has not given the correct position in the writ petition.
The qualifications, as reproduced in the writ petition, were revised by the Syndicate of Punjabi University on the recommendations of the University Grant Commission and Punjab Government on 2241989.
6.
In view of the fact that the petitioner has misquoted the qualifications and concealed the material facts, the petitioner is not entitled to any relief from the Court of law.
The writ petition is dismissed being devoid of merit.
The parties are left to bear their own costs.
I  Petition dismissed.