RS Mongia, J - The petitioner, who is a Graduate, was appointed as a Tehsil Welfare Officer at Faridkot, on 29th August, 1988, for a period of 89 days.
He continued as such till November 27, 1988, whereupon a fresh order of appointment dated 28th November, 1988, was issued to him for another 89 days and in this manner he continued till 24th February, 1989.
According to the petitioner, the post occupied by him was filled up by transfer of Tehsil Welfare Officer from Batala, but still some posts in the cadre were vacant.
Therefore, the petitioner represented that he may be appointed against one of those posts.
On 5th June, 1989, the petitioner was again appointed as Tehsil Welfare Officer at Samana for a period of 89 days.
According to this, petitioner was to continue upto 10th September, 1989.
2.
The petitioner is that the Director Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes, Department of Welfare, Punjab respondent No. 2, sent requisition to various Employment Exchange on 4th August, 1989, for sponsoring suitable candidates for appointments to the posts of Tehsil Welfare Officers.
The Employment Exchanges".
submitted a list of candidates possessing the qualification of Matriculation, which is the qualification prescribed for eligibility to the post of Tehsil Welfare Officer.
The petitioner's name has been registered with the Employment Exchange, Amritsar, in the general category against Serial No. 2762/87 dated 12th February, 1987, which, according to the petitioner, has been renewed from time to time.
His name has also been registered with the Employment Exchange at Patiala for the post of Welfare Officer vide Registration No. 6420/89 dated 11th August, 1989.
This, according to the petitioner, is permissible as it is a category apart, and, therefore, in spite of registration at Amritsar, registration at Patiala was permissible.
According to the petitioner, he had mentioned with the Employment Exchange, Patiala that he had acquired the experience against the post of Tehsil Welfare Officer.
3.
The grievance of the petitioner is that in spite of his being qualified and registered with two employment Exchanges, his name was not sponsored for the post of Tehsil Welfare Officer, for which interviews were held on 1st September, 1989.
The present writ petition was filed on 8th September, 1989, inter alia praying that the respondents be directed to consider the case of the petitioner for regular appointment as Tehsil Welfare Officer.
4.
On 11th September, 1989, when notice of motion was issued by the Motion Bench, it was observed that if any appointments are made, those would be subject to the result of the writ petition.
On 13th March, 1990, the writ petition was admitted and status quo regarding service was ordered to be maintained, as the petitioner still continued, as Tehsil Welfare Officer.
5.
The case put forth by the respondents is that the petitioner had got his experience as Tehsil Welfare Officer entered in Sub-Regional Employment Exchange, Patiala for a period of 177 days (31.3.1988 to 27111988 and 29111988 to 2421989), which was less than six months.
This experience had not been intimated to the SubRegional Employment Officer, Amritsar.
According to the respondents, as per the Employment Exchange procedure, an experience of less than 6 months, cannot be considered for allotting the applicant the original classification of occupation at the time of registration.
6.
After hearing the counsel for the parties, I am of the view that in view of the facts and circumstances mentioned above, the petitioner had a right to be considered for the post of Tehsil Welfare Officer and by 1st September, 1989 (the date on which interviews were held) he had gained sufficient experience.
It is also not denied that in fact the petitioner's name had been registered with the Employment Exchanges at Patiala and Amritsar.
It has also been admitted that the petitioner had attended the office of the Director, Welfare on 1st September, 1989, as he was told on 31st August, 1989 that he should appear on 1st September, 1989 before the Director and he would be told regarding the decision as to whether his claim could be considered along with other candidates sponsored by the Employment Exchanges.
7.
Now it is settled by a Division Bench of this Court in Piara Singh's case, 1988(4) S.L.R.
739, that a person who has completed one year service, his case should be considered for regularisation.
In view of this authority, as also the fact that the petitioner had got himself registered with the Employment Exchanges where names of others were also registered and were sponsored for the posts of Tehsil Welfare Officers, I consider it to be a fit case where a direction should be issued to the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner for regular appointment as it was done regarding other candidates on 1st September, 1989, when the candidates sponsored from different Employment Exchanges were considered.
8.
Consequently, the writ petition is allowed and a direction is issued to respondent No. 2 to consider the case of the petitioner for regular appointment as Tehsil Welfare Officer as was done on 1st September, 1989 qua the candidates who had been sponsored by different Employment Exchanges.
If the petitioner is found suitable for regular appointment, he will be entitled to all consequential benefits.
The above directions may be carried out within two months of the receipt of this order and till the case of the petitioner is considered, status quo with regard to service would continue There will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.