RS Mongia, J - The petitioners who belong to Schedule Castes/Backward Classes category, are the members of the Services governed by the Haryana Excise and Taxation Department Subordinate Offices Ministerial (Group C) Service Rules, 1981 (hereinafter called the Rules).
Rule 9(3) of the Rules, which governs the method of promotion is in the following terms :-  "9(3) All promotions, whether from one grade to another grade or from one group of service to another group of service, shall be made on seniority-cum-fitness basis and taking into consideration seniority but seniority alone shall not give any right to such promotions."
The Haryana Government issued instructions on 9th February, 1979, under Article 16(4) of the Constitution of India for reservation of certain posts of Scheduled Castes/Backward Classes etc.
The relevant part of the instructions is quoted below :-  "In supersession of Haryana Government instructions issued vide letter No. 2812-2GS-176/11578 dated the 5th May, 1976, letter No. 5074-2 GSI-76/21898 dated the 17th August, 1979, and subsequent letter No. 38/48/78-GSI dated the 14th September, 1978 on the subject noted above, I am directed to say that the State Government has further reviewed the existing policy of reservation of posts for Scheduled Castes, Backward Classes and Ex-servicemen in the services of Haryana and have decided as follows :- By Promotion (a) For Scheduled Castes 20% (in Class III and IV Posts) on the basis of -seniority-cum-merit.
There will be no reservation for Class I and II Posts.
(b) For Backward 5% (-do-) Classes.
(c) For Ex-Servicemen Nil.
(ii) Henceforth, in a block of 100 Posts in each cadre, the following posts should be reserved for person belonging to Schedules Castes and Backward Classes and for Ex-Servicemen :- (6) In the case of posts to be filled up by way of promotion the benefit of reservation should be given where the basis of promotion is seniority-cum-merit and the benefit of reservation should not made available where promotion is to be given on the basis of seniority-cum-fitness.
2.
Purporting to be acting under these instructions, the petitioners were promoted out of turn on the reserved posts in the roster meant for Scheduled Caste, Backward Classes and Junior Auditors/Assistants.
These promotion were ordered on 19th May, 1982, and 4th June, 1982.
3.
It would be seen from the perusal of Rule 9(3) of the Rules quoted above, that promotion from one grade to another is to be made on the basis of seniority-cum-fitness.
Paragraph 6 of the 1979 Instructions, which has been reproduced above, prohibits any reservation where the promotion is to be given on the basis of seniority-cum-fitness.
Since allegedly the petitioners had been given promotion in violation of the instructions of the Government, as also Rule 9(3) of the Rules, some officials belonging to the general category, who were adversely affected by the promotion of the aforesaid petitioner, served a notice under section 80 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
While this notice under section 80 of the Code of Civil Procedure was being examined by the State Authorities, it was found that the petitioners had been wrongly given the benefit of reservation in the matter of their promotions.
After receiving clarification etc. on the matter, a show cause notice was issued to the petitioners as to why they should not be reverted.
The petitioners gave reply to the said show cause notice, and after considering their reply, an order of reversion was passed on 10th February, 1988 (Annexure P-3) which has been impugned by the writ petitioners in the present case.
4.
It may be noticed here that three of the nine writ petitioners, namely, Tilak Raj petitioner No. 5, Zile Singh, petitioner No. 6 and Partapa Ram, petitioner No. 7 had filed three separate writ petitions earlier, being CWP Nos. 217, 348 and 349 of 1986, when show cause notice had been issued to them as to why they should not to be reverted.
The present writ petition was filed after the impugned order reverting the petitioner had been passed.
The Motion Bench while admitting the present writ petition on 19th April, 1988, had stayed the reversion of the petitioners till further orders.
The above said three writ petitions filed by petitioners Nos. 5, 6 and 7 alongwith some other writ petitions came up for final hearing before a Division Bench of this Court and vide judgment dated 2nd December, 1988, rendered in C.W.P.
No. 4787 of 1985 (Baljit Singh Chauhan v. The State of Haryana and others), all the writ petitions were dismissed.
The points which have been raised in the present writ petition, were also raised before the Division Bench that there was discrimination between two sources of promotions, inasmuch as 1979 instructions provided for reservation for the posts to be filled by promotion on the basis of seniority-cum-merit, but the same reservation was not available when the promotion was on the basis of seniority-cum-fitness.
Further that it should be deemed that the Government has relaxed the Rule/Instructions regarding reservation when it promoted the petitioners by treating the posts reserved even when these were to be filled in by promotion on the basis of seniority-cum-fitness.
All these arguments were repelled.
In view of the judgment of the Division Bench, I do not find anything wrong with the impugned order (Annexure P-3) reverting the petitioners.
5.
The learned counsel for the petitioners also submitted that the promotions had taken place in the year 1982 and the private respondents had made grievance regarding petitioners, promotion after many years and even the show cause notice was issued in the year 1985 or 1986 and by now the petitioners have enjoyed the higher status for almost 8 years.
Therefore, it would not be in the interest of justice to revert the petitioners at this stage.
The learned counsel for the State has on instructions from the Departmental assured me that none of the petitioners would in fact be reverted, as their turn in normal course on the basis of seniority has already come.
The only effect of upholding the order of reversion, Annexure P-3 would be that their dates of promotion would change from 1982 to later dates ranging between the year 1985 to 1990.
I may mention one more fact here that with effect from 11th August, 1988, paragraph 6 of the 1979 instructions, quoted above, stands deleted by the State Government, meaning thereby that with effect from 11th August, 1988, whether the promotional post is to be filled on the basis of seniority-cum-merit or seniority-cum-fitness, there would be reservation for Scheduled Castes/Backward Classes etc.
So with effect from 11th August, 1988, the first post that may have fallen vacant would go to the member of the Scheduled Castes/Backward Classes according to the roster.
Just to make it clear I may observe that none of the petitioners would be reverted and would continue on the promoted post till he can be adjusted against a post to which he is entitled by virtue of his seniority and after 11th August, 1988 by virtue of reservation.
6.
For the reasons recorded above, the writ petition is dismissed, subject to the observations made above.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.