RS Mongia, J - The petitioner having been sponsored by the Employment Exchange for the post of Accounts Assistant in the Haryana State Handloom and Handicrafts Corporation Ltd Chandigarh (hereinafter referred to as the Corporation), was interviewed for the said post on 28th July, 1980.
He having been selected for the post, was issued an appointment order on 5th August, 1980.
It was mentioned in the order that the petitioner would be on probation for a period of one year, which could be extended at the discretion of the management.
It was further mentioned that during the period of the probation, the services of the petitioner could be dispensed with on one month's notice on either side or pay in lieu thereof.
2.
It may be mentioned here that the Corporation is a Haryana State Government undertaking and has been incorporated under the Indian Companies Act for the development of Handloom and Handicrafts industry in the State of Haryana.
The Chairman and the Managing Director are the officers who are appointed by the Government.
From the bye-laws it is quite evident that the State Government has all pervasive control over the Corporation.
It has not been seriously contested that the Corporation is not an 'authority' under Article 12 of the Constitution of India.
3.
The Board of Directors of the Corporation have framed service bye-laws to regulate the recruitment and conditions of service of the persons appointed in the Corporation.
Bye-law 3.1(h) of the Bye-laws provides for the period of probation, where Bye-law 64.
(k) provides that an order of dismissal, removal or reduction shall not be passed against a person unless he had been given reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken against him.
A detailed procedure is also given as to how the enquiry is to be held against a delinquent officer/official.
4.
The petitioner was suspended vide order of the Corporation dated 24th June, 1986, as an enquiry was contemplated against him.
A charge-sheet dated 20th November, 1986 (copy Annexure P-2), was served on him and disciplinary action under Bye-laws 6.1 read with Bye-law 64 of the Bye-laws was set in motion.
The petitioner gave his reply on 10th December, 1986, and since the reply was not found satisfactory, an Enquiry Officer was appointed on 3rd March, 1987.
Pending enquiry, the petitioner was, however, reinstated on 5th March, 1987.
The first date fixed by the Enquiry Officer was 28th April, 1987, but no proceedings took place on that date.
On 15th May, 1987, vide Annexure P-9, the petitioner's services were terminated with immediate effect without completing the enquiry.
In this order reference has been made to the appointment letter dated 5th August, 1980.
In other words, the services were terminated in accordance with the terms and conditions of the appointment order.
It is this order that has been impugned by the petitioner in the present case.
5.
The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the impugned order, Annexure P-9, is by way of punishment, and, therefore, in violation of the provisions of Bye-law 64 of the Bye-laws, as no enquiry was held before passing the impugned order.
Further, the learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the factual basis in the impugned order of treating the petitioner to be on probation, and, therefore, terminating his service allegedly in accordance with the terms and conditions of the appointment letter, was wrong.
According to the learned counsel, the petitioner was a confirmed employee, he having completed the probation period successfully.
In any case, the counsel went on to submit that the impugned order was violative of the principles of natural justice.
6.
To highlight that the petitioner was a confirmed employee, the learned counsel for the petitioner drew my attention to Bye-law 3.1(h) of the Bye-laws, which is in the following terms :-  "3.2(h) The period of probation shall be one year unless specifically enhance for a particular post and shall be subject to further extension at the discretion of Appointing Authority in case the work of the probationer is not found to be satisfactory during the probation period."
According to the learned counsel, the perusal of the bye-law quoted above would show that since no order during the period of one year of appointment or immediately thereafter had been passed extending the period of probation, the petitioner should be deemed to be a confirmed employee.
It is not necessary to go into this aspect of the matter in this case for the view I am taking on the other point that even if the petitioner was on probation, the order of dispensing with his service, (Annexure P-9) was by way of punishment.
7.
It is clear from the narration of facts mentioned above that the petitioner has been suspended.
A charge-sheet containing serious allegations was served on him.
His reply had been received.
Even an Enquiry Officer was appointed and immediately after the first date of hearing before the Enquiry Officer, which was 28th April, 1987, the order of termination of petitioner's services, purported to be in consonance with the terms and conditions of appointment was passed.
In other words, the Corporation terminated the services of the petitioner treating him to be on probation.
I find that the basis or the foundation of the order of termination was the misconduct as reflected in the charge-sheet for which even enquiry had been initiated.
It has been held by the Supreme Court in Anoop Jaiswal v. Government of India and another, 1984(1) S.L.R.
426, that even where the services of a probationer are terminated during the period of probation on the basis of some misconduct or adverse report regarding his indiscipline, the order would be violative of Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India, though the order may be on the face of it wholly innocuous.
Though in the present case, Article 311(2) is not applicable, yet the Bye-laws of the Corporation provide that before passing an order of removal, dismissal etc., a detailed enquiry is to be held.
I hold that the order was by way of punishment and violative of the Service Bye-laws and natural justice.
8.
In view of what has been stated above, I allow the writ petition, and quash the order Annexure P-9, dated 15th May, 1987, dispensing with the services of the petitioner.
The petitioner would be deemed to be in service with continuity of service and all other benefits.
However, since the petitioner has not worked with the Corporation during all this period and it could be taken to be a plausible view at that stage to terminate the services of the probationer by withdrawing the enquiry, I order that the petitioner would be entitled only to half of backwages.
There will be order as to costs.
Petition allowed.