MR Agnihotri, J - The petitioner is a Staff Nurse in the Community Health Centre, Mullana, District Ambala.
Her husband, Mr. Jagmohan Jain, is the President of Youth Congress, Mullana Block, and had also acted as the Polling Agent of Ch.
Phul Chand, during the last Assembly elections.
In the elections, Ch.
Suraj Bhan defeated Ch.
Phul Chand and became the Revenue Minister in the State of Haryana.
According to the petitioner, she was transferred from Mullana to Government Hospital, Tohana, on a note sent by Ch.
Suraj Bhan, Revenue Minister, Haryana, respondent No. 1, on 5th April, 1989.
It is against this order of transfer that the petitioner has invoked the writ jurisdiction of this Court inter alia alleging victimisation, mala fides, arbitrariness, and discrimination on the part of the authorities of the State of Haryana.
2.
In the return filed by the respondents, though factual position has almost been admitted, including sending of the note by Ch.
Suraj Bhan, Revenue Minister respondent No. 1, recommending the transfer of the petitioner, yet the impugned transfer is sought to be justified on the ground of public interest.
However, the allegations of mala fides, victimisation, etc. have been denied.
3.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I find that though the petitioner has not been able to establish the allegations of mala fides levelled by her, yet the respondents have not been able to disclose the precise public interest due to which the transfer of the petitioner was ordered.
The petitioner has specifically averred that her husband Mr. Jagmohan Jain, is a TB patient and she is the only person in the family to attend to him at Ambala where he is undergoing treatment from Dr. CK Mittal, Tuberculosis and Chest Specialist, Ambala Cantt.
In these circumstances, I do not consider that interest of administration would be seriously hurt if the petitioner, who is a Staff Nurse in the Community Health Centre, Mullana, is allowed to continue at that very place.
Consequently, this writ petition is allowed and the impugned transfer order dated 30th April, 1989 (Annexure P-1) is set aside to the extent it relates to the petitioner.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.