RS Mongia, J - This is a Letter Patent Appeal against the judgment of learned Single Judge, dated 25th September, 1987, passed in CWP No. 1804 of 1988.
2.
Brief facts of the case are that Gurnam Singh Brar, writ petitioner (now respondent) had joined the Public Works Department (Irrigation Branch), Punjab, on 27th December, 1961, as a Sectional Officer.
He was confirmed in the said post vide order dated 17th February, 1981.
Shri Sampuran Singh had joined the Department as Sectional Officer on 7th November, 1962 and thus he was admittedly junior to the writ-petitioner.
3.
The case put forth by the writ-petition was that Sampuran Singh who was junior to him, was promoted as Sub Divisional Officer on 21st August, 1974, ignoring the claim of the petitioner, Shri Sampuran Singh had been promoted as Sub Divisional Officer on the plea that he had served the Nation during the Indo-Pak war of 1971 while posted in the border areas.
It was further alleged that Sarvshri Gurdev Singh Parmar and Darshan Kumar Kochar who were promoted as officiating Sub Divisional Engineers on account of good work done by them during 1975 floods, were also junior to the writ-petitioner as Sectional Officers.
It was further averred by the writ-petitioner, which was not denied by the respondents, that during 1971 war, he was also posted in the Jalalabad sector of the Indo-Pak border and during the war and floods of 1975, the petitioner had rendered meritorious services at a great risk to his personal safety.
His services had been highly appreciated by the Civilian and the Army Authorities.
The Commanding Officer of the regiment which had been deployed in that area, had also highly commended the work of the petitioner in plugging a breach in the Bikaner canal, thus facilitating the work of defence authorities.
When the petitioner was ignored, he filed a representation, but according to the averments made by the petitioner, he did not hear anything about his representation, which led to the filing of the writ petition in the year 1984.
The case put forth by the respondent-State (now appellant) in the written statement was that the petitioner had not been promoted because (i) his name had not been recommended by the concerned Superintending Engineer, and (ii) he did not have the requisite qualifications of 10 years' service, which was a requirement under Rule 114 of the Manual of Administration governing the service of the petitioner in the Irrigation Department.
The State also resisted the claim of the petitioner on the ground of laches.
4.
The learned Single Judge while allowing the writ petition, held that it was the duty of the Superintending Engineer to make recommendations for promotion as Sub-Divisional Officer and if he had failed to perform his duty, the petitioner should not be allowed to suffer, admittedly when his juniors had been promoted under similar circumstances.
As far as the question of qualifications was concerned, the learned Single Judge held that the petitioner was short of 10 years' service only by a couple of months' while Sumpuran Singh and other had only 8 to 9 years service to their credit and in their cases this condition was relaxed and there was no justification in not relaxing the condition of 10 years' service in case of the petitioner who was senior to Sampuran Singh and others.
As far as the laches were concerned, the learned Single Judge held that the making of the representation by the petitioner had been admitted by the State, but it had been averred that the same had been rejected on 17th December, 1976, but there was no averment that the rejection had been communicated to the writ-petitioner.
On this ground, the plea of laches was negatived.
5.
Mr HS Riar, learned Additional Advocate General, appearing for the appellant-State had urged that the learned Single Judge should not have entertained the writ petition because of laches and relaxation in the case of others was a mere concession, and, therefore, the petitioner could not claim relaxation as a matter of right as there was no violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India when the condition of 10 years' service was relaxed in the case of juniors to the petitioner.
Reliance was placed by the learned counsel on a Supreme Court judgment in KV Rajalakshmiah Setty and another v. State of Mysore and another, AIR 1967 SC 993.
6.
We find no force in the submissions of the leaned counsel for the appellants.
As far as the laches are concerned, it has been rightly held by the learned Single Judge that the rejection of the representation was never communicated to the petitioner, and, therefore, the petitioner could justifiably wait to get an answer from the respondent.
Moreover, once the learned Single Judge had entertained the writ petition and overruled the objection of laches, we, in Letters Patent Appeal, would not like to interfere in that discretion, which, to our mind, had been rightly exercised.
As far as the argument regarding that relaxation is a concession and cannot be enforced, suffice it to mention that relaxation of the condition of experience is not a concession, specially when the senior is ignored who is similarly situated and the junior is promoted by giving relaxation.
This would be clearly arbitrary and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
7.
For the reasons recorded above, this appeal fails and is dismissed, but with no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.