The petitioner was recruited to the Central Reserve Police Force on 21st October, 1980.
He was placed under suspension by order dated 12th June, 1988 on the allegation that he had misplaced his personal arms and ammunition which were later recovered.
However, he was again suspended and second departmental inquiry was ordered.
As a result thereof, he has been retired from service compulsorily by order dated 18th November, 1989, Annexure P4.
Departmental appeal filed on 19th February, 1990, was, however, returned being time barred.
2.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has challenged the impugned order of compulsory retirement mainly on two grounds, that (1) the punishment of compulsory retirement was not one of the punishments enumerated in Section 11 of the Central Reserve Police Force Act, 1949, and (2) the total service of the petitioner being less than ten years, that its, from 21st October, 1980 - the date of enrollment, to 18th November, 1989 - the date of compulsory retirement, no pension was granted to the petitioner which made the punishment, in fact, an order of dismissal from service.
3.
In the return filed by the respondents, the impugned action is sought to be justified by pleading, that a lenient view of the matter has been taken and instead of imposing a major punishment, the punishment of compulsory retirement from service was inflicted.
It has further been pleaded that as the petitioner had no qualifying service to his credit, he was not entitled to any pension.
4.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, we find the impugned action is wholly untenable in law.
As compulsory retirement of the petitioner after less than ten years' service is only a misnomer and, in fact, tantamounts to dismissal of the petitioner from service, such an action rendering the petitioner ineligible for claiming pension throughout his life, is liable to be struck down, following the law laid down by Hon'ble the Supreme Court in Gurdev Singh Sidhu v. The State of Punjab and another, AIR 1964 SC 1585.
5.
Consequently, we allow this petition in limine, quash the impugned order of compulsory retirement dated 18th November, 1989, Annexure P4, and remit the case back to the respondents to re-consider the case of the petitioner as also the appeal filed by him on merits, in accordance with law.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to the arrears of salary and other allowances to which he would have been entitled in law, had the impugned order dated 18th November, 1989, not been passed.
No costs.
Petition allowed.