Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - The petitioner while posted as Medical Officer of Health, Municipal Corporation, Amritsar, was served with order dated 1021989 (Annexure P-6), under proviso (i) and (ii) of Rule 13 of the Punjab Municipal Corporation Service (Recruitment and Conditions of Service) Rules, 1978, in public interest, in lieu of notice for a period of three months, he was paid a sum equivalent to the amount of his pay and allowances at the same rate at which he was drawing immediately before the date of retirement.
The petitioner has impugned the aforesaid order Annexure P-6 by filing writ petition under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
2.
Brief facts of the case are that the petitioner was appointed Medical Officer on 16.4.1966 and was promoted as Medical Officer(Health) on 1941983 in the higher pay scale of Rs. 1400-2100 and continued to draw the same upto 1121989.
Though the petitioner has earned good reports but in the annual confidential report for the year 1985-86 it was recorded by the Reporting Officer "that more close supervision is needed on the staff.
He needs a stricter approach towards his subordinates to take proper work out of them.
He also needs to inculcate self-confidence in him for better performance."
However, his assessment was made as average.
In the ACR for 1986-87, the following remarks were recorded :-  "He needs to put in more hard work in supervision, in order to achieve the desired results.
He is further required to be consistent in his day to day functioning."
3.
Against both the adverse remarks, petitioner represented to the authorities.
The case of the petitioner was examined with reference to Rule 13 of the Punjab Municipal Corporation Service (Recruitment and Conditions of Service) Rules, 1978 to consider the desirability of retaining him in service on the date he completes 25 years of service or attains 50 years of age.
The authorities considered the record and took a decision to retire the petitioner on the ground that the petitioner did not enjoy good reputation.
4.
Mr. Agnihotri, learned counsel for the petitioner contends that since the petitioner had filed representations against the so-called adverse entries, no action on the basis of the adverse entries could be taken till the said representations were decided.
On the other hand, Mr. HS Giani, learned counsel for the respondents submits that no decision on the representations filed by the petitioner against the so-called adverse remarks was taken or communicated to him.
5.
I have considered the respective submissions made at the bar and after screening whole record of the case, I am of the view that the so-called adverse entries could not be taken into consideration as the same are simply of advisory nature and do not reflect on the integrity of the petitioner.
The other matter upon which the respondent relies is that the petitioner was not enjoying good reputation.
But I am not inclined to accept the same.
In case the petitioner was having bad reputation, the respondents should not have promoted the petition as Medical Officer (Health) on 1941983 in the higher pay scale.
It is well settled law that even if the petitioner has average service record, unless the same is communicated it cannot be made the basis of retirement.
Hon'ble Supreme Court in Brij Mohan Chopra v. State of Punjab, AIR 1987 SC 948 : 1987(2) SLR 54, has held that during the pendency of the representation against the impugned adverse entries, an employee cannot be retired.
On consideration of the entire matter, I am of the view that there is no material on record which will warrant the compulsory retirement of the petitioner.
6.
For the forgoing reasons, this writ petition is allowed and order Annexure P-6 ordering compulsory retirement of the petitioner is quashed.
Respondents shall restore his post with all consequential benefits.
7.
In view of the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.