GR Majithia, J - In this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner has sought a direction from this Court to the respondents to reconsider his name for promotion to the rank of Lt.
Colonel by selection having regard to his excellent and consistent above average record of service by excluding the award of severe reprimand and also to quash the order of the Central Government rejecting his statutory complaint against the award of sever reprimand.
2.
It is not necessary to state facts in detail.
When the writ petition came up for motion hearing the following order was passed on January 30, 1990 :-  "Present :- Mr. RS Randhawa, Advocate, for the petitioner.
Contends that the impugned order (Annexure P-5) is, on the face of it, a non-speaking order.
Notice.
The main petition, however, be listed for final hearing during the month of May, 1990."
The Government of India, Ministry of Defence, New Delhi vide order No. 5(31)88/D(AG), dated May 3, 1988, dismissed the statutory complaint dated February 6, 1987 submitted by the petitioner.
The said order reads thus :- "The Central Government after considering the statutory complaint dated 6th February, 1987 submitted by IC-2697 W Major SS Balaggan, COD, Delhi Cantonment under the provisions of Section 27 of the Army Act, 1950 against the award of punishment of 'Severe Reprimand' by Cdr 21 Sub Area on 30.9.85 after a summary trial, hereby rejected the said compliant."
3.
The order does not indicate the reasons for rejecting the statutory complaint.
The quasi-judicial authorities dealing with the statutory complaints, which has got all the trappings of appeal, to dispose of the same by passing a speaking order.
The order must contain reason for the decision arrived at.
The order should not be cryptic.
In the instant case, the order does not conform to the requirement that a quasi-judicial authority must indicate the reasons for rejecting the statutory complaint.
4.
It is stated in the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents that the petitioner failed to make an acceptable grade for promotion to the rank of Acting/Lt.Col.
based on his overall career profile, comparative merit and the disciplinary award on record on its fresh consideration.
It is further stated that the petitioner will be given his first review during the consideration of No. 4 Selection Board, tentatively scheduled to be held during May, 1990.
It is not pointed out that the 4th Selection Board did consider the petitioner's case for promotion in the First Review.
Be that as it may, the petitioner has to be considered for promotion to the rank of Lt. Col. in accordance with the Rules.
5.
For the reasons aforementioned, the order dated May 3, 1988, passed by respondent No. 1 rejecting the statutory complaint of the petitioner against the award of severe reprimand is quashed since it does not contain reasons.
Respondent No. 1 is directed to dispose of the statutory complaint of the petitioner in accordance with law, as indicated above.
The petitioner's case for reconsideration for promotion to the rank of Lt. Col. will also be considered in accordance with the statutory rules.
6.
The writ petition is accordingly disposed of with no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.