MR Agnihotri, J - Squadron Leader GS Cheema, since retired and at present a practising Advocate, has invoked the writ jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 and 227 of the Constitution, for the restoration of disability pension of Rs. 450/- pm granted to him with effect from Ist April, 1983, by the Controller of Defence Accounts (Pension), Allahabad, and for the quashing of the order dated 19th September, 1988, Annexure P5, by which the disability pension of the petitioner has been reduced from 60 per cent to 30 per cent, that is, from Rs. 450/- pm to Rs. 225/- pm  2.
The petitioner retired from the Indian Air Force in the rank of Squadron Leader from No. 3 Base Repair Depot, Chandigarh, on 31st March, 1983, in pursuance of the recommendations of the Release Medical Category A4G5, as the petitioner's disablement got aggravated by the service conditions of the Indian Air Force.
As a result thereof, the petitioner was granted disability pension to the extent of 60 per cent for the period from Ist April, 1983 to 24th March, 1985, whereafter it was to be reviewed keeping in view the gravity and extent of the ailment.
On 21st March, 1986, the petitioner was again medically examined by the Re-Survey Medical Board and it was found that the disability remained the same.
Later on, in March, 1988, the petitioner was required to report to the Command Hospital (WC), Chandigarh, for appearing before the Re-Survey Medical Board for the second time.
This was held on 15th March, 1988, and physical condition of the petitioner regarding the ailment remained the same.
On the basis thereof, on 19th April, 1988, recommendations were made by the Air Headquarters to the Controller of Defence Accounts (Pension), Allahabad, for grant of continuation of disability pension.
However, on 19th September, 1988, the petitioner was informed that his disability had been found as 30 per cent disablement instead of 60 per cent as earlier notified.
As a result thereof, his monthly pension had been reduced from Rs. 450/- to Rs. 225/-.
This decision of the respondents has been challenged by the petitioner mainly on the ground that the petitioner mainly on the ground that the petitioner has still been undergoing treatment at the P.G.I., Chandigarh and other medical institutions and his condition has not improved, as a result whereof the disability of the petitioner remains the same that is, 60 per cent.
3.
Attempt has been made by the respondents to justify the impugned action on the ground that the reasons for reducing the percentage of disablement of the pensioners are not communicated to them and the detailed reasons leading to the reduction of percentage of disablement stand recorded by the Medical Adviser (Pensions).
Therefore, while acting upon the medical opinion, the question of complying with the principles of natural justice did not arise, inasmuch as there was hardly any necessity of affording an opportunity of personal hearing or issuing any notice to the petitioner.
4.
Having gone through the records of the case and after hearing the learned counsel, I find that there is no legal justification whatsoever in passing the impugned order reducing the disability pension of the petitioner from Rs. 450/- pm to Rs. 225/- pm A close scrutiny of the medical reports and other relevant material available on the records does not show any improvement in the health of the petitioner thereby warranting any reduction in his pension, as he is still undergoing treatment and his condition regarding disablement is reported to be the same as it was earlier.
Otherwise also, the petitioner was entitled to an opportunity affirming heard to explain his case and produce the necessary material before the respondents, before the decision to deduce his pension was to be arrived at.
In the absence of that, the impugned action becomes wholly arbitrary.
5.
In the result, I allow this writ petition, strike down the impugned order dated 19th September, 1988 (Annexure P.5), by which the disability pension of the petitioner has been reduced and direct the respondents to continue to pay to the petitioner the same amount of disability pension, that is Rs. 450/- pm, on the basis of 60 per cent disablement with effect from 22nd March, 1988, to 14th March, 1991, whereafter the respondents shall act in accordance with the rules.
The arrears of pension for the relevant period to which the petitioner would have been entitled, had the impugned decision to reduce the disability pension not been taken, shall be paid to the petitioner within two months.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to the costs of this petition which are quantified at Rs. 500/-.
Petition allowed.