MR Agnihotri, J - This judgment shall dispose of this Writ Petition and six other C.W.P.
Nos. 959, 3342, 3343, 3857, 4238 and 4253 of 1988 in which common questions of fact and law are involved.
2.
The petitioners, who are 24 in number, are Advocates practising in the District Courts at Ludhiana.
They are aggrieved against the appointment of Sarvshri Jagatjit Singh Grewal, Balwinder Singh Goel, Ashok Kumar Jain and Parmajit Singh, Advocates of Ludhiana, as Notaries Public at Ludhiana, under the Notaries Act, 1952, by order of the State Government dated 12th January, 1988.
3.
The State Government issued a notification dated 12th May, 1987, inviting applications from the persons who had been practising as legal practioners in district Ludhiana for at least ten years, for four posts of Notaries in the district.
The applications were to be submitted to and forwarded by the Deputy Commissioner, Ludhiana, who was designated as the Competent Authority for the district of Ludhiana under Rule 4 of the Notaries Rules, 1956.
In response thereto, 58 persons in all submitted their applications.
The Competent Authority invited objections under Rule 6 of the Notaries Rules within 14 days of the date of publication of the notification.
No objection whatsoever was received against any applicant.
However, on a reference made by the Deputy Commissioner, Ludhiana, the District and Sessions Judge, Ludhiana, recommended a panel of ten Advocates out of the aforesaid 58 applicants.
Thereupon, the Deputy Commissioner, Ludhiana, on 6th November, 1987, forwarded a panel of 13 Advocates to the Commissioner, Patiala Division, Patiala for appointment of four persons against the four posts of Notaries.
This list of 13 persons consisted of 10 persons recommended by the District and Sessions Judge, Ludhiana, and 3 persons added by the Deputy Commissioner.
However, the Commissioner, Patiala Division, Patiala on 13th November, 1987 returned this panel to the Deputy Commissioner, Ludhiana requiring him to recommend only four names against the four posts of Notaries.
In reply thereto, the Deputy Commissioner, Ludhiana, on 17th November, 1987 finally recommended the names of the following four persons : (1) Sh. Satwant Singh Dhaliwal; (2) Sh. Ashok Kumar Jain; (3) Sh. Nirmal Singh Baweja, and (4) Sh. Paramjit Singh.
4.
On receipt of the recommendations from the Deputy Commissioner, Ludhiana the Commissioner, Patiala Division, on 23rd November, 1987, forwarded the list of 13 persons originally recommended by the Deputy Commissioner, Ludhiana, to the State Government and requested the Government to make the appointment of four persons out of that list 13 persons.
It was emphasised by the learned Commissioner that out of 13 candidates recommended by the Deputy Commissioner, Ludhiana, 10 had been recommended by the District and Sessions Judge, Ludhiana, whose recommendations deserved serious consideration being in touch with the Advocates and appointments be made in the order of priority indicated by the Deputy Commissioner in his recommendations.
Ultimately, the State Government on 12th January, 1988, appointed respondents Nos. 4 to 7 as Notaries, which order is under challenge in this petition.
5.
Principal attack of the petitioners against the impugned order is, that the statutory procedure laid down for the purpose of making recommendations and appointments of Notaries under the Notaries Act, 1952, has not been fully complied with by the Deputy Commissioner, Ludhiana, that is, the Competent Authority, which has rendered the appointments of respondent Nos. 4 to 7 as illegal.
It has also been contended that Notary is only a profession and any person who wants to carry on this profession should be allowed to do so as a matter of right and there should not be any bar for that.
6.
Respondents, on the other hand, have sought to justify the impugned appointments by pleading that statutory procedure had been duly adopted, necessary procedural formalities observed and recommendations of the Deputy Commissioner, the Competent Authority under the Act accepted by the State Government, which was the ultimate authority for making the appointments under the Notaries Act and the Rules.
7.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the considered view that the petitioners have not been able to point out any legal or procedural infirmity in the appointment of respondent Nos. 4 to 7 as Notaries, and the writ petition deserves to be dismissed.
No doubt, the Notary is a profession but it is regulated by the Act of Parliament by imposing reasonable restrictions.
None of these restrictions is unreasonable; hence, it can be carried on only in accordance with the Act.
8.
So far as the competence of the appointing authority is concerned, admittedly, under Section 3 of the Notaries Act, it is the State Government which is competent to make appointment of a legal practitioner possessing the necessary qualifications, as Notary.
In the present case, the impugned order dated 12th January, 1988, by which respondent Nos. 4 to 7 have been appointed as Notaries, has emanated from the President of India, that is, the State Government under the President's Rule hence, there is no want of competence so far as the appointing authority is concerned.
All the four persons appointed as Notaries happened to be legal practitioners, having more than ten years practice to their credit; hence they fulfilled the necessary qualifications for appointment as Notaries under the Notaries Act and the Rules.
9.
Regarding the recommendations made by the Deputy Commissioner, Ludhiana, firstly of 13 persons and in the second instance of 4 persons, the objection is without any consequence.
The Deputy Commissioner, Ludhiana, who is the competent authority to recommend the names, in fact had recommended 13 persons in the very first instance and it is from the list of that very 13 persons that the State Government has made the appointments.
The recommendations of the District and Sessions Judge, Ludhiana, and their transmission by the Commissioner, Patiala Division, have provided adequate evidence of the fact that the persons recommended by the Deputy Commissioner by and large were suitable for making the office of Notary.
Not only that, the appointments of respondent Nos. 4 to 7 made by the State Government were once again reviewed by considering the review petition submitted to the State Government under Rule 8(3) of the Notaries Rules, 1956, but the said review petition was rejected on 8th March, 1988, thereby putting the seal of approval to the appointments already made.
10.
Consequently, the writ petition is dismissed with no order as to costs.
11.
To be fair to the learned counsel for the petitioners, it was brought to my notice that out of the four respondents appointed as Notaries, Sh. Paramjit Singh respondent No. 7, has since been appointed as District Attorney and a vacancy has been caused, against which fresh appointment has to be made.
Similarly, Sh. Ashok Kumar Jain, respondent No. 6, has been appointed as Court Auctioneer, and probably that has also caused a vacancy, requiring fresh appointment in his place.
If that is so, the Government shall consider the question of filling up the vacancies expeditiously, in accordance with law.
Petition dismissed.