Augustine George Masih, J - The present petition has been filed by the petitioner claiming ex-gratia payment as per the Haryana Compassionate Assistance to Dependents of Deceased Government Employees Rules, 2003.
2.
It is the contention of the petitioner that her husband Shri Bhag Ram, who was working as Head Constable in the Police Department, Haryana, died on 1821994, while in service.
The petitioner submitted her claim for appointment on compassionate grounds on 541994.
Vide letter dated 2881996 the petitioner was asked to appear for an interview on 391996 at Panchkula, and she appeared for the interview but later, vide letter dated 2341997 (Annexure P-4), she was informed that she could not be appointed as Clerk Constable as she was not fully qualified for the same.
The claim of the petitioner continued to be pending consideration with the respondents for compassionate appointment on a Class-IV post.
The Chief Secretary's Office vide letter 17671/W-5 dated 6102000 returned the case of the petitioner with the remarks that her case be considered for the post of Constable against the post of Constables.
As she did not fulfill the physical requirements of the said post, she could not be appointed on the said post.
Thereafter, the office of the Chief Secretary vide Communication dated 8122000 instructed the Department of Police that she may be adjusted against the post of Sr.
Lab Attendant in the office of Director Secondary Education, Haryana.
Thereafter, the office of the Director General of Police, Haryana, vide communication dated 18122000 submitted the case of the petitioner to the office of the Chief Secretary with a request for adjustment against the post of Sr.
Lab Attendant in the office of Director Secondary Education, Haryana.
The office of the Chief Secretary vide letter No. 16/63/99-3GS-II dated 2782002 returned the cases of all Class III and IV officials to the Police Department with the advice that the dependents of the deceased employees be considered for ex-gratia appointment in the Police Department.
The case of the petitioner on receipt from the office of the Chief Secretary was included in the list of cases lying pending in the Police Headquarters according to the seniority of the files.
Thereafter, vide letter dated 29/300903 of the Commandant 5th Battalion HAP Madhuban, District Karnal-respondent No. 3, the petitioner was informed that she could be granted ex-gratia financial assistance of Rs. 250 lacss and accordingly her willingness for accepting the same was sought.
The petitioner on receipt of the said communication gave her option and accepted the offer made by the Department for grant of Rs. 250 lacs as compassionate assistance.
The said acceptance was forwarded by respondent No. 3 to the Director General of Police-respondent No. 2 vide letter dated 3102003 (Annexure P-7).
Since no response was received from respondent No. 2, respondent No. 3 again sent a reminder along with the written option of the petitioner accompanied by the requisite documents so that the claim of the petitioner could be finalized.
The Director General of Police-respondent No. 2 vide his letter dated 15.6.2006 (Annexure P-9) addressed to the Commandant 5th Battalion HAP Madhuban, District Karnal-respondent No. 3, has rejected the case of the petitioner for ex gratia financial assistance of Rs. 250 lacs on the ground that the petitioner did not submit the application for ex gratia financial assistance within the time limit of three years from the death of her deceased husband.
The said decision of respondent No. 2 was communicated to the petitioner by respondent No. 3 vide letter dated 2662006 (Annexure P-10).
It is these communications, namely, Annexures P-9 and P-10 which have been challenged by the petitioner in the present writ petition.
3.
Notice of the petition was issued to the respondents who have responded by filing a written statement wherein the factual aspect as submitted by the petitioner in the writ petition has been admitted.
The only round taken by the respondents for not granting the claim of the petitioner is that of delay and on the other hand there is an assertion by the respondents that the claim of the petitioner already stood decided when her claim for appointment to the post of Constable as well as Clerk was considered but due to her not fulfilling the qualifications and physical standards, she could not be appointed on the said posts.
4.
We have heard counsel for the parties and are of the considered view that the claim of the petitioner deserves to be accepted for the simple reason that her claim all through has been pending with the respondent Department, which fact has been admitted by the respondents in their written statement for which a special reference can be made to the preliminary submissions as raised by them.
Even, the Haryana Compassionate Assistance to the Dependents of Deceased Government Employees Rules, 2003, provide that all pending cases will be considered under the said Rules and as per the assertions made by the petitioner and the stand of the respondents, the claim of the petitioner was considered by the office of the Chief Secretary also which vide its communication dated 2782002 while returning the cases of all Class III and IV employees to the Police Department had advised that the cases of dependents of deceased employees be considered for ex gratia appointment in the Police Department.
It is also the admitted case of the respondents in the written statement that the name of the petitioner was included in the pending list of cases lying with the Police Headquarters as per the seniority.
The case of the petitioner, thus, was finally decided and rejected by the office of the Director General of Police vide its communication dated 15.6.2006 (Annexure P-9) and that too on the ground that the petitioner had not submitted the application within a period of three years from the death of the deceased.
This reason,.
as assigned in the said letter, is totally contrary to the facts as the husband of the petitioner died on 1821994 and the petitioner submitted her application for appointment on compassionate grounds on 541994 i.e. within two months from the death of her husband.
The instructions, as applicable, at that point of time provided for compassionate appointment and therefore, the petitioner had applied for the same.
It is during the pendency of the claim of the petitioner that the Haryana Compassionate Assistance to the Dependents of Deceased Government Employees Rules, 2003 were promulgated and accordingly, her claim was required to be considered under the said Rules requiring consideration of all pending cases accordingly.
The action of respondent No. 2 also can not be sustained in view of the communication of the Chief Secretary dated 2782002 which advised the Department to consider the case of the dependents of the deceased employees.
It would not be out of way to mention here that on consideration of the claim of the petitioner in accordance with the 2003 Rules, her claim for grant of ex-gratia financial assistance of Rs. 250 lacss was forwarded by respondent No. 3 along with the written option of the petitioner to respondent No. 2 in the year 2003.
Therefore, the stand of the respondents cannot be sustained on this ground as well.
5.
In view of the above, this writ petition is allowed and order dated 15.6.2006 (Annexure P-9) passed by the Director General of Police, Haryana (Respondent No. 2) is quashed and a direction is issued to the respondents to release to the petitioner the ex gratia financial assistance of Rs. 250 lacs under the Haryana Compassionate Assistance to the Dependents of Deceased Government Employees Rules, 2003 within a period of two months from the date of receipt of copy of this order.
Petition allowed.