GS Singhvi, J - This petition is directed against award dated 10102001 (Annexure P-1) passed by the permanent Lok Adalat organised by the Legal Services Authorities, Punjab and Haryana High Court in Civil Writ Petition No. 836 of 2001, Gurcharan Singh and others v. The State of Punjab and others.
2.
Respondent Nos. 1 to 18 are retired employees of the Government of Punjab.
They filed Civil Writ Petition No. No. 836 of 2001 for grant of the following substantive reliefs :  "A writ in the nature of certiorari/mandamus be issued to the respondents thereby declaring the entitlement of commutation value of pension to the petitioners on the basis of multiplier 15 which has been applied in the case of Civil Writ Petition No. 836 of 1998 and with same rate of interest as was allowed in this writ petition titled Harinder Pal Singh Sidhu v. State of Punjab as decided by the Hon'ble Lok Adalat of this Hon'ble High Court."
3.
The petitioners controverted the claim of respondent Nos. 1 to 18 but by placing reliance on an earlier award passed by it in Civil Writ Petition No. 16531 of 1998, Harinder Pal Singh Sidhu v. The State of Punjab and others, the Lok Adalat disposed of the writ petition by giving the following directions :  "In the above circumstances, we are of the considered view that the State Government should retrieve the original position by giving either of the following two reliefs to the retiree government servant on or after 111996; Since undisputedly 40% of the commuted amount of pension inclusive of interest shall be recovered within about 12 years, as was the case prior to 111996 when 1/3rd of the amount of pension was allowed to be commuted, the sentence reproduced by us above in the order dated 2171998 "the commuted portion of pension would be eligible for restoration after 15 years of the actual date of commutation" should be omitted and the original policy of restoration of commuted amount of pension after 12 years or on attaining the age of 70 years, whichever is later, should be restored; or Since the State Government would be recovering the amount of 40% of the pension from the retiree government servant on the strength of the order Annexure P-2 for a period of 15 years instead of such recovery for a period of 12 years, the State Government should allow to the retirees 25% additional sum of the commuted amount of pension worked out on the basis of the Table referred to in Rule 11.5(2) ibid.
Such a relief alone could give real benefit to the retirees and at the same time would cause no tangible loss to the State exchequer.
4.
Orders granting either of the above two reliefs shall be passed by the State Government within a period of four months from today.
5.
This order is a settlement and an award of this Court executable as a decree under Section 21(1) of the Legal Services Authority Act, 1987."
6.
The main ground on which the petitioners have challenged the impugned award is that in the absence of a compromise or settlement between the parties, the Lok Adalat did not have the jurisdiction to decide the writ petition on merits.
According to the petitioners, they had neither entered into a compromise or settlement nor consented to the grant of relief to the private respondents in terms of prayer made by them in Civil Writ Petition No. 836 of 2001 and yet, the Lok Adalat disposed of the writ petition.
7.
Respondent Nos. 1 to 18 have filed written statement to contest the petition.
They have supported the impugned award, but have not controverted the assertion of the petitioners that the parties had not entered into a compromise or settlement with regard to their entitlement to commuted value of pension by applying the multiplier of 15.
8.
We have heard learned Deputy Advocate General, Punjab and perused the record.
9.
In Sham Lal Sharma v. State of Haryana, 2002(2) SCT 287, this Court interpreted the provisions of Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987 and held as under :-  "The Lok Adalats organised under the auspices of Legal Services Authorities and Committees constituted under the 1987 Act have also done commendable work.
However, on the pretext of rendering yeoman's service to the society, Lok Adalats cannot assume the role of regular Courts and decide cases de hors compromise or settlement.
The system of administration of justice envisaged under our Constitution consists of hierarchy of Courts i.e. Supreme Court of India, High Courts and Subordinate Courts.
The Supreme Court exercises original, exclusive, appellate and special jurisdiction to decide various types of cases.
Likewise, the High Courts exercise original, appellate and revisional jurisdiction for adjudicating different types of cases.
At the grass-root level, this jurisdiction vests in the Subordinate Courts.
Article 39-A, which finds place in Chapter-IV of the Constitution, enjoins upon the State to ensure that operation of the legal system promotes justice on the basis of equal opportunity and also provides free legal aid by suitable legislation or scheme or otherwise so that opportunity of seeking justice is not denied by reason of economic or other disability.
It was under this Article that the States had constituted Legal Aid Boards/Authorities for spreading legal education among masses and organise Lok Adalats for settlement of disputes by agreement or compromise.
In order to confer statutory status upon these bodies, the Parliament enacted the 1987 Act.
Chapter VI thereof which deals with Lok Adalats consists of four sections.
Section 19 is the first section in this chapter.
Sub-section (1) thereof empowers the State Authorities or District Authorities or the Supreme Court Legal Services Committee or High Legal Services Committee to organise Lok Adalats.
Sub- section (5) of Section 19 lays down the parameters of the jurisdiction of Lok Adalats.
It declares that a Lok Adalat shall have the jurisdiction to determine and to arrive at a compromise or settlement between the parties to a dispute in respect of - (i) any case pending before; or (ii) any matter which is falling within the jurisdiction of, and is not brought before, any Court for which the Lok Adalat is organised.
Proviso to this sub-section declares that the Lok Adalat shall have no jurisdiction in respect of any case or matter relating to an offence not compoundable under any law.
Section 20(1)(a) provides for reference of the case to the Lok Adalat on the agreement of the parties or otherwise.
Section 20(3) lays down that where any case is referred to a Lok Adalat under sub-section (1) or where a reference has been made to it under sub-section (2) the Lok Adalat shall proceed to dispose of the case or matter and arrive at a compromise or settlement between the parties.
Section 20(5) provides that where no award is made by the Lok Adalat on the ground that no compromise or settlement could be arrived at between the parties, the record of the case shall be returned by it to the Court from where reference has been received under sub-section (1) for disposal in accordance with law.
Section 21(1) declares that every award of the Lok Adalat shall be deemed to be a decree of a civil Court or, as the case may be, an order of any other Court or where a compromise or settlement has been arrived at, by a Lok Adalat in a case referred to it under sub-section (1) of Section 20, the court-fee paid in such case shall be refunded in the manner provided under the Court Fees Act, 1870.
Section 21(2) confers finality on the award made by the Lok Adalat and lays down that no appeal shall lie to any court against the award.
Section 22(1) lays down that the Lok Adalat shall, for the purposes of holding any determination under the 1987 Act, have the same powers as are vested in a civil Court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 while trying a suit in respect of the matters enumerated in Clauses (a) to (e).
Section 22(2) lays down that apart from the power vested in it under sub-section (1), every Lok Adalat shall have the requisite powers to specify its own procedure for the determination of any dispute coming before it.
The above survey of the relevant provisions of the Constitution and the 1987 Act shows that the jurisdiction and power to decide cases by adjudicating upon the issues of fact and law exclusively vest in the regular Courts.
Lok Adalats play an important complementary role by assisting the Courts in expeditious disposal of cases by way of compromise or settlement.
However, they cannot assume the role of regular Courts and decide the cases de hors compromise and settlement.
The powers conferred upon Lok Adalats under Section 22 of the 1987 Act are meant for achieving the main object of disposing of the cases by way of compromise or settlement, but the same cannot be used for deciding the cases in which the parties have filed to arrive at a settlement or compromise."
10.
By applying the ratio of above noted judgment to the facts of this case, we hold that the impugned award passed by the permanent Lok Adalat is without jurisdiction and is liable to be set-aside.
Ordered accordingly.
The writ petition is allowed in the manner indicated above.
Civil Writ Petition No. 836 of 2001 (Gurcharan Singh and others v. State of Punjab and others) shall now be listed for hearing on 142004 before the regular Bench as per roster.
Petition allowed.