Hemant Gupta, J - The challenge in the present writ petition is to the order passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal, Chandigarh Bench, Chandigarh (for short `the Tribunal') on 2292006, whereby an Original Application filed by Shri Amritpal, respondent No. 1 (hereinafter referred to as`the applicant') was allowed and the petitioner was directed to recommend the case of the applicant for appointment on compassionate ground.
2.
Shri Surjit Singh, father of the applicant, retired from the service of the petitioner on medical ground on 28.2.2003.
The applicant applied for appointment on compassionate ground in terms of the Government of India Policy dated 9.10.1998.
His name was recommended on 432004 for appointment against Class-III post.
But, subsequently, he was informed that since 5% quota of direct recruitment for appointment on compassionate ground is not available, therefore, his claim for appointment on compassionate ground was rejected.
It was on 30112004, the case of the applicant for extension in the waiting list was rejected and his name deleted.
3.
Before the Tribunal, the petitioner took up a stand that the applicant has mis-stated the facts as the elder brother of the applicant is in Government service and both the brothers are living in House No. 2877, Sector 47-C, Chandigarh.
Therefore, his case was rightly rejected for extension on compassionate ground.
In rejoinder, the applicant has relied upon a verification report of the Nodal Officer of the Department, who has reported that the brother of the applicant is living separately and is not supporting the other family members.
The Tribunal earlier dismissed the Original Application on 2412006, but subsequently, vide order dated 2292006, allowed a review application, after finding that the brother of the petitioner is, in fact, residing separately at House No. 2357, Sector 24-C, Chandigarh.
The Tribunal found that House No. 2877, Sector 47-C, Chandigarh, owned by the father of the applicant is a single roof Housing Board house and one son of Surjit Singh is living separately and other one is unemployed.
In view of the said fact, the Tribunal returned a finding that Jatinder Pal Singh, elder son of Surjit Singh, is in fact, residing separately in House No. 2357, Sector 24-C, Chandigarh and thus, reviewed the order and issued directions to consider the case of the applicant for appointment.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has produced the record of the minutes of the Common Committee for compassionate appointment from 521999 to 30.4.2005.
The said record shows that the name of the applicant was considered by the Common Committee for compassionate appointment in its meeting held on 1532004.
The name of the applicant was recommended for appointment to the Director Transport, UT, Chandigarh against Class-III post.
After such name was recommended, the Common Committee considered the claim of the applicant, on account of its having remained pending for more than one year and less than two years, in its meeting on 5112004.
The name of the applicant appears at Serial No. 55 of such minutes and was rejected with the following note :  "The deceased was conductor.
He had two sons.
One son is Class IV employee and is living separately as per affidavit.
Extension of one year is rejected."
5.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties at some length, we are of the opinion that the rejection of the claim of the applicant for extension in service on 5112004 is wholly unjustified.
The name of the applicant was recommended for appointment on compassionate ground only on 17.3.2004 i.e. about 8 months earlier.
Still further, the recommendation is to the effect that one son is a Class-IV employee and is living separately.
It forms an exception to policy instructions contained in para No. 10 thereof, dated 9.10.1998.
Still further, the said son was an employee even in March, 2004, when the name of the applicant was recommended for employment.
It is not explained as to how and under what circumstances, the employment of the brother of the applicant can become a ground for rejection of extension, having recommended the name of the applicant for appointment on compassionate ground sometime earlier.
6.
In view of the said fact, we are of the opinion that the rejection of the name of the applicant by the Common Committee in its meeting held on 5112004 is wholly unjustified and untenable.
Consequently, we do not find any merit in the present writ petition and the same is dismissed.
The directions contained in the order passed by the Tribunal dated 2292006 be complied with within three months from the date of the receipt of the copy of the order.
Petition dismissed.