Hemant Gupta, J - The challenge in the present writ petition is to the admission to MD/MS/PG Diploma at PGIMS, Rohtak.
2.
Vide notification dated 12112007, the Government of Haryana authorized Maharshi Dayanand University, Rohtak, to conduct the entrance test for admission in MD/MS/PG diploma and MDS Courses in the Government Medical and Dental Colleges in the State of Haryana, for the year 2008.
The entrance test was held on 2422008, but the said entrance examination was cancelled on 1332008.
The entrance examination was again conducted on 2552008 and the name of the petitioner was placed at 31st position having obtained 47 marks out of 90 marks and by taking into consideration marks obtained by the petitioner in the MBBS Course.
3.
On the other hand, respondent No. 4-Kulbir Singh also secured 47 marks, but his percentage of marks in MBBS Course was reflected as 76 and he was given rank number 34.
4.
After circulation of such merit list on 2552008, the list was revised as five candidates have got 47 marks in the entrance test.
The Rules contemplated that if two or more candidates secure identical marks in the entrance test and weightage, if any, then their relative merit will be determined by the marks obtained by them in MBBS/BDS examinations.
Relevant clause of the prospectus reads as under :  "If two or more candidates secure identical marks (entrance test + weightage if any) their relative merit will be determined by the marks obtained by them in MBBS/BDs exam.
In case the marks in the qualifying examination are also identical the candidate senior in age will be preferred."
5.
As per the aforesaid criteria, the merit list was revised and Kulbir Singh was given rank 24 in view of his marks obtained in MBBS examination by rearranging the merit list of candidates obtaining 47 marks.
The grievance of the petitioner is that respondent No. 4 has obtained MBBS degree from Russia, where there is no system of awarding marks as the grades are given by the Russian Institutes.
Therefore, it is not permissible for the respondents to assign 76% marks to Kulbir Singh, which has the effect of putting him higher in merit amongst the candidates obtaining 47 marks.
Respondent No. 4 was selected in Haryana Civil Medical Services on the basis of the degree obtained by him from Russia.
It is the case of the petitioner himself in the writ petition that respondent No. 4 was granted Grade-A, which is awarded for marks between 70 to 84% marks.
In view of the said fact, the argument raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner that respondent No. 4 has been wrongly placed higher in merit is without any substance.
6.
Consequently, we do not find any merit in the present writ petition.
Hence, the same is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.