Manmohan Sarin, J - The comprehensive and elaborate judgment of my esteemed brother analyzing provisions of Rule 41 of the CCS (Pension) Rules, 1972, OM dated 22nd April, 1940 and the entitlement to compassionate allowance where dismissal from service is on account of a grave mis-conduct or charge, have been perused.
I am in agreement with the conclusion reached that the impugned order of the Tribunal in the instant case deserves to be set aside.
2.
Considering the chequered history of this litigation spanning over nearly two decades, one could have considered deciding the question of entitlement to compassionate allowance in the exercise of extra-ordinary writ jurisdiction itself to avoid further delay.
However, the petitioner has not produced along with the writ petition any material or other evidence in support of his claim for compassionate allowance.
No medical records have been produced.
The matter, therefore, has to be remanded to the authorities for being considered in its entirety.
3.
In the instant case, petitioner who was a Constable (Executive) in the Delhi Police along with another constable demanded illegal gratification and extorted Rs. 1000/- from one Kundan Singh.
The charges against the petitioner were substantiated and proved beyond doubt culminating in the order of dismissal of the petitioner being passed by the Disciplinary Authority.
4.
Petitioner challenged the order of dismissal in OA filed before the Central Administrative Tribunal.
OA was dismissed on 19th August, 1993. Review was also dismissed on 4th October, 1993.
Petitioner belatedly filed a writ petition in 2002 challenging the order of dismissal.
Same was also dismissed on 27th May, 2002.
It was on 16th February, 2005, petitioner made his representation for grant of compassionate allowance under Rule 41 of CCS (Pension) Rules, 1972.
This was rejected leading to the filing of OA before the Tribunal.
The Tribunal directed the authorities to pass a reasoned order in consonance with Rule 41 of the CCS (Pension) Rules and the Government Instructions/Guidelines.
The respondent again rejected the claim for compassionate allowance vide an order dated 24th February, 2006.
5.
Petitioner filed OA 1005/2006 challenging the said order of rejection.
The OA was dismissed vide orders dated 24th May, 2006 which is impugned in the present writ petition.
As observed earlier, the impugned order deserves to be set aside as the authorities have primarily considered the solitary incident of 1987 and have failed to consider the entire service record.
Petitioner claims that said incident by itself cannot taint his otherwise satisfactory and commendable record.
6.
I am in agreement with the finding that for the purposes of considering grant of compassionate allowance, entire service record needs to be considered and an isolated incident of misconduct, however, grave, cannot be determinative of the issue even though dishonesty in service is a significant and relevant factor to be considered among others such as financial and personal circumstances of the concerned employee.
7.
As regards the time when claim for compassionate allowance may be made, Rule 41 of the CCS (Pension) Rules, 1972 does not prescribe any time limit.
However, normally the occasion for claiming compassionate allowance arise contemporaneously with the cession of employment and determination of pension and other benefits.
The trend of judicial pronouncements has been to process the claim for compassionate allowance even though belatedly made.
A number of judicial pronouncements have been noted by my learned brother in para 32 of his judgment, where the Courts have directed reconsideration of the claim for compassionate allowance even though belatedly made.
There have been discordant notes also in this regard.
In the instant case, petitioner has sought compassionate allowance nearly 17 years after dismissal from service.
I refrain from making any observation on this aspect as it would be for the Competent Authority to consider the justifiability of the claim for compassionate allowance, including the aspect of delayed submission based on all relevant factors, such as the circumstances of the petitioner and the need of the same having arisen belatedly, if so urged.
The impugned order is accordingly set aside and matter remanded to authorities for decision afresh within a month in the light of observations made hereinabove.
Order accordingly.