Hemant Gupta, J - The challenge in the present writ petition is to the order dated 882003, Annexure P-7, passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal, Chandigarh Bench, Chandigarh (hereinafter referred to as the `Tribunal'), whereby an application moved by the petitioner for initiating contempt proceedings against the respondents, was dismissed.
2.
The husband of the petitioner, late Shri Satya Prakash Kazal, was a member of the All India Services allocated to the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
He committed suicide and died on 3091997 leaving behind his wife Sangeeta Kazal, present petitioner, a step daughter and aged mother.
The petitioner is getting family pension of Rs. 4850/- per month ie, half of the total pension.
3.
The petitioner sought appointment on compassionate ground by filing Original Application under Section 19 of the Administrative Tribunal Act, 1985, before the learned Tribunal.
The learned Tribunal, vide order dated 442002, Annexure P-1, observed that the Union of India has hundreds of departments and it should come for the help of the petitioner and provide compassionate appointment to her in any department of the Central Government.
Therefore, the learned Tribunal directed the Union of India through the Secretary to Government of India, Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions, Department of Personnel and Training, New Delhi, to consider the case of the petitioner to provide her compassionate job in any department of the Central Government, preferably within a period of 3 months from the date of receipt of a copy of that judgment.
Since the petitioner was not given appointment on compassionate ground, therefore, she filed a Contempt Petition before the learned Tribunal alleging disobedience of the order passed by the learned Tribunal.
The said application has been dismissed by the learned Tribunal vide order dated 882003, Annexure P-7, impugned in the present writ petition.
4.
It has been pointed out in the reply that the Ministry of Home Affairs is the Cadre Controlling Authority for the Central Secretariat Clerical Services.
The name of the petitioner was forwarded to the said Ministry.
The case of the petitioner alongwith the other applicants for appointment on compassionate ground, was considered by the Screening Committee in its meeting held on 742003.
The names of three deserving candidates were recommended by the Screening Committee for appointment as Lower Division Clerks, but the name of the petitioner could not recommended as she was drawing family pension.
Subsequently, the case of the petitioner was sent for appointment as Lower Division Clerk in the Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy of Administration at Mussoorie, a subordinate office under the Ministry of Home Affairs.
It was found that the three candidates, all dependents of the deceased employees of the Academy, were awaiting compassionate appointment in the Academy, but could not he appointed on compassionate ground due to non-availability of vacancies under 5% quota of the direct recruitment posts reserved for appointment on compassionate ground.
The name of the petitioner had been kept on the waiting list and she may be appointed on her turn after the vacancy under 5% of the direct recruitment quota, becomes available.
It has been further pointed out that in order to help the petitioner, the Academy in Mussoorie has been instructed to appoint the petitioner on contractual basis for one year with the hope that her turn for compassionate appointment in the Academy may materialize by that time.
Therefore, the order passed by the learned Tribunal has been complied with.
5.
The learned Tribunal vide the order impugned in the present writ petition, held that the name of the petitioner has been placed in the waiting list for appointment as Lower Division Clerk in the Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy of Administration at Mussoorie.
The petitioner has been appointed on contractual basis for a period of one year as stop gap arrangement therefore, the directions of the learned Tribunal have been complied with.
6.
The directions of the learned Tribunal were to consider the name of the petitioner for appointment on compassionate ground.
The Screening Committee considered the name of the petitioner, but found that her name cannot be recommended for appointment as she was drawing family pension.
Thereafter, the claim of the petitioner for appointment on compassionate ground has been considered against 5% vacancies of direct recruitment quota at Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy of Administration at Mussoorie.
The petitioner was even appointed on contractual basis to provide her help.
Such sequence of events shows that the respondents have taken compassionate view and made every efforts to adjust the petitioner for appointment on compassionate ground.
Since no vacancy has arisen, therefore, the petitioner was not appointed.
7.
In view of the above, we do not find that the direction of the learned Tribunal has been violated in any manner, which may warrant initiation of contempt proceedings against the respondents.
Consequently, the present writ petition is dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.