KC Puri, J - The petitioner has filed Civil Writ Petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for the issuance of a writ of Mandamus commanding the respondents to release his retiral benefits from the office of respondent No. 2 and for quashing order dated 1042009, Annexure P-9.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as a Clerk in the office of respondent No. 2.
The petitioner was promoted as Mandi Supervisor with effect from 131975, in the office of respondent No. 2.
The petitioner was transferred from Market Committee, Gurdaspur to Market Committee, Kalanaur on the bifurcation of Market Committee, Gurdaspur.
Directions have been sought to release retiral benefits to the petitioner.
3.
The respondents filed written reply wherein it is mentioned that on the bifurcation of the Market Committee, the petitioner was permanently absorbed in Market Committee, Kalanaur.
Retiral benefits are to be paid by the Market Committee, Kalanaur.
The petitioner filed civil suit challenging absorption in the said Market Committee and his suit was dismissed.
The petitioner filed an appeal and that was also dismissed.
The petitioner was simply transferred for sometime to respondent No. 2 at his request.
The parent department of the petitioner is Market Committee, Kalanaur.
Vide Annexure P-9, the petitioner was directed to have his service benefits from Market Committee, Kalanaur.
The petitioner is not co-operative.
4.
We have heard both sides and have gone through the record of the case.
5.
The only dispute in the present writ petition is whether the petitioner is entitled to service benefits from Market Committee, Gurdaspur or from Market Committee, Kalanaur.
Initially, the petitioner was appointed in Market Committee, Gurdaspur and, later on, on bifurcation of the Market Committee, he was absorbed in Market Committee, Kalanaur.
The petitioner remained unsuccessful in civil suit challenging his absorption in the said Market Committee, Kalanaur.
Vide Annexure P-9, the petitioner has been directed to collect his retiral benefits from Market Committee, Kalanaur.
The petitioner is adamant to have his service benefits from Market Committee, Gurdaspur for which he has no right.
6.
Consequently the writ petition is without any merit.
The same stands dismissed.
However, directions are issued to the Market Committee, Kalanaur to release his retiral benefits within two months from today.
The petitioner shall approach the Market Committee, Kalanaur within 15 days for completion of necessary formalities.
Petition dismissed.