Mohinder Pal, J - The petitioner is serving as Development Officer in the Life Insurance Corporation of India (for short `the respondent-Corporation).
The respondent-Corporation issued `Scheme of Ex-gratia Reimbursement of Medical Expenses', Annexure P-1 to the writ petition (hereinafter referred to as `the Scheme') under which the employees of the respondent-Corporation are entitled to reimbursement of medical expenses to the extent of Rs. 3 lacs and if the medical expenses are more than Rs. 3 lacs, 70% of the expenses beyond Rs. 3 lacs are also reimbursable subject to the overall limit of ex-gratia of Rs. 5 lacs.
The said entitlement is in addition to the amount of Rs. 80,000/- which is payable to the employees of the respondent-Corporation under the mediclaim scheme which is contributory one.
2.
In January 2006, the petitioner was diagnosed as suffering from Hepatitis CV+ at Fortis Hospital at Amritsar and was admitted there on April 23, 2006.
A copy of summary diagnosis has been attached as Annexure P-2 with the writ petition.
Certificate dated May 20, 2006, Annexure P-3, issued by the Fortis Hospital is to the effect that the said treatment would continue for six months.
The petitioner remained under treatment for the disease of Hepatitis CV+ for the requisite period with Amitabh Gastric & Liver Care Clinic and Endoscopy Centre at Amritsar under Dr. Amitabh Mohan Jerath.
The petitioner incurred an expenditure of Rs. 2,90,988/-, out of which Rs. 80,000/- were reimbursed to him under the contributory mediclaim scheme and for the remaining amount of Rs. 2,10,988/-, he submitted his claim, Annexure P-5, for reimbursement under the Scheme, Annexure P-1.
However, the respondent- Corporation rejected the claim vide order dated January 01, 2007, Annexure P- 6, on the ground that disease of Hepatitis CV+ is not covered under the list of major diseases contained in the Scheme, Annexure P-1.
3.
In this petition filed under Articles 226/227 of the constitution of India, the petitioner has prayed for issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari quashing the order dated January 01, 2007, Annexure P-6.
He has also prayed for issuing a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondent- Corporation to reimburse the medical claim of the petitioner for Rs. 2,10,988/-.
4.
In the written statement filed by the respondent-Corporation, it has been averred that since the diseases of `Hepatitis with virus on antiviral therapy' are not covered under the Scheme (Annexure P-1), the claim of the petitioner, who was suffering from Hepatitis CV+, was rejected.
5.
We have heard Mr. RD Bawa, Advocate, appearing for the petitioner and Mr. BR Mahajan, Advocate, appearing for the respondent-Corporation and have perused the Scheme, Annexure P-1, which entitles the employees of the respondent-Corporation to reimbursement of medical expenses.
It contains a list of 26 major diseases/surgeries and the disease of Hepatitis CV+ is not included in it.
However, as the petitioner was suffering from a disease concerning liver, his case for reimbursement is covered under the disease mentioned at serial No. 15 of the of the said list, which reads as under :-  "Diseases of the Liver leading to hepatic failure or transplantation."
6.
The dictionary meaning of word hepatic is pertaining to or affecting the liver' and of word hepatitis is "Inflammation of the liver caused by a virus or a toxin; infectious disease; liver disease."
The petitioner was suffering from Hepatitis CV+ i.e. inflammation of the liver caused by a virus or a toxin.
As stated above at serial No. 15 of the list of diseases mentioned in the Scheme, Annexure P-1, "Diseases of the Liver leading to hepatic failure or transplantation" have been mentioned.
Therefore, the stand of the respondent- Corporation that the medical claim of the petitioner was not covered under the Scheme as he was suffering from Hepatitis CV+, cannot be upheld.
7.
Consequently, this writ petition is allowed and the respondent-Corporation is directed to reimburse the medical claim of the petitioner for Rs. 2,10,988/- within a period of one month from the date of receipt of a copy of this order failing which the petitioner will be entitled to interest at the rate of nine per cent per annum.
Petition allowed.