Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - This is an application for expeditious hearing of the writ petition.
I invited counsel for the parties to argue the writ petition itself, and accordingly, they argued it.
Hence, by this order I am disposing of both the application for expeditious hearing and the writ petition.
2.
The writ petition was filed alleging that the district inspector of schools wrongfully withheld permission to the petitioner to improve his qualification by prosecuting a correspondence course and taking the examination at the end of the course.
3.
Counsel for the state submits that since the petitioner was appointed on the basis of recommendations made by the school service commission, he cannot be permitted to improve his qualifications on the basis whereof he will very probably seek financial benefits in future.
To this counsel for the petitioner has made it clear that if according to law in force the petitioner does not become entitled to claim any financial benefits on improving his qualifications, in future he will not claim the benefits.
4.
In my view the district inspector of schools was not right in withholding the permission.
The petitioner in my opinion, was entitled to seek permission to improve his qualifications prosecuting a regular course or a correspondence course whatever he wanted to prosecute.
The permission could not be withheld on the ground that in future he would very probably claim financial benefits on the basis of improved qualification.
Whether in future he would be entitled to claim financial benefits would be a question for decision when the benefits will be claimed.
In anticipation, he cannot be prevented from prosecuting a course and taking the examination.
5.
For these reasons, I dispose of both the application for expeditious hearing and the writ petition ordering that the district inspector of schools shall grant necessary permission to the petitioner for prosecuting the correspondence course and taking the examination at the end of the course so that the petitioner may improve his qualifications.
The permission shall be granted within a fortnight from the date of communication of this order.
I make it clear that this order or the permission to be granted by the district inspector of schools will not make the petitioner entitled to claim any financial benefit on improving his qualifications, if on the basis of the law existing at the relevant date he does not become entitled to claim the benefit.
There shall be no order for costs in the case.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this order shall be supplied to the parties, if applied for, within three days from the date of receipt of the file by the section concerned.
Petition allowed.