Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The eight petitioners were below the board level employees of the Jute Corporation of India Limited (the second respondent), a Government of India Enterprise.
They are aggrieved by the decision of the corporation to give them financial benefits under the voluntary retirement scheme treating their age of superannuation as fifty eight.
2.
On July 30th, 2002 when the revised voluntary retirement scheme was notified the age of retirement of the below board level employees of the corporation was sixty.
On December 12th, 2003 the appropriate authority of the corporation decided that with effect from March 31st, 2004 the age of retirement of that category of employees would be fifty eight.
Accordingly the office memorandum dated December 15th, 2003 was issued and notified.
During the period from December 15th, 2003 to January 12th, 2004 the petitioners submitted their requisite applications for voluntary retirement in terms of the scheme notified on July 30th, 2002.
Their offers were accepted by the competent authority during the period from December 31st, 2003 to January 28th, 2004.
They were to attain the age of fifty eight during the period from January 2005 to May 2006.
3.
The dealing authorities were not sure whether for the purpose of calculating benefits payable to the petitioners their respective left out services were to be counted treating their age of superannuation as fifty eight.
In some cases the benefits were calculated, but not paid, counting the left out services treating the age of superannuation as sixty.
Some authorities were also of that view.
Because of the confusion the matter was referred to the competent authority, i.e. the board of directors of the corporation.
In the circumstances, the board took the further decision dated March 4th, 2004.
It decided that since by the decision dated December 12th, 2003 the age of retirement of the employees concerned had been fixed at fifty eight, by rolling back the previously existing superannuation age sixty, the employees opting for voluntary retirement from December 12th, 2003 would be given financial benefits counting their left out services treating their retirement age as fifty eight, and not sixty.
Accordingly, benefits were given to the petitioners treating their age of retirement as fifty eight.
4.
Counsel for the petitioners argues that since the rolled back retirement age fixed at fifty eight was to come into effect from March 31st, 2004 the petitioners were entitled to get benefits counting their left out services treating their age of retirement as sixty, the age existing at the dates their respective offers to retire voluntarily were accepted by the competent authority.
His argument is that when some of the authorities themselves were of the view that benefits were to be given to the petitioners treating their retirement age as sixty, the question of taking a further decision by the board on March 4th, 2004 could not arise.
In reply counsel for the corporation has contended that at the date of petitioners applied for voluntary retirement it was known to them that their age of retirement was fifty eight, and not sixty, and hence they were entitled to get benefits only for the left out services upto the age of fifty-eight.
On the strength of Bishun Narain Misra v. The State of UP and Ors, AIR 1965 SC 1567 he has argued that the corporation possessed the necessary power to take the decisions dated December 12th, 2003 and March 4th, 2004.
5.
According to the terms and conditions of the voluntary retirement scheme compensation payable to the petitioners was to consist of salary of thirty five days for every completed year of service or part thereof and twenty five days for every year of service left until superannuation.
At the dates they submitted their applications it was known to them that they would retire on reaching the age of fifty eight.
Though the decision dated December 12th, 2003 was to become effective from March 31st, 2004, the decided position was that after December 12th, 2003 no below board level employee of the corporation was entitled to remain in service after March 31st, 2004 if he was fifty eight.
The offers to go on voluntary retirement and acceptance thereof took place on this foundation.
6.
Hence it cannot be said that simply because the petitioners had filed their applications before March 31st, 2004 or the offers had been accepted by the competent authority also before March 31st, 2004, their left out services were to be calculated treating their age of retirement as sixty.
That would have created an anomalous situation, for the petitioners, had they chosen to remain in service, would not have been entitled to remain as such upto the age of sixty.
In my opinion, the benefit which they could not have claimed, had they remained in service, could not be claimed by them by deciding to go on voluntary retirement.
7.
For these reasons, I hold that the corporation was absolutely justified in giving the petitioners financial benefits counting their left out services treating their retirement age as fifty eight.
The writ petition is accordingly dismissed.
There shall be no order for costs in it.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this order shall be supplied to the parties, if applied for, within three days from the date of receipt of the file by the section concerned.
Petition dismissed.