Syed Bashir-ud-Din, J - Writ petitioners allege that they were appointed in a stop-gap arrangement somewhere in March 1995.
As the Education Department had suspicions about their appointment/engagement, they along with two other persons were asked to produce before the authority the first appointment order in original.
However, they failed to do so.
In the meanwhile petitioners filed Writ Petition 3374-76/96 for release of salary which writ petition was finally disposed of on 1641999 in terms directing respondents to release undisbursed pay dues to the petitioners for the work done and duties rendered in case their appointment and posting as Teachers in the School Education Department of the State is genuine and valid.
The authorities, while in process of verification of the genuineness of the appointments/engagements of the petitioners, faced contempt petitions 588/99 and 2 of 2001, allegedly for not implementing the above order.
The School Education Department on failure of the petitioners to produce original initial appointment orders and on being satisfied that the petitioners managed their entry in the Department fraudulently disengaged their engagement/service.
The same stand was taken before the contempt court.
The contempt petitions were disposed of by order dated 28.9.2001 after holding that the respondents were not in contempt and did not disobey the Court order.
While dismissing the contempt petitions, Court observed that the Court order "shall not stand in the way of the petitioners to seek appropriate relief by filing writ petition, if so advised".
The action of the State Government/Competent Authority on consideration of the matter, having disengaged the petitioners along with two other candidates, on 24102001 is under challenge in this petition.
2.
Shorn of details, petitioners' case is that their appointment in Government Boys High School Matihindoo Anantnag is rooted to communication 47758-59 dated 2431995 addressed by CEO to ZEO Vailoo (Annexure A).
Their appointment as Teachers in stop-gap was made by the ZEO.
The record of the ZEO was snatched by the militants about which FIR 76/1995 is registered at Police Station Kokernag.
Though some fake appointment cases are referred to the Crime Branch for investigation, petitioners did not figure in such cases.
Petitioners since have been dismissed in disregard to facts of the case.
In the earlier writ petition, there (sic)  3.
Respondents' stand, disclosed through reply filed by the Director School Education as re-inforced in his submission by the Ld.
AAG, is that the claimed engagement/appointment of the petitioners is fraudulent.
Petitioners taking undue advantage of peaking militancy conditions at relevant time in the Valley and that too in a remote area of valley like village Matihindoo, managed fake and forged relieving order to show as if petitioners were appointed pursuant to the order dated 2431995 of CEO Ananatnag (Annexure-A).
Petitioners at no point of time were ever engaged/appointed in the School Education Deptt., of Education (of State ?).
Petitioners, dispute being asked to produce the original first appointment orders, have failed to do that.
(Naturally) from the School records, petitioners are not shown to be ever appointed/engaged as Teachers, as claimed by them.
The impugned order was passed after considering the matter and taking all aspects of the matter into consideration.
The order is not vitiated on any count.
4.
On Annexure-A too much onus is laid and emphasis is given by the petitioners.
The petitioners are rooting their appointment to this communication.
Annexure-A reveals that the CEO has asked to ZEO Vailoo to provide adequate staff in respect of Science and Mathematics subjects for High School Matihindoo, on representation of the Headmaster of School by making internal adjustments inter alia on condition that the Teacher should be adjusted as not working as on FAT/migrant candidate teacher.
This communication nowhere refers even remotely to petitioners.
Now if petitioners were appointed and working as Teachers which is a condition for applicability of this communication, then the appointment/engagement order had to be produced, but it is not so.
Petitioners' own case is not that, they were appointed earlier to this order.
Instead their positive case is that they were appointed pursuant to this communication (Annexure-A).
Communication does not authorize appointment of teachers.
At the relevant time, a candidate could be appointed as Teacher either by direct Recruitment through SSRB or by promotion from in-service quota of Laboratory Assistants serving in the School Education Department.
Petitioners are not claiming to be appointed from either source.
If petitioners' case is that they were engaged by way of stop-gap arrangement, they cannot complain of violation of any service right, inasmuch as, petitioners have no grievance to make of any violation of any right attributable to terms and conditions of appointment to a Government Servant.
Merely that the petitioners may have signed some register or contributed towards GPF after filing writ petition in the Court, would not make their alleged appointment/engagement valid or genuine.
Petitioners have repeatedly failed to produce original appointment order(s) before the authorities and even the counsel made a statement before this court that they cannot produce any such order.
The condition of payment of the undisbursed salary under Court orders, is that the appointment/posting of petitioners in School Education Department is genuine and valid.
Once the respondents' positive case is that petitioners' alleged appointment/engagement, if any, is fake and fraudulent, by the Director School Education sworn affidavit, in reply, then it is for the petitioners to place on record proof/material to show that the appointment and posting is not so.
Not only the petitioners have failed to do so, even rejoinder is not filed.
The statement and reply in the affidavit on oath is intact and should hold the ground notwithstanding an omnibus and generalized allegation in the writ petition.
The protection available to public servants of the Government/civil servants regarding hearing and enquiry is not available to petitioners who are neither appointed substantively nor their engagement is genuine and immune from fraudulent engagement.
It also needs to be taken note of that the FIR 76/1995 registered at Police Station Kokernag in respect of alleged snatch of records of High School Larnoo and Matihindoo does not refer specially to appointment orders, instead it simply says that the "unidentified gunmen snatched all the documents from our capture and also beaten us."
This FIR has been also closed as not admitted/proved by the IO way back in Nov 2000.
Much cannot be made of this FIR.
It is seen from Government Order No. 90-GAD(Vig) of 1997 dated 21101997 in respect of fraudulent/forged appointments of Teachers/Peons etc. in Govt. High Schools at Larnoo and Matihindoo of Anantnag District, sanction is accorded by the Govt. to prosecute number of officials including the Head Masters, Office incharge, ZEOs and Treasury Officer Kokernag in FIR 32/95 registered at Police Station VOK under Section 420, 467, 120-B RPC.
5.
Now if for a moment petitioners' plea is that they do not fall within the category of fraudulent and forged orders for appointment as Teachers in the Larnoo, Matihindoo High Schools, then in the face of stout refutation of this plea by the respondents in reply by an officer of the rank of Director School Education Kashmir Division asserting that petitioners' engagement/appointment is forged and fraudulent, disputed questions of fact are raised.
If so, then in the facts and circumstances of the case jurisdiction and powers cannot be exercised by the writ court in such situation.
In the above view of the matter, no case for admittance of writ to hearing is made out.
Petition is dismissed in limine.
Petition dismissed.