Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The petitioner took the Secondary Examination, 2006 held by the West Bengal Board of Secondary Education.
Mark sheet supplied to her showed that in the subject `Life Science', out of ninety, she obtained thirty-three.
In the oral examination of that subject, out of ten, she secured ten.
In other subjects she secured excellent marks.
For example, in Mathematics, out of hundred, she secured ninety-five, and in Physical Science, out of ninety, she secured eighty-two.
Alleging that something was wrong she took out this writ petition dated July 3, 2006.
2.
By order dated July 11, 2006 I directed the board to produce the script concerned.
On July 18, 2006 when the matter was taken up for admission hearing, counsel for the board produced the script and submitted that though the petitioner had actually secured eighty three in the subject concerned, by mistake the mark was shown as thirty-three.
By order dated July 18, 2006 I directed the board to supply the corrected mark-sheet to the petitioner.
In compliance with that order the mark sheet was supplied to the petitioner at her home.
3.
The question that remains for decision is whether an order for compensation and costs should be made.
The board has filed affidavit stating that for negligence on the part of the head examiner concerned, the unfortunate event happened.
It has stated that all support will be given to the petitioner so that for the mistake she may not suffer any discomfort in future.
It has also tendered unqualified apology for causing mental agony and other inconvenience to the petitioner.
4.
In view of the affidavit filed by the board, I think it will not be appropriate to make any order directing payment of compensation and costs.
I am satisfied with the explanation given by the board that the mistake took place even though it had taken all necessary steps for preventing occurrence of such mistakes.
Though its secretary it has tendered unqualified apology for the mistake.
I do not find any reason to say that it and its authorities were negligent in the matter.
5.
I do not think any possible anomaly on the top sheet of the script that the re-examiner put signature on May 10, 2006, i.e. after the results were published, needs any closer examination, since further examination of that aspect will not produce any benefit for the petitioner.
Before parting with the case, I only say that while dealing with the young students like the petitioner the board should be very careful, because such mistake as has taken in the case of the petitioner may even cost the life of a student.
6.
No one knows better than the board that in every year a few students taking its secondary examination take their lives on getting unexpected results.
The board must take immediate steps for sensitizing all concerned so that a foolproof system may be brought into operation for obviating undesirable situations like the present one.
It must take deterrent action against any person found guilty of dereliction of duty.
7.
With these observations, I dispose of the writ petition holding that there is no need to make any order directing payment of compensation and costs.
It is hoped that the observations made hereinbefore shall be given due regard by all the authorities concerned.
8.
Urgent xerox certified copy of this order, if applied for shall be given to the parties within three days from the date of receipt of the file by the Section concerned.
Order accordingly.