Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J.- The writ petitioner is questioning the validity of circular No. L/Secy.
87/05 dated August 19th, 2005 issued by the Secretary, West Bengal Council of Higher Secondary Education regarding changes in the higher secondary examination from the Academic Session 2005-06.
2.
The circular said, "1.
The present Higher Secondary Examination will be separated into two examinations - one at the end of class XI and another at the end of class XII.
2.
Examination at the end of class XI will be conducted by the respective Institution on the basis of the syllabus to be covered in class XI as specified by the council.
Examination at the end of class XII will be conducted by the council only on the basis of the syllabus covered in class XII as specified by the council and the result will be published by the council centrally"  3.
It further said, "3.
Question paper for class XI examination will be prepared by the council for a temporary period, but the assessment of answer scripts would be done by the respective institution.
4.
Schedule for class XI examination and the contents of syllabus to be covered in class XI and XII will be intimated by the council in due course.
5.
The Higher Secondary examination Mark Sheet of class XII will show only the marks obtained in class XII examination conducted by the council.
6.
Necessary changes in Examination Regulation of the council will be done in due course."
4.
The petitioner was a student at Nabanalanda Higher Secondary School, Kolkata.
She took the two year higher secondary course in June, 2005.
The course was governed by the West Bengal Council of Higher Secondary Education (Examination) Regulations, 1999, they were framed by the council in exercise of power conferred on it by provisions in S. 21 of the West Bengal Council of Higher Secondary Education Act, 1975.
According to requirement of provisions in that Section the regulations were approved by the State government.
5.
In terms of provisions in regn.
9 xxv(c), in order to be eligible to appear as a regular candidate in the examination, the petitioner was required inter alia, to pass the annual examination at the end of class XI.
The annual examination was scheduled for March, 2006, she started taking it, but did not take it for all the papers.
Her case is that according to practice followed in the past the school made arrangements to permit her to take a supplementary examination, but the council ensured that the school did not proceed to hold any supplementary examination.
6.
Counsel submits that under the regulations the school was the sole authority to decide whether a supplementary examination was to be held.
His contention is that without amending or repealing the regulations the council was not empowered to issue the impugned circular effecting changes in the structure of the examination system for the course concerned.
He relies on provisions in S. 21 of the Act, and the decisions in TMA Pai Foundation & Ors., v. State of Karnataka and Ors. (2002)8 SCC 481, and Debopriya Ganguly v. State of West Bengal and ors. AIR 2005 Cal.
76 and submits that the council infringed the petitioner's fundamental right to education.
7.
Counsel for the council has filed a supplementary affidavit annexing the decision of the state government dated August 16th, 2005 approving the proposals of the council regarding reforms in the structure of examination of the course concerned from the academic session 2005-06.
He says that the directions given by the impugned circular were exactly those which the State government had approved by its letter dated August 16th, 2005.
He contends that in view of provisions in S.41 of the Act, the council was under a statutory obligation to abide by the directions given by the state government.
8.
His further contention is that having taken the annual examination, though partly conducted in teens of the impugned circular, the petitioner was not entitled to challenge it by filing this writ petition.
He produces the official gazette showing the new regulations.
The West Bengal Council of Higher Secondary Education (Examination) Regulations, 2006 were notified on October 19th, 2006 and that by them the 1999 Regulations were repealed.
I agree with him that having taken the examination conducted in terms of the circular, the petitioner was not entitled to question that by filing this writ petition.
9.
The authorities given to me are of no assistance.
I do not see how the petitioner can contend that the circular infringed her fundamental right to education.
The real issue is whether the impugned circular infringed her any legal right, in my opinion, it did none.
Under the regulations, since repealed, she did not have any legal right to call upon the authority of the school to permit her to take a supplementary examination.
The authority of the school did not either possess any power, expressly given to it, to hold a supplementary examination.
10.
This being the position, I do not see how the petitioner can complain of infringement of her any right as contended.
In my judgment, the circular in question neither created nor took away any right.
It simply introduced certain changes in the examination structure of the course in question.
Hence I conclude that the petitioner having acted upon the circular, in that without any protest she took the examination conducted in terms thereof, was not entitled to question its validity.
11.
Even otherwise, I do not find any merit in her case.
The contention that the council did not possess the power to issue the circular, in my opinion, has no merit.
There is no dispute that the council was empowered to make the requisite regulations.
True it is that regulations made by it were to be approved by the state government.
It is on record that the State government approved the reforms in the structure of examination from the academic session in question.
The new regulations incorporating them were made and duly notified, they came into force during the life of the session in question, they, however, are not in question in the present case.
12.
For these reasons, I dismiss the writ petition.
As a result, nothing remains to be decided in the application (CAN 6400, of 2006) taken out by the petitioner for an interim order, and it shall also be deemed to be dismissed.
There shall be no order for costs in the case.
13.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this order, if applied for, shall be supplied to the parties within three days from the date of receipt of the file by the Section concerned.
Petition dismissed.