Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The writ petitioner, a constable in Central Industrial Security Force, is aggrieved by the decision of Commandant CISF, Unit ONGC, Jorhat (Assam) dated May 19, 2004 ordering stoppage of benefits under the ACP scheme and recovery of benefits paid to him in terms of order dated February 26, 2002.
2.
After the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions (Department of Personnel and Training) of the Government of India issued office memorandum dated August 9, 1999 notifying the Assured Career Progression Scheme for the Central Government civilian employees, the Director General, Central Industrial Security Force (Ministry of Home Affairs) issued the necessary CISF circular Estt.
I/16/2000 dated February 18, 2000 regarding benefits of the scheme for the CISF employees.
The circular, however, is not in question in the present writ petition.
In para 3 of the circular it was said, "CISF employees of the categories mentioned above have passed the promotion cadre course wherever prescribed as per Recruitment Rules of the posts for which financial upgradation has to be given shall only be considered for the grant of financial upgradation under the ACP scheme."
3.
Although on February 26, 2002, having not passed the promotion cadre course for the post of head constable, the petitioner was not eligible, by order dated February 26, 2002, with others, benefits of the scheme were given to him on the ground that in the grade of constable he had completed the requisite period of twelve years service.
Subsequently he was called upon by the competent authority to clear the promotion cadre course, but he expressed unwillingness to do that on two occasions.
However, on January 3, 2004 he passed the course of the promotion cadre.
On the ground that he had failed to pass the promotion cadre course the authority issued the order dated May 19, 2004 directing stoppage of benefits of the scheme and recovery of the amounts already paid.
Subsequently the authorities took into consideration the fact of his passing the course on January 3, 2004 and decided to grant him benefits of the scheme once again with effect from January 30, 2005.
4.
Feeling aggrieved by the action of the petitioner took out the present writ petition.
Counsel relies on the decisions in Shyam Babu Verma and ors. v. Union of India & Ors, (1994)2 SCC 521 [1994(1); Bhagwan Shukla v Union of India and Ors, AIR 1994 SC 2480; SV Chaudhary v. Commissioner of Sales Tax and Ors, 2003(7) SLR 398; and Rameshwar Lal Panwar v. State of Rajasthan and Anr., 2005(4) SLR 229; and argues that since the petitioner was not at fault for the wrongful grant of the benefits, the authorities were not empowered to recover any amount.
His further contentions are that the benefits were given rightly, since passing of the promotion cadre course was not a condition precedent for getting the benefits, and that, in any case, the authorities were not empowered to stop payment of the benefits and direct recovery of amounts already paid, without giving the petitioner an opportunity of showing cause and hearing.
5.
I am unable to agree with him.
The provisions in circular dated February 18, 2000 were clear that only on passing the promotion cadre course for the post of head constable, the petitioner would have been eligible to be considered for grant of financial upgradation for that post in terms of the ACP scheme.
It is just apparent that when he was not eligible to be considered, the authority issued the order dated February 26, 2000 extending the benefits to him.
Hence I am unable to accept the contention that since the petitioner was not at fault for wrongful grant of the benefit, the authorities did not possess the power to recover the amounts wrongly paid to him.
I do not think, on the facts of the case, the petitioner can seek assistance from the decisions relied on.
Here he continued to enjoy the benefits, wrongfully given, declining to acquire the eligibility, though he was given two chances for that.
Hence, in my view, he was liable to refund the payment made to him wrongfully.
6.
I am, however, unable to accept the case of the respondents that the benefits were to be given to the petitioner only with effect from January 30, 2005.
Their counsel has said that since consequent upon transfer of the petitioner from the unit concerned the service records were not readily available, the screening committee decided to give benefits to the petitioner from January 30, 2005, though he had become eligible to get the benefits on January 3, 2004.
On May 19, 2004 in my view the authority ought not to have proceeded mechanically.
It seems to me that the problem arose because the authority decided to settle the matter unilaterally.
At that date the petitioner was eligible to get the benefits, since he had by then passed the promotion cadre course.
This is the prejudice the petitioner suffered by not getting an opportunity of showing cause and hearing.
But I do not find any reason to remit the matter to the authority for observing the formalities, since from the materials on record.
I find that the petitioner was entitled to get the benefits from January 3, 2004.
Regarding this counsel for the respondents has found little to say.
7.
For these reasons, I dispose of the writ petition ordering that the respondents shall grant benefits of the scheme to the petitioner with effect from January 3, 2004 and that if the benefits paid during the period from February 26, 2002 to January 2, 2004 are yet to be recovered, then the recovery shall be effected in easy instalments so that the petitioner is not seriously affected.
The authorities shall modify their decisions taken for granting benefits to the petitioner with effect from January 30, 2005.
Steps in terms of this order shall be taken within a fortnight from the date of communication of this order.
There shall be no order for costs in the case.
8.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this order shall be supplied to the parties, if applied for, within three days from the date of receipt of the file by the Section concerned.
Order accordingly.