Prasenjit Mandal, J - This writ application has arisen out of the judgment and order dated 24.2.2006 passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal, Calcutta Bench in Original Application No. 195 of 2003.
The learned Tribunal dismissed the application of the writ applicant.
Being aggrieved by the said judgment and order, this writ application had been filed by the writ applicant.
2.
The factual matrix of the case is that in response to the advertisement the writ applicant submitted an application for the post of Insurance Inspector/Manager Grade-II under the ESI Corporation.
He appeared at the written examination held on 11.7.1999.
Thereafter he was called for an interview but with utter surprise he noticed that the letter of interview did not bear any date, time and Place of the interview.
Accordingly, he rushed to the Joint Director and prayed for allowing him to appear before the Interview Board.
His prayer was allowed and accordingly his interview was held on 6101999.
The writ applicant had also complained of demanding illegal gratification from him by some officials for giving him an appointment to the said post.
But ultimately he was not appointed to the post.
Even he was not intimated of the result of the recruitment process.
Then he made an appeal to the Hon'ble President of India and other persons.
He got also replies.
Thereafter he filed the application before the Central Administrative Tribunal, Calcutta Bench.
3.
We perused the materials on record and heard the learned Advocates of both the sides over the matter.
4.
Admittedly the writ applicant belongs to Scheduled Caste community and he appeared at the written test examination for the recruitment to the post of Insurance Inspector/Manager, Grade-II under the ESI Corporation on 11.7.1999 and then he received one letter for an interview but without any mention of the date, time and place of the interview.
Admitted also that immediately he rushed to the Joint Director of the ESI Corporation who issued the letter of interview.
It is also admitted that the writ applicant appeared before the Interview Board on 6101999.
5.
The writ applicant contended that he did not know the result of the recruitment process and in fact he was not informed of the result.
But from the affidavit in opposition supported by annexure, we find that the result of the recruitment process was duly published in the Notice Board.
The writ applicant complained before the Hon'ble President of India and other authority and we find that the Joint Director had informed the Government of India by his letter dated 2642001 about the publication of the result and also the representation of the writ applicant (vide annexure 0/2 at page 13) of the affidavit-in-opposition.
6.
As regards the complaint of demand of bribe by the concerned authority for offering an appointment we find from the record that the complaint was duly enquired into and the same was found to be baseless.
Such fact was also informed to the concerned authority by the letter dated 4102000 of the Additional Commissioner, Vigilance (vide 0/1 at page 12 of the affidavit in opposition).
7.
So the allegation of the writ applicant over demand of bribe does not stand at all.
8.
As regards merits of the case, upon due consideration of the materials on record, we find that no candidate belonging to Scheduled Caste and obtaining marks below the writ applicant was appointed by the concerned authority.
Such statement has been made in `0/2' at page 14 of the affidavit in opposition.
We find that the writ applicant obtained 238 marks total whereas the last Scheduled Caste candidate who was recruited, obtained 251 marks total.
The said letter of the Joint Director (Rectt.)
had clearly laid down that neither the writ applicant was selected nor he was placed in the waiting list (that is panel for further recruitment).
Therefore, we are of the view that the writ application has no merits at all.
9.
In view of our above findings we hold that the writ application is totally devoid of merits.
The learned Tribunal has rightly dismissed the application and there is nothing to interfere with the impugned judgment and order.
10.
Accordingly, the writ application fails to succeed and it is dismissed.
11.
No order as to costs.
Urgent xerox certified copy of this order, if applied for, be supplied to the learned Advocates for the parties on compliance of all formalities.
Girish Chandra Gupta, J - I agree.
Petition dismissed.