CN Ramachandran Nair, J - The writ petition is filed for direction to the respondents to permit the petitioners to write the test for recruitment to the post of Vocational Teacher in Fisheries.
According to the petitioners, petitioners who have post graduate degree in Marine Biology are entitled to write the test.
Even though test is over, the writ petition survives because petitioners pray for a declaration that they are entitled to participate in test conducted for selection to the same post in the future.
Counsel appearing for the 4th respondent referred to the qualification for selection contained in Ext.
R.4(b), which prescribes the qualification for selection to the post of teacher in Fisheries as follows :  Vocational Teacher in Fisheries (Fish Processing Technology) By Transfer or By direct recruitment Degree in Fisheries Science with not less than 60% marks awarded by the Kerala Agricultural University or a qualification recognised as equivalent thereto : OR M Sc.
Degree in Industrial Fisheries with not less than 50% marks from any of the recognised Universities.
2.
Petitioners admittedly are not degree holders in Fisheries Science or MSc.
degree holders in Industrial.
Fisheries.
Therefore, the only question to be considered is whether their degree is equivalent to the degree in Fisheries Science.
The counsel for the 2nd respondent contended that the degree in Fisheries Science itself is qualified with the further condition that such degree should be obtained from Kerala Agricultural University, where the course conducted is 4 year integrated course covering all fields of Fisheries Science.
Therefore, according to him, MSc.
Marine Biology, which is the 2 years course after taking degree either in Botany or Zoology, is not a course equivalent to the degree in Fisheries Science.
On going through the special Rules, it is seen that the work of the teacher in Fisheries is to train in "Fish Processing Technology".
Obviously, petitioners with their two year learning in Marine Biology which deals with marine life after taking a degree in either Botany or Zoology will not give them any exposure to fish processing technology, which is an integral part of the Fisheries Science.
The other alternate qualification is MSc.
degree in Industrial Fisheries, which is the science dealing with preservation, processing and marketing of fish as part of fishing as an industry.
3.
In the circumstances, I do not think there is any need to go into the further details of the academic curriculum of the relative courses because without any difficulty it can be concluded two year post graduate course in Marine Biology is not equivalent to the 4 years integrated course in Fisheries Science.
In other words, the qualification prescribed for the job is oriented to suit the requirements of fishing industry and not pure science like Marine Biology.
In the circumstances, petitioners are not entitled to the relief prayed for.
The writ petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.