Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The petitioner is questioning the actions of the West Bengal College Service Commission which is not a party in the writ petition.
The commission is a statutory authority constituted in terms of provisions of the West Bengal College Service Commission Act, 1978.
2.
At this stage counsel for the petitioner prays for leave to add the commission as a respondent in the case.
I think the oral prayer should be allowed.
Counsel for the second and third respondents, the authorities of the commission, submits that he has instructions to appear for the commission as well.
Hence I order that the West Bengal College Service Commission shall be added in the writ petition as the eighth respondent.
Advocate for the petitioner is directed to amend the cause papers at once.
3.
Both the petitioner and the sixth respondent (Sri Ritendu Mukhopadhyay) participated in the selection process initiated by the commission for selecting candidates and preparing a panel for appointment as Lecturer of Geography in different colleges in the state.
They both were selected, and while the petitioner secured the third panel position, the sixth respondent found his place at the ninth position.
The panel was prepared on June 8th, 2006, and it was to remain valid for one year from that date.
The empanelled candidates were to be allotted in terms of provisions of the West Bengal College Service Commission (Manner of Selection of Persons for Appointment to the posts of Teachers including Principals) Regulations, 1980, regn.
9.
4.
Sub-regulations (1), (2) & (3) of regn.
9 are : "(1) On receipt of a request made by the Principal of a College for recommending the name of a suitable candidate for appointment in a vacancy against an approved post, the Commission shall recommend only one name from the panel for appointment against the vacancy.
A copy of the letter recommending the name shall be endorsed to the candidate concerned.
(2) The topmost name appearing in the panel at the material time shall be recommended every time.
(3) The area wise preference of the candidates as well as the special requirement of the college concerned shall also be taken into account."
5.
In terms of provisions in regn.
9 the empanelled candidates were to be recommended by the commission only on receipt of a request made by the principal of a college, i.e., though the panel was prepared after notifying the vacancies information for which had been collected by the commission in terms of provisions in regn.
3, it was not to recommend, of its own accord, any candidate from the panel unless it received a request for a suitable candidate from the college concerned.
It seems to me that the provision was made keeping in view the elementary principle that an employer is entitled not to make any appointment against an existing vacancy.
The other principle which appears to be relevant is that an empanelled candidate does not acquire a right to be appointed against an existing vacancy.
6.
The case of the petitioner was considered by the commission in its meeting held on June 15th, 2006; it considered her case on the basis of request received from the Principal of Kandra Radhakanta Kundu Mahavidyalaya, Burdwan dated November 29th, 2005 for recommending a suitable candidate for appointment against an existing vacancy for the post of Lecturer of Geography.
The letter of recommendation was endorsed to her by the secretary of the commission on July 10th, 2006.
By letter dated July I4th, 2006 she informed the commission about her readiness and willingness to join the college she had been recommended for.
7.
The problems started when the commission recommended the sixth respondent for Burdwan Raj College, Burdwan.
His case was considered by the commission in its meeting held on June 20th, 2006, and recommendation letter was endorsed to him on August 4th, 2006.
The petitioner felt aggrieved by the decision of the commission to recommend the sixth respondent for Burdwan Raj College.
Her case is that in view of the area-wise preference she had signified, the commission was under the statutory obligation to recommend her for Burdwan Raj College when admittedly she occupied a much higher position in the panel than the sixth respondent.
8.
The short point for decision is whether by not considering the petitioner's case for recommending her for Burdwan Raj College the commission committed any wrong.
Counsel for the petitioner has argued that the Principal of Burdwan Raj College and the authority as of the commission acted mala fide.
The principal of the college or any authority of the commission has not been made a party by name.
It seems to me that the allegation that the persons concerned acted mala fide has been made just casually.
I do not find any reason to go into the question in detail, when the very foundation for undertaking such an exercise was not laid down in the writ petition.
9.
Counsel for the petitioner contends that the Principal of Burdwan Raj College sent the request letter actually on March 21st, 2006.
For this he relies on the date of the letter.
The date of the letter, in my view, cannot be the decisive factor, when in the affidavits the principal and the authorities of the commission have stated on oath that the request letter was actually received by the commission on June 19th, 2006.
It is therefore clear that on June 15th, 2006 when the petitioner's case was considered, no valid request made by the Principal of Burdwan Raj College was before the commission.
Hence there was no scope to consider her case for recommending her for Burdwan Raj College.
10.
Counsel for the petitioner argues that since the recommendation was endorsed to the petitioner only on July 10th, 2006, on June 20th, 2006 when case of the sixth respondent was considered or Burdwan Raj College, the commission was under an obligation to review its decision dated June 15th, 2006, because the petitioner had, in her area-wise preference, signified her preference for Burdwan Raj College.
In my view he is not right.
The commission did not possess any power to review on merits its decision dated June 15th, 2006; and in any case, there was no reason for it to review that decision.
11.
It is not the petitioner's case that in between June 15th, 2006 and June 20th, 2006 cases of the fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh and eighth empanelled candidates were not considered by the commission.
In the absence of any allegation regarding that, it is to be presumed that their cases had been considered by the commission before June 20th, 2006, and hence the commission could not go back for reviewing its decision given in the petitioner's case on June 15th, 2006.
At that date she was the top most candidates in the panel, and her case was duly considered.
12.
For these reasons I hold that the petitioner is not entitled to get any relief.
The writ petition is accordingly dismissed.
There shall be no order for costs in it.
13.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this order, if applied for, shall be supplied to the parties within three days from the date of receipt of the file by the section concerned.
Petition dismissed.