Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The petitioner is seeking an order quashing the decision of the university dated December 12th, 2006 to the extent that affected his rights to get declared passed in Part-IV of the Five Year LL.B.
Course and also to get declared his results of Part-V of that course.
By that decision the university informed him that by mistake he had been declared passed in the Part-IV Examination, 2005 of the course, and hence not only the mark sheet concerned would stand cancelled, but results of his Part-V Examination, 2006 of the course would not be declared as well.
2.
After taking admission to the course and after passing Part-I and Part-II thereof, the petitioner took the LL.B Part-III Examination, 2002 but failed.
In 2003 he took the LL.B.
Part-III (Supplementary) Examination and LLB Part-IV Examination, and while passed the Part-IV Examination, failed to clear the Part-III (Supplementary) Examination.
In terms of regulations whereby he was governed his LLB Part-IV Examination, 2003 results were to be kept in credit for one year, i.e. on passing LLB Part-III Examination, 2004 he was to be declared passed both in Part-III and Part-IV of the course.
He took the LLB Part-III Examination, 2004, but as ill luck would have it he failed.
In terms of regulations his LL.B.
Part IV Examination, 2003 results stood automatically cancelled, and he was to take re-admissions to Part-III of the course, which he did in 2005.
3.
In 2005 he took the LL.B.
Part-III examination as a fresh candidate, and this time he passed the examination.
While issuing passed mark sheet, the university issued to him passed mark sheet also for LLB Part-IV Examination, 2005, though he had not taken the LLB Part-IV Examination, 2005 and there was no question of his taking that examination.
On the strength of such mark sheet issued by the University by mistake he submitted application for taking the LL.B.
Part-V Examination, 2006 and took the examination, since the university had failed to detect the mistake it committed by issuing to him a passed mark-sheet for the LLB Part-IV Examination, 2005.
The mistake was, however, detected by the University subsequently, and consequently it decided to withhold his results of Part-V and issued the letter dated December 12th, 2006.
4.
I am unable to accept the contention of counsel for the petitioner that since the petitioner was not at fault, a mandamus should be issued directing the university not only not to cancel the mark sheet showing the petitioner as passed in the LLB Part-IV Examination, 2005, but also directing it to publish the petitioner's Part-V Examination results.
In my view, counsel for the University has rightly said that the petitioner is not entitled to take advantage of an inadvertent mistake committed by the university.
In terms of the regulations governing the course, and whereby the petitioner was admittedly governed, on his failing the LLB Part-III Examination, 2004, his LLB Part-IV Examination, 2003 results, showing him passed, stood automatically cancelled.
He was to take re-admission to Part-III, and that he did.
He knew that he did not take the.
LLB Part-IV Examination, 2005.
Hence it is apparent that the mark sheet concerned was issued by the university by sheer mistake.
5.
On the facts, I do not find any reason to examine whether in the application filed by the petitioner for taking the LL.B.
Part-V Examination, 2006 he made any misleading statement.
I only say that there are certain confusing materials.
In my opinion, that aspect does not require any close examination, since in view of the regulations the petitioner is not entitled to get a mandamus asking the university to treat him as a candidate passing the LLB Part-IV Examination, 2005, or the LLB Part-IV Examination, 2003.
Since he is yet to take the Part-IV Examination of the course, for which I am told he is eligible, there is no question of taking any steps by the university for declaring results of his LL.B.
Part-V Examination, 2006 for which he was not eligible, though he took it.
I am not inclined to consider the question of ordering costs against the university, since, as I have already indicated, the application submitted by the petitioner for taking the LL.B.
Part-V Examination, 2006 contained certain confusing materials and information.
I am unable to hold that for the mistake in question the university is to be wholly blamed.
6.
For these reasons I dismiss the writ petition and order that there shall be no order for costs in it.
7.
As a special case, copy of this order duly countersigned by AR (C) or A.C.O.
shall be supplied to advocates for the parties on usual undertakings.
8.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this order, if applied for, shall be supplied to the parties within three days from the date of receipt of the file by the section concerned.
Petition dismissed.