Prasenjit Mandal, J - This writ application has been filed by Sri Aswini Kumar Kundu, a retired State Government employee, against the judgment and order dated 19122003 passed by the West Bengal Administrative Tribunal in OA No. 1793 of 2000.
The learned Tribunal has dismissed his application without costs.
The writ applicant has filed the mandamus application praying for the following reliefs :  "(a) A writ in the nature of certiorari directing the respondents to certify and produce all records relating to the order passed by the Ld.
Tribunal in Original application No. 1793/2000 on 19122003 dismissing the original application so that conscionable justice may therein be administered in quashing the same;  (b) A writ in the nature of Mandamus commanding the respondents to forthwith act in accordance with law and to pay the petition all his retirement benefits treating the petitioner to have retired from service with effect from 3061995."
2.
Fact in short of the case is that the writ applicant, Sri Aswini Kumar Kundu was appointed Amin on 12.6.1956.
After continuous work for more than 5 years, he fell ill owing to mental troubles and he was unable to attend office from 1961 to 1981 and then he approached the Respondent Authority to allow him to join the office in 1981.
At that time he produced the necessary certificate of fitness.
But he was not allowed to join the office.
Nor did the Respondent Authority give any reply to him as to his prayer for joining the office but he attended the office since 1981 and he submitted his attendance through a chit of papers apart from submitting representations to the competent authority.
Then he retired from service on superannuation with effect from 3061995.
His service had not been terminated at any point of time.
He filed an application before the West Bengal State Administrative Tribunal, but his application was dismissed.
The observations made by the learned Tribunal were not correct.
So he has filed the present writ application for the reliefs already stated.
3.
Having considered the case of the writ applicant duly supported by annexures, affidavit-in-opposition, affidavit in reply and also the submissions made by the learned Advocates of both the parties, we find that it is an admitted position that the writ applicant was appointed Amin on 12.6.1956 and that he worked for about 5 years sometime up to 1961.
Admittedly the writ applicant could not work in the office from 1961 to 1981.
It is also an admitted position that the Respondent Authority did not take any step against the writ applicant for his unauthorized absence for such a long period of about 20 years.
4.
The writ applicant has claimed that he reported for duty in 1981 along his certificate of fitness; but he was not allowed to join.
Even no reply was given to his letter.
He has claimed that he attended office since then and submitted his attendance through a chit of papers apart from submitting representations to the Respondent Authority.
Such claim of fact has been totally denied by the Respondent Authority.
The writ applicant did not produce any chit of papers to show that he reported for duty along with the certificate of fitness in 1981.
The only paper he has annexed to his application in this regard is the annexure P-1 which is a letter addressed to the Minister in charge of the Land and Land Revenue, Government of West Bengal.
The copy of this letter does not show that his application was processed by the concerned department before being placed before the Minister-in-Charge.
It is interesting to note that the writ applicant has claimed that he approached the DLRO, Alipore, Calcutta for reporting duty in 1981 and he has filed one copy of the so-called letter marked as enclosure 2 of annexure P-1.
The copy of this letter, we hold, cannot be entertained because it does not bear any endorsement of the concerned DLRO, Alipore, Calcutta.
The writ applicant has even failed to mention the name of the concerned officer to whom he reported for duty or to whom he submitted his chit of papers for recording his attendance.
Above all the Respondent Authority has claimed that the nomenclature of the S.D.L.
and L.R.O.
was introduced for the first time on and from April, 1989.
The writ applicant has filed an affidavit in reply but he did not controvert anything in his affidavit in reply in this regard.
Therefore, the claim of the writ applicant that he attended the office since 1981, we hold has no basis at all and the same cannot be accepted.
5.
It is also interesting to note that the writ applicant filed another OA case being No. 420 of 2000 before the State Administrative Tribunal, West Bengal claiming for pension and an appointment of his son on compassionate ground.
By the order dated 1172000 the learned tribunal rejected his prayer but directed the Respondent Authority to treat the application of the writ applicant as a representation and to inform the writ applicant of the fate of his service in consultation with the office record.
Accordingly, the Respondent Authority heard the writ applicant in person and passed the order dated 2882000 to the effect that the writ applicant was not entitled to any pension on the ground that the writ applicant did not render the qualifying service for pension.
The Respondent Authority also held that the requisite conditions for an appointment of his son were not fulfilled.
It may be noted here that he filed the representation only on 451999 before the appropriate authority, that is after 4 years from the date of his so-called retirement (i.e. on 3061995, had he been in service).
6.
Thereafter the writ applicant filed the OA case No. 1793 of 2000 before the West Bengal Administrative Tribunal claiming the pay and allowances and retiral benefits treating his service up to 3061995 on the plea that he did not receive any order of termination from service.
This is no doubt a claim by way of an after thought.
His representation before the Authority made on 451999 is nothing but an attempt to create ground for filing cases before the learned Tribunal seeking benefits if possible.
As stated earlier the admitted position is that the writ applicant rendered services as an Amin for the period from 12.6.1956 to sometime in 1961.
Thereafter he did not render any service since sometime in 1961 to the date of his so-called date of retirement on superannuation on 3061995.
Thus, we find that the writ applicant had worked for a period of five years or so during his entire career and that period of service was not at all sufficient for granting any pension.
It might be the situation that the Respondent Authority did not terminate the service of the writ applicant at any time since 1961.
But the conduct of the writ applicant showed that he had abandoned the service since sometime in 1961.
There is no reliable evidence before us to show that the writ applicant was suffering from mental illness during the period between 1961 to 1981.
Nor is there anything to show that the employer was kept informed about the alleged illness or that any prayer for leave had been made in that behalf.
So the conduct of the writ applicant amounted to abandonment of service since after 1961.
In such a situation, though no departmental proceedings were initiated and the service of writ applicant was not terminated by any specific order of termination by the Respondent Authority, we are of the view that the writ applicant is not entitled to get any benefit of service he has claimed.
7.
There is no evidence that since 1981 to the date prior to 451999 the writ applicant ever prayed for releasing salary since 1981 or for any retiral benefit of the service on the ground that he retired from service on 3061995.
He filed the representation to the DLRS only on 451999 that is after lapse of more than three years from the so-called date of his retirement on superannuation on 3061995.
In the circumstances, we are of the view that the learned Tribunal has rightly observed that the application of the writ applicant before the learned Tribunal was barred by limitation and that the writ applicant was not entitled to get any pension or pensionary benefits.
The writ applicant has set up a new case in his second application before the learned Tribunal which is totally barred by limitation.
The learned Tribunal has, therefore, rightly dismissed his application.
8.
During argument the learned Advocate for the writ applicant has referred to the ruling of the case of Chittaranjan Poira v. State of West Bengal and others reported in 1999(1) CLJ 463.
It was a case where the termination of service had been done without giving an opportunity of hearing.
But this is not the case here.
For the reasons discussed above, we hold that this ruling is not applicable in the instant situation.
9.
In the result, the writ applicant is not entitled to get any mandamus relief as claimed.
We hold that there is nothing to interfere with the judgment and order dated 19122003 passed by the learned Tribunal in OA Case No. 1793 of 2000.
Accordingly, the writ application is dismissed.
10.
Considering the circumstances, there will be no order as to costs.
11.
Urgent xerox certified copy of this order, if applied for, be supplied to the learned Advocates for the parties on compliance of all formalities.
Girish Chandra Gupta, J - I agree.
Petition dismissed.