Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The petitioner is questioning the order of the disciplinary authority dated January 23rd/30th, 2006 terminating his service with effect from that date.
Case of the authorities is that for unauthorized absence from duty from July 28th, 2005 disciplinary proceedings were initiated against the petitioner by issuing a charge-sheet dated September 12th, 2005.
2.
By a letter dated September 13th, 2005 the authority informed the petitioner that his explanations to the charge-sheet had been found unsatisfactory.
An inquiry officer was appointed.
Ex. parte inquiry was held.
The second show-cause notice dated December 8th/12th, 2005 was issued.
Copy of the inquiry proceedings was supplied with that notice.
Though the petitioner received the second show cause notice, he did not submit any representation.
In the circumstances, the disciplinary authority issued the impugned punishment order.
Though the petitioner was entailed to prefer an appeal, he did not prefer one and instead took out this writ petition.
3.
The whole question is whether the charge-sheet was ever served on the petitioner.
In para 4 of the writ petition he has stated that the charge-sheet was never served.
The respondents are not in a position to show anything that the charge-sheet was actually served on the petitioner.
They have given an evasive reply to the specific case of the petitioner made out in para 5.
They have not said that the charge sheet was actually served.
Their counsel says that notices issued by the inquiry officer and the second show-cause notice issued by the disciplinary authority were received by the petitioner.
He is right.
4.
But then, the question is whether without serving the charge-sheet the authorities were competent to proceed with the matter.
It seems to me that the disciplinary authority quite mechanically proceeded with the matter.
After issuing the charge-sheet on September 12th, 2005 the authority issued the letter dated September 13th, 2005 alleging that the petitioner's explanations, when no explanations were submitted in any form, were found unsatisfactory.
It is beyond comprehension how the order dated September 13th, 2005 could have been issued by an authority acting bona fide.
It is not the case of the respondents that it was issued inadvertently.
5.
Simply because after receiving the notices issued by the inquiry officer and the disciplinary authority the petitioner did not respond in any manner, in my view, the illegality vitiating the proceedings should not be ignored.
The proceedings, in my opinion, never commenced, since the charge- sheet issued by the disciplinary authority was never sent to the petitioner.
It is apparent that the charge-sheet never went out of the file.
This being the position, the disciplinary authority was not competent to make final order in the proceedings terminating service of the petitioner by way of punishment.
In my view, the proceedings and orders following the charge-sheet are liable to be quashed.
6.
I am, however, not inclined to make any order granting any financial benefit to the petitioner.
By his conduct he disentitled himself to that relief.
Inspite of receipt of the notices issued by the inquiry officer and the second show cause notice issued by the disciplinary authority, he simply remained silent.
In his first representation submitted after receiving the punishment order he did not say that the charge-sheet had not been served on him.
It is long after receipt of the punishment order that the point was taken in the legal notice given by his lawyer.
On these facts, I am of the view that the he is not entitled to get any relief on account of financial benefits.
7.
For these reasons, I allow the writ petition and quash the inquiry proceedings, the second show cause notice, and the punishment order.
The respondents will be at liberty to proceed with the matter afresh.
Since the petitioner has already got a copy of the charge-sheet, there will be no need of serving the charge-sheet on him by the authority.
He shall submit his reply, if any, to the charge-sheet within a fortnight from date.
After considering the reply, the disciplinary authority shall decide about the future course to be followed in the matter.
8.
If a decision is taken to hold a fresh inquiry, then after giving the petitioner reasonable opportunity to present his case and to defend himself, the proceedings shall be concluded within a month.
From this day till the final order is made in the proceedings the petitioner shall be deemed to be suspended, and subsistence allowance according to rules shall be paid to him.
The question how the intervening period preceding this day shall be treated will be decided by the disciplinary authority while making the final order.
There shall be no order for costs in the case.
9.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this order, shall be supplied to the parties within three days from the date of receipt of the file by the Section concerned.
Petition allowed.