P Jyothimani, J - The writ petition is filed challenging the impugned order of the 1st respondent dated 872006 under which in respect of the teachers and others having worked for more than three years are sought to be considered for counselling for transfer.
2.
According to the petitioner, the impugned order dated 872006 was followed by the list the candidates who are eligible for being considered for counselling as on 13.7.2006 was also published.
3.
A reference to the impugned order shows that it is merely instructions for conducting counselling for the benefit of teachers working under the first respondent.
However, the learned counsel for the petitioner would submit that in the list of candidates to be considered for counselling, persons who are not eligible have been included and the petitioner being the President of the association of teachers is interested in these affairs.
4.
On the face of it, I do not agree with the contentions of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
In any event, it is always open to the petitioner or any other person affected by including any other who are not eligible for to approach for redressal.
But, it is not for the petitioner who represents the union to file the writ petition for redresssal of the grievance.
5.
The learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the petitioner association has made a representation to the first respondent dated 13.7.2006 and the petitioner will be satisfied if a direction is given to the first respondent to consider the said representation and pass appropriate orders.
6.
Heard the learned counsel for the petitioner and the learned Additional Government Pleader.
7.
Considering the submissions made on either side and also the limited scope of the submission, the first respondent is directed to consider the representation of the petitioner dated 13.7.2006 and pass appropriate orders within a period of three weeks.
8.
The writ petition is disposed of with the above direction.
No costs.
Consequently, MPMD.
Nos. 1 & 2 are also disposed of.
Petition disposed of.