Manmohan Sarin, J - Petitioner Ghan Shyam, a Khalasi, working in the Northern Railways, was compulsorily retired vide orders dated 24-4-1998.
The Appeal preferred against the order of compulsory retirement was dismissed on 8th June, 1998.
Petitioner preferred a Revision before the Revisional Authority, which was also dismissed on 4-8-1998.
A Mercy Appeal preferred to the President of India met the same fate and was rejected on 27-2-2001.
Petitioner thereupon, preferred the OA No. 3015/2003 along with MA No. 2616/2003, which was dismissed by the Central Administrative Tribunal (CAT) as barred by limitation, vide orders dated 19-1-2004.
Petitioner suffers from a 95% disability.
His both legs were amputated following an accident in the year 1987.
He moves on wheel chair.
Learned counsel for the petitioner, Mr. KK Sharma submits that the case deserves a compassionate approach.
The delay in preference of the appeal should have been condoned keeping in mind the disability, suffering and penury of the petitioner.
2.
It would be appropriate to recapitulate the facts leading to the passing of the order for compulsory retirement for a proper appreciation of the pleas urged by the petitioner in assailing the said order and for condonation of delay in preferring the appeal/OA before CAT.
3.
Petitioner is alleged to have misbehaved with CDO In-charge Mr. KB Awasthi on 31-8-1996, by using abusive and unparliamentary language in the "Sick Line".
It is alleged that he again misbehaved and used abusive language in the coaching yard later in the afternoon on the same day.
The incident happened in the presence of several witnesses.
The fact-finding inquiry after recording statements of witnesses and complainant arrived at the conclusion that the petitioner had misbehaved and abused CDO In-charge, in the Sick Line at 1415 hrs.
and in coaching yard later in the afternoon.
4.
In fact, the petitioner is stated to have himself admitted that he was agitated and used unparliamentary language in a loud voice in the coaching yard with the CDO Incharge since he wanted to know whether he had been suspended or not.
During the inquiry proceedings, he is also stated to have accepted that he had lost his equilibrium and misbehaved.
Show cause notice and charge-sheet were issued.
Representation of the petitioner was considered and the Disciplinary Authority considering the representation and reply to the show cause notice concluded that petitioner had committed gross misconduct and his overall behaviour was not good.
He was not considered fit to be retained in service any more and the penalty of compulsory retirement was imposed.
5.
The Revisionary Authority vide orders dated 4-8-1998 held that the charges of gross misbehaviour with superior officers were of a grave nature and stood substantiated after reasonable opportunity to defend having been provided.
Petitioner was advised vide communication dated 10-12-1998 that after rejection of his application, a mercy petition could be submitted to the President of India.
The petitioner accordingly filed his mercy petition, which was also rejected vide orders dated 27-2-2001 by the Competent Authority.
The petitioner, therefore, submits that the limitation for the purposes of approaching the Tribunal should commence only after the disposal of his mercy petition as he had been advised by the respondents that mercy petition against the dismissal of his appeal and revision lies before the President of India.
6.
Mr. KK Sharma, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner, made a twofold submission.
Firstly, considering the disability of over 90% of the petitioner and the fact that he could approach the Tribunal only after the disposal of the mercy petition by the President, the delay for purposes of condonation should be counted only after 27-2-2001.
For condonation of delay, the ground urged is that the petitioner was in penury and frustrated and under depression.
His family was virtually starving.
He had lost his mental equilibrium and hence, could not prefer this appeal.
7.
We find that the OA was filed two years after the cause of action.
Therefore, the delay even if reckoned from the date when the mercy petition was disposed of, is substantial.
While the petitioner on account of his disability deserves sympathy as a handicapped person, yet the disability being of a permanent nature, cannot be specifically called in to explain the inordinate delay of two years in preferring the appeal.
Moreover, the ground taken is that the petitioner had lost his mental equilibrium and was in penury.
It is this lack of proper temperament and having no control over his temperament, which led to the incident of gross misconduct.
Mr. BS Rajesh Agrajit, learned counsel for the respondents, has rightly submitted that it was on account of petitioner's disability that he was being assigned such duties that he could carry out on a wheel chair, yet the same did not give a license for insubordination and foul temperament.
He further submits that his overall behaviour has not been good and despite counselling, he had failed to improve.
As regards petitioner being in penury, it is stated before us that following the compulsory retirement, petitioner was entitled to pension.
However, he refused to avail of the same as he laboured under the impression that if he accepted the pension, it would tantamount to his accepting the penalty of compulsory retirement.
In that sense, it may be taken that the financial difficulty was self-inflicted.
We find that the Tribunal has rightly observed that the petitioner has failed to set out broadly the nature of his mental infliction or the period thereof and/or any medical evidence in support of the ground that he was disabled for a period of two years from preferring the appeal.
8.
In these circumstances, even if one would like to adopt a liberal approach and especially on account of the petitioner's disability, there is no explanation forthcoming for disclosing any sufficient cause for condonation of delay.
9.
The second limb of Mr. KK Sharma's argument is that the petitioner was denied proper opportunity to defend himself and that there was hardly any evidence led in the inquiry, are devoid of merit and contrary to record.
The fact-finding inquiry reveals that the incident of misbehaviour has been confirmed by number of witnesses.
In fact, the petitioner himself had admitted the same when he stated that he had lost his equilibrium and that he had behaved in a manner not in consonance with the decorum of the organization.
It is also not correct that the complainant's statement was not recorded.
10.
We also do not find any ground on merits for interference with the impugned order, the inquiry had been conducted in accordance with the principles of natural justice.
It was the petitioner himself, who had declined to lead any defence witness and accepted his guilt and expressed his regret.
11.
In these circumstances, we uphold the order of the Tribunal dismissing the appeal as barred by limitation and on merits.
Besides, that there has been no violation of natural justice as claimed by the petitioner, no ground is made out for entertaining this writ petition in the exercise of writ jurisdiction.
Writ petition is dismissed accordingly.
Petition dismissed.