Manmohan Sarin, J - Petitioner-Smt. Indu Chopra assails the order dated 2nd June, 2000 passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal.
Principal Bench, New Delhi, vide which the Tribunal dismissed the OA, bearing No. 2022/1997 filed by the petitioner.
By the said OA, petitioner had sought quashing of the letters dated 24th April, 1997 and 30th May, 1997, by which she was asked to return the Gold Pass which was a duty pass, being used by her, Petitioner also sought a direction to the Ministry of Railways and the Railway Board to extend the privilege of travelling in AC 1st Class without payment of any difference in fare on Privilege Pass and Post Retirement Complimentary Pass, as denial of the same to the petitioner would be discriminatory under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
She also sought directions for issuance of Platinum Pass on the ground that petitioner was in the same grade of Rs. 8000/- (fixed) as a member of the Railway Board/Financial Commissioner.
2.
The crux of the controversy arising for consideration in this case is whether the petitioner who had enjoyed the grade equivalent to that of Financial Commissioner, without having the corresponding rank and status would be eligible for the perquisites i.e. passes and travelling benefits which are available to the Chairman, Members of the Railway Board and General Manager of the Railways.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner Mr. Sachdeva has painstakingly taken us through the special circumstances leading to her posting and grant of grade of Financial Commissioner in his attempt to justify her entitlement for the passes and perquisites, as claimed.
4.
Petitioner got selected through the competitive Central Services Examination for the Indian Railways Accounts Service in 1962.
She secured the first position in her batch and was given the posting on 17th July 1962.
Petitioner received her due promotions and was the seniormost officer in her cadre and her merit was recognized.
The respondents, however, bypassing her, appointed one Mr. V Sivakumaran as Financial Commissioner on 23rd August, 1995.
5.
Recognising the seniority-cum-merit of the petitioner, the post of Financial Advisor and Chief Accounts Officer held by her, was upgraded to Financial Commissioner's grade as personal to the petitioner-Smt. Indu Chopra.
6.
Annexure P-8 i.e. the order dated 23rd August, 1995 is of relevance in this regard and is being reproduced for the facility of reference :-  "The Appointments Committee of the Cabinet has approved the appointment of Shri V Sivakumaran, IRAS : 62, as Financial Commissioner, Railway Board and ex-officio Secretary to the Government of India in the grade of Rs. 8000/- per month (fixed) with effect from the date he assumes charge of the post.
The Appointments Committee of the Cabinet has also directed that the post of FA & CAO, Northern Railways, presently held by Smt. Indu Chopra, IRAS : 62 may be upgraded to the Financial Commissioner's grade, as personal to Smt.
Chopra."
7.
Pursuant to the above appointment and conferment of fixed grade of Financial Commissioner of Rs. 8000/-, while in service, petitioner was given the benefit of travel facilities as are available to the Members of the Railway Board and the Financial Commissioner i.e. Gold Pass and she continued to enjoy the same.
8.
Vide an order dated 25th March, 1996, the terms and conditions of the travel pass and post-retirement complimentary pass for the Chairman and Members of the Railway Board were varied.
As a result of the modification, Chairman and the Members of the Railway Board were entitled to travel along with their spouse in 1st Class AC on all trains without payment of 1/3rd difference between of first class and AC sleeper class fare.
Petitioner, at this stage, sought similar concession for herself vide her letter of request dated 26th December, 1996.
Railway Board did not accept the said request and vide its letter of 4th July, 1997 took the position that under the existing policy, Gold Passes are not being issued to such officers who report to the General Manager, even though they may be in the grade of Rs. 7300-7600 etc.  9.
At this stage, It would also be pertinent to notice the structure of the Railway Board.
The Board is headed by a Chairman having a Member (Electrical), Member (Engineering), Member (Staff), Member (Mechanical), Member (Traffic) and Financial Commissioner in Zone.
The appointment of the Members of the Board and the Financial Commissioner is done through the Appointments Committee of the Cabinet.
10.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that petitioner was working under the administrative control of the General Manager and was drawing the grade of Rs. 8000/- which is the grade of Financial Commissioner and was thus entitled to be treated as equal in status to the Members of the Board and the Financial Commissioner.
He submits that when Sh. V Sivakumaran was appointed as the Financial Commissioner, it was a conscious decision by the Appointments Committee of the Cabinet to confer on the petitioner the fixed grade of Rs. 8000/- which was the Financial Commissioner's grade and for all purposes and intents, she was to have the status of a Financial Commissioner.
It would make no difference if she technically did not possess the rank or status of a Financial Commissioner and was working as Financial Advisor and Chief Accounts Officer.
11.
Learned counsel for the respondents Mr. VSR Krishna, in rebutting this plea, submitted that while the petitioner was given the fixed grade of Rs. 8000/- but the same was made personal to her.
She continued to report to the General Manager.
He submits that it was the conferment of a grade or protection of a scale but not conferment of status.
He submits that perusal of Annexure P-8 would bring out such a distinction.
He submitted that for conferment of the requisite pass under the Railway Servants (Pass) Rules, 1986 and its schedule, the requirement is to have equivalence in grade and status both but not only with the scale or grade.
12.
We have examined the record and the correspondence and also considered the submissions made by both the counsel.
The respondents have rightly asserted that petitioner was granted the fixed grade of Rs. 8000/- without being conferred the status and rank of Financial Commissioner.
This becomes apparent from Annexure P-8 whereby by Mr. V Sivakumaran's appointment was approved as Financial Commissioner, Railway Board and ex-officio Secretary to the Government of India in the grade of Rs. 8000/-.
As regards the petitioner, approval was in the following terms :-  The Appointments Committee of the Cabinet has also directed that the post of FA & CAO, Northern Railways, presently held by Smt. Indu Chopra, IRAS:62 may be upgraded to the Financial Commissioner's grade, as personal to Smt.
Chopra."
13.
It would be seen that because of the seniority of the petitioner, the grade of the post of FA & CAO, which she was holding was upgraded to the grade of the post of Financial Commissioner and it was made personal to her.
This would mean that future FA & CAO may not even get the same grade.
Significantly, it did not confer the rank or status of Financial Commissioner upon the petitioner.
Similarly perusal of Schedule-I of the Railway Servants (Pass) Rules, 1986 shows that Gold Pass is a Duty pass and the entitlement is of "Chairman and Members of Railway Board including Financial Commissioner for Railways and Officers who are in equivalent grade and status".
In the case of the petitioner, she undoubtedly has equivalence in grade but not in status as she continued to report to the General Manager.
We may also notice that petitioner has since retired on 30th September, 1997 and her retiral benefits and pension may have been calculated on the basis of last drawn salary, yet that would not change the position with regard to her status.
The decision of the respondents in these circumstances in denying the petitioner the benefit and perquisite available to the members of the Railway Board and/or Financial Commissioner cannot be said to be vitiated by any infirmity or error liable to be corrected in the exercise of writ jurisdiction.
Rather the rules support the respondents' view point.
Petition has no merit and is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.