Vijender Jain, C.J.
(Oral) - This order shall dispose of two appeals i.e. LPA No. 541 of 2002 filed by Ram Sarup and LPA No. 185 of 2003 filed by the Chief Administrator, Haryana Urban Development Authority, Panchkula (hereinafter to be referred as `HUDA') as both arise from the judgment in CWP No. 4936 of 1998.
2.
Ram Sarup, the appellant in LPA No. 541 of 2002, is aggrieved by the judgment of the learned Single Judge in so far as it denies back wages.
HUDA, the appellant in LPA No. 185 of 2002 is aggrieved by the order of the learned Single Judge, directing it to consider the service record of last 10 years before 1988-89 and to consider the report for the year 1988-89 as Good.
3.
A brief factual narrative of the present controversy would be appropriate.
The appellant was appointed as Clerk in the office of HUDA on 311978.
He was promoted as an Assistant w.e.f.
23.1.1983.
As he suffered from heart ailment, he requested that his promotion as Head Clerk be kept in abeyance till his condition improves.
Respondent Nos. 3 to 8 were promoted as Head Clerks, ignoring the claim of the appellant vide order dated 2991989.
Promotion was denied to the appellant, on the basis of his service record/pending disciplinary action as recorded in the aforementioned order.
The appellant immediately sent a representation dated 3101989 to the Chief Administrator, HUDA stating therein that he had requested that his promotion be kept in abeyance on account of his ill health but promotion had been denied on the ground of his service record and that disciplinary action was pending against him.
It was alleged that no disciplinary action was pending against the appellant and his service record did not warrant such an order.
Thereafter other Assistants were promoted to the post of Head Clerk vide orders dated 2821992 and 14111994.
In the order dated 14111994, it was once again recorded that the appellant was denied promotion on account of unsatisfactory service record and pending disciplinary proceedings.
4.
Aggrieved by the denial of promotion, the appellant preferred a petition praying of the issuance of a writ of mandamus directing HUDA to promote the appellant, as Head Clerk, in accordance with his seniority and from the date of his juniors were promoted.
The appellant also prayed for grant of consequential benefits and arrears of salary etc. HUDA resisted the appellant's claim on the plea that as per Government instructions, Ram Sarup was required to earn 70% Good Annual Confidential Reports during the 10 years, preceding consideration for promotion.
As Ram Sarup did not fulfill this criteria, promotion was rightly declined.
5.
After a perusal of the pleadings and a consideration of the arguments advanced, the learned Single Judge allowed the writ petition holding that the HUDA had failed to consider the reports of last 10 years.
It was further held that in view of the appellant's post record, the report for the year 1988-89 should have been considered as Good.
It was, thus, held that as the HUDA had failed to consider service record as per the rules, Ram Sarup's plea for promotion to the post of Head Clerk be considered, in accordance with law and if found eligible, promotion be granted from the date his juniors were considered and promoted for the first time.
The learned Single Judge, however, declined the prayer for arrears of salary, invoking the principle of `no work no pay'.
6.
Learned counsel for Ram Sarup, contends that as the appellant was disallowed back wages for no fault on his part, the learned Single Judge erred in invoking the principle of `no work no pay'.
It is contended that the aforementioned principle is inapplicable to the present case.
Learned counsel for HUDA, on the other hand, has argued that the learned Single Judge erred while holding that the last report, namely, the report for the year 1988-89 be considered as Good.
It is contended that as no report had been received for the aforementioned year, the learned Single Judge could not have directed the said report to be considered as Good.
It is further argued that the judgment, relied upon, namely, Jagrup Singh v. State of Haryana, 1998(3) SCT 1 does not lay down that where an Annual Confidential Report is not available, the report be considered as Good.
It is, therefore, prayed that the appeal, filed by HUDA, be allowed and the judgment, rendered by the learned Single Judge, be set aside.
7.
We have given our thoughtful consideration to the arguments, advanced by learned counsel for the parties, and upon a perusal of the impugned judgment, as also the record, are satisfied that the learned Single Judge, considered the cumulative effect of the preceding Annual Confidential Reports and the average thereof, while directing that the report for the year 1988-89 be considered as Good.
It would also be necessary to notice, that the learned Single Judge, while directing consideration of Ram Sarup's case for promotion, held that the authority had failed to consider his service record of the preceding 10 years.
The learned Single Judge, thus, directed consideration of Ram Sarup's service record, for 10 years, preceding 1988-89.
We, therefore, express our inability to accept the contention raised by counsel for HUDA that as the report for the year 1988-89 was not available, the same could not have been considered while appraising the appellant's Annual Confidential Reports.
The learned Single Judge as noticed hereinabove, considered the cumulative effect of the preceding Annual Confidential Reports, the average thereof and, proceeded to hold that a grading of Good should be assigned for the year 1988-89.
In so far as the plea that Ram Sarup appellant should have been granted back wages, the plea cannot be accepted.
The learned Single Judge rightly disallowed back wages as Ram Sarup had not worked on the post, and was, therefore, not entitled to any arrears of salary on the principle of `no work no pay'.
8.
Learned counsel for the appellant contends that the directions issued by the learned Single Judge have not been obeyed.
We direct the respondents to comply the direction of the learned Single Judge in this regard within a period of two months.
In view of the above, both the appeals are dismissed with the aforesaid directions.
No order as to costs.
Appeals dismissed.