SS Saron, J - The petitioner is a doctor.
He was appointed as Assistant Professor on ad hoc basis in the Department of Psychiatry at the Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh (respondent) (`Institute' - for short) on 632000 (Annexure P-1).
Thereafter, in response to an advertisement for filling up the post of Assistant Professor of Psychiatry in the respondent-Institute on regular basis, he applied for the same.
He was selected and appointed vide appointment letter dated 14122002 (Annexure P-2).
Condition No. 3 of the said appointment letter envisages that if the petitioner resigns during probation, he shall be liable to refund to the Institute all the moneys paid to him on account of pay and allowances, etc. Further, for submitting resignation during probation or after one year of probation, he shall be required to give one month's notice or deposit with the Institute, pay and allowances in lieu of the notice period by which it falls short of one month.
While working as Assistant Professor, the petitioner was selected for appointment as Consultant in General Psychiatry at South Stafford Shire Health Care, NHS Trust.
Accordingly, on 14112003, he submitted his resignation from the post of Assistant Professor at the Institute.
The respondent-Institute, however, insisted that since the petitioner had not completed two years' of service from the date of his appointment on regular basis, he could only be permitted to resign on refund of the entire amount received by him on account of pay and allowances for the period from 14122002 i.e. the date of his appointment till the date of resignation on 14112003.
The petitioner had to join his new place of posting by 5122003 and, therefore, he had no option but to deposit the aforesaid entire amount of salary, which came to Rs. 3,06,229/- on 19112003.
Thereafter, his resignation was accepted on 1122003.
The petitioner, however, later came to know that similar conditions that had been incorporated in the appointment letters of others by the respondent-Institute had been relaxed by it.
Accordingly, he submitted a representation on 30122004 (Annexure P-5) in which the case of one Shri Abhijit Banerjee was referred who had also resigned during the period of his probation but the aforesaid condition qua the refund of salary had been waived off on the condition that he would deposit one month's salary in lieu of one month's notice.
The petitioner, thus, requested that the aforesaid condition be relaxed/waived off in his case as well.
The respondent-Institute, however, sent a one line memo dated 15.4.2005 (Annexure P-6) informing the petitioner that his representation regarding acceptance of resignation/refund of pay has been considered and was found to be without any force.
It is stated that the said memo does not contain any reason for declining the request of the petitioner and that it does not even dispute the fact that the condition regarding refund of the entire salary paid to Shri Abhijit Banerjee had been waived off.
The petitioner later came to know that the aforesaid condition in his case had not been waived off on the ground that he had attended one conference in USA at the expense of the respondent-Institute.
The petitioner submitted another representation dated 352005 pointing out that he had not attended any conference nor had he withdrawn the sanctioned amount because he was not given visa by the Immigration Authorities for visiting USA.
However, no response has been received to the said representation.
Accordingly, by way of the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner seeks the quashing of the impugned memo dated 15.4.2005 (Annexure P-6) whereby his representation has been rejected as also the quashing of the condition requiring him to deposit/surrender the amount of salary earned by him for the period of service rendered as Assistant Professor from 14122002 to 14112003 with a further prayer that the amount of Rs. 3,06,229/- along with interest @ 15% per annum be refunded.
2.
On notice, written-statement has been filed by the respondent-Institute.
The factual assertions as made in the petition are not disputed.
However, it is stated that the petitioner accepted the post of Assistant Professor on the terms and conditions as incorporated in the appointment letter.
Besides, the Institute had to spend time and incur expenses to finalise the process of selection like firstly, the file is to be approved, thereafter the advertisements are issued, applications are sorted out, payment of TA/DA is made to the experts and meetings of the standing selection committee are held.
In nutshell, it is submitted that it can be said that this process involves lot of exercise of the man power and expenditure on the exchequer.
It is further submitted that when the petitioner submitted his resignation on 14112003, he had not completed two years' regular service after appointment.
Therefore, he was required to deposit the amount received by him in terms of clause-3 of his appointment letter.
The petitioner deposited the amount on 19112003.
It is thereafter that he made a representation on 30122004 i.e. after a delay of more than one year.
The case of Shri Abhijit Banerjee, it is stated, is not similar to the case of the petitioner as he was working as Junior Lab Technician which is a Class-C post whereas the petitioner was a member of Group `A' Class services.
The representation of the petitioner, it is submitted, has rightly been rejected.
The respondent-Institute, it is submitted, has been invoking clause 3 of the appointment letter in other similar cases also, a reference of which is made in the written-statement.
3.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and given our thoughtful consideration to the matter.
4.
The question that arises for consideration is whether the petitioner is entitled for refund of the salary deposited by him on account of the conditions contained in his appointment letter dated 14122002 (Annexure P-2) and whether the said condition is liable to be quashed even though the petitioner has complied with the same.
The said condition No. 3 of the appointment letter of the petitioner as Assistant Professor reads as follows :-  "If during your probation, you resign from the service for any reason, you shall be liable to refund to Institute all the moneys paid to you on account of pay and allowances etc. during the period of probation.
However, for submitting resignation at any time, i.e. during probation or after the probation period is over, you shall be required to give one month notice or have to deposit with the Institute pay and allowances in lieu of the notice period by which it falls short of one month."
The condition as contained above in fact creates an unconscionable contract.
Besides, it is unfair and unreasonable.
The petitioner, who was a candidate for appointment as Assistant Professor, had no choice but to accept the said condition as contained in the letter of appointment or to forgo his employment.
In Central Inland Water Transport Corporation Limited v. Brojo Nath Ganguly, AIR 1986 SC 1571 it was held that if terms of contract of employment and service rules detrimental to the employees are found unconscionable, unfair and unreasonable, against public policy and public interest and against the principle of distributive justice, in the context of parts III and IV of the Constitution, these would be violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
In the said case Rule 9(i) of the relevant rules relating to termination of employment for acts other than misdemeanour was considered.
The said rule provided that the employment of permanent employee shall be subject to termination on three months' notice by either side i.e. by the employer by paying the equivalent of three months' basic pay and DA, if any, in lieu of notice or by the employee by depositing a like amount when he had failed to give due notice.
It was inter alia held that there is a mutuality in the said Rule 9(i) - the same mutuality as in a contract between lion and the lamb that both will be free to roam about in the jungle and each will be at liberty to devour the other.
Thus, when one considers the unequal position of the employer and its employees the argument of mutuality, it was observed, becomes laughable.
The ratio of the said judgment applies to the case in hand.
The respondent-Institute when it offered appointment to the petitioner for the post of Assistant Professor was in a position of dominance and had an unequal bargaining power.
It could impose the condition leaving hardly any choice for the petitioner.
In Central Inland Water Transport's case (supra), it was also held that it was not possible to equate a contract of employment with a mercantile transaction between two businessmen and much less to do so when the contract of employment is between a powerful employer and a weak employee.
Thus, at the time of seeking employment, the petitioner had no option except to sign on the dotted lines accepting the terms and conditions as had been fixed by the employer.
However, such condition whereby he is liable to refund to the respondent-Institute the amount on account of pay and allowances etc. received by him for the period he had actually worked and rendered his service, would be a condition which is against public interest and opposed to public policy; besides being void under Section 23 of the Indian Contract Act.
Therefore, the condition No. 3 as incorporated in the appointment letter is unequal, unfair, unreasonable, against public policy and public interest as well as against the principle of distributive justice inasmuch as it left the petitioner with no choice or option but to accept the terms of appointment on the dotted lines or to forgo the employment.
The petitioner having no option, accepted them.
Thereafter, during the period of probation, he was selected as Assistant Professor at South Stafford Shire Health Care, NHS Trust and Consultant in general psychiatry.
However, despite submitting his resignation on 14112003, the respondent-Institute insisted that he could not be permitted to resign until he refunds the entire amount received by him on account of pay and allowances for the period from 14122002 till the date of his resignation i.e. till 14112003.
In the circumstances, the petitioner had no option but to deposit the entire amount of salary which came to Rs. 3,06,229/- which he deposited on 19112003.
This, in our view, is also an act of arbitrariness on the part of an overbearing employer insisting that the employee should refund the entire amount of salary and thereby exercise its unequal and overbearing bargaining power.
The reasons given by the respondent-Institute to the effect that it has to incur expenses to finalise the process of selection like getting the file approved, issuing advertisement, sorting out applications, paying TA/DA to the experts, arranging meetings of the Standing Selection Committee, which according to them, involves lot of exercise on the part of manpower and expenditure on the exchequer.
It is not a case where the respondent-Institute had incurred any expenses in imparting training to the petitioner.
In the circumstances, the reasoning given is not acceptable as recruitment exercise is a normal administrative affair of any institute, which would have to be undertaken in its day-to-day functioning.
The same possibly cannot be the basis for asking the petitioner to refund the entire amount of salary for the period that he had worked if he resigned from the post of Assistant Professor.
Therefore, the reasons recorded for refund of the amount, to say the least, are such which no person properly advised on the facts would have reached at.
5.
In the circumstances, we are of the view that the impugned condition-3 in the appointment letter of the petitioner creates an unconscionable contract and is void ab initio.
The action of the respondant-Institute making the petitioner to refund the entire salary and allowances received by him from the date of his appointment till the date of his resignation, is also arbitrary and illegal.
6.
For the foregoing reasons, the writ petition is allowed with the direction to the respondent-Institute to refund to the petitioner the amount of Rs. 3,06,229/- which were deposited by him as refund of salary etc. for the period from 14122002 to 14112003.
However, since the petitioner had served the legal notice after one year of the refund, he would not be entitled to any interest.
Accordingly, the writ petition stands allowed in the above terms.
Petition allowed.