BP Katakey, J - The writ petitioner, who is working as Soil Conservation Ranger, has filed this writ petition for directing the State respondent to include his name in the zone of consideration for promotion to the post of Asstt.
Soil Conservation Officer by waving requirement of passing the five and half months training course envisaged in the Mizo Soil and Water Conversation Department (Group B Gazetted Post) Recruitment Rules, 1995 and also for fixation of his seniority in the post of Soil Conservation Ranger above the respondent No. 3.
2.
The facts in brief is that the petitioner as well as respondent No. 3 were appointed initially on ad hoc basis vide order dated 10288 and thereafter, the services of both of them were regularized vide order dated 29788 with effect from their initial dates of appointment.
A final seniority list of the Soil Conservation Ranger was published on 6592 wherein the petitioner was placed above the respondent No. 3.
The department thereafter on 2792000 published another provisional seniority list showing the name of the petitioner above the respondent No. 3 but in the final seniority list published on 28.5.01, the petitioner was shown below the respondent No. 3.
On 10603 another provisional seniority list was prepared placing both the petitioner and the respondent No. 3 against serial No. 5.
The petitioner against the said provisional list submitted the objection on 9-7-03.
As the department was contemplating to promote the Soil Conservation Ranger to the post of Asstt.
Soil Conservation Officer, the petitioner approached the authority for waving the requirement of completion of five and half months training so that he can also be considered for promotion but as no action was taken, the petitioner has filed the present writ petition.
During the pendency of the writ petition as the petitioner has successfully completed the five and half month training course in Soil Conservation on 23-3-2004 prayed for considering his case for promotion to the post of Asstt.
Soil Conservation Officer.
Thereafter, the secretary to the Government of Mizoram, Soil and Water Conservation Department vide notification dated 30-12-2004 has promoted the respondent No. 3 along with three others to the said promotional post of Asstt.
Conservation Officer pursuant to the recommendation of the Mizoram Public Service Commission.
The petitioner accordingly has amended the writ petition indicating the aforesaid facts, however, no prayer has been made for setting aside the promotion of the respondent No. 3.
3.
I have heard Mr. George Raju, learned counsel for the petitioner and also Mr. N Sailo learned State counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent Nos. 1 and 2.
None appears for the respondent Nos. 3 and 4 despite service of notice.
4.
Mr. George Raju learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that after filing of the writ petition, the authority has published the final inter se seniority list of Soil Conservation Ranger vide office memorandum dated 8-8-2003 wherein the petitioner has been shown as senior to the respondent No. 3 and therefore, he has no grievance in so far as the seniority between them in the rank of Soil Conservation Ranger.
5.
The further submission of Mr. Raju, learned counsel for the petitioner is that though in the writ petition he has prayed for directing the respondents to waive the requirement of passing the five and half month training course in Soil Conservation, which is the essential qualification for the purpose of consideration for promotion to the post of Asstt.
Soil Conservation Officer in terms of the 1995 Rules, since he on 23-3-04 has completed the said training course, his grievance in the present writ petition is for not considering his case for promotion, to the said promotional post along with the respondent No. 3, who is admittedly junior in the feeder post.
Mr. Raju, learned counsel has submitted that as he has obtained requisite qualification for the purpose of consideration for promotion to the said promotional post in terms of the provision of 1995 Rules having successfully completed the five and half months training course in Soil Conservation and having five years regular service as Soil Conservation Ranger, the respondents are bound to consider the case of the petitioner, as he is senior to the respondent No. 3 in the feeder post.
As the respondents have considered the case of the respondent No. 3 for promotion after the petitioner successfully undergone said training course, the promotion of the respondent No. 3 who is junior to the petitioner is required to be interfered with and necessary direction may be issued to convene a review OPC for consideration of the petitioner's case along with respondent No. 3 for promotion.
According to the learned counsel since the petitioner has acquired the necessary qualification for being considered for promotion on the date when the DPC meeting was held, the petitioner ought to have been considered for promotion to the promotional post.
6.
Mr. N Sailo learned State Counsel for the respondent Nos. 1 and 2, relying on the affidavit in opposition filed on their behalf has submitted that the petitioner has successfully completed the required training on 23-3- 2004 and therefore, the case of the petitioner could not be considered for promotion to the next higher post along with respondent No. 3 and others as the relevant date for the purpose of acquiring qualification is the date when the promotional post fell vacant and in any case can not be date after the Mizoram Public Service Commission was notified for filling up for the said promotional post.
According to the learned counsel, the vacancy which were filled up vide order of promotion dated 30-12-2004 occurred on 2-4-90, 25-10- 94, 20-6-2001 and the date when the MPSC notified for filling up the post was on 19-3-2004.
The petitioner cannot be considered for promotion as on those dates he has not acquired the minimum requisite qualification as per the Rule.
The further submission of the learned State counsel is that in any case the petitioners is not entitled to any relief as he has not challenged the promotion of the respondent No. 3 the post of Asst.
Soil Conservation Officer.
7.
I have considered the submission of the learned counsel for the parties and also perused the pleadings including the annexures appended thereto.
8.
In the present case though the writ petitioner has prayed for fixation of his seniority over the respondent No. 3 in the grade of Soil Conservation Ranger; since the said grievance of the petitioner has already been redressed by the authority by publishing the final seniority list on 8-8-03 placing the petitioner above the respondent No. 3, the petitioner has not pressed the said prayer.
The only point which left to be decided in the case is, whether the petitioner who has acquired the necessary qualification for consideration for promotion to the next promotional post after the post was notified to the MPSC by the authority, can be considered for promotion.
9.
There is no dispute about dates on which the vacancies filled up vide order dated 30-12-2004 arose i.e. on 2-4-90, 25-10-94 and 20-6-01.
It is also not in dispute that the MPSC was notified by the authority for filling up of the said post on 19-3-2004.
Petitioner has acquired the minimum requisite qualification i.e. he successfully completed the five and half months mandatory training course so as to enable him for consideration for promotion on 23-3-2004 i.e. after the post was notified to the MPSC.
10.
The promotion to a post can be effected only in the event of there being a vacant post.
In the instant case the vacancy arose in the year 1990, 1994 and 2001.
The said posts are, to be filled up by the persons who acquired the necessary qualification, on the date when the post fell vacant.
The petitioner has acquired the necessary qualification only on 23-3-2004.
The petitioner has even not acquired the said necessary qualification on the date i.e. on 19-3-2004 when the MPSC was notified by the authority for filling up of the said posts.
The process of selection of candidate for promotion to the said promotional post started on the date when the vacancies were notified to the MPSC as required under the Rules i.e. on 19-3-2004.
Therefore, the petitioner has to acquire the minimum, requisite qualification at least on the date when posts were notified to the MPSC.
The petitioner has admittedly obtained necessary qualification on a date subsequent to the date notification.
That being the position the petitioner was rightly not considered for promotion to the promotional post along with the respondent No. 3 and others.
Moreover the petitioner in the writ petition has not challenged the promotion of the respondent No. 3 to the post of Assistant Soil Conservation Officer.
11.
That being the position, I do not find any merit in the writ petition, hence the same is dismissed.
No cost.
Petition dismissed.