Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The petitioner is questioning the order of the District Inspector of Schools (SE), Murshidabad dated December 17th, 2004 rejecting his request for extension of benefit of higher scale of pay for possessing higher qualification.
2.
On December 1st, 1994 the petitioner was appointed as an assistant teacher of the school.
He had a bachelor's degree, though by mistake in the approval order it was mentioned that he possessed a master's degree.
Subsequently he obtained a master's degree.
He claimed that with effect from December 14th, 2004 he became entitled to get higher scale of pay, since he obtained a master's degree, a higher qualification.
His claim was turned down by the district inspector of schools, and questioning the decision the present writ petition has been taken out.
3.
Counsel for the petitioner argues that the decision of the authority being a non speaking one is liable to be set aside.
Counsel for the state submits that in view of the position of law existing now there is no scope to reconsider the petitioner's request.
He says that according to the provisions of the West Bengal Schools (Control of Expenditure) Act, 2005, s. 14(2), no teacher of a school is entitled to claim any additional increment or higher scale of pay on acquiring any qualification other than the qualifications specified for the post.
Counsel for the petitioner submits that provisions in s. 16 of the Act protected the teachers' entitlement to the benefit, since the existing terms and conditions of the teachers are not to be affected by the provisions of the Act.
4.
It seems to me that counsel for the state is right in his submissions.
The provisions in s. 14(2) are clear that every teacher of a school shall, if appointed in the post of a graduate teacher category, be entitled to draw pay in the scale of pay in which he is appointed and shall not be entitled to claim any additional increment or higher scale of pay for acquiring any qualification other than the qualifications specified for such post.
There is no dispute that the petitioner was appointed in the post of a graduate teacher category, and that he acquired the higher qualification subsequent to his appointment.
Hence in view of those provisions, he is not entitled to claim the benefit of higher scale of pay on improving his qualification.
5.
I am unable to agree with counsel that provisions in s. 16 of the Act shall make the benefits available to the petitioner.
Provisions in s. 16 only provide that notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in the Act, the terms and conditions of service of a teacher or a non-teaching staff in the employment of a school, immediately before the commencement of the Act, shall not be varied to his disadvantage in so far as such terms and conditions relate to the appointment of such teachers and non-teaching staff to the posts held by them immediately before the commencement of the Act.
Case of the petitioner is not that at the date of commencement of the Act he was getting the benefit of higher scale of pay, or that according to the terms and conditions of his appointment he was entitled to get the higher scale of pay.
His case rather is that according to the government orders and circulars existing at the date of commencement of the Act, he was entitled to claim the benefit of higher scale of pay.
6.
In s. 20 of the Act it has been made clear that the provisions of the Act or any rules or orders made thereunder shall have effect notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any contract, custom or usages to the contrary.
Even if it is assumed that the government orders and circulars existing at the date of commencement of the Act could be treated as pieces of law, then also the petitioner cannot claim the benefit on the basis thereof, since those government orders and circulars have lost their force and utility because of the specific provisions in ss.
14(2) and 20 of the West Bengal Schools (Control of Expenditure) Act, 2005.
It is therefore clear sending the matter back to the district inspector of schools will be nothing but a useless formality, because, in law, the petitioner is not entitled to claim the benefit.
Hence I find no reason to interfere with the impugned decision of the authority, though I agree with counsel for the petitioner that it is a non- speaking decision.
7.
For these reasons the writ petition is dismissed.
There shall be no order for costs in it.
8.
Copy of this order duly countersigned by the AR(C) or ACO shall be supplied to advocates for the parties, on usual undertakings.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this order shall be supplied to the parties, if applied for.
Petition dismissed.