Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The petitioner is aggrieved by the decision of the District Inspector of Schools (SE), North 24 Parganas dated February 23rd, 2006 rejecting his request to grant him benefits of additional increments for possessing post graduate degree.
2.
Counsel submits that although on being recommended by the school service commission the petitioner was appointed as a graduate category teacher in the school (a higher secondary school), upon introduction of the course of anthropology, the school authority permitted him to take the classes, since he had the requisite post graduate degree.
Counsel points out that by letter dated July 24th, 2003 the higher secondary education council advised the school authority to take up the matter of higher pay scale with the district inspector of schools concerned.
His contention is that when the school permitted the petitioner to take classes supposed to be taken by a postgraduate category teacher, there is no reason why the benefits of additional increments should not be given to him.
He says that in the year 2003 the petitioner was entitled to claim the benefits on the basis of the ROPA Rules, 1998, since he possessed the post-graduate degree.
3.
I am unable to agree with counsel that the district inspector of schools has wrongly decided that the petitioner would not be entitled to any benefit.
In terms of provisions in s. 14 of the West Bengal Schools (Control of Expenditure) Act, 2005, as a graduate category teacher, the petitioner was not entitled to claim any benefit of additional increment or higher scale of pay for possessing post graduate degree.
Such degree was not one of the qualifications specified for the post to which the petitioner was appointed consequent upon recommendation by the school service commission.
Admittedly he was appointed as a graduate category teacher.
4.
May be that the petitioner started taking anthropology classes at the higher secondary level, but such fact was not sufficient to entitle him to claim the benefits of additional increment.
Simply because the council advised the school authority to take up the matter of pay scale with the district inspector of schools concerned, the petitioner's legal right did not accrue.
In the year 2003 the petitioner could have said that in view of provision of 1998 ROPA Rules he was entitled to make the claim.
But the position of law has changed.
During pendency of his application seeking the benefit, the law has undergone a change.
The 2005 Act has come into force.
5.
In terms of provisions in s. 16 of the 2005 Act a pending application was not saved.
Hence the petitioner cannot say that since his request had been made prior to the 2005 Act coming into force, the provisions thereof will not stand in the way of his getting the benefit.
By the provisions in s. 16 of the 2005 Act only terms and conditions relating to the appointment were saved.
That is to say, because of the legislation terms and conditions relating to appointment of the petitioner cannot be changed.
It is not the case of the petitioner that one of the terms and conditions was that for possessing the master's degree he would be entitled to claim any benefit.
6.
In terms of the 1998 ROPA Rules also the petitioner cannot claim the benefits.
Provisions in s. 20 of the 2005 Act abrogated the provisions thereof to the extent they are contrary to the provisions in s. 14 of the 2005 Act.
It has been categorically mentioned in the provisions in s. 14 that a graduate category teacher will not be entitled to claim any benefit for acquiring any qualification other than the qualifications specified for the post to which he is appointed.
The district inspector of schools has taken note of the change in the position of law.
He has held that as the law stands now, the petitioner is not entitled to claim the benefits of additional increment.
7.
For these reasons I am unable to give any relief to the petitioner.
There is no reason to interfere with the decision of the district inspector of schools.
The writ petition is accordingly dismissed.
There shall be no for costs in it.
Copy of this order duly countersigned by the AR (C) or ACO shall be supplied to advocates for the parties, on usual undertakings.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this order shall be supplied to the parties, if applied for.
Petition dismissed.