PS Patwalia, J - Petitioner Karam Chand has filed this writ petition seeking quashing of order dated 30102003 by which the benefit of military service granted to him towards increments has been withdrawn.
He prays that he be granted the benefit of military service towards his increments and pensionary benefits upon his retirement from the post of Driver.
The facts leading to the filing of this writ petition are as hereunder :-  2.
Petitioner joined military service on 30101962 during the period of proclamation of the first National Emergency.
It may be clarified here that National Emergency was proclaimed on 26101962 and continued upto 1611968.
Petitioner was ultimately discharged from the military service in 1978.
He is in receipt of pension for the period when he served in the military.
3.
After his discharge the petitioner was appointed as a Driver at Ranjit Sagar Dam Project, Shahpur Kandi on 18121981.
After joining the civil employment, petitioner was granted the benefit of five increments towards his pay for having served in the military for five years during the period of proclamation of National Emergency.
He was due to retire from civil employment on 31.10.2003 on attaining the age of superannuation.
4.
About two weeks before the retirement petitioner received a show cause notice dated 17102003 asking him to explain why the benefit of military service granted towards increments should not be withdrawn and his pay should not be refixed accordingly.
The petitioner filed reply to the said notice on 20102003.
Ultimately by an order dated 30102003 the benefit of military service granted to the petitioner towards increments was withdrawn.
The same was done on the ground that since the petitioner was drawing pension for the service rendered by him in the Army, he could not get the benefit of that service towards his increments.
As a result of passing of the order dated 30102003, petitioner's pay was refixed and a recovery of Rs. 41,416/- was ordered against the petitioner.
Aggrieved against this order, petitioner has filed the present writ petition.
5.
A reply has been filed on behalf of the State contesting the petition written statement once against the stand taken is that since the petitioner was drawing pension for the service rendered by him in the military, he could get the benefit of that service towards increments.
6.
We have heard Ms. Jagdeep Bains, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner and Mr. Ashok Aggarwal Additional Advocate General, Punjab for the respondents and perused the paper book.
7.
Learned counsel for the petitioner contends that the respondents have wrongly withdrawn the benefit of military service granted to the petitioner towards his increments in civil employment.
She argues that he was entitled to this benefit in terms of the provisions of Punjab Government National Emergency (Concession) Rules, 1965 (hereinafter to be referred as `1965 Rules').
She further states that the petitioner should be granted his pension after refixing his pay and giving the benefit of military service as qualifying service towards pension.
8.
On the other hand, learned Additional Advocate General contests the claim and maintains that since the petitioner has been granted pension of the period he served in the military, he is not entitled to the benefit of the said tenure either towards increments or pensionary benefits in civil employment.
9.
The grant of benefit of military service towards increments, seniority and pension is to be regulated by Rule 4 of 1965 Rules.
The said rule is.
reproduced hereunder :  "4.
Increments, Seniority and Pension :- Period of military service shall count for increments, seniority and pension as under :- (i) Increments, the period spent by a person on military service, after attaining the minimum age prescribed for appointment of any service or post, to which he is appointed, shall count for increments.
Where no such minimum age is prescribed the minimum age shall be as laid down in Rules 3.9, 310 and 311 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume-II.
This concession shall, however, be admissible only on first appointment.
(ii) Seniority :- The period of military service mentioned in Clause (i) shall be taken into consideration for the purpose of determining the seniority of a person who has rendered military service.
(iii) Pension :- The period of military service mentioned in Clause (i) shall count towards pension only in the case of appointments to permanent services or posts under the Government subject to the following conditions :- (1) The person concerned should not have earned a pension under military rules in respect of the military service in question.
(2) Any bonus or gratutity paid in respect of military service by the defence authorities shall have to be refunded to the State Government.
(3) The period, if any, between the date of discharge from military service and the date of appointment to any service post under the Government shall count for pension, provided period does not exceed one year.
Any period exceeding one year but not exceeding three years may also be allowed to count pension in exceptional cases under the orders of the Government."
A reading of this rule would show that in Rule 4(i) and 4(ii) there is no disqualification that the period of military service would not count towards increments or seniority if the Ex-serviceman has earned pension for the said service under the military rules.
This disqualification only occur in Rule 4 (iii) dealing with counting of the military service towards pension.
It is in this sub-clause that a condition has been imposed that the said service rendered in the military would count towards qualifying service for pension in civil employment only if an employee has not earned pension for the said service under the military rules.
A reading of Rule 4 therefore makes it apparent that even if an Ex-serviceman has earned pension for the military service under the military rules, yet that service has to be counted towards his increments and seniority in civil employment.
10.
There is in our opinion justification in this distinction.
After the National Emergency was enforced in October, 1962, the State of Punjab had circulated various instructions announcing concessions in order to attract young people to join the military.
Those instructions were ultimately codified into 1965 Rules.
The object of the Rules is to compensate a person in civil employment for the period which he spent in the military during the period of proclamation of the National Emergency on the premises that had the person not joined the military he would have secured a civil employment.
It is therefore that the military service rendered by a person during the period of emergency is added to his civil employment.
However, if a person has already earned pension for the service rendered in the military under the military rules then counting the said service again for qualifying service in civil employment would result in giving a double benefit to a persons.
It is therefore that 1965 Rules have imposed this disqualification in so far as the counting of the said service towards pensionary benefits is concerned.
However, a person earns an increment for each successive year and longer the number of years he will work, the equal number of increments he will earn.
Similar is the position regarding seniority.
It is for this reason that 1965 Rules envisage the grant of military service towards increments and seniority in civil employment even if a person has earned pension in respect of his military service under the military rules.
11.
Therefore, we are of the opinion that the claim of the petitioner has to be allowed partially.
The benefit of military service rendered by the petitioner during the period of emergency is to be granted to him towards increments.
The order dated 30102003 withdrawing the increments granted to the petitioner is therefore set aside.
In case any recovery has been effected from the petitioner on the basis of the aforesaid order, the respondents are directed to refund the same to the petitioner.
However, while calculating the pension payable to the petitioner the service rendered by the petitioner in the military for which he is already drawing pension would not be counted as qualifying service.
The respondents are therefore directed to calculate the pension payable to the petitioner without taking into account the military service rendered by the petitioner as qualifying service.
Let these directions be carried out within three months from the date of receipt of certified copy of this judgment.
The writ petition stands allowed in the afore stated terms.
In the circumstances of this case, there shall, however, be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.