The petitioner was initially appointed as a Chargeman in the year 1971 with the Bhakra Beas Management Board (hereinafter referred to as "the BBMB") on work charge basis.
He was, thereafter, promoted by the BBMB as Test Inspector on ad hoc basis in the year 1974.
Thereafter, the petitioner competed for direct appointment in the Punjab State Electricity Board (hereinafter referred to as "the PSEB") on the post of Test Inspector on 1141979.
Thereafter, the petitioner was promoted as AAE (JE-I) in the PSEB on 19.2.1999.
After superannuation, the petitioner has filed the present writ petition seeking a direction to the PSEB to include the service rendered by him with the BBMB in the service rendered with the PSEB for the purpose of pension and other retiral benefits.
2.
The respondents have filed their separate written statements.
The PSEB has stated that it was specifically made clear in the appointment order of the petitioner that in case he is presently employed with any Central Government/State Government/Autonomous Body, he shall have to resign before joining the PSEB.
Consequently, the petitioner had resigned from the BBMB and accepted a fresh appointment with the PSEB.
Learned counsel appearing for the PSEB submits that the instructions relied upon by the petitioners apply only to ad hoc employees of the PSEB who have been subsequently regularised.
Therefore, any period spent by the petitioner with BBMB cannot be taken into account for pensionary benefits.
Similarly, learned counsel appearing for the BBMB has submitted that the petitioner had worked on work charge/ad hoc basis for sometime.
Thereafter, he resigned and he was paid the entire dues.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner, however, submits that employees of the BBMB are taken from member States i.e., States of Rajasthan, Haryana and Punjab.
The PSEB is an autonomous body of the State of Punjab.
The petitioner had been appointed on work charge as well as on ad hoc basis on a post which had fallen to the share of the State of Punjab.
Even after selection by the PSEB, he was continued on the post which he was holding prior to joining the PSEB.
He, therefore, submits that the service rendered by the petitioner has to be counted for pension and the respondents have wrongly rejected his claim.
4.
We have considered the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties.
It is not disputed that the PSEB and the BBMB are wholly independent entities.
The employees of one Board cannot be inter-mingled with the other, although some employees of the PSEB may be permitted to serve the BBMB, on the basis of the share quota.
However, these employees are sent to the BBMB on deputation.
All along, the employees retain their lien with the PSEB.
Having considered the entire matter, we are of the considered opinion that the claim put forward by the petitioner cannot be accepted.
After serving the BBMB on worked charge/ad hoc basis, he voluntarily resigned and accepted a fresh appointment with the PSEB, after competing in open selection.
The appointment order itself makes it abundantly clear that the petitioner had been appointed by direct recruitment.
Therefore, it would not be possible for us to hold that the petitioner is entitled to tag on the service rendered by him in the BBMB with the service rendered by him in the PSEB.
5.
In view of the above, we find no merit in the writ petition and the same is hereby dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.