RC Gandhi, J - Petitioner by means of this petition seeks direction to the respondent No.2.
Public Service Commission, to declare the petitioner eligible for conducting his interview having secured 1086 marks, above the cut off marks.
He also seeks direction for revaluation of his General English paper.
2.
Respondent No.2.
Public Service Commission, issued Notification No. PSO/Examination-02/09 dated 20-2-2002 inviting applications from the permanent residents of Jammu & Kashmir desirous to compete for Jammu & Kashmir Civil Service Competitive Examination, for direct recruitment to the posts in the pay scale of 7500-12000, in various services.
Petitioner applied for seeking selection.
He was assigned Roll No. 204224 by respondent No.2.
He appeared in Preliminary Examination and passed the same.
He appeared in the main examination.
The respondent No.2 issued the select list and the name of the petitioner was not included therein.
Another select list was issued, wherein also name of the petitioner was not included.
Respondent No.2 published the merit list of the candidates in daily Kashmir Images on 14-6-2004.
The petitioner according to the merit list appeared at S. No. 64.
The cut off point for inviting the candidates for interview fixed by the Public Service Commission was 988.
The petitioner approached the Commission to know as to why he was not called for interview though he has secured 1086 marks.
His request was not heeded to and considered.
In such circumstances, this petition has been filed.
3.
Respondents have filed the reply stating therein mainly that the Appendix IB attached to SRO 161 of 1995 envisages that a candidate has to qualify all the papers and if he fails in any of the papers which is required to be passed, the candidate is not eligible to be summoned for interview.
It is also stated that the petitioner appeared in General English paper I but has not qualified it, therefore, he incurred disability for being called for the interview.
He was required to pass this paper compulsorily.
4.
Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner reiterating the grounds set out in the writ petition has submitted that petitioner being meritorious having secured 1086 marks was required to be summoned for interview and the stand taken by respondents that the petitioner has not qualified the Paper General English-I, is not tenable as this paper was only of qualifying nature and not compulsorily to be passed.
In rebuttal, learned counsel for the respondents has submitted that petitioner was required to qualify all the papers and unless he qualifies all the papers he was not entitled to be called for interview.
6.
To appreciate the pleas of learned counsel for the parties, relevant portion of Appendix IB is extracted below:  "B.
Main Examination  The written examination shall consist of the following papers: Paper I General English 300 marks  Paper II Essay in English 150 marks  Paper III and IV General studies 300 marks  Papers V, VI, VII & VIII.
Any two subjects to be selected from the list of the optional subjects indicated below.
"(1) Paper I on English will be of matriculation standard and will be of qualifying nature only.
The marks obtained in this paper shall not count for ranking."
7.
Relying upon this provision contained in the Appendix, learned counsel for the respondents has submitted that the language contained therein is itself explanatory indicating that General English paper I will be of Matriculation standard and of qualifying nature only, which means that every candidate has to pass it compulsorily.
8.
Mr. Qureshi, in rebuttal, relying upon the proviso to the Rule 8(iv) of SRO 161 of 1995 has submitted that if a candidate fails in one paper, he does not incur disability to summon him for interview by the respondent No.2.
Proviso is extracted below:  "Provided that a candidate who fails to secure such minimum number of marks, as are fixed by the commission in their discretion in more than one subject, shall not be eligible to be called for interview."
9.
From the language contained in the proviso, it is clear mandate of law that if a candidate fails to secure such minimum number of marks in more than one subject as fixed by the Commission in its discretion, in that event, he shall not be eligible to be called for interview.
The discretion is to be exercised in a situation where the candidate, in more than one subject, has not secured the minimum number of marks.
More than one does not mean one.
It is not brought on record that respondent No.2 has exercised such discretion expressly.
Otherwise also the language contained in the Note to Rule 8, suggests that the General English paper is not required to be compulsorily passed.
If it would have been so, the marks secured in the paper should have been counted for the ranking also.
Ranking is to be considered by taking the marks secured in all papers and not by excluding the marks of the papers in which a candidate has failed.
The Note contained to the Appendix reveals that marks obtained in the General English paper are not to be counted for ranking and is of qualifying nature which suggests that if a candidate does not qualify, he does not incur disability for interview.
If this paper has that much significance that if not qualified the candidate shall be ineligible for interview, it does not appeal as to why, in that event, its marks are excluded to determine ranking.
Looking it in this perspective, it appears to be harmonious interpretation that non-qualifying of this paper should not come in the way of the candidate to call him for interview as is also evident from the Proviso to Rule 8 as the petitioner has not failed in more than one subject.
10.
For the aforesaid reasons, the writ petition is allowed.
Respondents are directed to interview the petitioner.
Petition allowed.