PS Patwalia, J - Petitioner Harjit Singh has filed this writ petition being dissatisfied with the judgment rendered by the Central Administrative Tribunal, Chandigarh Bench, Chandigarh, dismissing the Original Application No. 979/CH/1999 filed by the petitioner.
He prays that the judgment of the Tribunal be set aside and a direction be issued to the Department of Posts to promote him to the Postal Service Group-B grade.
The relevant factual matrix of the case is as hereunder.
2.
The petitioner joined the Department of Posts as a Postal Assistant on 371969.
He was further promoted as an Accountant and still further as an Assistant Post Master in the lower selection grade.
3.
That as per the Department of Postal Superintendent/Post Masters Group-B recruitment rules 1987, 6% of postal service Group-B grade posts are to be filled up by promotion from amongst the clerical line officials working against the posts in the lower selection grade and above.
For this purpose, a departmental examination is held from time to time.
Vide letter dated 1281997 applications were invited to fill up a total of 6 Group-B grade posts by holding a departmental examination on 30/31121997.
The petitioner also appeared in the said examination.
The petitioner's name however did not figure in the list of successful candidates in spite of the fact that 3 vacancies in the general category remained unfilled.
4.
The petitioner claims that he secured minimum of 45% marks in each of the papers and 50% marks in the aggregate in the examination and therefore as per the letter dated 2861975 from the Director General, Posts and Telegrams, New Delhi to all Heads of Postal Circles, since the qualifying percentage was 45% in each paper and 50% in the aggregate, petitioner had duly qualified the examination.
He therefore claims that he is entitled to be considered and promoted against one of the three vacant posts.
It is further the petitioner's claim that the respondents were denying him promotion on the basis of a letter dated 5111997 wherein for the first time the qualifying standard was enhanced to 50% marks in each paper and 50% marks in the aggregate.
It is the petitioner's case that this decision/circular would apply to vacancies which would arise after its issuance and would not apply to the earlier vacancies, to which the decision of 1975 would apply.
Since the petitioner was qualified as per the earlier decision, he had a right to be promoted.
When his claim was not accepted by the respondents, he approached the Central Administrative Tribunal, Chandigarh Bench, Chandigarh by Original Application No. 979 of 1999, making the aforesaid claim.
5.
The respondents appeared before the Tribunal and took a stand that the first departmental examination was conducted in 1975.
The criteria of minimum pass marks of 45% in each paper and 50% in aggregate relied upon by the petitioner was only for that examination.
Subsequently, the departmental examination was discontinued in the year 1979.
When the examination was again introduced in 1986, the criteria of qualifying marks was reformulated as 50% in each paper as also in the aggregate.
For candidates belonging to Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribes, the qualifying standard was 40% in each paper as also in aggregate.
Thereafter a decision was taken in the year 1997 that the relaxation of 10% marks granted to the reserved categories should be discontinued.
This was circulated by letter dated 5111997 It was therefore stated in the said letter that the "existing criteria" of minimum pass marks prescribed for general category candidates viz. 50% in each paper and 50% in aggregate would be applicable in respect of all officials including reserved category candidates.
6.
The Tribunal examined the matter and recorded the following findings :-  "The applicant has based his claim on the assumption that for the vacancies of 1996, the criterion of minimum pass marks was 45% in each paper and 50% in aggregate.
According to him since he had obtained more than 45% marks in each paper and also more than 50% in aggregate, he should have been declared pass and appointed to a PS Group `B' post.
It is his contention that the criterion was changed by letter Annexure A-1 dated 5.11.97.
In our view, the contention is misplaced and the applicant is rearing under a mistaken belief.
It is true that earlier as per letter dated 08775 attached with Annexure A-3/1, the qualifying marks in each paper were 45% and the total qualifying were 50% in aggregate and this criterion is stated to have been followed for the first departmental test conducted in the year 1975.
However, this criterion stood changed with effect from 1986.
This is evident from letter dated 13th September, 1986, when a departmental examination for PS Group `B' service was held.
The Departmental Examination Section in the Ministry of Communications, Deptt.
Of Posts, GOI, New Delhi had addressed letter annexure R-1 dated 19986 to their SPG section and made a query as to what was the minimum qualifying standard in each paper and aggregate.
In response, the SPG section replied as nder :- "The minimum qualifying standard in qualifying examination is 50% marks.
This to be relaxed to 40% in the case of SC/ST candidates."
According to the respondents this criterion is being followed right since 1986 and we cannot disbelieve this assertion.
Applicant is wrong in assuming that the criterion was changed only through letter Annexure A-1, dt. 5.11.97.
In fact, this is a letter whereby the benefit of qualifying the exam by SC/ST candidates under the relaxed standard was withdrawn in view of Govt. of India orders dated 22797 and it was clarified that "existing criteria" of minimum pass marks prescribed for general candidates for PS Group `B' Examination viz. 50% in each paper and 50% in aggregate will now be applicable in respect of all officials including reserve community candidates.
It is relevant to mention that earlier for members of SC/ST community, the criteria of qualifying the exam was 40% but annexure A-1 sought to treat them at par with other general category candidates in the matter of departmental examination and to qualify the same with criterion of 50%.
The use of words "existing criteria" in annexure A-1 itself indicates that the criteria of 50% already existed.
Thus, we hold that the applicant was required to pass the departmental examination for PS Group `B' on the basis of criterion, as mentioned in R-2 viz. 50% in each paper/aggregate.
But he having secured less than 50% marks in papers I and II was rightly not included in the panel of successful candidates, A-2.
It is not his case that he has been treated unlike the others who participated in the examination of December, 1997 and thus discriminated.
As such, no case is made out in favour of the applicant."
7.
It is this finding of the Tribunal which has been assailed by the petitioner in this writ petition.
8.
We have heard Shri RS Bains, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner and Ms. Daya Chaudhary, Assistant Solicitor General, appearing on behalf of the respondents and perused the record.
9.
The contention raised by Mr. Bains, learned counsel for the petitioner is that the criteria circulated on 5111997 can not apply to the vacancies which have arisen before the same was formulated.
He contends that appointment on those vacancies should be regulated by 1975 criteria.
On the other hand, Ms. Daya Chaudhary, learned counsel for the respondents contends that in fact, the 1975 criteria was only for that examination.
After the examination was discontinued in 1979 and reintroduced in 1986, a fresh criteria was formulated.
It was on this criteria which was in existence well before 1997 that the petitioner's eligibility was assessed.
To bring out the fact that the criteria of 50% marks in each paper and 50% in the aggregate was formulated in 1986 she has relied upon two documents.
The first is a memorandum dated 19091986 wherein some information was asked for.
The relevant extract of the same is as hereunder :-  "Refer your memo no. 11-14/86-SPG dated 11986 regarding holding of the departmental competitive examination for promotion to post masters service group `B' from general line officials.
Before a circular indicating the detailed time table is issued, the following information may kindly be furnished immediately.
(i) Whether there is any age limit, (ii) The minimum qualifying standard in each paper and aggregate if any, and (iii) Duration of examination in each paper."
10.
This information was supplied vide memorandum dated 13101986, the relevant extract of which is as under :-  Sub : Holding of Departmental Examination for promotion to Postmasters Services Group `B' from General Line Officials - proposal for.
The undersigned is directed to refer to DE section's Memo no. 39-1/86-DE dated 19th September, 1986 on the above subject and to furnish below the required information :-  (i)There is no age limit for appearing in the examination.
(ii)The minimum qualifying standard in qualifying examination is 50% marks.
This is to be relaxed to 40% in the case of SC/ST candidates.
(iii)Duration of examination of each paper will be 3 hours.
11.
She states that a reading of these two memorandums would clearly bring out that the minimum qualifying standard of 50% was prescribed in the year 1986 itself.
It is therefore that the circular of 591997, while considering the issue of lower qualifying marks for reserved category candidates referred to the criteria of 50% marks in each paper and 50% in the aggregate as "existing criteria of minimum pass marks prescribed for general candidates".
12.
Having considered the submissions of the learned counsel, we are inclined to agree with the learned Assistant Solicitor General.
A reading of the letter of 2861975 shows that the subject of the letter referred to the departmental competitive examination of 1975.
Clause 2 and 3 of the letter deal with age/eligibility and the date of conduct of the examination.
They are reproduced as hereunder :-  "2.
(i) The admission to the examination is restricted to qualify IPOs/IRMS who have put in 5 years of regular service after passing the said examination.
1st July, 1975 shall be the crucial date for determining the years of service put in by a candidate.
The regular service in the grade will include service put in any higher grade also or any service rendered on deputation.
The intention is that 5 years approved service should be counted from the date an official is appointed in regular arrangement, after passing the examination.
(ii) There is no age restriction for the examination to be held in the year 1975.
(iii) In the selection through departmental competitive examination proper reservation for SC and ST etc. will be made in accordance with the rules prescribed in this behalf from time to time.
(iv) The total number of chances to which the candidates shall be entitled to limited to 4 only.
3.
The examination will be conducted sometime in Oct/November 1975 in accordance with the syllabus attached, through the P&T Service Selection Board for which detailed information will be issued in due course.
The number of vacancies likely to be filled will also be announced later on."
13.
The letter also prescribes the syllabus for 1975 examination.
We are therefore of the opinion that the said letter was prescribing the criteria for the 1975 examination.
It was not meant for the 1995 examination.
The respondents have categorically stated that in any case, from 1979 onwards, the examination was discontinued and re-introduced in 1986.
The communications of 19986 and 131086 clearly bring out that minimum qualifying standard was increased to 50% marks with a relaxation of 40% in the case of Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribes.
This is further fortified by the letter of 5.11.97 which refers to the same as the existing criteria.
We are therefore of the opinion that the criteria of 50% marks in each subject and in the aggregate was existing from 1986 onwards.
In this situation, the petitioner has been assessed on the existing criteria.
This is not a case where a criteria formulated in 1997 has been applied to vacancies occurring earlier.
When assessed on this criteria, the petitioner does not qualify the examination and hence is not entitled to any relief.
No fault can thus be found with the conclusion reached by the Central Administrative Tribunal.
14.
For the reasons mentioned herein above, we find no merit in this writ petition and the same is accordingly dismissed.
In the circumstances of the case, however, there would be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.