JS Narang, J - The order dated June 29, 1999, passed by the Commissioner under the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923 (hereinafter referred to as "the Act"), has been challenged in the present appeal.
2.
Respondent No. 2 had filed a claim application by stating that her husband late Sh. Chhida Ram had been working with respondent-appellant as a Chowkidar at monthly wages of Rs. 2,000/-.
It is claimed that he used to perform his duty 24 hours, as he had been asked to reside inside the factory premises.
During the course of employment the workman suffered some heart problem on July 3/4, 1997 on account of being overworked.
He was not looked after and consequently died at 9 am on July 4, 1997.
The matter was not reported anywhere nor the post-mortem was carried out.
The body alongwith the luggage was sent to his native place.
The claimant requested for the compensation which was declined.
A notice dated September 18, 1997 was served upon the employer to which no response was received.
The claimant filed a claim of Rs. 1,10,000/- as compensation alongwith interest and penalty.
3.
The claim had been contested by the appellant.
Apart from other pleas, the contest is vis-a-vis the maintainability.
The stand is that the deceased was not a workman as he was never ever employed by the management as a Chowkidar in the factory.
It is the claim of the management that the deceased had been employed as a Constable in Delhi Police.
Sh. Garib Ram, one of the directors, had retired as Assistant Commissioner of Delhi Police.
Since both of them belonged to the same village and were close to each other, Chhida Ram used to visit him in the factory off and on.
The deceased retired from the police service somewhere in November, 1980 upon attaining the age of superannuation.
The management has its own watch and ward staff, therefore, there was no need to have employed the deceased as a Chowkidar.
It has also been averred that the deceased had died his natural death on July 4, 1997.
It was out of generosity that the staff of the management took him at the instance of the aforesaid director and got him examined from the Doctor at Alwar, where the employees of the management used to get their treatment.
Since the workman was never ever in the employment of the management, the question of paying any compensation does not arise.
4.
Upon the pleadings of the parties the issues had been framed and the respective evidence had been produced before the competent authority.
The claimant examined herself as her own witness alongwith two other persons.
Copy of the ration card and the notice sent to the management have been exhibited as Exs.
AW1/1 and AW1/2 respectively and the registered receipt as Ex. AW1/3.
Some other documents like Doctor's certificate and jamabandi have been marked as A and B but were never proved to be exhibited accordingly.
In her cross- examination she has admitted that Sh. Garib Ram was a friend of her husband and both used to work in Delhi Police.
Both were also classmates from childhood and that the residence of Garib Ram is situated in the same village as that of her husband.
She has also admitted that she has no proof of her husband having been paid Rs. 2,000/- as wages by the management.
Other witness Satpal Sharma has also deposed orally.
Similarly, another witness Daya Chand has appeared, who has also deposed orally, except for the fact that both the witness had proved the diary written by Chhida Ram, which has been exhibited as AW1/2.
5.
On the other hand Garib Ram has appeared as MW1.
He has categorically stated that Chhida Ram knew him and used to visit his house generally and probably once or twice in a month.
The company staff became acquainted with him and they were aware of the fact that he was his friend.
He has categorically stated that Chhida Ram was never ever engaged in the employment of the company as a Chowkidar, as the same would be an insult for him.
He has also stated that it was in July, 1997, probably 3rd of July, 1997 that he had received a telephonic message in Karol Bagh from the company premises that Chhida Ram had come but was not feeling well.
He had instructed the staff of the factory to take him to doctor.
Next day he had received message that Chhida Ram has died.
He had directed that the dead body of Chhida Ram be sent to his native place.
He has also produced the attendance register of the management which has been exhibited as RW1/1 to RW1/7, which does not contain the name of Chhida Ram.
The ESI returns from April, 1994 upto September, 1995 have also been exhibited as RW1/8 to RW1/10 which do not contain his name.
Similarly, the management produced Sh. Gautam as MW-2, who was the production in charge of the respondent company for the last 9-10 years and used to reside in the factory premises with his family.
He has admitted that he knew Chhida Ram as he used to visit Sh. Garib Ram, director of the company.
He has categorically denied that Chhida Ram had ever worked as a Chowkidar in the company.
He has further stated that it was on July 3, 1997, Chhida Ram had come to the factory premises at noon and had told him that he had come to Mohan Baba Mandir but was not feeling well.
Consequently, Sh. Garib Ram, director was informed and as per his instructions Sh. Chhida Ram was taken to the doctor for providing medical aid.
He stayed in the company premises and in the morning he became serious.
He was again taken to the doctor, who admitted him but in the hospital he died.
6.
Upon perusal of the evidence, issue No. 1 has been found in favour of the claimant vis-a-vis the maintainability of the application.
So far as issued Nos. 2 and 4 are concerned, the finding has been returned in favour of the deceased holding that he was working with the respondent-appellant as a Security Guard, who expired on July 3/4, 1997.
Therefore, the management is liable to pay compensation to the dependents of the deceased.
It has been observed on the basis of admission of the fact that Chhida Ram was present in the factory premises on July 3, 1997 and he had been admitted to the hospital and that he died in the hospital on July 4, 1997.
In the hospital the address of Chhida Ram was given as C/O DK Plywood, Bhiwadi.
It is obvious that he was working with respondent-management.
Resultantly, the application had been allowed vide order dated June 29, 1999, vide which the compensation as well as penalty has been awarded in the sum of Rs. 1,32,162/-.
7.
The aforesaid has been challenged by way of present appeal.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that the learned Commissioner fell into error in opining that Chhida Ram worked with the respondent-appellant.
In fact, he was never ever shown in the mustor rolls, which have been duly produced before the learned Commissioner and that the returns essentially required to be submitted under the ESI Act had also been produced, which had been duly exhibited, did not show the name of Chhida Ram as one of the employees.
It has been admitted by the wife of the deceased that he was very well known to Sh. Garib Ram, director of the company, who had retired as Assistant Commissioner of Police and that Chhida Ram had also retired as a Constable from Delhi Police.
It has also come in the statement of Garib Ram that Chhida Ram was never ever employed as a Chowkidar and that employing him as Chowkidar with the respondent-appellant, would be an insult of Garib Ram as well as to Chhida Ram.
He further admitted that Chhida Ram used to visit him twice a month and the factory persons were very well aware of his acquaintance with Chhida Ram.
It is because of this reason that he had been given the help for providing medical assistance on July 3, 1997.
He was taken to hospital, where the other employees were always sent for treatment.
By merely describing the address as "C/O the appellant" would not mean that he may be accepted as an employee of the respondent-appellant.
No evidence has been brought on record to establish that he was paid Rs. 2,000/- pm as Chowkidar.
In the absence of any categoric evidence in this regard, learned Commissioner erred in holding the relationship of employee and employer with Chhida Ram.
The person, who has been admitted to be close friend of Garib Ram, has himself stated that he was never ever employed as a Chowikdar in the company.
This fact has been lost sight of by the learned Commissioner.
Since no evidence has been produced for establishing the relationship of employer and employee, the question of awarding compensation did not arise.
In fact the claim of the applicant deserved to be dismissed.
8.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondent had argued that the relationship of employer and employee stands established as has been categorically observed by the learned Commissioner that the existence of the workman at the factory premises on July 3, 1997, when he suffered heart attack, and that he was taken to the hospital by the management itself and was again brought back to the factory premises and he died in the morning of July 4, 1997 in the factory premises.
9.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties and have also perused the paper book as also the impugned order dated June 29, 1999 and have also examined the evidence analysed by the learned Commissioner.
I am not at all satisfied with the manner in which the finding has been returned that the relationship of employer and employee, stood established between the respondent-appellant and Chhida Ram.
The claimant has categorically admitted that she has no documentary evidence for proving the payment of Rs. 2,000/- pm She has very fairly admitted that Garib Ram was very well known to deceased Chhida Ram and that he used to visit him.
Further, both of them belonged to the same village and were also classmates.
She has not been able to produce any document to establish the relationship of employer and employee.
So far as production of ration card is concerned, giving the address of the factory premises would not establish that he had been residing in the factory premises of the company as a workman having been employed a Chowkidar.
He may have been residing in the factory premises on friendly basis.
No company would incur expenses of Rs. 2,000/- pm without being shown in the books of accounts and the requisite returns being filed before the statutory authorities created for the purpose.
It has come on record that the muster roll was produced as also the return submitted before the ESI, which do not indicate the name of deceased Chhida Ram.
Just alleging that a sum of Rs. 2,000/- pm was paid by company, without the supporting documents, would not establish that he was working as a Chowkidar with the company.
Merely the address having been mentioned in the hospital as "C/O the appellant" would not establish that he was working with the company.
It has been established beyond doubt that Chhida Ram deceased was very well known to Garib Ram, who was one of the Directors and when he was taken ill on July 3, 1997, he was removed to hospital at the instance of Garib Ram and he being his friend, the employees in the factory rendered the requisite help.
It is also reported that he did in the hospital on July 4, 1997.
His body was sent to his native village at the instance of Garib Ram, who has been admitted to be his friend.
It is a case of no evidence to hold that relationship of employer and employee stood established.
Learned Commissioner did not examine this aspect at all and proceeded to hold the relationship of an employer and employee only on the basis of address given in the ration card and in the certificate issued by the hospital on the death of Chhida Ram.
This evidence cannot be taken as connecting evidence with any circumstance brought on record for establishing relationship of employer and employee.
In view of the above, the appeal is allowed.
The findings on issue No. 2, 4 and 5 are reversed.
Resultantly, the claim application of the applicant is dismissed.
Appeal allowed.