Shiv Kumar Sharma, J - The appellant, who was a Constable, was placed on trial before learned Judicial Magistrate No. 2, Jaipur City for having hurled obscene words at a young girl Laxmi.
Finding those words offensive to the chastity and modesty of girl, the learned Magistrate vide judgement dated March 17, 1986 convicted and sentenced the appellant under Sections 294, 341 and 509 IPC.
Partly allowing the appeal, learned Additional Sessions Judge Jaipur City vide judgment dated December 13, 1990 although confirmed the conviction of the appellant, released him on probation under Section 360 of the Code of Criminal Procedure on the condition that appellant would not repeat the offence in future and observe peace for three years.
2.
A look at the material on record demonstrates that after the Magistrate convicted and sentenced the appellant, the Superintendent of Police Jaipur City vide order dated July 2, 1986 dismissed the appellant from service.
However, the DIG Police Jaipur Range set aside the order of removal vide order dated November 10, 1987 and took back the appellant in service with the condition that appellant shall be placed under suspension till the decision of criminal appeal.
After the decision in Criminal Appeal, the appellant placed the copy of the judgment dated December 13, 1990 before the Supdt.
of Police Jaipur City, who passed an order dated February 27, 1991 dismissing the appellant from service.
The departmental appeal preferred against the said order was dismissed by the DIG Jaipur Range on September 19, 1992. Review petition against those orders was also dismissed by His Excellency Governor on June 3, 1994.
3.
After learned Single Judge dismissed the writ petition on January 17, 2001 holding that release on probation did not obliterate the conviction, the appellant has preferred the instant special appeal.
4.
Smt. Naina Saraf, learned counsel for the appellant vehemently canvassed that the allegation against the appellant did not indicate moral turpitude.
The Supdt.
of Police had no authority to pass an order of dismissal against the appellant.
The penalty of removal imposed without applying judicial mind was improper.
Dismissal from service for the minor punishment under Sections 294, 341 and 509 IPC was harsh.
According to learned counsel the appellant was innocent and falsely implicated in the criminal case.
Reliance is placed on Pawan Kumar v. State of Haryana, 1996(3) SCT 339 : (AIR 1996 SC 3300), Divisional Personnel Officer Southern Railway v. TR Challappan, (AIR 1975 SC 2216) and Union of India v. Sunil Kumar Sarkar, 2001(2) SCT 64 : (2001)3 SCC 414) : (RLW 2001(2) SC 190).
5.
We find no substance in the submissions.
Adverting to Rule 2(a)(vi) of the Rajasthan Police Subordinate Service Rules, 1989 (for short '1989 Rules') we notice that the Supdt.
of Police is the appointing authority for the post of Constables.
Rule 13 provides that the character of a candidate to be appointed for the Rajasthan Police Subordinate Service should be such to qualify him for employment in the service.
The character of a Constable who is appointed to protect the people, should be above board.
6.
In Pawan Kumar v. State of Haryana (supra) "moral turpitude" is defined as an expression which is used in legal as also societal parlance to describe conduct which is inherently base, vile, depraved or having any connection showing depravity.
7.
The prosecution had established beyond doubt that the words addressed by the appellant to young girl Laxmi were clearly offensive to her chastity and modesty.
The words were likely to express and personate to the mind of the hearers, including the girl, something which delicacy, purity and decency forbade to be expressed.
They were suggestive of unchaste and lustful ideas and were impure, indecent and lewd.
8.
In the instant appeal we are not required to review the evidence adduced in the criminal case.
Without going into the niceties of the submissions of learned counsel and only on the ground that appellant being a constable and in the police uniform was found involved in the act of eve-teasing, we find the appellant disentitled to the relief sought by him.
9.
For these reasons, the appeal being devoid of merit stands dismissed without any order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.