Markandeya Katju, CJ.
- This writ appeal has been filed against the impugned judgment of the learned Single Judge dated 6th July, 2005.
2.
Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
3.
The writ petition was filed with two prayers.
Firstly, the prayer was to quash the Office Order No. 139 dated 16th June, 2003, which is Annexure P-7 to the writ petition.
A perusal of that order dated 16th June, 2003 shows that by the said order certain persons were entrusted with current duty charge for a period of three months to the post of Executive Engineer (Civil) as a stop-gap arrangement with immediate effect with the Delhi Jal Board.
4.
Since that order was only for three months, it automatically came to an end on 16th September, 2003.
5.
The learned Single Judge has by his impugned judgment quashed the order.
We fail to understand how an order which did not even exist on the judgment can be quashed.
That order ceased to exist in September, 2003 and, therefore, it could not obviously be quashed in July, 2005 when that prayer had become infructuous.
Learned counsel for the Appellant submitted that subsequent to the automatic lapse of that order, the petitioner had continued in service.
If that was so, the writ petition should have been amended and there should have been a further prayer for restraining the petitioner from functioning after 16th September, 2003 but no such amendment application was filed nor was any amendment made challenging any subsequent appointment order, which may have been given to the petitioner.
6.
The first prayer in the writ petition has become infructuous and, hence, the writ petition should have been dismissed on that ground alone.
7.
So far as the second prayer in the writ petition is concerned, it reads as follows :  "(b) to pass an order/directions and/or any other appropriate writ directing the Respondents to fill up the post of Executive Engineer according to Seniority list duly issued by the Respondents in accordance with the Recruitment rules."
8.
Thus, the second prayer is only that the post of Executive Engineer should be filled up in accordance with the seniority list.
There is no prayer challenging the said seniority list.
Unless any challenge to a seniority list is made, we fail to understand how that list could be disturbed by the learned Single Judge.
When a final seniority list is issued certain rights accrue to the persons whose names are in that seniority list.
If anyone wants to challenge that seniority list he has to file a writ petition or go before the appropriate forum to challenge the same.
There is no challenge to the seniority list at all.
Rather the prayer is that the post of Executive Engineer should be filled up in accordance with the seniority list.
9.
The learned Single Judge in paragraph 18 of his judgment has directed that the seniority of the parties hereto must be refixed within eight weeks.
10.
In our opinion, the aforesaid direction clearly amounts to disturbance of the seniority list, which could not be done because there is not even a challenge to the seniority list in the writ petition.
11.
A judge cannot ordinarily grant a relief which has not even been claimed by any party.
In the circumstances, we set aside the impugned judgment dated 6th July, 2005.
12.
As regard the prayer that a direction be made in regard to the seniority list, we are informed that in some other writ petition being Writ Petition No. 9099-9123/2004, the seniority list has been challenged.
13.
The parties are agreed that we may dispose of the Writ Petition No. 9099- 9123/2004 on that date.
14.
Three days time is granted to Mr. PP Khurana, Senior Advocate to file a counter affidavit in those writ petitions.
Rejoinder thereto be filed within two days thereafter.
15.
These appeals are disposed of.
Appeals disposed of.