S Ravindra Bhat, J - The petitioner has challenged an order dated 152001 issued by the Assistant Commissioner of the respondent-MCD, in these proceedings under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
The petitioner is working as a Driver, CSE Department, Rohini Zone functioning under the Additional Deputy Commissioner of the MCD.
He claims to be an office-bearer of an Association of Employees.
It is alleged that the petitioner had objected to certain practices followed by the MCD to the issue of slips in respect of trucks which reported at the Weigh Bridge.
It is alleged that as a retaliatory measure the impugned suspension order was passed.
2.
The petitioner has averred that on a previous occasion in the year 1996 he had been placed under suspension but that order had been thereafter revoked.
3.
The respondent MCD in its affidavit has tried to justify the action by stating that the petitioner was guilty of misbehaviour at the SLF site Bhalswa with the staff working at the Weigh Bridge.
There was a traffic jam at GT Road because of his activities.
It is alleged that the petitioner was insisting that the staff working on the bridge should issue him slips before dumping the garbage.
4.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner submits that the impugned suspension cannot be justified since it is tainted by mala fides and has been continued without any application of mind.
He relies upon a Circular issued by the Govt. of India dated 712004 which is said to be binding upon the MCD.
By the said circular the suspension of public and government servants has to be necessarily reviewed periodically from time to time, after the expiry of each block of 90 days.
He submitted that this procedure has not been followed and the petitioner continued to be under suspension indefinitely for a period of nearly five years.
This amounts to a punitive order, and is arbitrary, learned Counsel urges that till date no charge-sheet has been issued nor has any departmental proceedings being initiated.
In this view, the continuation of the suspension order amounts to malice in law.
5.
Learned Counsel for the respondent on previous occasions sought time to obtain instructions to the correct position and report whether the charge- sheet had been issued.
She relies upon the averments in the counter affidavit to say that the petitioner was suspended on account of his misconduct and that a deparmental inquiry had been ordered.
However, no material has been placed on record to show whether a charge-sheet was indeed issued or departmental proceedings having been initiated.
6.
It has been often held that Courts ordinarily refrain from interfering with orders of suspension unless illegality, unreasonableness or mala fides are made out.
7.
In the facts of the case, I am of the opinion that the continuation of the suspension order without issuance of the charge-sheet amounts to complete non-application of mind by the MCD.
It has resulted in a punitive order as far as the petitioner is concerned.
Although an order of suspension does not result in the termination of the contract of the employment, nevertheless if the employee is continued on suspension without cause and without issuance of charge-sheet for an unreasonable period it acts harshly and opressively.
There is authority to the effect that an inordinate delay in the initiation and/or conclusion of departmental proceedings results in arbitrariness of the suspension order [see : Hiralal v. DDA, 1995 Lab IC 2196 (Del); NP Murthy v. TT Devasthanams, 1992(1) SLR 555; DS Chandnani v. Chittotosh Mukherjee, CJ Bombay 1992(4) SLR 98 (Bom)].
Hence, I am of the opinion that inaction of the respondents in reviewing the suspension order on the one hand and continuing the petitioner under suspension for a long and unexplained period of 4 years in spite of the fact that no charge-sheet had been issued and also in view of the Memorandum dated 712004, is arbitrary.
8.
The petition is accordingly allwed.
The charge-sheet dated 152001 is hereby quashed.
The respondents shall reinstate the petitioner in services within a period of four weeks from today.
The petitioner shall not be entitled to full salary and allowances; that relief is restricted to a period of one year namely, from 1102004 till date.
The amount constituting the balance full salary and subsistence allowance already paid from 01102004 till date shall be disbursed within a period of four weeks from today.
9.
All rights and contentions of the parties in respect of any departmental proceedings which may be initiated by the MCD are kept open.
Dasti.
Petition allowed.