Rajive Bhalla, J (Oral) - The prayer in the present writ petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution by the petitioner, is for the issuance of a writ in the nature of Mandamus directing the respondents to revise the pay scale attached to the post of Motor Vehicle-Inspector, (diploma holders) from its existing revised pay scale of Rs. 570-1080 to Rs. 700-1200 with effect from 111978.
2.
The petitioner is a diploma holder in Automobile Engineering and pursuant to an advertisement was selected by the Departmental Recruitment Committee as a Motor Vehicle Inspector in June 1974 in the pay scale of Rs. 200-450.
As per Rule 7 of the Punjab Transport Department (State Service Class -III) Rules, 1963, the post of Service Station Incharge is a feeder post for promotion to the post of Motor Vehicle Inspector.
3.
Upon the acceptance of a report submitted by the Second Pay Commission, the pay scales to the aforementioned posts were revised as under :-  (i) Service Station Incharge ... Rs. 700-1200 for diploma holders; Rs. 570-1080 for non diploma holders  (ii) Motor Vehicle Inspector ... Rs. 570-1080  4.
A perusal of the revised pay scale reveals that the post of Service Station Incharge is a feeder post for promotion to the post of Motor Vehicle Inspector, the pay scale of a Service Station Incharge was split into two; Rs. 700-1200 for diploma holders and Rs. 570-1080 for non diploma holders, whereas a Motor Vehicle Inspector was granted a single pay scale namely Rs. 570- 1080 without a higher pay scale for a diploma holder.
5.
This apparent anomaly namely a person on a lower post drawing a higher pay scale was noticed by the petitioner and consequently, the petitioner submitted representations to the respondents requesting them to take up the matter with the Anomaly Committee.
The said anomaly, was not referred to the Anomaly Committee by the Government, compelling the petitioner to file the present writ petition.
6.
Counsel for the petitioner contends that on the face of it the pay scales, assigned to the two posts, suffer from an anomaly.
Admittedly, the post of Service Station Incharge is a feeder cadre post for promotion to the post of Motor Vehicle Inspector.
However, diploma holder Service Station Incharges have been granted a higher pay scale than the Motor Vehicle Inspectors holding or not holding diploma.
It is further contended that the promotional post, cannot and should not be assigned a pay scale lower than the feeder post.
As an illustration, counsel for the petitioner contends that a diploma holder working as a Station Service Incharge, who would be drawing a pay scale of Rs. 700-1200, would on promotion, be granted a reduced pay scale of Rs. 570-1080.
When tested on the basis of this illustration, counsel for the petitioner contends that the irrational nature of the pay scale becomes apparent and, therefore, the Government should have considered the anomaly in its right perspective.
7.
Counsel for the Respondents on the other hand contends that the entire matter stands considered by the Government and the representations made by the petitioner declined as the Government did not find any anomaly in the pay scales.
8.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the records.
9.
A perusal of the pay scale, prescribed for the two posts, leaves no manner of doubt that a diploma holder appointed as a Service Station Incharge would draw a higher salary than a diploma holder Motor Vehicle Inspector.
The post of a Service Station Incharge is a feeder cadre post for promotion to the post of Motor Vehicle Inspector.
However, upon promotion to a Service Station Incharge, such an employee, would be granted a pay scale lower than that drawn by him as a Service Station Incharge.
Another aspect of the matter that merits notice is whether the post, which is the feeder cadre post for promotion to the next higher post can be assigned a pay scale higher than that of the promotional post.
Another apparent inconsistency is that a diploma holder Motor Vehicle Inspector, which post is admittedly higher in status, draws a lower basic salary than a Service Station Incharge.
Prima facie there appears to be an anomaly in the basic salary assigned to the two posts.
It appears that the aforementioned controversy has not been considered by the Government.
Consequently, it would be appropriate to direct the respondents to reconsider the question of the pay scales assigned to the post of Motor Vehicle Inspector and Service Station Incharge within a period of three months from the date of receipt of a certified copy of this order.
Any consequential order/benefits that may have to be passed/may become due to the petitioner as a result of any anomaly that may be directed to be removed, shall be passed/paid to the petitioner within a period of two months thereafter.
10.
Counsel for the Respondents points out that the petitioner is no longer in service from 4101989.
Needless to say, if any benefits are due to the petitioner on account of the removal of the anomaly, the said benefits would be confined to the period, he remained in service.
11.
The present writ petition is consequently allowed with no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.