Jayanta Kumar Biswas, J - The writ petitioner is aggrieved by his dismissal from service.
2.
He was working as sramik in West Bengal State Electricity Board (hereinafter referred to as "the board").
A disciplinary proceeding was initiated against him by issuing a charge-sheet dated March 17th, 1998.
It was alleged that by printing and using false money receipts he had collected moneys from the consumers against their electricity bills, and thus caused financial loss to, and loss of reputation of, the board.
It was stated that in his statement dated January 28th, 1998, he had admitted the fact of printing the false money receipts.
3.
In the enquiry the board examined ten witnesses, and exhibited seventeen documents.
No defence evidence was adduced.
The enquiry officer found that the charge stood proved.
Copy of the enquiry report was supplied.
He was given opportunity to show cause why penalty of dismissal should not be imposed.
4.
The disciplinary authority passed the dismissal order on December 15th, 1999; its last paragraph reads as follows :-  "Since an Industrial Dispute is pending before the 3rd Industrial Tribunal Calcutta in which he is concerned, an amount equivalent to his one month's wage has been remitted to him on 151299 and an application seeking approval of the above action has been filed before the 3rd Industrial Tribunal as required under section 33 (2) (b) under Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 on 151299."
By an order dated June 12th, 2002 the tribunal held that the enquiry was vitiated by breach of principles of natural justice, because (a) the enquiry officer explained the charges to the petitioner on January 4th, 1999, without supplying the documents relied on by the management; and (b) though the petitioner by his letter dated April 23rd, 1999 had expressed his unwillingness to tender defence witnesses without the help of his defence helper, the enquiry officer proceeded with the enquiry.
5.
On September 12th, 2002 the board applied for permission to withdraw the 33 (2) (b) application.
By order dated February 18th, 2003 the tribunal granted permission to withdraw it.
Then the petitioner took out the present writ petition on October 28th, 2003.
6.
The petitioner's case is this.
In law no dismissal order exists.
Order dated December 15th, 1999 was to take effect only on approval granted by the tribunal.
Since the application for approval was dismissed as withdrawn, it cannot take effect.
So until a fresh final order is passed in the disciplinary proceeding he would be considered a suspended workman; and as such he is entitled to subsistence allowance from January 2000.
A fresh order, however, cannot be passed without a fresh enquiry, since by order dated June 12th, 2002 the tribunal held that the enquiry was vitiated by breach of principles of natural justice.
Such order of the tribunal is binding on the respondents, though they were permitted to withdraw the 33 (2) (b) application.
Even otherwise, it is apparent that the enquiry was vitiated, because he had not been given reasonable opportunity to defend himself.
7.
His learned advocate has relied on the decisions reported at AIR 1960 Cal 409 (Sonar Bangla Bank Ltd v. Calcutta Engineering College & Ors.); AIR 1961 SC 790 (Kaushalya Devi & Ors. v. Baijnath Sayal (deceased) & Ors.); AIR 1975 SC 1898 (Punjab Co-operative Bank Ltd v. RS Bhatia (dead) through LRs); (1978) 3 SCC 119 (Workmen of Cochin Port Trust v. Board of Trustees of the Cochin Port Trust & Anr.); AIR 1986 SC 1168 (Fakirbhai Fulabhai Solanki v. Presiding Officer & Anr.); AIR 1999 SC 1416 (Capt.
M Paul Anthony v. Bharat Gold Mines Ltd & Anr.); (1999)1 SCC 273, (VS Charati v. Hussein Nhanu Jamadar (dead) by LRS.
); and (1999)4 SCC 89 (R Rathinavel Chettiar & Anr. v. V Sivaraman & Ors.).
8.
The case of the respondents is this.
The order regarding validity of domestic enquiry passed by the tribunal, being without jurisdiction, has no force in the eye of law.
The enquiry was held after giving all reasonable opportunities to the petitioner to defend himself.
Once the application under Section 33 (2) (b) was dismissed by the tribunal as withdrawn, the dismissal order dated December 15th, 1999 became automatically effective, and no fresh order was necessary.
9.
After hearing the parties, I find that there is no merit in the writ petition.
The following are may reasons.
10.
Admittedly, on December 15th, 1999 no industrial dispute in which the petitioner was concerned was pending.
So there was no scope to make an application under Section 33 (2) (b) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 for approval to his dismissal.
In other words, no post facto approval of the tribunal was necessary to the dismissal order dated December 15th, 1999 passed by the disciplinary authority.
Hence no application under Section 33 (2) (b) could be entertained by the tribunal.
However, the jurisdiction of the tribunal was invoked, and finally by order dated February 18th, 2003, it dismissed the section 33 (2) (b) application as withdrawn.
11.
The disciplinary authority was not prohibited by any law from dismissing the petitioner.
No prior approval from any authority or forum was necessary for dismissing the petitioner.
Provisions of section 33 (2) (b) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 required, there was a pending industrial dispute, only subsequent approval of the tribunal.
The dismissal was not to take effect from the date of order of approval, but from the date when the disciplinary authority passed the order.
Refusal to approve would have perished the dismissal order and its effects.
So, both on fact and in law, the master-servant relationship between the respondents and the petitioner ceased the moment the disciplinary authority passed the dismissal order.
12.
Once the tribunal permitted withdrawal of the section 33 (2) (b) application, the petitioner's chance to get benefit out of an order of the tribunal refusing approval disappeared.
The dismissal order that took effect on the date of its passing remained.
The order permitting withdrawal did not cast any obligation or duty on the respondents to take any step, though it once again clearly required the petitioner to challenge the dismissal order if he was to get rid of it.
He was free to challenge it when it was passed, and again when the section 33 (2) (b) application was dismissed as withdrawn.
He also would have been free to challenge it, had there been an order by the tribunal to approve it.
13.
The mindless steps taken by the respondents under section 33 (2) (b) cannot be countenanced, and they are grossly, unfair, and fall far short of the level of conduct expected of model employers.
But these disturbing aspects have nothing to do with the validity or existence of the dismissal order passed by the disciplinary authority.
The order remained operative from the date it was passed.
14.
The effect of withdrawal of the 33 (2) (b) application was as if it had never been filed.
Has the dismissal order required approval of the tribunal then, for the withdrawal, it would have been regarded as an operative illegal dismissal order, but not void ab initio.
It would have been considered a void dismissal order only after refusal of approval by the tribunal.
This is the legal position (see : M/s. Punjab Beverages Pvt. Ltd. v. Suresh Chand & Anr. reported at AIR 1978 SC 995).
15.
It is therefore clear that there is no merit in the petitioner's first contention.
The order dated December 15th, 1999 did not become non est for withdrawal of the 33 (2) (b) application.
It was also not illegal, as it had not been passed in contravention of section 33 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947; there was nothing to make it void ab initio.
It all along remained valid and operative.
16.
Order passed or decision given or findings recorded by an incompetent forum have no force in law.
Hence the findings recorded by the tribunal in its order dated June 12th, 2002 would be simply deemed to be non est, and the order must be regarded as a nullity.
They cannot be relied on at all for examining the validity of the enquiry held against the petitioner, and they must be ignored altogether.
17.
At no stage of the enquiry the petitioner made any complaint that copies of the documents relied on by the management were not supplied to him.
By letter dated April 23rd, 1999 he categorically informed the enquiry officer that he would neither examine any defence witness, nor produce any document in defence.
In it he did not state that he would lead evidence only in the presence of the defence helper.
In the reply to the second show cause notice, he did not raise any contention, except the contention regarding sufficiency of evidence before the enquiry officer, and the evidential value of his confessional statement.
18.
The station superintendent before whom the confessional statement in writing was given by him was examined in the enquiry, and the witnesses to the statement were also examined.
In the statement he clearly admitted that he fabricated money receipts for collecting moneys from the consumes of the board against their electricity bills.
The witnesses stated that he used the fabricated money receipts for collecting moneys from the consumers of the board against their electricity bills.
The witnesses stated that he used the fabricated money receipts, and appropriated the moneys fraudulently collected.
All the witnesses were available for cross-examine.
He unsuccessfully cross- examined only some of them.
19.
Evidence before the enquiry officer was so eloquent, that no person of reasonable prudence would find fault with the findings of guilt recorded by him.
The disciplinary authority agreed with the findings of the enquiry officer, and imposed the penalty of dismissal from service.
There is no reason at all to hold that the enquiry, the findings of the enquiry officer, and the decision of the disciplinary authority, suffer from any infirmity.
Hence I am unable to accept the contention that the enquiry was vitiated by breach of principles of natural justice.
20.
The decisions cited at the bar do not require any discussion, since none of them have any manner of application to the case.
Although his learned advocate pressed them into service, I found no scope to use any of them for the petitioner's benefits.
21.
The decisions cited at the bar do not require any discussion, since none of them have any manner of application to the case.
Although his learned advocate pressed them into service, I found no scope to use any of them for the petitioner's benefits.
22.
For the foregoing reasons, the writ petition is hereby dismissed.
There will be no order for costs in it.
23.
Urgent certified xerox copy of this judgment and order shall be supplied to the parties, if applied for.
Petition dismissed.