SS Nijjar, J - At the time when the petitioners filed OA in the Central Administrative Tribunal, they were working as Sub Overseer Mistry (earlier called Works Mistry).
They had joined the respondents between 1984-1990.
They were all having 3 years Diploma in Civil Engineering and had been appointed through Railway Recruitment Board in the scale of Rs. 1400-2300.
Under the Rules, they were to be considered for promotion on the post of Inspector of Works-Grade III.
These promotions are made under Rule 145 of the Indian Railways Establishment Manual Volume-I which provide as under:  " 145.
(1) The vacancies in the category of Inspector of Works Grade-III in scale of Rs. 1400-2300 will be filled as under :  (i) 75% by direct recruitment through Railway Recruitment Boards; and (ii) 25% by promotion by selection of Works Mistries in scale of Rs. 1400-2300; (2) Qualification etc. for direct recruitment are as under  (i) Educational Diploma in Civil Engineering (ii) Age; Between 18 to 28 years (iii) Training & Stipend period of training one year stipend Rs.
1400."
It is a case of the petitioners that the respondents were duty bound to fill in 25% of the posts of Inspector Works by promotion from the cadre of Works Mistries.
The promotions were to be made on the basis of selection.
However, the respondents failed to make any selection under Rule 145(1)(ii).
At the same time, the respondents had filled more than 42 vacancies from 1988 to March, 1991, by making recruitment through the Railway Recruitment Board.
The petitioners made numerous representations but no decision was taken by the respondents.
It was pleaded before the Central Administrative Tribunal that the following vacancies have been filled by direct recruitment :  5 vacancies in 1986  21 vacancies in 1988  4 vacancies in 1989  1 vacancy in 1990  9 vacancies in 1991  All these persons have become senior to the petitioners due to the inaction of the respondents in not making selection under Rule 145(1)(ii).
The respondents filed a detailed written statement.
In paragraph 4 of the written statement, it has been mentioned that, in fact, no vacancies existed for the category to which the petitioners belong therefore, the question of making any selection did not rise.
The Central Administrative Tribunal, after examining the pleadings of the parties has noticed that during the pendency of the OA, selection to the 25% quota meant for promotion from the category of the applicants had been held and that some of the petitioners even appeared in the selection process and could not qualify.
The other petitioners who had qualified, had been given due promotion.
It has been observed that applicants 6 and 7 before the Central Administrative Tribunal could not qualify even though they had participated in the selection process.
The remaining 6 applicants have been granted promotion on the basis of the selection.
The claim of the petitioners with regard to seniority with effect from 1986 has been rejected on the ground that no rotation has been provided in the Rules.
It is settled proposition of law that if rota of vacancy is not provided in the Rules, the same cannot be read into the Rules.
Furthermore, we notice that the petitioners have not cared to implead any of the direct recruiter over whom seniority is sought as respondents in the OA as well as in the writ petition and therefore the petitioners cannot be granted the relief prayed for.
This view of ours finds support from the judgment in Suraj Parkash Gupta and others v. State of J&K and others, (2000) 7 SCC 561  2.
We are of the considered opinion that the order passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal does not suffer from any illegality or error of jurisdiction.
Dismissed.
Petition dismissed.