Jawahar Lala Gupta, J - On April 27, 1995, Respondent No. 2 appointed Respondents 3 to 9 to the posts of Deputy Managers (Procurement).
The petitioners pray that the selection and appointment of Respondents 3 to 9 be quashed and that the respondents 1 and 2 be directed to fill-up these posts on the basis of seniority.
The respondents contest this claim.
2.
Mr. Ashok Sharma, learned counsel for the petitioners contends that the respondents had circulated only.
4 posts but in fact, 7 persons have been appointed.
Some of these persons were over-age and their selection and appointment is illegal.
He further submits that the quota fixed for promotion has not been observed.
On the other hand, it has been submitted on behalf of the respondents that the appointment to the post of Deputy Manager (Procurement) is governed by Rule 28(a)(ii) of the Punjab State Cooperative Milk Producers Federation Service (Common Cadre) Rules, 1980.
According to this rule, the appointments could be made either by direct recruitment or by transfer.
The posts cannot be filled up by promotion.
These posts could not be advertised for direct recruitment in view of the ban imposed by the State Government.
Accordingly, these posts were internally notified.
Various candidates including the petitioners had applied for the posts.
After shortlisting the applications, 77 eligible candidates were called for interview.
In fact, 60 candidates had actually appeared out of whom seven were appointed against the available posts.
The appointments were made in order of merit.
It has been further pointed out that in the letter by which the posts were internally circulated, it had been provided that the age of the candidates was relaxable.
Accordingly, the selected persons were eligible for appointment.
It has been further mentioned that no quota for promotion has been prescribed.
The questions that arise for consideration are-  (i) Is the selection and appointment of Respondents 3 to 9 in conformity with Rule 28?
(ii) Is the order appointing Respondents 3 to 9 illegal and contrary to the circular inviting applications?
(iii) Has the quota rule been violated?
Reg:- (i) Rule 28 inter alia provides as under :-  "Rule 28 (a)-Appointment to various posts shall be made as under :- Dr. No. 11 Artificial Insemination Officer/ Vety.
Officer/Fodder Dev.
Officer/Dairy Technologists/Dairy Extension Officers (now designated as Dy.
Manager Proc./Dy.
Managers (Acctts)/Dy.
Manager, Marketing/Security Officer/Dy.
Manager, Production/Dy.
Manager Quality Control and Managing Chilling Centres.
(i) By direct recruitment.
(ii) By transfer of a person on deputation from any department of Govt. or any institution."
A perusal of the above provision shows that the various posts mentioned at Sr. No. 11 can be filled up either by direct recruitment or by transfer.
There is no provision for promotion.
Still further, as has been pointed out by the respondents, the State Government had imposed a ban on appointments by direct recruitment.
Accordingly, the respondents on account of the exigencies of service had resorted to internal circulation of the vacancies.
The action of the respondents in filling up the posts by selection from amongst the applicants cannot be said to be in violation of the statutory provision as reproduced above.
The rule does not provide for filling-up the posts by promotion.
Consequently, the claim made by the petitioners that the posts had to be filled up by promotion cannot be sustained.
3.
The first question is accordingly answered.
It is held that the selection and appointment of respondents 3 to 9 is in conformity with Rule 28.
Reg: (ii)  4.
It was contended that in spite of the fact that only four posts had been circulated, respondent No. 2 has appointed seven persons.
It was further submitted that persons who were over age could not have been appointed.
5.
It is undoubtedly true that only four posts had been circulated.
However, it has been stated on behalf of the respondents that before the selection, one of the Milk Unions had asked for one post of Deputy Manager (Procurement).
As such five posts had become available.
Still further, two posts had become temporarily available on account of the absence of the original incumbents.
It also deserves mention that filling-up of seven posts gives no cause of action to the petitioners.
They were eligible.
They have been considered and yet they have not been selected.
The variation in the number of posts has not affected them at all.
Consequently, they can have no legitimate cause for grievance.
Still further, the circular inviting applications categorically mentions that the age limit was relaxable.
In such a situation, the action of respondent No. 2 in relaxing the age requirement cannot be said to be unfair or illegal.
The second question is answered in the negative.
Reg:(iii)  6.
The respondents point out that "there is no such provision in the statutory rules."
In fact Rule 28 as reproduced above shows that there is no provision for filling up the posts of Deputy Managers (Procurement) by promotion.
In such a situation, the question of violation of the quota rule cannot arise.
7.
Even the third question is answered in the negative.
8.
Lastly, it deserves mention that Mr. Paramjit Singh, counsel for respondent No.2 has produced before us the proceedings of the Selection Committee which had been constituted for holding interview.
These proceedings are at Mark `X'.
A definite criterion based on educational qualifications, confidential reports for the last 10 years, special reports and interview had been laid down.
The Committee had interviewed 55 candidates belonging to the general category and 5 from amongst the members of the Scheduled Castes.
It prepared two separate merit lists.
The petitioners were placed at Sr. No. 30,34 and (sic) in order of merit.
The persons who were much higher than them viz. respondents 3 to 9 have been appointed.
The action of the respondents is apparently just and fair.
It, consequently, calls for no interference.
9.
In view of the above, we find no ground to interfere.
The writ petition is, accordingly, dismissed in limine.
Petition dismissed.