AB Pal, J - The petitioner Smt. Biaksiami has been working as Muster Roll Typist for a period of above 15 years after her passing pre-university examination from NEHU in the office of the District Supply Officer.
She is being paid only Rs.84/- per day treating her as Muster Roll Group-D employee though she has been working a Muster Roll LDC Typist, whose daily wage is Rs. 117/-.
She has been applying for regularization of her service from time to time, which has been turned down on the ground of a complete ban on fresh recruitment.
By this writ petition, she has challenged the communication dated 492003 declining to regularize her service.
She has also challenged the discrimination in relation to her daily wages.
2.
The respondents are the State of Mizoram, the Director of Food & Civil Supplies Department and the District Civil Supply Officer, who filed a joint affidavit-in-apposition admitting the status of the petitioner that she was engaged against sanctioned post of Croup-D unskilled employee at the rate of Rs. 84/- per day though she has been working as Muster Roll Typist.
It has also been admitted that she has been working for the last 15 years but could not be regularly appointed due to ban on filling up the vacancies by the Government as imposed on 1172002 (Annexure-C).
There is, therefore, no dispute that she deserved regular appointment but only due to the ban, the respondents could not do justice to her.
3.
I have heard Mr. G Raju, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. A Dasgupta, learned counsel for the respondents, who fairly submitted that as soon as the ban would be lifted, her case would be considered for regularization.
4.
My attention has been drawn by the learned counsel for the petitioner to a letter by the respondent No. 2 to the Secretary of Food and Civil Supplies recommending petitioner's case and requesting him to regularize her service against a regular vacant post of LDC under the Regularisation of M.R.Employees Mizoram Scheme, 2000.
He also mentioned, there were five vacant posts of LDC and the petitioner was the seniormost amount the MR employees.
It is apparent that because of the ban, her case could not be favourably considered even though there were vacant posts.
The Deputy Secretary of the said Department replied to the Director (respondent No. 2) that the proposal could not be agreed to for regularisation of the petitioner's service against direct quota of LDC as there was complete ban in direct recruitment due to financial constraint.
This communication dated 492003, which is under challenge in this writ petition indicates that the ban is only in respect of direct quota, not the promotional quota.
5.
Be that as it may, the question that emerges is whether regularisation of a Muster Roll employee should be strictly treated as direct recruitment when the regularisation scheme provides for filling up certain posts only from the Muster Roll employees.
Taking a liberal view in the matter and having regard to the scheme (Annexure-C) notified by the respondent State, it would appear that the regularisation cannot be strictly treated as direct recruitment which entails an essential feature of open competition.
The scheme, inter alia, provides that 25% of the vacant posts under direct recruitment may be reserved for Muster Roll employees.
This, in fact, will indicate that certain posts have been taken away from the direct recruitment quota for the purpose of filling up only from the Muster Roll employees on the basis of their educational qualifications and performances.
These vacancies being separated only for the purpose of filling up from Muster Roll employees, cannot be treated as direct recruit qota and hence, the ban on fresh recruitment, if applicable only to direct recruitment quota, shall not apply to the regularisation of the Muster Roll employees, who should be regularized subject to availability of vacancies and in terms of the provisions of the said scheme.
6.
Admittedly, there are five vacancies of LDC in the office of the Director of Food & Civil Supplies and atleast one post, being 25%, as appear the scheme should be available for regularisation of the Muster Roll employees.
The respondent No. 2 in his letter at Annexure-D to the Secretary to the Government of Mizoram stated that the petitioner is the seniormost MR employee and in view of this position, there should not be any difficulty for the respondents to regularize her service against a vacant post of LDC.
7.
As regards the discrimination regarding the daily wages, admittedly she has been working as Typist, which is the job of LDC- Typist in regular employment.
Annexure-B is the letter of the Deputy Secretary to the respondent No. 2 conveying approval of the government for engagement of 102 casual employees on Muster Roll basis.
This shows that for LDC, the rate of daily wages is Rs. 117/-.
The petitioner though admittedly has been engaged as Typist getting an amount of Rs. 84/- per day as she has been entertained as a Group-D unskilled Muster Roll employee.
The letter of the Director at Annexure-D clearly indicates that she is qualified to be appointed as LDC and, therefore, there cannot be any reason to deny her the daily wages of Rs. 117/- as LDC Skilled.
II.
Undoubtedly, this under payment is discriminatory and cannot stand to legal scrutiny.
8.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed with a direction to the respondents to regularize the service of the petitioner appointing her as LDC against one of the five vacant posts in the Directorate of Food & Supplies Department within a period of two months from the date of this order.
I also direct that the petitioner shall be paid, pending her appointment on regular basis, daily wages at the rate of Rs. 117/- and this order shall have prospective effect only.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.