SS Nijjar, J - In this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner seeks the issuance of a writ in the nature of Certiorari for quashing the order dated 2061996 rejecting the claim of the petitioner's husband for the grant of disability pension communicated to her husband by letter dated 871996 and the order dated 21.4.1998 rejecting the appeal filed on behalf of the petitioner's husband.
The petitioner has filed this petition on behalf of her husband on the ground that he is not mentally fit to pursue the present writ petition.
2.
The petitioner claims that her husband was enrolled in the Indian Army as a Sepoy in the Sikh Regiment, Ramgarh Cantt., Bihar on 141988.
He was medically examined and found fit.
He completed nine months training.
After it he was sent to Pathankot in January/February, 1989.
After 4/5 months, he was sent to Arunachal Pradesh.
In May/June,1989, he was posted in "Gachham" unit at "Tanga" posts near China Border in Arunachal Pradesh.
The posting at Tanga is a very high altitude.
Climatic conditions of the place are different from the native place of the petitioner and her husband.
After his posting, the husband of the petitioner was sent back to Ramgarh Cantt., Bihar and put on duty for driving training of Military transport for about six months.
Again he was sent back to the unit in Arunachal Pradesh.
He remained there about 2/3 months.
From there, he was sent to Ganganagar, Rajasthan.
Thus from the extreme cold, he was sent to an extremely hot place.
In January, 1993, the petitioner's husband developed a disease when he was posted at Ganganagar which was later on detected as "Affective Psychosis (Major Depression)."
He remained admitted in various military hospitals for treatment at Ganganagar, Bathinda, Delhi and Chandimandir.
He was finally declared "unfit" for military service.
On 15.9.1994, the petitioner's husband was invalidated out of service on medical grounds for the disease i.e. Affective Psychosis (Major Depression).
He was placed in lower medical category "EEE".
The petitioner's husband made a claim for Disability Pension which was rejected by the respondents by order dated 2061996.
The appeal filed against the aforesaid order has been dismissed by letter dated 21.4.1998.
3.
Written statement has been filed by the respondents.
The medical treatment received by the husband of the petitioner at various medical hospitals for the diseases noted against each, has been given as under :-  "(a) 5 Air Force Hospital Jorhat 7th Jan, 91 RT URETEROTIC CLOIC WITH CRYSTALLURIA (b) 176 Military Hospital 25th May, 93 11th June, 93 (c) 174 Military Hospital 12th June, 93 22nd June, 93 (d) 176 Military Hospital 23rd June, 93 30th June, 93 (e) Army Hospital Delhi Cantt.
1st July, 93 25th Aug 93 (f) 176 Military Hospital 26th Aug 93 GIDDINESS(INV) HEAPACHE(INV) PSYCHALGIA (g) 176 Military Hospital 12th Jan 94 14th Jan 94 (h) Comd.
Hospital West Comd.
16th Jan 94 15th Feb 94 PSYCHALGI (OLD)PSYCHOSIS (i) Comd.
Hospital West Comd.
15th Mar.
94 19th Sept. 94 AFFECTIVE PSYCHOSIS MAJOR DEPRESSION-296 4.
The husband of the petitioner was recommended to be invalidated out of service in low medical category "EEE" (Psychological).
The invalidating disease was held by the Release Medical Board to be constitutional in nature and not connected with military service.
He was brought before the Invalidating Medical Board held at Command Hospital Western Command, Chandimandir to ascertain attributability/aggravation facts and percentage of his disability on 2281994.
After taking into account all the reasons for onset of the disease and factors of conditions of military service, the degree of the disease of the individual was assessed at 40% for two years but neither attributable to nor aggravated by Military Service, it being a constitutional disease.
The invalidating Medical Board proceedings were approved by the completent authority i.e. DDMS, Headquarters, Western Command, Chandimandir on 391994.
He was invalidated out of service w.e.f.
1991994 under Army Rule 13(3) Item III (iii) having been found medically unfit for further service.
The claim put forward by the husband of the petitioner was rejected by Officer In-charge PCDA (P), Allahabad (U.P.).
However, a sum of Rs. 6825/- on account of Invalid Gratuity and a sum of Rs. 7245/- on account of Death-cum-Retirement Gratuity was paid to the husband of the petitioner through money-orders on 1101996.
In addition, a sum of Rs. 34,148/- was paid by the Army group Insurance Fund towards Disability Benefit Cover admissible to the individual under the Army Group Insurance Scheme.
The respondents have also taken preliminary objections that the writ petition deserves to be dismissed as highly belated.
5.
The petitioner has filed replication and reiterated the claim made in the writ petition.
It has been stated that the question of delay in matters of pension is irrelevant.
In support of the plea, the petitioner has relied on the judgments in the case of Bidhi Chand v. State of Punjab, 1999(1) SCT 481 (P&H) : 1998(7) SLR 639, HS Grewal v.
U.O.I., 1999(1) SLR 158 and Branjit Kaur v.
U.O.I., (CWP No. 6715 of 2000 decided on 2312002 by this Court).
With regard to the medical history, it is stated that the disease of depression started in the year 1993 when he was posted in Rajasthan.
Therefore, onset of the disease is much after the entry of the petitioner's husband in the Army.
It is further pleaded that there is no mental illness in the family of the husband of the petitioner.
Therefore, the opinion of the Medical Board holding the disease of the petitioner's husband to be constitutional disorder is not sustainable in the eyes of law.
6.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length and perused the paper-book.
7.
Learned counsel for the petitioner argues that the husband of the petitioner was not suffering from the disease at the time he was enrolled in the Army.
According to the rules, the claimant does not have to prove conditions for entitlement.
In fact he is entitled to the benefit of any reasonable doubt.
For this submission, learned counsel relies on Rule 9 of Appendix II of the Entitlement Rules for Casualty Pensionary Awards, 1982 which is as under :-  "ONUS OF PROOF 9.
The claimant shall not be called upon to prove the conditions of entitlements.
He/she will receive the benefit of any reasonable doubt.
This benefit will be given more liberally to the claimants in field/afloat service cases."
8.
Learned counsel for the petitioner further submits that the husband of the petitioner was declared to be mentally and physically fit at the time of his enrolment in the Army.
He had undergone many arduous tests before being allowed to join the Army.
Learned counsel further submits that even if it is assumed that the husband of the petitioner was suffering from depression at the time of entry into service, he would still be entitled to disability pension in view of Rule 14 of the aforesaid rules.
The said Rule is reproduced as under :-  "DISEASES  14.
In respect of diseases, the following rule will be observed :- (a) Cases in which it is established that conditions of Military Service did not determine or contribute to the onset of the disease but influenced the subsequent courses of the disease will fall for acceptance on the basis of aggravation.
(b) A disease which has led to an individual's discharge or death will ordinary be deemed to have arisen in service, if no note of it was made at the time of the individual's acceptance for military service.
However, if medical opinion holds, for reasons to be stated, that the disease could not have been detected on medical examination prior to acceptance for service, the disease will not be deemed to have arisen during service.
(c) If a disease is accepted as having arisen in service, it must also be established that the conditions of military service determined or contributed to the onset of the disease and that the conditions were due to the circumstances of duty in military service."
In support of the aforesaid submission, the learned counsel for the petitioner relies on a Division Bench judgment of this Court in the case of ASJ Chaudhary v. Union of India and others, 1999(1) RSJ 778.
He submits that in the opinion of the Medical Board, it has not been stated the disease could not have been detected at the time the husband of the petitioner was enrolled in the Army.
In the absence of note to that effect, it has to be presumed that the disease has either arisen during service or has been aggravated by Army service.
Learned counsel further submits that the opinion of the Medical Board recommending invalidation of the husband of the petitioner does not mention the disease to be constitutional.
Even in the classification of the disease contained in Annexure to Appendix II, major depression has been shown as a disease which can be affected by altitude or by harsh postings which cause stress and strain.
Learned counsel also relies on a judgment of this Court in the case of Harjit Singh v. Union of India, 1998(4) SCT 88, in support of the submission that the onus is on the respondents to prove that the disease did not arise due to army service or was not aggravated by Army service.
Mere mention of the word that the disease is constitutional would not absolve the respondents of the onus of proof envisaged under Rule 14 of the aforesaid Rules.
9.
Mr. Gurpreet Singh, learned counsel appearing for the respondents, however, submits that the disease of "Schizophrenia" is a mental disorder.
Undue environmental stresses can precipitate a relapse of the disease, but environmental conditions cannot lead to the development of the disease.
In support of the aforesaid submission, learned counsel relies on a Single Bench judgment of the Madhya Pradesh High Court in the case of Gopal Dass Maheshwari v. Union of India and others, 1999(3) SCT 262 (M.P.) : 1998(6) SLR 163.
Learned counsel further submits that it was for the husband of the petitioner to affirm/establish that conditions of military service contributed to the onset of the disease or contributed to the same.
Even if the disease is accepted as having arisen in service, it must also be established that the conditions of military service contributed to the onset of the disease or contributed to the same.
Even if the disease is accepted as having arisen in service, it must also be established that the conditions of military service determined, contributed to the onset of the disease and the conditions were due to the circumstances of duty in military service.
In support of the submission, learned counsel relies on a judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Union of India and Anr. v. Baljit Singh, 1997(1) SCT 386 (SC) : 1997(1) SLR 98.
Learned counsel further submits that in view of the opinion expressed by the Medical Board, the husband of the petitioner would not be entitled to any disability pension.
The opinion of the Medical Board has to be respected unless it is superseded by a fresh Medical Board.
In support of this submission, learned counsel relies on the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Ex. Sappar Mohinder Singh v. Union of India, (Civil Appeal No. 164 of 1993 decided on 1.4.1.1993) wherein it has been held as under :-  "....
In view of all the relevant circumstances of the case, we are of the opinion that the Disability Pension assessed at the rate of 40% by the Medical Board, which had examined the appellant, should be respected until a fresh Medical Board examined the appellant again and came to a different conclusion."
10.
Learned counsel also relies on a Division Bench judgment rendered by this very Division Bench in the case of Kulwinder Singh v. Union of India and others, 2003(4) SCT 59 (P&H) : 2003(5) SLR 734.
11.
Since both the counsel have cited a number of judgments, it would be appropriate to consider the relevance of the same at this stage.
On the question of delay, we find merit in the submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner that the writ petition cannot be dismissed as being belated.
The petitioner has clearly stated that her husband is unable to pursue the claim for disability pension as he is not mentally fit.
Apart from this, it is a settled proposition of law that non-grant of pensionary benefits would constitute a continuing wrong.
The petitioner has rightly relied on the judgments of this Court in the cases of Bidhi Chand v. State of Punjab (supra) and HS Grewal v. U.O.I.
(supra).
12.
We are also unable to accept the submission of Mr. Gurpreet Singh, learned counsel appearing for the respondents that the disease from which the husband of the petitioner was suffering was constitutional in nature.
Learned counsel has placed much reliance on a Single Bench judgment of the Madhya Pradesh High Court in the case of Gopal Dass Maheshwari (supra).
In the facts and circumstances of that case, a Single Judge of the Madhya Pradesh High Court, RS Garg, J has held as under :-  "8.
I am required to refer to all this because learned counsel for the petitioner contended that because of the environment made available to the petitioner during the course of his services, he has suffered the disease.
When the expert authors say that because of some metabolic change or some inside mental disorder a patient splits his personality or becomes a psychotic disorder suffering with schizophrenia then unless contrary is proved by the legally admissible evidence, it cannot prima facie be held that the environmental conditions have led to the mental disorder of the man."
13.
The learned Single Judge had relied on opinion of experts which would tend to show that undue environmental stress can precipitate relapse, but would not lead to such anxiety leading to Schizophrenia.
These observations are contained in paragraph 7 of the aforesaid judgment which are as under :-  "According to Black's Medical Dictionary at page 445, Schizophrenia is the collective name given to a group of conditions characterized during an acute episode by positive symptoms such as hallucinations, strange experience and inability to think clearly.
Such symptoms may lead to bizarre speech and behaviour.
Acute episodes usually respond to treatment with medication, the phenothiazines being the class of drugs most commonly used.
According to Block's Medical Dictionary undue environmental stress can precipitate a relapse but he nowhere says that the environmental conditions may lead to such anxiety leading to schizophrenia."
We are of the opinion that these observations are not applicable in the facts and circumstances of the present case.
A careful perusal of the report of the Medical Board would indicate that there is no categoric finding recorded by the Medical Board to show that the disease from which the husband of the petitioner was suffering, existed at the time when he was enrolled in the Army.
The proceedings of the invalidating Board have been attached as Annexure R-1 to the reply.
In the statement of case which is contained in Part II of the report, it is observed as follows :-  "PART II  STATEMENT OF CASE  (Not to be communicated to the individual)  Disabilities Date of Origin Place and Unit where serving at the time.
AFFECTIVE PSYCHOSIS 23.6.93 4 Sikh Regt.
Sri Ganga Nagar.
2.
Clinical details : As per attached Summary and opinion."
+ + 14.
In the summary of the case, it is categorically stated that the husband of the petitioner had been complaining of "Headache Giddinese" since two months.
This report is given on 1181994.
In the Column history of past illness, it is stated "NIL relevant".
In the column of Family History it is stated "No h/o mental illness in the family.
No stressors".
In the column of Personal History, it is stated "Enrolled in 1988.
Married in 1991.
No issue.
No red ink entries.
Occasional alcohol consumption".
In the column of Physical Examination and Investigation it is stated "Physical examination during hospitalization in June 93 at Neurological Centre at AHDC did not reveal any abnormality.
All relevant investigation including REG and CT Scan were within normal limits".
In the column of Psychiatric Examination it is stated "Initial Psychiatric examination in Jul' 93 and subsequently observation at AHDC showed anxious and depressed mood, somatic preoccupations, resentment in keeping beard and long hair (he is a Sikh) and sleep disturbances.
There were no features of psychosis."
In the column of Treatment and Progress, it is stated "the patient was treated as a case of Psychalgia (IC) 307.8) with antidepressants and Psychotherapy and after improvement was discharged in cat "CEE" (Pay) for 6/12 years".
Opinion by Major Vijay Pande, Classified Specialist (Psychiatry) dated 2894 is as under :-  "OPINION BY MAJOR VIJAY PANDE, CLASSIFIED SPECIALIST (PSYCHIATRY) OF COMMAND HOSPITAL (WC) CHANDIMANDIR DECISIONDATE-94 This 26 yrs old serving soldier with about 6 yrs of service is a case of Affective Psychosis (Major Depression) - (revised dig).
The patient was initially treated in Jul/Aug' 93 as a case of Psychalgia with antidepressants and psychotherapy and after improvement was discharged in cat "CEE" (temp) wef Aug' 93.
The patient has had a relapse in Dec 93 - Manifesting with features of Major Depression in the form of psychomotor retardation, lack of self care, second person auditory hallucination, anhedonia, depressed mood, fleeting suicidal ideas and partial insight.
He has shown partial recovery to treatment with antidepressants and psychotherapy and had developed residual features of depression.
In view of this, poor unit report remotivation he in unlikely to be a fit and efficient soldier.
Recommended to be invalided out of service in low med cat "EEE" (Psychological).
(Recommended to be upgraded to cat "AYE" for Psychalgia).
Adv.
: 1.
To continue Tab Nortyptilline 25 mg x 2 HS x one year.
2.
In case of relapse to report to nearest civil mental hospital.
Sd/-  (Vijay Pande) Major Classified Specialist  (Psychiatry)" In Part III of the opinion of the Medical Board which is marked Confidential, it is clearly stated as follows :-  "1.
Did the disability/ies exist before entering service: No Therefore the Medical Board states that the disease is not aggravated by Military Service "being a constitutional disease".
Having given the aforesaid opinion on the very next page the Board opines as under :-  Disability (as numbered in question 1, Part II) Percentage of disablement Probable duration of this degree disablement Composite assessment (as disabilities) AFFECTIVE PSYCHOSIS (Major 
depression) - 296 40% 2 yrs.
40% (Forty percent) A careful perusal of the aforesaid document indicates clearly that the disease from which the husband of the petitioner was suffering did not exist before entering into service.
It also cannot be said to be constitutional in nature as the Board has categorically stated that there is no history of mental illness in the family of the husband of the petitioner.
In fact that disease arose in July, 1993.
Even in the final column, it is stated that the probable duration of this degree of disablement was two years which is assessed at 40%.
In view of the above, it would not be possible for us to accept the submission of Mr. Gurpreet Singh that the husband of the petitioner was suffering from the disease before he was enrolled in the Army.
We, therefore, hold that the judgment of the Madhya Pradesh High Court would not be relevant in the facts and circumstances of the present case.
In fact a Division Bench of this Court has considered the relevant provisions in the case of ASJ Chaudhary (supra).
In the aforesaid case, the Division Bench was also considering the non-grant of the disability pension as the petitioner therein had been invalidated out of service as he was suffering from Schizophrenia.
The Division Bench considered the Army Regulations, 1961 which have been framed under Section 161 of the Army Act, 1950.
Regulation 173 being relevant was considered by the Division Bench as well as the provisions made in Appendix II which provided that there must be a causal connection between disablement or death and military service for attributability or aggravation to be conceded.
The Division Bench considered the impact of Rules 4 and 7 of the aforesaid Rules which are as under :-  "4.
In deciding on the issue of entitlement all the evidence, both direct and circumstantial, will be taken into account and the benefit of reasonable doubt will be taken into account and the benefit of (given ?)
more liberally to the claimant in field service cases.
xxx xxx xxx xxx  7.
In respect of diseases the following rules will be observed :- (a) Cases, in which it is established that conditions of military service did not determine or contribute to the onset of the disease but influenced the subsequent course of the disease, will fall for acceptance on the basis of aggravation.
(b) A disease which has led to the individual's discharge or death will ordinarily be deemed to have arisen in service if no note of it was made at time of the individual's acceptance for military service.
However, if medical opinion holds for reasons to be stated, that the disease could not have been detected on medical examination prior to acceptance for service, the disease will not be deemed to have arisen during service.
(c) If a disease is accepted as having arisen in service, it must also be established that the conditions of military service determined or contributed to the onset of the disease and that the conditions were due to the circumstances of duty in military service."
(It appears that Rule 7 was subsequently renumbered as Rule 14).
After considering a number of judgments rendered by this Court, the Division Bench observed as follows:-  "19.
The ratio of the decisions, referred to hereinabove, fully support the argument of Shri Randhawa that the rejection of petitioner's claim for disability pension is legally unsustainable because at the time of his acceptance for military service, no note was recorded that he was suffering from Schizophrenia and the opinion recorded by the Medical Board, at the time of his discharge from service does not contain a note that the disease was such which could not be detected at the time of petitioner's entry in the service."
Again the case of Union of India v. Gurnam Singh, (1998(2) Judicial Reports (Labour and Services) 191, the Division Bench of this Court observed as follows :-  "4.
A bare reading of paragraph 7(b) shows that in the absence of any note recorded at the time of individual's acceptance for military service, the disease which has led to the individual's discharge will ordinarily be deemed to have arisen in the course of service.
The only exception to this rule is that the competent authority holds an opinion for the reasons to be recorded in writing that the disease could not have been detected on medical examination prior to acceptance for service.
In the case in hand, no note was made at the time of the respondent's entry into service that he was suffering from epilepsy and no record was placed before the learned Single Judge to show that the competent authority had formed an opinion, on the basis of the reasons recorded on the file that the disease with which the respondent suffered was such that it could not be detected on medical examination prior to his acceptance for service.
Along with the appeal also no such material has been produced."
Similar view has been expressed by another Division Bench of this Court in the case of Union of India and others v. Shyam Lal Malhotra, 1995(2) RSJ 493.
In the case of Harjit Singh (supra), a Single Judge of this Court, HS Bedi, J, again considered the same rules and regulations and observed as follows :-  "10.
Mr. Dahiya's reliance on Baljit Singh's case (supra) is, to my mind, misplaced on facts as that was a case dealing with an injury and not a disease.
It is the conceded proposition that sub-rules (a) to (c) of Rule 14 (earlier Rule 7) must be read together and it must be established amongst other things that the conditions of military service had determined or contributed to the onset of the disease or its aggravation, but it must, nevertheless be borne in mind that onus to deny a claim rests on the authorities and not on the claimant as postulated by Rule 9 which provides that the claimant shall not be called upon to prove the condition of entitlement and that he will receive the benefit of any reasonable doubt and that this benefit would be given more liberally to the claimant in the field/afloat service cases.
It will be seen from the record that the Medical Board had, while rejecting the claim, merely observed "constitutional disease, hence not connected with the service".
To my mind, the onus put on the authority charged in this situation, more particularly as the board did not consider that he had put in service almost continuously in the field, and as such the case for the grant of disability pension was to be considered more liberally."
15.
We are of the considered opinion that the aforesaid observations of the learned Single Judge was fully applicable to the facts and circumstances of the present case.
We have also reproduced the findings recorded by the Medical Board which make it abundantly clear that the opinion of the Board to the effect that the disease suffered by the husband of the petitioner was "constitutional in nature" is not supported by the findings recorded by the Medical Board itself.
We are of the considered opinion that the observations made by the Supreme Court in the case of Ex. Sapper Mohinder Singh (supra) are of no assistance to the respondents.
In that case, the respondents-pension sanctioning authorities had differed with the findings of the Medical Board without constituting a fresh Medical Board for the examination of the claimant and reduced the assessment of disability.
Therefore, the Supreme Court has held that the opinion of the Medical Board had to be respected by the Pension Sanctioning Authority.
In the present case, we are satisfied that the findings recorded by the Medical Board in the report attached with the written statement do not justify the conclusion that the husband of the petitioner was suffering from a constitutional disease.
16.
Lastly Mr. Gurpreet Singh has relied on a judgment rendered by this Division Bench in the case of Kulwinder Singh (supra).
In that case we had examined the record and had come to the conclusion that the disease was neither attributable nor aggravated by Military Service.
The petitioner in that case had only appeared before the Recruiting Officer on 16102000.
He successfully competed the physical test on 17102000.
He was medically examined and was declared fit for enrolment in the Army.
The petitioner subsequently claimed that he was mercilessly slapped seven times on the left side of the face over the left ear on 722001 around 9 am in the Parade Ground by the Platoons Incharge of the Training Centre.
Even then the petitioner had been declared fit in the medical examination conducted in the Training Centre on 1322001.
On a further examination on 342001, he was declared unfit.
In that case, the Medical Board had opined that the disability viz., CHRONIC SUPUPRATIVE OTITIS MEDIA (BIL) 382 existed prior to enrolment and was not detected by the Recruiting Medical Officer.
It was categorically opined that the disability is not connected with the Army service.
Taking into consideration the aforesaid facts, this Divisional Bench had held that the disability pension had been rightly denied to the petitioners therein.
The aforesaid judgment is of no assistance to the case pleaded by Mr. Gurpreet Singh.
17.
In view of the above, we are of the considered opinion that the respondents have arbitrarily denied the disability pension to the petitioner.
Consequently, the writ petition is allowed.
The order dated 2061996 rejecting the claim of the husband of the petitioner for grant of Disability Pension and the order dated 21.4.1998 rejecting the appeal filed on behalf of the husband of the petitioner are hereby quashed.
The respondents are directed to grant the Disability Pension to the petitioner, from the date the husband of the petitioner was ordered to be invalidated out of Army.
The arrears of pension be paid to the petitioner within a period of three months from today.
The arrears shall also be paid with interest at the rate of 8% per annum.
No costs.
Petition allowed.