JS Khehar, J (Oral) - Both the petitioners were inducted into the employment of the Education Department, Haryana as members of Class-III service.
During their employment, they were sent to discharge their duties by way of deputation, with the Union Territory, Chandigarh.
While on deputation, the claim of the petitioners was considered for onward promotion to the post of Principal (in the Haryana Education Service Class II).
The respondents having found the petitioners suitable for promotion to Class II service, issued an order dated 6/1981980 promoting the petitioners to the post of Principal in the Haryana Education Service Class II.
2.
Romesh Kumari Jain, respondent No. 3, was recommended by the Haryana Public Service Commission, for appointment against the post of Principal in the Haryana Education Service Class II, on 2081980.
She assumed her duties as such on 18111980.
3.
Romesh Kumari Jain, respondent No. 3 addressed a representation dated 4111985 (Annexure P-15) to the authorities, claiming seniority over the petitioners.
The solitary contention of respondent No. 3 while addressing her claim for a higher position in the seniority list vis-a-vis the petitioners, was that, she had joined her assignment as Principal in the Haryana Education Service Class II on 18111980, whereas the petitioners herein, had assumed their duties as such on 2941981.
Based on the fact, that Romesh Kumari Jain, respondent No. 3, had assumed her duties as Principal in the Haryana Education Service Class II, prior to the petitioners, and the mandate of Rule 10 of the Punjab Education Service (Class II) Rules, 1934 (hereinafter referred to as the 1934 Rules) which postulates the manner of determining inter se seniority of members of the Haryana Education Service Class II, she sought an amendment/modification in the existing seniority list.
Rule 10 of the 1934 Rules is being extracted hereunder :-  "10.
The Seniority inter se of members of the service shall be determined by the length of continuous service on any post in the service; provided that where there are different cadres in the service, the seniority shall be determined separately for each cadre; provided further that in the case of members appointed by direct recruitment, the order of merit determined by the Commission shall not be disturbed in fixing the seniority : Provided further that in the case of two or more members appointed on the same date, their seniority shall be determined as follows :- (a) a member appointed by direct recruitment shall be senior to a member appointed by promotion or by transfer; (b) a member appointed by promotion shall be senior to a member appointed by transfer; (c) in the case of members appointed by promotion or by transfer seniority shall be determined according to the seniority of such members in the appointments from which they were promoted or transfered; and (d) in the case of members appointed by transfer from different cadres, their seniority shall be determined according to pay, preference being given to a member who was drawing a higher rate of pay in his previous appointment; and if the rates of pay drawn are also the same, then the length of their services in the previous appointment and if the length of such service is also the same, the older member shall be senior to the younger member.
Note 1 :- This rule shall not apply to members appointed on purely provisional basis, pending their passing the qualifying test.
Note 2 :- In the case of members whose period of probation is extended under Rule 9 the date of appointment for the purpose of this rule shall be deemed to have been deferred to the extent the period of probation is extended."
It was the pointed contention of respondent No. 3 in the aforesaid representation, that her "continuous service" against the post of Principal in Education Department, Haryana having proceeded the commencement of "continuous service" of the petitioners, she was entitled to a higher position in the seniority list.
Having tentatively accepted the aforesaid contention of respondent No. 3, a show-cause notice was issued to the petitioners narrating the following factual position :-  "Smt. Romesh Kumari Jain, Lecturer, Government Kanya Senior Secondary School, Panipat (Karnal) on being selected by the Public Service Commission, Haryana (be direct recruitment) to Class II joined duty on this post on 18111980, has raised objection to the provisional seniority list as corrected upto 111984 in view of the prevalent service rules.
On consideration of these objections, it has been noticed that S Smt. Bimla Lather, Romesh Kumari Jain and Rajinder Kaur on their direct appointment joined their posts on 21.11.1980, 18111980 and 721981 in Class II.
In view of this position, it has been tentatively decided that their seniority be mentioned below the name of Smt. Indira Sharma, who joined the post on 23.8.1980 in Class II post.
As a result of this your seniority will be affected.
Therefore, through this notice, you are hereby informed that in case you have any objection to the same, then you are requested to submit your representation alongwith documentary proof to this Directorate upto 1731986, otherwise the seniority of Smt. Romesh Kumari Jain, Lecturer alongwith other officials will be fixed and the representations received after 1731986 will not be considered."
4.
Having accepted the interpretation rendered by respondent No. 3 on Rule 10 of the 1934 Rules, the Education Department, Haryana issued the impugned order dated 2911991 (Annexure P-24), whereby Romesh Kumari Jain, respondent No. 3, was placed senior to the petitioners in the seniority list of Principals in the Haryana Education Service Class II.
The reasons depicted for doing so were recorded in para 2 of the aforesaid order, which is also being reproduced hereunder :-  "So far the question of making Romesh Kumari Jain, and Vimla Lather as senior to you is concerned both of them were recommended by Haryana Public Service Commission as direct recruits on 2081980, while orders for your promotion were issued by the Government on 19890.
But you did not comply both the government orders and did not take charge at the places of your posting, but you took charge of the post in pursuance of orders of the Union Territory Administration dated 27.4.1981.
As such, the question of your being senior to Smt. Romesh Kumari Jain does not arise, because the seniority of the recommendees of Commission is considered from the date of its recommendations.
By not availing of the promotion under government order dated 1981980, you have yourself deprived of the resultant gain.
It is not proper on your part to rake up an old and stale matter relating to seniority settled in the year 1979.
Had you been so serious about you seniority, you should have availed of benefit of government order of promotion dated 1981980."
5.
Through the instant writ petition, the petitioners have impugned the order dated 2911991.
The solitary contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners for setting aside the order dated 2911991 is based on the interpretation of Rule 10 of the 1934 Rules.
According to the learned counsel for the petitioners, seniority under Rule 10 of the 1934 Rules is to be based on the "date of appointment", in as much as, length of continuous appointment must be deemed to commence with effect from the date of appointment.
The contention of the learned counsel for the respondents is, that the same must be based on commencement of "continuous service" i.e. the date on which a member of the service commence to discharge his duties by submitting a joining report.
6.
In sum and substance, therefore, while adjudicating upon the controversy in hand what needs to be determined is, whether under Rule 10 of the 1934 Rules, inter se seniority of members of the service is to be based on, the date of appointment, or the date of joining.
7.
In so far as, the instant issue is concerned, the contention of the learned counsel for the respondents, is clearly based on the expressions used in the main part of the aforesaid rule, namely, that inter se seniority of the members of the service would be determined "by the length of continuous service".
According to the learned counsel for the respondents, therefore, seniority under the aforesaid rule can only be based on the date when an individual assumes charge of the post.
In order to substantiate his aforesaid contention, it is illustratively submitted that length of service for calculation of retiral benefits would mean the service rendered from the date of joining service upto the date of retirement.
On the same analogy, it is submitted that even for determination of inter se seniority under Rule 10 of the 1934 Rules continuous service has to be taken to mean the date of joining service.
8.
According to the learned counsel for the petitioners, the aforesaid Rule 10 of the 1934 Rules projected by the learned counsel for the respondents would lead to anomalous situations.
It is the vehement contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners that the term "appointed on the same date" in the proviso to Rule 10 of the 1934 Rules, must necessarily be read with the operative words used in the main part of the said rule.
In other words, the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners is, that the words "determined by the length of continuous service" expressed in the main part of Rule 10 of the 1934 Rules must be given an interpretation in conjunction with the words "appointed on the same date" expressed in the proviso to the rule.
According to the learned counsel for the petitioners, unless the aforesaid course is adopted, the determination of seniority, under Rule 10 of the 1934 Rules, would be unacceptable as the same would lead to unacceptable situations.
Illustratively, it is pointed out, that in case of appointment of two individuals, say, by way of direct recruitment through the same process of selection on the same date, who (for some reasons) cannot assume their office on the same date, on the basis of the interpretation of the main rule, the individual who joins earlier must be placed at a position higher than the individual who joins later.
But in terms of the proviso to the aforesaid rule, since both such individuals have been appointed on the same date, the one placed higher in the merit list shall be placed senior to the one placed lower in the merit list.
Likewise, in case of appointment of two individuals by way of promotion through a common order, on the basis of interpretation of the main rule, the individual who joins first must be granted a position higher in the seniority list as against the one who joins later, whereas under the proviso to the rule, the promotee placed senior in the lower cadre will continue to be senior in the promotional cadre, irrespective of the date of joining.
Coupled with the aforesaid illustration, learned counsel for the petitioners contends that if, between two dates of joining from a common process of selection, say by direct recruitment, a number of candidates assumed charge from the alternative process of selection, say by promotion, in such a situation under the main part of Rule 10 of the 1934 Rules, the individuals who join first must rank senior to those who assume charge later.
whereas, if the direct recruit who joins later is placed higher in the merit list than the one who joined earlier, the one who joins later must rank senior on account of his superior position in the process of selection, under the proviso.
As such, the direct recruit who joined later will not only be senior to the direct recruit who joined earlier but also to all promotees who joined in between.
On the same analogy, if between two dates of joining from a common process of selection, say by promotion, a number of candidates assume charge from the alternate process of selection, say by direct recruitment, in such a situation under the main part of Rule 10 of the 1934 Rules, the individual who joins first must rank senior to all those who join later, whereas, if the promotee who joins later was senior in the feeder cadre he must continue to be senior even if he joins later.
As such the promotee who joins later will not only be senior to the promotee who joined earlier but also to all direct recruits who joined in between.
This interpretation, according to the learned counsel for the petitioners, will defeat the expression depicted in the proviso to Rule 10 of the 1934 Rules, to the effect that direct recruits appointed on the same date, shall be placed in seniority in the order of their merit and promotees appointed on the same date, shall be arrayed amongst themselves in the order of their seniority in the feeder cadre.
Thus viewed, according to the learned counsel for the petitioners, there is no escape but to read the term "appointed on the same date" in conjunction with the term "continuous length of service" for an effective and harmonious construction of Rule 10 of the 1934 Rules.
9.
Having considered the issue on the basis of the submissions advanced by the learned counsel for the parties, although, there is no doubt, that the main part of Rule 10 of the 1934 Rules mandates, that seniority inter se members of the service is to be determined by the length of their continuous service, and as such, seems to express, that the date of joining would be the relevant date for determination of inter se seniority.
However, the aforesaid interpretation obviously has certain flaws and can lead to anomalous situations.
If the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners is accepted, i.e. that the length of "continuous service" on a post used in the main part of Rule 10 of the 1934 Rules is synonymous with the term "appointed" used in the proviso to the aforesaid rule, no anomalous results, like the ones noticed above would arise.
Having examined the rule closely, I am satisfied, that the interpretation of Rule 10 of the 1934 Rules will not lead to any absurd situation, if continuous service is determined with reference to the date of appointment.
10.
For the reasons recorded above, it is concluded, that under Rule 10 of the 1934 Rules, seniority is to be based on the date of appointment.
Length of continuous service would, therefore, mean the date of appointment to the service, and not the date of the joining service.
Since both the petitioners were appointed as Principal in the Haryana Education Service Class II on 6/1981980, i.e., before the recommendation of respondent No. 3 to the same post and service (on 2081980), it is inevitable to conclude, that the petitioners are senior to respondent No. 3 in the cadre of Principals in the Haryana Education Service Class II.
Learned counsel for the petitioners states, that if the petitioners are placed in the seniority list above respondent No. 3 - Romesh Kumari Jain, they would automatically be senior to respondent Nos. 4 to 6, i.e., Vimla Lather, Rajinder Kaur and Tripta Sayal, who have all been placed at positions junior to the aforesaid Romesh Kumari Jain in the impugned order dated 2911991 (Annexure P-24).
The instant contention also merits acceptance.
For the reasons recorded above, the instant writ petition is allowed.
The petitioners would be entitled to all consequential benefits.
Petition allowed.