SS Nijjar, J. (Oral) - With the consent of counsel for the parties, the writ petition is taken up for final disposal at the motion stage today itself.
2.
The petitioner belongs to Chamar Caste which has been declared a Scheduled Caste in the State of Haryana.
A Scheduled Caste Certificate was issued to the petitioner by the competent authority on 2871990 (Annexure P-2).
He possesses the necessary qualifications for being appointed on the post of Junior Engineer (Civil).
He is also dependent of an Ex-serviceman SC-B Category.
A certificate to this effect was issued to the petitioner by the Secretary, Zila Saink Board, Jhajjar on 122000.
On 1482004, the Haryana Staff Selection Commission issued advertisement No. 5 of 2004 inviting applications for 127 posts of Junior Engineer (Civil) in the Haryana State Agricultural Marketing Board.
The last date for submitting the application was 3082004.
Two posts were reserved for the Category of Ex-servicemen S.C.-B.
The petitioner applied as dependent of Ex-servicemen S.C.-B and deposited the requisite fee on 2582004.
He also submitted the eligibility certificate which had been issued to him by the competent authority, when he had made an application in response to advertisement No. 1/2000.
At the same time, the petitioner applied for fresh eligibility certificate by depositing the original eligibility certificate with the Zila Sainik Board.
Jhajjar to fortify his claim.
On 1882004, when the petitioner visited the Office of the Zila Sainik Board, he was informed that he had to again follow the entire procedure prescribed for issuance of a fresh eligibility certificate.
He was required to complete the following procedures :-  "1.
A certificate be obtained from the Sarpanch of Gram Panchayat.
2.
Witness may be obtained of at least three retired army officers known to the petitioner.
3.
Counter signatures of Tehsildar.
4.
Deposit the old eligibility certificate with the documents.
5.
Signatures of Secretary Zila Sainik Board Jhajjar."
3.
The petitioner, after completing all the formalities again approached the Officer of the Zila Sainik Board, District Jhajjar on 2582004.
The Secretary, however, was not available due to official engagements.
Although the eligibility certificate was prepared on 2582004, it was not issued to the petitioner till 2292004.
In the meantime, by letter dated 1492004, the petitioner was called to appear for the Interview on 2592004.
The petitioner was directed to bring the following documents :-  "1.
Marks Sheets, degrees from Matriculation onwards.
2.
Proof of passing matric with Hindi.
3.
Proof of Date of Birth.
4.
Proof of fee deposited by Treasury Challan/P.O.
5.
SC/BC/ESM, DESM candidate will bring with him/her Domicile of Haryana Certificate issued by the concerned SDO (Civil)/City Magistrate.
6.
DESM candidates may bring with him/her valid Eligibility Certificate issued by the Zila Saink Board.
It should be noted that dependent certificate will not be accepted.
7.
DESM candidate will bring with him/her an affidavit as per specimen enclosed duly attested by the Ist Class Magistrate.
8.
ESM candidate will bring with him an "Affidavit" to the effect that he is not in service under Haryana Govt. or working on lower post."
4.
On 7112004, the respondents declared the result of the selection.
The name of the petitioner was not included in the list of selected candidates.
The petitioner also learnt that the two posts reserved for the category of dependents of Ex-serviceman S.C.-B have been kept vacant due to non- availability of candidates.
5.
The petitioner claims that in the advertisement, it has been provided that in the event of non-availability of candidates belonging to the Ex-serviceman Category, the posts shall be offered to the eligible candidates who are dependents of Ex-serviceman.
Therefore, the petitioner is clearly entitled to be considered against one of the posts reserved for Ex-serviceman SC-B Category.
The claim of the petitioner has been illegally rejected on the ground that he did not submit the eligibility certificate on or before 3082004 i.e. last date for submission of applications.
6.
The respondents-State have filed a written statement.
The facts as narrated by the petitioner are not disputed.
It is, however, clarified that the petitioner did not submit the eligibility certificate before 3082004, or even before the Interview Committee.
The petitioner had submitted the eligibility certificate issued on 122000 which was valid upto 122001.
7.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and perused the paper- book.
8.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the petitioner had made all efforts to obtain the necessary certificate before 3082004.
Although the certificate was prepared on 2582004, the same was not issued to the petitioner till 2292004.
The petitioner had appeared before the Interview Committee on 2592004 and produced the eligibility certificate dated 2292004.
Two posts in the Category of the petitioner are still available.
Therefore, no legal rights of any other candidate would be adversely affected in case the claim of the petitioner for appointment is considered.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondents submits that all formalities with regard to eligibility had to be completed by 3082004.
Since the petitioner did not produce the eligibility certificate on the aforesaid date, the candidature of the petitioner could not be considered.
The petitioner was considered in S.C.-B Category, but on the basis of his performance, he could not be selected.
9.
We have considered the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties.
10.
It is not possible to accept the plea of the respondents that the petitioner failed to produce the certificate dated 2292004 at the time of his interview on 2592004.
The petitioner had nothing to gain by not producing the eligibility certificate.
In the writ petition, he has meticulously set out the efforts made by him for obtaining the necessary eligibility certificate before 3082004.
A perusal of the eligibility certificate attached as Annexure P-10 with the writ petition, shows that it had been prepared on 2582004.
It was not issued to the petitioner till 2292004 as the Secretary of Zila Sainik Board, Jhajjar was not available.
We are of the opinion that for this lapse of the Zila Sainik Board, the petitioner cannot be made to suffer.
The eligibility of the petitioner to be considered for selection in the Category of dependents of Ex-serviceman, S.C.-B is not in doubt, excepting the production of the eligibility certificate.
In view of the peculiar facts and circumstances of this case, we are of the opinion that it would be wholly inappropriate to permit the respondents-State to ignore the candidature of the petitioner.
11.
In view of the above, we allow the writ petition and direct the respondent-State to consider the claim of the petitioner in the Category of dependents of Ex-serviceman SC-B Category against the two posts reserved for the aforesaid category.
Let the claim of the petitioner be considered within a period of two months of the receipt of a certified copy of this order.
No costs.
Petition allowed.