The petitioner joined the Punjab State Electricity Board on 6.10.1964.
On 2452001, a charge-sheet was issued against the petitioner for allegedly making wrong payment of Rs. 9953/- to another employee on account of the leave encashment.
A regular departmental enquiry was held into the charges.
The Inquiry report was submitted on 2122002.
It was observed in the Inquiry report that no charge-sheet/allegation as mentioned in the charge-sheet No. 11191/EA-4358-D dated 2452001 is proved against the petitioner and the charge-sheet is liable to be dropped.
The petitioner, therefore, made an application on 1412003 that the charge-sheet be dropped.
However, instead of dropping the charge-sheet, the respondents have passed order Annexure P-4 on 1762003.
By this order, it has been directed by the Full Time Members of the Board to impose a cut of 10% permanently on the pension of the petitioner.
The petitioner seeks the quashing of this order by way of this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
2.
Written statement has been filed.
The respondents have taken a preliminary objection that an appeal is competent against the impugned order.
The facts as narrated in the writ petition are, however, not controverted.
3.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties.
We do not find any merit in the submission of the learned counsel for the respondents that an appeal is competent before the Board against the order Annexure P-4 dated 1762003.
A perusal of the order shows that the impugned order has been passed by the Full Time Members of the Board.
Regulation 17 of Employees Punishment & Appeal Regulations, 1971 provides that no appeal shall lie against any of the orders made by the Board.
Clearly, therefore, the petitioner would not be entitled to seek any relief before the Board by way of filing the appeal.
We are also of the considered opinion that order Annexure P-4 is arbitrary, having been passed without application of mind.
In the order it is stated that after perusing the reply filed by the petitioner and the report of the Inquiry Officer, 10% cut is imposed on the pension of the petitioner.
As noticed earlier, the Inquiry Officer has exonerated the petitioner, therefore, on the basis of the Inquiry Report, no cut could have been imposed on the pension of the petitioner.
The order is clearly arbitrary, whimsical and suffers from non-application of mind.
Clearly, therefore, the order is violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
Even otherwise, we are constrained to observe that order Annexure P-4 is a non-speaking order.
It is settled principle of law that authorities are duty bound to pass detailed speaking orders when the civil rights of the employees are liable to be adversely affected by the order.
The impugned order is also liable to be quashed on this short ground.
In view of the above, the petition is allowed.
Impugned order Annexure P-4 is quashed.
The respondents are directed to release the entire pension of the petitioner in accordance with rules.
Let the entire pension be released within a period of three months from today.
Since, the petitioner has been deprived of the pension arbitrarily, we deem it appropriate to order that the arrears if pension shall be paid to the petitioner with interest @ 9% per annum from the date of retirement till payment.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to costs which are quantified at Rs. 1,000/-.
Petition allowed.