Mehtab S Gill, J - Petitioner has prayed for issuing a writ in the nature of mandamus for quashing order dated May 24, 2002 (Annexure P-13).
2.
Petitioner has averred that on January 1, 1966, he was appointed on promotion to the post of Treasury Officer.
He joined as Treasury Officer on January 5, 1996 and was allocated the work of Punjab State Pensioners.
Mr. Subhash Chander Sayal, another Treasury Officer, was allowed to continue work of Pension (Central) and Cheque Branch.
Petitioner, till his date of superannuation, i.e., January 31, 2002, worked as Treasury Officer under the administrative control of respondent No. 3.
Appointment letter dated January 1, 1996 and work distribution order dated January 5, 1996 are attached with the petition as Annexures P-1 and P-2.
3.
During the period, February 1997 to November, 1997, though petitioner did not do anything to show any sort of negligence in his work.
But to the surprise of the petitioner, he was issued a charge-sheet, dated March 14, 2001, for non-detection of bogus payment, wrongly allowed by the Treasury Officer, Patti.
It has been further averred that the charge-sheet was wrongly issued to the petitioner.
It was stated in the charge-sheet that the petitioner failed to check the bogus vouchers amounting to Rs. 1,48,875/-.
Show-cause notice dated March 14, 2001 is attached as Annexure P-3.
4.
Petitioner, on April 14, 2001, replied to the show-cause notice, which is attached as Annexure P-4.
5.
Petitioner, on attaining the age of superannuation, applied for his pensionary benefits to respondent Nos. 2 and 3.
They accorded administrative approval of the proposed pensionary benefits and assured the petitioner that his pension and other benefits, will be sanctioned in due course of time.
6.
On May 10, 1992, after four months of retirement of the petitioner, petitioner was served with charge-sheet, treating him as in service under the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970 (hereinafter referred to as "the Rules").
Charge-sheet was issued with an ulterior motive, to harass the petitioner.
7.
On May 20, 2002, petitioner applied through respondent No. 3 for withdrawal of his pensionary benefits from the State Bank of India, East Mohan Nagar Branch, Amritsar.
Respondent No. 3 did not object to it and issued authorisation of payment to the Accountant General of Punjab for disbursement of sanctioned amount, which are attached as Annexures P-7 to P-9.
8.
On May 24, 2002 respondent No. 3 passed an order which is attached as Annexure P-13, holding back retiral benefits of the petitioner.
9.
Notice of motion was issued.
10.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has stated, that the retiral benefits of the petitioner could not have been withheld.
Charge-sheet issued to the petitioner was after his retirement and after a gap of a number of years.
Payment of Rs. 1,48,875/- was made by issuing bogus vouchers.
Petitioner was never in charge of the disbursement of this amount.
11.
Learned counsel for the respondents has stated, that as per Rules 9.14(c) and 111(b) of the Rules, Volume II read with Rule 2.2(b), Death-cum- retirement gratuity and commuted value can be withheld.
12.
We have heard the learned counsel for the petitioner and the learned counsel for the respondent.
13.
Rule 9.14(c) of the Rules, Volume II, reads as under :-  "No gratuity shall be paid to the Government employee until the conclusion of the departmental or judicial proceedings and issue of final order thereon."
Rule 2.2(b) of the Rules, Volume II, is reproduced as under :-  "a Government employee against whom judicial or a departmental proceeding has been instituted or a pensioner against whom any such proceeding has been instituted or continued under Rule 2.2(b), shall not be permitted to commute any part of his pension during pendency of such proceedings."
14.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has stated that charge-sheet has been served upon the petitioner.
Show-cause notice has also been issued.
Petitioner has filed his reply.
15.
We, thus, do not, at this stage, feel it proper to interfere in the ongoing departmental enquiry.
16.
As the petitioner has retired from service, respondents are directed to finalise the enquiry, pending against the petitioner, within a period of four months from the date of passing of this order.
With the above observations, writ petition is disposed of.
Order accordingly.