SS Nijjar, J. (Oral) - We have heard the learned counsel for the petitioner at length and perused the record of the case.
2.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that his claim for promotion has been illegally withheld on the ground that he was punished for a misconduct during the relevant period by imposition of a penalty of stoppage of one increment with cumulative effect.
3.
We have perused the impugned order.
The respondents have carefully considered the entire case.
It has been noticed that the name of the petitioner was considered for promotion to the post of S.D.O.
at the time when his juniors were promoted.
He was not found eligible for promotion as he was facing charge-sheet under Rule 7 of the Haryana Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1987 (hereinafter referred to as the Punishment and Appeal Rules).
This fact has been admitted by the petitioner.
Ultimately, the decision was taken on the charge-sheet on 2352003.
He was awarded the punishment of stoppage of one increment with cumulative effect alongwith one per cent cut on the pay and allowances of the suspension period tantamount to major punishment.
4.
Relying on the instructions dated 18111971, the respondents have rejected the claim of the petitioner for retrospective promotion.
Learned counsel submits that the respondents have wrongly rejected the claim as the instructions dated 18111971 have been clarified by instructions dated 19071973.
5.
We have perused the instructions dated 18111971 and 1971973.
On the basis of the instructions dated 18111971, the petitioner would only be entitled to retrospective promotion if he had been completely exonerated.
As noticed above, the petitioner has been punished by withholding of one increment with cumulative effect.
Even for the period of suspension a cut in his salary has been imposed.
In clarification No. 3 of the instructions dated 1971973, it has been provided that if increment of an employee is stopped for a particular period and the employee becomes eligible for promotion during that period, the case should be considered even during the currency of stoppage of increment if his overall record makes him entitled to promotion.
The aforesaid clarification is not available to the petitioner as one increment has been stopped with cumulative effect.
Even for the suspension period, there was a cut on the salary and allowance of the petitioner.
Stoppage of increment with cumulative effect is a major punishment under the Punishment and Appeal Rules, 1987.
That being so, the petitioner cannot be given the benefit of the instructions dated 18111971 or clarification No. 3 of the instructions dated 1971973.
In view of the above, we find no merit in the present petition.
Dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.