Mehtab S Gill, J - In this petition, the petitioner has prayed for quashing communication dated 592003 (Annexure P.9) vide which Financial Commissioner and Principal Secretary to Government conveyed the decision of the government to allow provisional pension to him and to withhold his gratuity during the pendency of criminal proceedings.
He has further prayed for issuance of a direction to the respondents to release the monetary benefits including leave encashment payable to him.
2.
A perusal of the record shows that while he was working as Deputy Superintendent (Revenue) in the office of Sub-Divisional Officer (Civil), Gohana, the petitioner was arraigned as an accused in FIR No. 67 dated 1442001 registered at Police Station, Gohana, for the offences under Sections 379/411/467/468/471/472/473/120-B of the Indian Penal Code.
He was arrested on 22102001.
After 7 days, he was placed under suspension.
He was retired from service w.e.f.
30.4.2003 vide order dated 2942003.
3.
The petitioner's grievance is that even though a period of more than 8 months has elapsed, the respondents have not paid him full pension and gratuity and other retiral benefits, like commutation of pension, leave encashment etc. and in this manner, he has been deprived of his legal as well as constitutional rights.
4.
In the reply filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been averred that during the pendency of the criminal case, the petitioner is not entitled to gratuity, commutation of pension etc.  5.
Shri MR Verma relied on the judgment of the Full Bench in Dr. Ishar Singh v. State of Punjab and another, 1994(1) SCT 563 and argued that the respondents cannot withhold the gratuity payable to his client simply because of the pendency of the criminal case.
He further argued that there is no provision in the Rules for withholding of the benefit of the leave encashment on account of pendency of the criminal case and, therefore, a direction be issued to the respondents to release all the retiral benefits.
6.
The learned Senior Deputy Advocate General submitted that in view of Rule 22(c) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume-II (for short, `the Rules'), the petitioner cannot be paid gratuity till the conclusion of trial of the criminal case.
He further submitted that in view of Rule 914 of the Rules, the petitioner is not entitled to commutation of pension.
7.
We have given serious thought to the arguments of the learned counsel.
Rules 22(c) and 914 of the Rules, which have bearing on the decision of this case, read as under :  "Rule 22(c) 22 Recoveries from pension.
(a) and (b) xx xx xx (c) (1) Where any departmental or judicial proceedings is instituted under clause (b) of Rule 22, or where a departmental proceeding is continued under clause (i) of the proviso thereto against an officer who has retired on attaining the age of compulsory retirement or otherwise, he shall be paid during the period commencing from the date of his retirement to the date on which, upon conclusion of such proceedings, final orders are passed, a provisional pension not exceeding the maximum pension which would have been admissible on the basis of his qualifying service upto the date of retirement or if he was under suspension on the date of retirement upto the date immediately proceeding to the date on which he was placed under suspension, but no gratuity or death-cum-retirement gratuity shall be paid to him until the conclusion of such proceedings and of final orders thereon.
The gratuity, if allowed to be drawn by the competent authority on the conclusion of the proceedings will be deemed to have fallen due on the date of issue of final orders by the competent authority.
(2) Payment of provisional pension made under sub-clause (1) shall be adjusted against the final retirement benefits sanctioned to such officer upon conclusion of the aforesaid proceedings but no recovery shall be made where the pension finally sanctioned is less than the provisional pension or the pension is reduced or withheld either permanently or for a specified period.
Rule 914 914 Provisional pension where departmental or judicial proceedings may be pending.
- (1)(a) In respect of Government employee referred to in clause (c) of rule 22, the Head of Office shall authorise the provisional pension equal to the maximum pension which would have been admissible on the basis of qualifying service upto the date of retirement of the Government employee or if he was under suspension on the date of retirement, upto the date immediately preceding the date on which he was placed under suspension.
(b) The provisional pension shall be authorised by the Accountant General, Punjab during the period commencing from the date of retirement upto and including the date on which, after the conclusion of departmental or judicial proceedings, final orders are passed by the competent authority.
(c) No gratuity shall be paid to the Government employee until the conclusion of the departmental or judicial proceedings and issue of final order thereon : Provided that where departmental proceedings have been instituted under rule 10 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970 for imposing any of the penalties specified in clauses (i), (ii) and (iv) of Rule 5 of the said rules, the payment of gratuity shall be authorised to be paid to the Government employee.
(2) Payment of provisional pension made under sub-rule (1) shall be adjusted against final retirement benefits sanctioned to such Government employee upon conclusion of such proceedings but no recovery shall be made where the pension finally sanctioned is less than the provisional pension or the pension is reduced or withheld either permanently, or for a specified period."
A reading of the above reproduced provisions shows that during the pendency of the judicial proceedings, the employee is neither entitled to gratuity nor he can claim commutation of pension.
Therefore, the decision of the government contained in Annexure P9 not to pay gratuity to the petitioner cannot be termed as illegal.
Likewise, non-grant of benefit of commutation of pension cannot be termed as illegal or violative of the petitioner's constitutional right to property.
However, we do not find any justification, legal or otherwise, for withholding the amount of leave encashment payable to the petitioner.
During the course of arguments, we asked the learned Senior Deputy Advocate General to point out the rule under which the amount of leave encashment payable to a retiree can be withheld, but he could not draw our attention to any such rule.
Therefore, we are inclined to accept the petitioner's prayer for directing the respondents to release the amount of leave encashment.
8.
The judgment of the Full Bench in Dr. Ishar Singh's case (supra) on which reliance has been placed by Shri MR Verma does not have any bearing on the petitioner's case because it is an undisputed position that on the date of retirement, he was facing prosecution for offences under Sections 379/411/467/468/471/472/473/120-B of the Indian Penal Code.
9.
In the result, the writ petition is partly allowed.
The respondents are directed to release the amount of leave encashment payable to the petitioner.
The needful be done within three months from the date of submission/receipt of copy of this order.
However, he shall not be entitled to gratuity and commutation of pension till the conclusion of the judicial proceedings.
Petition partly allowed.