Dr. Mukundakam Sharma, J. (Oral) - This writ petition is filed by the petitioner praying for direction to the respondents to pay to the petitioner disability pension @ 50% and to compute his pension as would be calculable at the salary received by him on the post of Warrant Officer/Junior Commissioned Officer of Army alongwith arrears and 12% interest thereon.
2.
The petitioner was enrolled in the Air Force as Combatant Soldier on 4.8.1963.
It is alleged in the petition that the petitioner while performing his duties developed some health problems and reported to medical authorities of the Army.
Due to the aforesaid health problems the petitioner was placed in a low medical category.
Thereafter the petitioner was brought before a properly constituted medical board and the board recommended that the petitioner be released in a low medical category with effect from 31st August, 1991 from Army with 20% disability pension.
3.
It is contended by the learned counsel for the petitioner that in view of the recommendations of the Vth Pay Commission raising the minimum percentage of disability pension to all central government employees from 20% to 50%, the petitioner made representation dated 8th July, 2002 for the revision of his disability pension.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner contends that in reply to the representation of the petitioner the respondent No. 2 vide communication dated 31st July, 2002 sent a letter to the bank for disbursement of the disability pension @ Rs. 310/- pm with effect from 111996 whereas the actual amount of disability pension @ 20% would have been Rs. 380/- pm and the present entitlement of 50% disability pension @ Rs. 950/-, as the petitioner retired from the Army as a Subedar ie Junior Commissioned Officer.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has drawn our attention to the order dated 6th August, 2001 issued by the respondent which is applicable to the Army Personnel.
In the said order it is categorically stated that the said order is applicable to all Pre-96 Armed Forces Disability Pensioners who are in receipt of Disability Pension as on 111996.
The petitioner admittedly was in receipt of the disability pension as on 111996 and, therefore, the said order dated 682001 should be applicable to the case of the petitioner.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has also drawn our attention to another circular issued by the respondents on 7th June, 1999 which reiterates the aforesaid position.
It is stated in the said circular that with effect from 111996, pension of all armed forces pensioners irrespective of their date of retirement/discharge/invalidment would not be less than 50% of the minimum pay in the revised scale of pay introduced with effect from 111996 of the rank and group last held by the pensioner.
It is also contended that the said circular also provides that the 50% disability pension should be calculated on the basis of the rank and post last held by personnel below the officer rank.
6.
Considering the entire facts and circumstances of the case particularly the contents of the aforesaid circulars and orders of the respondents, we are of the considered opinion that the respondents should re-consider the matter of revision of the pension of the petitioner and the rank and group on the basis of which such pension should be calculated in the light of the aforesaid order dated 6th August, 2001 and circular dated 7th June, 1999 provided the said circulars are applicable to the facts and circumstances of the case.
In case it is held by the authority on reconsideration that relief and benefit in terms thereof should be given to the petitioner by the respondent, an order thereto shall be passed as expeditiously as possible.
This writ petition stands allowed to the aforesaid extent.
7.
While reconsidering the matter in terms of this order, it shall be open to the respondents to consider applicability of various other circulars also to which reference is made by the respondents in their counter-affidavit placed before us.
8.
A copy of the order be given dasti to the counsel appearing for the parties.
Petition allowed.