Hemant Gupta, J - This order shall dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 9254, 9371, 10421, 13821, 13812, 16826, 17274, 19670 of 2002, 3936, 8689, 10274 and 10975 of 2003 as all these writ petitions raises common question of law and fact.
However, for the facility of reference, facts have been taken from CWP No. 9254 of 2002.
2.
On 1842001, Director Secondary Education, Haryana, invited applications for various posts of Lecturers (School Cadres)/Masters/Mistress.
A copy of the said advertisement has been attached with the writ petition as Annexure P-1.
There were 27 posts of Lecturers (School Cadre) and 57 posts of Masters/Mistress for handicapped category.
The applications were to be submitted not later than 1552001.
The applicants were required to attach the disability certificate of at least 40% disability from the Chief Medical Officer.
The upper age limit was 45 years as on 1552001.
3.
The petitioners, who are physically handicapped and eligible in terms of the advertisement, applied for the posts of Lecturers, Masters/Mistress and were interviewed by the Selection Committee presided over by respondent No. 3 i.e. Joint Director (Schools) for the posts of Lecturers and by Deputy Director, Secondary Education for the posts of Masters/Mistress.
The petitioners have pleaded that all the posts of Lecturers as well as Masters/Mistress of general category and other reserved categories have already been filled up but there was a back log of handicapped category posts.
It has been further stated that after the interview of the candidates, the result of the selected candidates was declared on 17.2.2002.
All the petitioners have been selected in the original list.
All the formalities have also been completed for the appointment.
4.
The petitioners have further stated that there was no defect in the selection but a false excuse was prepared that three handicapped candidates did not belong to Haryana State.
As per government instructions, only handicapped candidates of Haryana State are entitled to be considered for these posts.
On the basis of the said excuse, a notice was published in the newspapers dated 662002 that interviews will be held again by another Selection Committee.
Vide the said advertisement, the Government has decided to take fresh interview of all the candidates who had earlier applied against the said advertised posts.
5.
While issuing notice of motion, this Court permitted the selection process to continue but restrained the respondents from finalising the same.
6.
In reply, it has been stated by the Deputy Director Schools-I, office of the Director Secondary Education, Haryana, Chandigarh, on behalf of respondents No. 1 and 2 that the matter was referred to the State Government for clarification whether the benefit of reservation can be extended to the candidates from outside of Haryana State.
The government decided to cancel all the interviews already conducted by the department for the posts of Lecturers (School Cadre) and decided to take fresh interviews for all the eligible candidates who had earlier applied against the said posts.
It was alleged that the government has inherent administrative powers to take such decision in the interest of its residents of disabled category.
7.
During the course of arguments, the select list of Lecturers (Handicapped) had been handed over by the learned counsel for the State which has been taken on the record and is marked as Mark A It is conceded by the learned Assistant Advocate General, Haryana, appearing for the Haryana State, that in the select list Mark A there were only three candidates i.e. Rajiv Mittal (Blind) for the posts of Lecturers in the subject of Commerce and Ashok Kumar Sharma (Ortho) and Sata Nand Mishra (Deaf) in the subject of Physics, were from outside the State of Haryana and were not eligible as per government instructions to apply for the posts reserved for physically handicapped.
A perusal of the list also shows that one post in the subject of Commerce was reserved for Blind or Low Vision candidates and two posts for orthopaedically handicapped candidates in the subject of physics.
It is also not disputed that, as per government decision, fresh interviews are required to be conducted for 27 posts of Lecturers and 57 posts of Masters/Mistress for the reason that names of three ineligible candidates find mention in the final/select list prepared by the Selection Committee.
8.
Learned counsel for the petitioners has argued that the petitioners are the candidates belonging to Haryana State and, thus, fulfil the eligibility condition.
They were selected by a duly constituted Selection Committee.
No illegality in the selection process is pointed out except that the names of three candidates find mention in the select list who are not entitled to be appointed in terms of the government instructions as they are not residents of Haryana State.
Therefore, the decision to annul the entire selection is wholly illegal, arbitrary, whimsical and is not justified for any reason.
9.
The learned counsel for the petitioners has relied upon the decisions of the Supreme Court in the cases of Shankarsan Dash v. Union of India, 1991(2) SCT 555 (SC) : 1991(2) Services Law Reporter 779, RS Mittal v. Union of India, 1995(3) SCT 284 (SC) : 1995 Supp (2) Supreme Court Cases 230 as well as a Division Bench decision of this Court in the case of Girish Arora and others v. State of Haryana and another, 1997(3) SCT 240 (P&H) : 1998(1) Recent Services Judgment 613 to contend that though a successful candidate does not acquire any indefeasible right of appointment but the State has no licence of acting in arbitrary manner.
The decision not to fill up the vacancies has to be taken bona fide for appropriate reason.
In the present case, the only reasoning furnished is that the names of three ineligible candidates find mention in the select list.
It is contended that at best such ineligible candidates can be ignored for appointment but the entire selection process cannot be set at naught only because certain candidates in which the authorities were interested have not made to the select list.
10.
In Shankarsan Dash's case (supra), a Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court has held as under :-  "It is not correct to say that if a number of vacancies are notified for appointment and adequate number of candidates are found fit, the successful candidates acquired an indefeasible right to be appointed which cannot be legitimately denied.
Ordinarily the notification merely amounts to an invitation to qualified candidates to apply for recruitment and on their selection they do not acquire any right to the post.
Unless the relevant recruitment rules so indicate, the State is under no legal duty to fill up all or any or the vacancies.
However, it does not mean that the State has the licence of acting in an arbitrary manner.
The decision not to fill up the vacancies has to be taken bona fide for appropriate reasons.
And if the vacancies of any of them are filled up, the State is bound to respect the comparative merit of the candidates, as reflected at the recruitment test, and no discrimination can be permitted...." 11.
In RS Mittal's case (supra), the Supreme Court has held that no doubt it is correct that a person on the select list has no vested right to be appointed to the post for which he has been selected but at the same time the appointing authority cannot ignore the select panel on its whims decline to make the appointment.
Supreme Court has further held as under :-  "It is no doubt correct that a person on the select panel has no vested right to be appointed to the post for which he has been selected.
He has a right to be considered for appointment.
But at the same time, the appointing authority cannot ignore the select panel or decline to make the appointment on its whims.
When a person has been selected by the Selection Board and there is a vacancy which can be offered to him, keeping in view his writ position, then, ordinarily there is no justification to ignore him for appointment.
There has to be a justifiable reason to decline to appoint a person who is on the select panel.
In the present case, there has been a mere inaction on the part of the Government.
No reason whatsoever, not to talk of a justifiable reason, was given as to why the appointments were not offered to the candidates expeditiously and in accordance with law...." 12.
In Sudhir Kaushik v. State of Haryana and others, CWP No. 10419 of 1996 decided on 1311997 by a Division Bench of this Court, the selected candidate sought the intervention of the High Court when selection made by the Selection Committee duly constituted in terms of Rule 7 of the Haryana Affiliated Colleges (Security of Service) Rules, 1993, was not approved by the Managing Committee of the college.
A Division Bench of this Court found that the rules has been scrupulously followed in the matter of selection by the Committee consisting of a nominee of the Director, Higher Education, a nominee of the Vice-Chancellor, an outside expert, a representative of the Managing Committee and Principal of a Government College.
However, the Governing Body of the college did not approve the selection.
The High Court found that each of the reasons is arbitrary and it issued a direction for issuance of letter of appointment.
The Court held as under :-  "No doubt, mere selection may not give any right to claim appointment, but the courts can always ask the authorities as to why the appointment is not being given.
If the reasons for not giving appointment are wholly arbitrary or not germane regarding appointment, the Court would certainly interfere."
The Managing Committee challenged the order passed by the High Court in the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Civil Appeal No. 7709 of 1997 reported as Bhagwan Parshu Ram College and another v. State of Haryana and others, (1996) 6 Supreme Court Cases 46.
The Supreme Court dismissed the appeal and upheld that the reasons for not appointing are arbitrary and not germane to the appointment.
The Supreme Court concluded with the following observations :-  "5.
The four reasons set out in the said resolution had been critically considered by the High Court and each of them was rejected for cogent reasons.
There is no material to come to the conclusion that there was any pressure exerted by the Kurukshetra University.
The appointment made by the Selection Committee had to be accepted inasmuch as the relevant rules did not permit the Managing committee to sit in judgment over such a Selection made and, therefore, the view taken by the Managing Committee in this regard is wholly arbitrary.
6.
It is no doubt true that the position in law is that a selection process commenced for an appointment may be cancelled or stopped at any stage or not completed by appointment of the selected candidate but such action can be attacked as arbitrary or mala fide.
The decisions relied upon by the appellate state this very principle.
The decision of the appellants in not issuing a letter of appointment to Respondent No. 4 results in not completing the process of recruitment commenced earlier by them.
The direction issued now by the High Court only ensures the completion of the process of selection, by appointing Respondent 4........" 13.
A Division Bench of this Court in Girish Arora's case (supra) has reviewed the entire case law regarding the right of the State Government in the matter of approving the recommendations made by the Public Service Commission.
It has been held in the aforesaid case that the power of the appointing authority is not absolute and untrammelled.
The appointing authority does not have the licence of acting in arbitrary manner.
In the said case, selection was made by the Haryana Public Service Commission but the appointment letters were not issued as certain complaints were received against the process of selection.
It was also held that even if there are some complaints against a particular candidate, the Government could not withhold the entire select list.
The Court, thus, concluded as under :-  "56.
The allegations that some of the selected candidates are wards of the highly placed officers of the Government cannot be made basis for withholding the appointments.
The mere fact that one happens to be the son or the daughter of a serving officer of the government or a public representative cannot lead to an inference that his/her selection must have been the result of manipulation or favouritism.
Such presumption cannot be made basis for justifying the withholding of the appointment of a duty selected candidate.
In recent times, it has become a practice of the unsuccessful candidates to assail the selection by making allegations that the selected candidates are wards of highly placed officers of public figures.
In our view, such allegations cannot be made basis for nullifying the selection by the Court nor can the Government withhold appointment to the selected candidates on the basis of such allegations except where it is proved that the selection of the candidate has been procured by use of extraneous considerations.
In the present case no such evidence has been produced before the Court.
Therefore, the action of the Government to withhold appointment on the basis of allegations that selected candidates are related to highly placed officers cannot be upheld.
57.
We also find substance in the argument of Sh. Rajiv Atma Ram that even if for a moment it is assumed that there were some complaints against few of the selected candidates, the same could not be made basis for withholding of the appointment of all the candidates.
Learned Advocate General could not explain to us the reason for setting at naught the entire selection made by the Commission."
In view of the above, it transpires that the only reason given by the State counsel to justify re-interview of all the candidates is that the names of three candidates appear in the select list although they were not eligible.
If the said candidates are not eligible, the obvious course available to the government is not to issue the appointment letters to such candidates but to conduct fresh interview of all the candidates is wholly unjustified.
14.
The argument of the learned State counsel that advertisement Annexure P-1 inadvertently could not contain a stipulation that the posts are meant for Haryana domicile is without any merit.
The only effect of such a condition would be that outside candidates would not be eligible for consideration.
It is not the case where a category of candidates were deprived of the right to apply due to inadvertent omission in the advertisement.
There is no justification in conducting the interview again.
The posts of general category and other reserved categories have already been filled up.
It is only 3% posts meant for physically handicapped candidates which are required to be filled up.
The State Government has not acted fairly while deciding to hold the interview again.
The action of the State Government is arbitrary and not legally sustainable in law.
In view of the above, the writ petitions are allowed.
The respondents are directed to issue appointment letters to the selected candidates as per select list prepared by the Selection Committee.
The process of appointment shall be completed within a period of two months from today.
No costs.
Petitions allowed.