SS Nijjar, J. (Oral) - The petitioner sought issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to consider and promote the petitioner to the post of Assistant Engineer (Civil) from the post of Research Assistant under Regulation 10(6) of the Punjab State Electricity Board Services of Engineers (Civil) Regulations, 1965 (hereinafter referred to as the "Regulations").
The petitioner is a qualified Engineer.
He obtained a degree in BE (Civil) from Guru Nanak Engineering College, Ludhiana in the year 1985.
He secured first division.
Thereafter, he did ME (Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engineering) in the year 1992.
The petitioner was duly selected and appointed as Research Assistant in the Punjab State Electricity Board (hereinafter referred to as the "Board") on 1921987.
The service conditions of the petitioner were governed by the Regulations.
In term of Regulation 10(6), the petitioner claims promotion against 5% of the posts.
Regulation 10(6) had originally provided that 9% of the posts of Assistant Engineers (Civil) are to be reserved for promotion from amongst the candidates who are graduates in Civil Engineering or AMIE before joining the service of the Board.
They are also required to complete 3 years of service.
Subsequently by an amendment, the quota of 9% was reduced to 5%.
This amendment had come into operation w.e.f.
2571991.
9% quota of AMIE qualified technical subordinate was merged with the quota of Engineering graduates, thus making a total of 14% of the posts which were reserved for the technical subordinates.
The clubbing of aforesaid quota was made effective by amendment dated 2151997.
However, the amended provision has been challenged in C.W.P.
No. 11726 of 1997.
The aforesaid writ petition came up for hearing on 2811998 and the same was admitted.
The operation of the amendment had been stayed.
Consequently the Board has taken a decision to make the promotion on the basis of unamended Regulations.
In other words, 5% of the posts remained reserved for Engineering Graduates.
2.
The respondents have filed written statement and controverted the claim put forth by the petitioner.
It has been stated that the 5% quota of the posts has been reserved for appointment of technical subordinates and the petitioner being not technical subordinate, cannot be considered for promotion.
3.
The petitioner has filed replication and has stated that Regulation 10(6) is applicable to Engineering Graduates who possess the graduate degree prior to joining the service of the Board.
Regulation 10(6) is as under :-  "Regulation 10(6) 5% of the posts of Assistant Engineers (Civil) may be reserved for promotion from amongst the graduates in Civil Engineering/AMIE qualified hands who possess this qualification before joining the service of the Board and have completed three year service in that capacity."
A persual of the aforesaid Regulation shows that all Assistant Engineers (Civil) who are graduates in Civil Engineering/AIME are eligible to be considered for promotion provided they possess the aforesaid qualifications before joining the Board.
It is also necessary that they should have completed three years of service.
4.
Undoubtedly, the petitioner has completed three years service.
He is also a graduate in Engineering.
Infact he possess post-graduation qualification also.
We are, therefore, of the opinion that the petitioner is eligible to be considered for promotion against one of the posts reserved under Regulation 10(6).
At this stage learned counsel appearing for the Board has stated that till now only Junior Engineers who have been appointed in or before the year 1985 have been considered for promotion and since the petitioner has been appointed in the year 1987, his turn would not come.
5.
We are of the opinion that whether or not the turn of the petitioner to be considered for promotion would reach is a matter to be examined by the Board.
On this ground alone, it would not be possible to deny the relief to the petitioner.
It is settled proposition of law that no employee can claim a right to be promoted, but at the same time, the right to be considered for promotion under the Regulations cannot be denied to an employee.
In view of the above, this petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to consider the claim of the petitioner for promotion in accordance with law within a period of two months from the date of receipt of a certified copy of this order.
Petition allowed.