VK Bali, J (Oral) - In this appeal filed under clause X of the Letters Patent, challenge is to the order dated April 12, 2002, passed by the learned Single Judge, vide which Civil Writ Petition No. 3172 of 1987, filed by the petitioner under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India challenging the order of his compulsory retirement dated April 5, 1986, was dismissed.
2.
Brief facts of the case reveal that the petitioner was appointed as Weighment Clerk on July 10, 1959, and in due course of time, was promoted as Assistant Grade-I (Depot) on April 7, 1971.
By applying Regulation 22(2) of the Food Corporation of India (Staff) Regulations, 1971 (for short the Regulations), he was compulsorily retired at the age of 51 years, though the age of superannuation was 58 years.
It is this order, which was challenged by the petitioner in the writ petition, with the result, already indicated above.
3.
Before the learned Single Judge, two fold contentions, that were raised, pertained to the competence of the authority that passed the order of compulsory retirement.
It has been the case of the petitioner that the appointing authority of Assistant Grade-I, which is a class III post, was Zonal Manager, whereas the impugned orders were passed by Senior Regional Manager, an authority lower in rank than the appointing authority of the petitioner and, therefore, the order of compulsory retirement was illegal and required to be set aside.
The second ground on which order of compulsory retirement was sought to be set aside pertained to mala fides of Shri AS Bodhwal, Assistant Manager (D), who, it was stated, was instrumental in spoiling confidential records of the petitioner.
Both these points were examined by the learned Single Judge and findings thereon were returned against the petitioner.
4.
In the Letters Patent Appeal that has been filed, whereas, the first point, as referred to above, has been pressed, no arguments have been raised with regard to second point.
The petitioner has, however, sought to add an additional dimension to the case by stating that he was promoted to the post of Assistant Manager and all adverse entries that might have been recorded in his confidential records, prior to the date of his promotion to the post aforesaid, should be deemed to have been washed out or would be of no effect whatsoever.
5.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance, examined records of this case.
6.
In the context of facts and circumstances of this case, we, however, find absolutely no merit in either of the contentions of learned counsel for the appellant as noted above.
While dealing with the first point, the learned Single Judge held that order of compulsory retirement was under the Regulations as applicable on April 5, 1986.
The amendment that came about in Regulations w.e.f.
October 16, 1987, would not govern the case.
The finding recorded by the learned Single Judge appears to be correct as the petitioner was compulsorily retired on April 5, 1986 and the Regulations in vogue at that time would govern as to who was the appointing authority of the petitioner.
Regulations of 1987, specifying appointing authorities for various posts were of no avail and, therefore, even if the appointing authority, as per Regulations of 1987 for the post of Assistant Grade-I, may as such be Zonal Manager and order of compulsory retirement of the petitioner might have been passed by the Senior Regional Manager, it would not advance the cause of the petitioner at all.
Confronted with the findings of learned Single Judge, as mentioned above, the counsel for the petitioner, however, shifts his argument by contending that in the present case appointment of petitioner was made by the Zonal Manager, even though, under the Regulations, his appointing authority may be Senior Regional Manager and, therefore, in the matter of appointment of the petitioner, the appointing authority shall have to be considered as Zonal Manager alone.
This point was not raised before the learned Single Judge.
However, if, from the pleadings of during the course of arguments, it might have been an admitted position, we would have seriously examined the question posed by learned counsel representing the petitioner, as mentioned above.
However, what is found from the pleadings is that in paragraph 2 of the petition, even though the petitioner might have mentioned, while giving his service graph, that he was further promoted as Assistant Grade-I (Depot) on 741971 (Copy annexed P-1) by the appointing authority- Zonal Manager, he, however, sought to substantiate the pleadings aforesaid by referring to his appointment letter dated 741971, Annexure P-1.
Relevant part of paragraph 2 of the writ petition reads thus :-  "2.
That the petitioner joined the Erstwhile Food Department, Government of India as weighment Clerk on 10.7.1959 and was promoted as Assistant Grade-II (Depot) in the year 1969 and was further promoted as Assistant Grade-I (Depot) on 741971 (copy annexed P-1) by the Appointing authority-Zonal Manager."
7.
No issue, it appears, has been joined by the petitioner in paragraph 2 pertaining to illegality of the impugned order of compulsory retirement on the basis that same was not passed by the appointing authority.
Such an issue, no doubt, has been raised in paragraph 8 of the writ petition, wherein, it has been pleaded that compulsory retirement order has been passed by an incompetent authority, whereas the competent authority was Zonal Manager as per Regulations prevailing at the time of his promotion to the post of Assistant Grade-I, i.e., 741971.
It has further been mentioned that at that time the Senior Regional Manager, Punjab, was not shown competent to pass such orders in view of the Appendix-II.
While replying to para 8 of the petition, respondents in the written statement clearly averred that order of retirement has been passed by the competent authority, i.e., Senior Regional Manager and further that the Senior Regional Manager is a competent authority to retire a Class-III official in public interest under Regulation 22 of the Staff Regulations.
From the pleadings, on the specific issue raised by learned counsel, what transpires is that while giving narration of facts in paragraph 2, petitioner simply states that he was appointed/promoted on the post of Assistant Grade-I by the Zonal Manager and at the most endeavours to prove the said fact by annexing his promotion order as Annexure P-1 and it is only in paragraph 8 that he pleads that as per Regulations his appointing authority is Zonal Manager and not the Senior Regional Manager.
Once, the petitioner had relied upon Annexure P-1, which, from reading of the same and as is also admitted during the course of arguments, is only an extract of the order of appointing/promotion, and concededly, does not have the part which might show as to who had issued the same, there was no occasion for the respondents to have specifically denied the said para.
We have independently gone through order dated 741971, Annexure P-1.
It is not signed by any one.
In the facts and circumstances of this case, an adverse inference has to be drawn against the petitioner and a finding has to be recorded that in case Annexure P-1 was produced on record as a whole, same might have turned against the petitioner.
Insofar as, however, pleadings made in paragraph 8 pertaining to appointing authority under the Regulations is concerned, same has been specifically denied and, as on today, it is conceded position that, under the Regulations, appointing authority of Assistant Grade-I is Senior Regional Manager and not the Zonal Manager.
8.
Be that as it may, if, under the Regulations, the appointing or promotional authority of the post of Assistant Grade-I may be Senior Regional Manager and instead an order is passed by a higher authority, it can be termed to be only a technical defect and if the petitioner, in any case, has to take the technical point, the very order of his appointment would be bad and shall have to be ignored.
9.
In so far as second point that has been raised in support of the appeal is concerned, Mr. CM Chopra, learned counsel for the appellant, was at pains to explain that the post, on which the appellant was promoted, i.e., Assistant Manager, was a selection post under Regulation 10 of the Regulations and a proper procedure was gone into while selecting the appellant on the said post and, therefore, all adverse entries that might have been recorded prior to the date of his promotion would be of no consequence and could not as such have been taken into consideration for compulsory retiring him.
We might have gone into the contentions raised by learned counsel for the appellant but the pleadings made in the petition are such that there is no need to go into details of this contention.
While dealing with the matter of promotion, all that has been mentioned in para 6 of the writ petition is that the petitioner was promoted as Assistant Manager (Depot) as he was due for promotion since long.
There is no mention that the aforesaid promotional post was a selection post or for that matter, any selection process was gone into in promoting the petitioner.
In fact all that has been mentioned is that the petitioner was due for promotion since long, which clearly envisages that he came to be promoted on the said post on the dint of his seniority.
We may further mention here that it is positive case of the respondents so pleaded in the written statement that the promotion of the petitioner was withheld by the Department and immediately thereafter order of compulsory retirement was passed.
In the light of discussion made above, we find no merit in this Letters Patent Appeal and dismiss the same, however, leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Appeal dismissed.