Adarsh Kumar Goel, J - This petition has been filed for a direction to allow the claim of the petitioner for reimbursement of expenses incurred on medical treatment.
2.
Case of the petitioner is that she was appointed as JBT teacher in the subject of Punjabi in the year 1961 and retired from service on 3111998.
Prior to her retirement, she met with an accident on 261995 and had to undergo surgery at the Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh (PGI).
On account of further complications, she had to undergo surgery at the Chandigarh Medical Centre, Sector 17, Chandigarh and sought permission for surgery from the Chandigarh Administration.
In anticipation thereof, she underwent surgery and for treatment in this regard, submitted a bill for the period from 2481995 to 3181995 amounting to Rs. 29,802.15.
On 2972000, her medical bills were returned by the State of Punjab on the ground that the petitioner had to make a claim to the Chandigarh Administration where she was posted on deputation.
Accordingly, the petitioner applied to the Chandigarh Administration and the same was not being accepted.
Hence this petition.
3.
In the reply filed on behalf of the Chandigarh Administration where the petitioner was serving on deputation at the relevant time, it is admitted that the petitioner made a claim for the amount but it is stated that she had never taken permission for treatment in private hospital.
A sum of Rs. 6095/- was sanctioned to her for her treatment with the PGI but claim for treatment from private hospital without prior permission from Director, Health Services, Chandigarh was not admissible in view of instructions dated 1321995 (Annexure R3/1).
It is also stated that her case was never referred by the PGI or by the Director, Health Services to the private Medical Centre.
4.
In the rejoinder filed, it is stated that even if prior permission was required for treatment outside Government Hospital, the said instructions have been adopted by the Chandigarh Administration in the year 2001.
In any case, the petitioner had sought necessary permission and in anticipation of sanction, she underwent surgery by Dr. Parduman Singh which has not been disputed and, thus, rejection of her claim on the only ground that prior sanction was not obtained, was arbitrary.
5.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties.
6.
The petitioner did seek permission for treatment outside government hospital.
As per instruction dated 1321995, Annexure R.3/1, issued by the State of Punjab, which have been adopted by the Chandigarh Administration, treatment in private hospitals is permissible subject to reimbursement being allowed at the rates fixed by Director Health and Family Welfare.
Thus, in the present case, the petitioner is entitled to reimbursement.
In absence of any other rates being shown to have been finalised by Technical experts as mentioned in the above instructions, it would be just that the petition is allowed reimbursement as per PGI rates.
Accordingly, this petition is allowed and a direction is issued to respondent Nos. 3 and 4 to allow reimbursement of medical within a period of three months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
Petition allowed.