Nisar Ahmad Kakru, J - The petitioner a lineman in the power Development Department is sought to be superannuated on retirement at the age of 58 years by impugned communication which is called in question by medium of this writ petition on the ground that lineman's post is borne on the inferior service, therefore, entitled to continuation till he attains age of sixty years.
Contesting the claim it is averred by the respondents in their reply that a 'Lineman' does not come within the purview of inferior service.
In this backdrop, the case turns around the interpretation of Regulation 226 of the Rules called the "Jammu & Kashmir Civil Service Regulations, 1956" and provisos I & II attached thereto relevant to the controversy in issue which may be extracted :  "226.
[(1)] An officer shall retire compulsorily on his attaining the age of 55 years, unless the competent authority considers him efficient and permits him to remain in service.
He may, however, be retained in service after the date of compulsory retirement with the sanction of the Government on public grounds which must be recorded in writing but he must not be retained after the age of 60 years except in very special circumstances : Provided that the Government servants who were in service on 10-10-1966 and were treated inferior as per schedule II, will retire on attaining the age of 60 years : Provided further that a Government servant in service on 1-1-1987 or appointed on or after that date shall retire his attaining the age of 58 years."
2.
The phraseology employed in the rule being so simple the intent of the statute maker need not be unfolded by any interpretative process.
The rule admits no ambiguity.
It can be understood in its grammatical meaning without any difficulty.
From its plain reading what is deducible is that a Government servant has a right to continue in service till he attains the age of 55 years but as per the proviso I attached to the Regulation 226 the continuation would extend to sixty years in case the Government servant falls within the ambit of inferior service provided he was in service as on 10-10-1996.
Thus it emerges that proviso I would become applicable in two eventualities one :  (a) That he is a member of inferior service as per schedule II of the J & K Civil service Regulations, 1956.
(b) The other that he was in Service on 10-10-1966.
It goes without saying that absence of either of the conditions shall render the Government servant disentitled to the benefit of the proviso I.
Considering the case of the petitioner on the touchstone of analysis of the proviso I, the objection raised by the respondents that the post of 'Lineman' does not fall within the definition of inferior service pales into insignificance for the petitioner has himself averred in his pleadings that he is an appointee of 1971 (see para 2 of writ petition).
Obviously, he has entered the service after 10101966, therefore, he cannot invoke proviso I for his retention in service beyond 55 years of age but he does fall within the four corners of the proviso II which envisages retirement of a Government servant on his attaining the age of 58 years if he was in service on 1-1-1987 or was appointed on or after that date.
It needs a reiteration that the petitioner is an appointee of 1971 and was admittedly in service on 111987, therefore, he is entitled to derive the benefit of proviso II entitling him to continuation until he attains the age of 58 years.
3.
Viewed thus relief sought for continuation in terms of proviso I to Regulation 226 of the J & K Civil Service Regulations, 1956 is declined.
Writ petition is dismissed along with all connected C.M.Ps.
Interim direction is vacated.
No order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.