Sunil Kumar Garg, J - This writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India has been filed by the petitioner on 7102003 against the respondents with a prayer that by an appropriate writ, order or direction the respondents be directed to grant admission to the petitioner in the Veterinary Nursing Course, 2003-2004 as advertised vide advertisement dtd.
7.6.2003 (Annex.4) issued by the Dy.
Director (Training), Animal Husbandry Department, Government of Rajasthan, Jaipur.
2.
The facts of the case as put forward by the petitioner are as under :  i) The petitioner is a bonafide resident of Rajasthan and he passed his Secondary Examination in the year 2000 from the Board of Secondary Education for Rajasthan in first division with 7017% marks.
Thereafter, he passed Sr.
Secondary Examinations in Hindi, Chemistry, Biology, English and Physical from National Institute of Open Schooling in the year 2003 which is an institute of Government of India, New Delhi and passed in good Second Division with 594% marks.
Copy of the bonafide certificate is marked as Annex.1, Copy of mark- sheet of Secondary examination is marked as Annex2 and copy of mark-sheet of Sr.
Secondary Examination is marked as Annex.3.
ii) Further case of the petitioner is that the respondent No. 2 (Dy.
Director, Training) issued an advertisement dtd.
7.6.2003 (Annex.4) for admission to two years Veterinary Nursing Course - 2003-2004 and in pursuance of that advertisement dtd.
7.6.2003 (Annex.4), the petitioner applied and he was placed in the merit list at serial No. 92 and thereafter he was called for counselling vide letter dtd.
2582003 (Annex.6) issued by respondent No. 2 (Dy.
Director, Training) which was held in the office of respondent No. 2 (Dy.
Director, Training) on 2292003. iii) Further case of the petitioner is that at the time of counselling and after seeing his mark-sheet of Sr.
Secondary Examination (Annex.3), the petitioner was denied admission on the ground that the qualification of Sr.
Secondary obtained by the petitioner from National Institute of Open Schooling, Govt. of India was not recognized in the State of Rajasthan, though according to the petitioner, the said qualification was duly recognized by NCERT.
However, the petitioner was not given any official communication about denial of his admission.
iv) Thereafter the petitioner gave legal notice dtd.
2592003 (Annex.7) to the respondents, however, no action was taken by the respondents and hence this writ petition with the abovementioned prayer.
3.
In this writ petition, the main submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that the Sr.
Secondary School Mark-sheet (Annex.3) obtained by the petitioner is from a very prestigious institution of Govt. of India, which is formerly known as National Open School, Government of India, New Delhi and the same is recognized by the Government of Rajasthan, as is evident from the guidelines (Annex.8) issued by the Board of Secondary Education for Rajasthan annexed with the additional affidavit filed by the petitioner later on and as per Clause 8 of the guidelines (Annex.8) issued by the Board of Secondary Education for Rajasthan, National Open School, Delhi was recognized by the government of Rajasthan and hence denial of admission to the petitioner is violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
4.
Reply to the writ petition was filed by the respondents and their case is that the petitioner's candidature was rightly rejected because he did not possess the required qualification as according to the respondents, a bare perusal of the advertisement dtd.
7.6.2003 (Annex.4) issued by the respondent No. 2 (Dy.
Director, Training) makes it clear that the applicant must pass Sr.
Secondary qualification from the Board of Secondary Education Rajasthan or from Central Schools which are located in Rajasthan state but the petitioner passed Sr.
Secondary Examination from National Institute of Open Schooling, Government of India, New Delhi and therefore, he was not fulfilling the conditions as mentioned in the advertisement dtd.
7.6.2003 (Annex.4) and hence no case is made out and the writ petition be dismissed.
4.
Heard and perused the record.
5.
There is no dispute on the point that the petitioner is a bonafide resident of Rajasthan as is evident from the bonafide certificate (Annex.1) issued by the Sub Divisional Magistrate, Nohar.
6.
There is also no dispute on the point that the petitioner passed Secondary Examination from the Board of Secondary Education for Rajasthan in the year 2000 from a School situated in Rajasthan as is evident from the mark-sheet (Annex2).
7.
There is also no dispute on the point that the petitioner passed Sr.
Secondary Examination from National Institute of Open Schooling, New Delhi a school situated not in Rajasthan, but outside Rajasthan.
8.
There is also no dispute on the point that from the guidelines (Annex.8) issued by the Board of Secondary Education for Rajasthan, the National Open School was recognized by the Government of Rajasthan.
9.
There is also no dispute on the point that in the advertisement dtd.
7.6.2003 (Annex.4) issued by the respondent No. 2 (Dy.
Director, Training), there is a condition that the applicant should be bonafide resident of Rajasthan and he should pass Secondary Examination or Sr.
Secondary Examination from the Board of Secondary Examination for Rajasthan or from any of the institute recognized by the Government of India which are located in the Rajasthan State.
10.
The question which arises for consideration is whether in the facts and circumstances of the present case, the candidature of the petitioner was rightly rejected or not.
11.
In my considered opinion, looking to the fact that since the petitioner was bonafide resident of Rajasthan and he passed Secondary Examinations from the Board of Secondary Education for Rajasthan as is evident from the mark- sheet (Annex2) and he passed the Sr.
Secondary from an institute which is recognized by the Government of Rajasthan, but that institute is located at New Delhi and not in the Rajasthan, denial of admission to the petitioner in Veterinary Nursing Course, 2003-2004 would be discriminatory and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
Had the petitioner would not have been the bonafide resident of Rajasthan and he would have passed Secondary Examination as well as Sr.
Secondary examination from any other place other than State of Rajasthan, the argument of the learned counsel for the respondents could have prevailed and furthermore, once the Government of Rajasthan has recognized the institute from which the petitioner passed Sr.
Secondary examination, the petitioner cannot be denied admission in Veterinary Nursing Course, 2003-2004 merely on the ground that the Institute from which the petitioner passed the Examination of Sr.
Secondary is situated in Delhi and not in the Rajasthan.
Had the National Institute of Open Schooling, New Delhi from which the petitioner passed the Sr.
Secondary examinations would not have been recognized by the Government of Rajasthan, the submission of learned counsel for the respondents could have been accepted, but since the petitioner is a bonafide resident of Rajasthan and he passed his Sr.
Secondary Examination from the National Institute of Open Schooling, New Delhi which is recognized by the Government of Rajasthan, therefore, merely because the institute was not situated in the Rajasthan, he cannot be deprived of benefit of passing Sr.
Secondary from National Institute of Opening Schooling, New Delhi which is recognized by the Government of Rajasthan.
Thus, denial of admission to the petitioner is Veterinary Nursing Course, 2003-2004 has infringed the legal right of the petitioner and he is entitled to the relief sought for in this writ petition.
12. for the reasons mentioned above, it is held that the petitioner is entitled to admission in Veterinary Nursing Course, 2003-2004 and the present writ petition deserves to be allowed.
Accordingly, the present writ petition is allowed and the respondents are directed to grant admission to the petitioner in Veterinary Nursing Course, 2003-2004 as advertised vide advertisement dtd.
7.6.2003 (Annex.4).
Cost made easy.
Petition allowed.