Sunil Kumar Garg, J - This writ petition under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India has been filed by the petitioners on 14.3.2001 against the respondents with the prayer that by an appropriate writ, order or direction, the impugned judgment and award dated 141997 (Annex.5) passed by the learned Judge, Labour Court, Bikaner (respondent No. 2) by which termination of services of the respondent No. 1 Richpal Singh with effect from 2491981 was held to be not proper and invalid and thus, the respondent No. 1 was ordered to be reinstated in service with all consequential benefits and he was awarded a sum of Rs. 3000/- as back wages, be quashed and set aside.
2.
The case of the petitioners as put forward by them in this writ petition is as follows :-  "Through Notification dated 7th November, 1992, the State Government in exercise of power under Section 10(1) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (hereinafter referred to as "the Act 1947") made reference to the Labour Court, Bikaner (respondent No. 2) to the effect whether the retrenchment of the respondent No. 1 Richpal Singh by the petitioners with effect from 2491981 was just and proper or not.
On receipt of that reference, the respondent No. 2 Labour Court, Bikaner registered the case being Labour Dispute Reference No. 3/1993 and issued notices to both the parties.
Thereafter, the respondent No. 1 Richpal Singh filed his claim petition (Annex.3) stating inter-alia that he was appointed on 2421979 and continuously worked upto 2491981 and thus, he had completed 240 days in a calendar year.
It was further stated by the respondent No. 1 that his services were suddenly terminated with effect 2491981 without giving one month's notice or in lieu of such notice, wages for the period of the notice and thus, termination of his services was in violation of the provisions of the Act of 1947.
Hence, it was prayed by the respondent No. 1 that termination of his services with effect from 2491981 be declared illegal and be quashed and set aside and he be reinstated back in service, with all consequential benefits.
A reply to the claim petition (Annex.
3) was filed by the petitioners before the respondent No. 2 Labour Court, Bikaner through Annex.
4 stating inter-alia that the respondent No. 1 was first engaged vide order dated 2431979 (Annex.1) under famine relief work as Driver to carry the water to the remote areas during the course of famine.
Thereafter, the respondent No. 1 again exhibited desire to be engaged on famine relief work on Famine Water Tanker and since he was having knowledge of driving, therefore, his application was recommended to the Collector (Relief), Churu and thus, he was afresh appointed alongwith other persons in famine relief work by the Collector (relief), Churu vide order Annex.
2 dated 1541981 purely on ad hoc basis and he was posted on famine water tanker No. RJ-1-1316.
Thus, it is very much clear that the respondent No. 1 was engaged under famine relief work and as soon as the famine relief work came to an end, his services were rightly terminated with effect from 2491981.
It was further submitted by the petitioners that the provisions of the Act of 1947 do not apply to the case of the respondent No. 1 as he was engaged for doing the famine relief works.
Hence, it was prayed that the claim of the respondent No. 1 be rejected.
After considering the entire material available on record and hearing both the parties, the learned Judge, Labour Court, Bikaner (respondent No. 2) through impugned judgment and award dated 141997 came to the conclusion that the termination of services of the respondent No. 1 Richpal Singh with effect from 2491981 by the petitioners was invalid and bad in law and thus, ordered reinstatement of the respondent No. 1 with all consequential benefits and awarded Rs. 3000/- as compensation, holding inter-alia :-  (i) That the case of the present petitioners that the respondent No. 1 had worked in their employment under famine relief operation was not found established.
(ii) That provisions of the Act of 1947 were applicable to the case of the respondent No. 1.
(iii) That the termination of services of the respondent No. 1 by the petitioners amounted to retrenchment.
(iv) That before terminating the services of the respondent No. 1, the provisions of the Act of 1947 were not complied with by the petitioners and thus, since the services of the respondent No. 1 were terminated with effect from 2491981 in violation of the provisions of the Act of 1947, therefore, the respondent No. 1 is entitled to reinstatement.
Aggrieved from the said judgment and award dated 141997 passed by the respondent No. 2 Labour Court, Bikaner, the petitioners have preferred this writ petition.
In this writ petition, the following submissions have been made by the learned counsel appearing for the petitioners :-  (i) That the finding of the respondent No. 2 learned Labour Court that the respondent No. 1 was not engaged for famine relief works is per se illegal as from his appointment orders Annex.
1 dated 2431979 and Annex.
2 dated 1541981, the fact that he was appointed under famine relief works is well established.
(ii) That in case of workers engaged for famine relief works, the provisions of the Act of 1947 are not applicable and their case is governed by the provisions of Rajasthan Famine Relief Works Employees (Exemption From Labour Laws) Act, 1964 (hereinafter referred to as "the Act of 1964") and Section 3 of the Act of 1964 provides that labour laws do not apply in the case of famine relief works.
Hence, the findings of the learned Labour Court that the provisions of the Act of 1947 are applicable to the present case are wholly erroneous and illegal one.
(iii) That the respondent No. 1 had concealed the material fact and during the proceedings, he filed an application under section 33C(2) of the Act of 1947 before the respondent No. 2 Labour Court, Bikaner and a reply to that application was filed by the petitioners through Annex.
6 and in that reply it was stated by the petitioners that the respondent No. 1 was serving in the Rajasthan State Road Transport Corporation (for short "the Corporation") since 1989 and that fact is very well established from the letter of the Corporation dated 2881998 (Annex.7) and thus, there was no relationship of employer and employee between the petitioners and the respondent No. 1.
Thus, from this point of view also, the respondent No. 1 is not entitled to the relief of reinstatement.
Hence, it was prayed that this writ petition be allowed and the impugned judgment and award dated 141997 (Annex.5) passed by the learned Judge, Labour Court, Bikaner (respondent No. 2) be quashed and set aside.
A reply to the writ petition was filed by the respondent No. 1 in which he has supported the impugned judgment and award dated 141997 (Annex.5) passed by the learned Judge, Labour Court, Bikaner (respondent No. 2).
The fact as alleged by the petitioners that the respondent No. 1 was serving in the Corporation since 1989 has been admitted by him, but his case is that he was engaged there for a very short period.
Apart from this, it has been further submitted by the learned counsel for the respondent No. 1 that the scope of interference by the High Court under Articles 226 & 227 of the Constitution of India with the findings of the learned Labour Court is very limited one and since the findings of the learned Labour Court are based on correct appreciation of evidence and material available on record, therefore, no interference is called for with the same.
Hence, the writ petition filed by the petitioners be dismissed.
3.
I have heard the learned counsel appearing for the petitioners and the learned counsel appearing for the respondent No. 1 and gone through the materials available on record.
4.
The first question that calls for consideration is whether the findings of the learned Labour Court (respondent No. 2) on issue No. 1 to the effect that the respondent No. 1 was not engaged for famine relief works are correct one or not.
5.
Before proceeding further, it may be stated here that the power of general superintendence conferred by Article 227 of the Constitution of India involves a duty on the part of the High Court to keep all courts and tribunals within its territorial jurisdiction within the bounds of their authority, to see that they do what their duty requires and they do it in a legal manner.
This means that the High Court can interfere in cases of -  (a) Erroneous assumption or excess of jurisdiction.
(b) Refusal to exercise jurisdiction.
(c) Error of law apparent on the face of the record, as distinguished from a mere mistake of law or error of law relating to jurisdiction.
(d) Violation of principles of natural justice.
(e) Arbitrary or capricious exercise of authority, or discretion.
(f) Arriving at a finding which is perverse or based on no material.
6.
Through order Annex.1 dated 2431979, the respondent No. 1 was appointed for three months and in that order Annex.
1 there is a clear mention of the fact that the respondent, No. 1 was to take famine tanker for distribution of water.
7.
Thereafter, through order Annex.
2 dated 1541981 passed by the Collector (Relief), Churu, the respondent No. 1 was again appointed on the post of Driver and in that order Annex.
2, it was also clearly mentioned that because of famine, the duty of the respondent No. 1 would be to take water through tanker.
8.
I have also gone through the findings of the Labour Court (respondent No. 2) in respect of issue No. 1 which deals with whether the respondent No. 1 was appointed by the petitioners for doing the famine relief works or not.
The learned Labour Court came to the conclusion that in the appointment orders of the respondent No. 1, it was not mentioned that he was appointed for family relief works and furthermore, the Assistant Engineer, who terminated the services of the respondent No. 1, had not been produced and apart from this, the order of the Collector (Relief), Churu, on the basis of which, the services of the respondent No. 1 were terminated, was also not produced on record.
9.
In my considered opinion, the above reasoning given by the learned Labour Court (respondent No. 2) in coming to the conclusion that the respondent No. 1 was not appointed for famine relief work are absolutely erroneous, illegal, and perverse and not supported by any documents and thus, the same cannot be sustained.
10.
From the appointment orders of the respondent No. 1 dated 2431979 (Annex.
1) and dated 1541981 (Annex2), it is very much clear that the respondent No. 1 was appointed as driver for doing the job of distribution of water to the affected areas through famine tanker under famine relief works.
Apart from this, the appointment order of the respondent No. 1 dated 1541981 (Annex2) was issued by the office of the Collector (Relief), Churu and this fact itself goes to show that the appointment of the respondent No. 1 was under famine relief works.
11.
Thus, it is held that the respondent No. 1 was appointed by the petitioners for performing the duties of driver for distribution of water to the affected areas through famine tanker under the famine relief works/operation and therefore, the findings of the learned Labour Court (respondent No. 2) that the respondent No. 1 was not appointed for doing the famine relief works are liable to be set aside.
12.
When this being the position, now it is to be seen whether the provisions of the Act of 1947 would be applicable to the case of the respondent No. 1 or not.
13.
Section 3 of the Act of 1964 reads as follows :-  "3.
Labour laws not to apply to famine relief works etc. - Notwithstanding anything contained in any labour law no such law shall apply nor the same shall be deemed ever to have applied, to the famine relief works or the employees thereof in respect of any matter covered by any such law."
14.
Section 3 of the Act of 1964 makes the position clear that in case of workers appointed for doing famine relief works, the provisions of Labour laws would not be applicable and in schedule appended to the Act of 1964 at serial No. 3 The Act of 1947 is there and therefore, provisions of the Act of 1947 would not be applicable to the case of the respondent No. 1 as he was engaged by the petitioners for doing the famine relief works.
15.
Thus, it is held that the provisions of the Act of 1947 would not be applicable to the case of the respondent No. 1 as he was appointed by the petitioners for doing the famine relief works and therefore, the findings of the learned Labour Court (respondent No. 2) that the provisions of the Act of 1947 would be applicable to the case of the respondent No. 1 are liable to be set aside.
16.
The Division Bench of this Court in Dewa Ram v. The State of Rajasthan (1990(2) RLW 155) has further observed that appointments for doing the famine relief works are not covered by the provisions of the Act of 1947 and as soon as the famine work/famine operation ended, the services came to an end.
Therefore, from this point of view also, the respondent No. 1 was not entitled to the relief sought for.
17.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court in Himanshu Kumar Vidyarthi and ors. v. State of Bihar and others, ((1997) 4 SCC 391) observed that every Department of Government cannot be treated as "industry" and therefore, dispensing with services of persons engaged on daily wages in a Government Department is not a retrenchment within the meaning of Section 2(oo) of the Act of 1947 and not only this, it was further observed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court that on disengagement on completion of work, they had no right whatsoever.
From this point of view also, the respondent No. 1 was not entitled to the relief sought for.
18.
Apart from this, it is well settled that if a person is engaged for performing a particular job for a particular period, on completion of such period, his services stand automatically terminated.
Similarly, in the present case, the respondent No. 1 was appointed as driver for distribution of water to the affected areas through famine tanker under the famine relief works/operation and on completion of such famine relief works/operation, if the services of the respondent No. 1 were terminated, no illegality or irregularity has been committed by the petitioners in doing so and in such situation, the respondent No. 1 had no claim or right whatsoever to the post even though his case is governed by the Act of 1947.
19.
Apart from the above, the learned counsel for the petitioners has invited my attention to the letter Annex.
7 dated 2881998 written by the Corporation to the office of the Collector (Relief), Churu where it was stated that the respondent No. 1 was first appointed in Corporation through order dated 2551989 and he was posted in Kotputli Depot and vide order dated 4101989, his services were terminated, but after that, on compromise, he was again appointed as Driver through order dated 1851996 and since then, he is in the service of the Corporation as Driver.
20.
When this being the position, the respondent No. 1 was guilty of suppression of material fact as the fact that he was in the service of the Corporation was concealed by him while making application under section 33- C(2) of the Act of 1947 before the respondent No. 2 Labour Court, Bikaner and apart from this, when he is already in service of the Corporation since 1851996 as regular driver, he was not entitled to the relief of reinstatement.
21.
For the reasons stated above, since the findings of the learned Labour Court (respondent No. 2), which have been mentioned above, are wholly erroneous, perverse and based on no material, therefore, they cannot be sustained and liable to be set aside in exercise of the power under Article 227 of the Constitution of India and thus, this writ petition deserves to be allowed and the impugned judgment and award Annex.
5 dated 141997 passed by the learned Judge, Labour Court, Bikaner (respondent No. 2) are liable to be quashed and set aside.
Accordingly, this writ petition filed by the petitioners is allowed and the impugned judgment and award Annex.
5 dated 141997 passed by the learned Judge, Labour Court, Bikaner (respondent No. 2) are quashed and set aside.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.