JS Khehar, J (Oral) - Through an advertisement dated 932001, respondent No. 2 i.e. Director, Rural Development and Panchayats, Punjab, invited applications for appointment to the post of Panchayat Secretary.
A copy of the aforesaid advertisement is appended with the writ petition as Annexure P-7.
A perusal of Annexure P-7 reveals that 34 posts of Panchayat Secretary reserved for Blind, Deaf & Dumb and Handicapped candidates had been advertised.
The petitioner applied for the post of Panchayat Secretary as a handicapped candidate asserting that he possessed low vision.
In this behalf, the petitioner has placed on record a certificate depicting that he enjoys poor vision and his disability is 40%.
It is also not a matter of dispute that the petitioner does not fulfil the qualifications prescribed for the appointment of Panchayat Secretary.
During the course of selection the petitioner was found suitable.
However, the order of appointment was not issued in his favour.
2.
The instant writ petition has been filed seeking a writ of mandamus for a direction to respondents No. 1 and 2 to appoint the petitioner against one of the reserved vacancies for handicapped candidates.
3.
On issuance of notice of motion, a detailed written statement has been field on behalf of respondents No. 1 and 2 and a separate written statement has been filed on behalf of respondents No. 3 and 4.
The solitary reason for not accepting the claim of the petitioner as has emerged from the pleadings filed on behalf of the respondents is that the State Government has issued instructions dated 232001 excluding the low vision and total blind candidates from appointment against the post of Panchayat Secretary.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has raised two-fold contentions.
Firstly, learned counsel contended that the policy instructions dated 232001 cannot be made applicable to the case of the petitioner primarily on account of the fact that respondent No. 2 expressly invited applications from amongst low vision/blind candidates through advertisement dated 932001 i.e. after the aforesaid instructions.
The second contention of learned counsel for the petitioner is based on the proviso to Section 33 of the Persons With Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995 (for short "the Act of 1995").
Section 33 of the Act is being extracted hereunder for facility of reference :-  "33.
Reservation of posts :- Every appropriate Government shall appoint in every establishment such percentage of vacancies not less thatn three per cent for persons or class of persons with disability of which one per cent each shall be reserved for persons suffering from :- i) blindness or low vision; ii) hearing impairment; iii) locomotor disability or cerebral palsy.
Provided that the appropriate Government may, having regard to the type of work carried on in any department or establishment, by notification subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in such notification, exempt any establishment from the provision of this section."
A persual of the proviso to the aforesaid provision reveals that the government has a right to exclude through a notification appointment by way of reservation permissible under the Act of 1995.
It is contended that no notification has till date been issued by the respondent-State and as such there cannot be an exemption from the mandate of the provisions of the Act of 1995.
5.
Having considered the arguments addressed at the bar, we are satisfied that the claim of the petitioner is fully justified.
Instructions dated 232001 are clearly contrary to the mandate of Section 33 of the Act of 1995.
An exemption from the provisions of the Act of 1995 can only be made by a notification at the hands of the government.
No such notification is stated to have been issued as per pleadings filed in the instant case.
Since in terms of the provisions of Section 33 of the Act of 1995, the State Government had issued an advertisement dated 932001 expressly indicating that the vacancies will be filled from amongst handicapped candidates, inter alia, lower vision/blind candidates, it is not permissible now for the respondent-State to deny appointment to the petitioner in accordance with the merit obtained by the petitioner in the process of selection.
6.
We accordingly allow the writ petition and direct respondents No. 1 and 2 to appoint the petitioner to the post of Panchayat Secretary.
The petitioner shall not be entitled to the wages for the period he did not discharge his duties.
He shall, however, be placed in the seniority list at the position he is entitled to on the basis of his rank determined as per marks obtained in the selection process.
Petition allowed.