GS Singhvi, J - This is a petition for issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to grant all the benefits admissible to the petitioner under Demobilised Indian Armed Forces Personnel Reservation of Vacancies in the Punjab State Technical (Medical and Engineering) Services Rules, 1978 (for short, `the 1978 Rules') including the arrears of salary, promotion etc.  2.
The petitioner joined Indian Army on 2541966 as Lieutenant.
In the course of service, he was promoted as Captain and continued to serve till November 18, 1976.
After discharge from Indian Army, the petitioner applied for the post of Dental Assistant Surgeon advertised by the Punjab Public Service Commission (for short `the Commission') vide advertisement No. 25 (published in The Tribune dated 2121978).
Out of 39 advertised posts seven were reserved for Released Indian Armed Forces Personnel, who had joined the Indian Army on or after November 01, 1962.
The petitioner was selected by the Commission and on that basis, he was appointed as ad hoc Dental Assistant Surgeon vide memo dated 551979 (Annexure P4).
Later on, his services were regularised.
After joining the service, he made representation claiming the benefit of the military service.
The same was rejected by the State Government and this was conveyed to Director, Health and Family Welfare, Punjab vide letter dated 29111985 (Annexure P5).
Thereafter, the petitioner got served a notice under Section 80 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
In reply thereto, Director, Health and Family Welfare, Punjab informed Civil Surgeon, Jalandhar under whom the petitioner was working at the relevant time that his representation had already been rejected by the State Government.
3.
The petitioner has challenged the decision of the State Government by describing it as violative of his fundamental right guaranteed under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
He has averred that even though, the 1978 Rules were enforced w.e.f.
31.12.1976 and remained in force up to 31.12.1978 and the order appointing him as Dental Assistant Surgeon was issued on 551979, he is entitled to the benefits admissible to Released Indian Armed Forces Personnel because the advertisement pursuant to which he was selected and appointed had been issued before the expiry of the tenure of the said Rules.
He has further averred that the respondents cannot make any distinction between the Released Armed Forces Personnel, who had joined the Army on or after 1111962, in the matter of grant benefits under the 1978 Rules simply because the process of selection initiated by the Commission was not finalised up to 31.12.1978.
4.
According to the respondents, the petitioner is not entitled to the benefit under the 1978 Rules because the term thereof had come to an end before his appointment as Dental Assistant Surgeon.
5.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties.
Rules 1, 3(c), (e), 4(1), 5 and 6 of the 1978 Rules, which have bearing on the petitioner's claim read as under :-  "1.
Short title, commencement and duration.
- (1) These rules may be called the Demobilised Indian Armed Forces Personnel Reservation of Vacancies in the Punjab State Technical (Medical and Engineering) Services Rules, 1978.
3.
Definitions.
- In these rules, unless the context otherwise requires.
(a) and (b) xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx (c) "Indian Armed Forces Personnel" means the Emergency Commissioned Officers, the Short Service Regular Commissioned Officers, the Junior Commissioned Officers, the Non-Commissioned Officers and other ranks of the Armed Forces of the Union.
(d) xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx (e) "Released Indian Armed Forces personnel" means the Indian Armed Forces Personnel who were commissioned to or who joined the Armed Forces of the Union, as the case may be, on or after the 1st day of November, 1962, but before the 10th day of January, 1968 and who were released on demobilisation thereafter but does not include- (i) Volunteer Reserved Forces Personnel of the Armed forces of the Union called upon for temporary service; or (ii) Indian Armed Forces Personnel who, before their appointment against vacancies reserved under these rules - (a) are granted permanent commission; or (b) joined or join a civil service of the Union or a civil service of a State or a civil post under the Union or a State after their release from the Armed Forces of the Union; (iii) Engineers and Doctors employed under the Central Government or State Governments or Government-owned industrial undertakings after 1963, who were required to serve in the Armed forces of the Union for a minimum prescribed period under the Compulsory Liability Scheme and who are granted Short Service Commission under the rules during the period of such service; (f) and (g) xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx 4.
Reservation of Vacancies.
- (1) Twenty per cent of the vacancies in the service to be filled up by direct recruitment shall be reserved for being filled up by the Released Indian Armed Forces Personnel.
(2) to (4) xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx 5.
Method of recruitment, age-limit, qualifications etc. of Released Indian Armed Forces Personnel.
- (1) The vacancies reserved for the Released Indian Armed Forces Personnel shall be filled by selection of the eligible personnel on the basis of their record of military service and their performance at a written examination or test, interview or any of them as may be prescribed by the Punjab Government and to be conducted by the Commission or Punjab Subordinate Services Selection Board, or any other recruiting authority.
(2) (a) No Released Indian Armed Forces Personnel shall be eligible to compete for the reserved vacancy unless :- (i) he possessed the educational and other qualifications prescribed for the service to which these rules apply at the time of joining the pre- Commission training or at the time of getting the Commission where there is only post- Commission training; and (ii) his age or the crucial date of the year in which he joined the pre- Commission training or got the Commission where there is only post- Commission training did not exceed the upper age limit prescribed for the Service.
Explanation.
- The expression `crucial date' means such date of the relevant year specified by the Punjab Government for the purpose of upper age-limit prescribed for recruitment to a post in the service.
(b) No Released Indian Armed Forces Person shall be permitted to compete more than three times for recruitment to the service.
(c) No Released Indian Armed Forces Person shall be eligible for appointment unless he after release is found to be physically fit according to the rules applicable to the service.
(d) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (c), a Released Indian Armed forces Person who suffers from disability caused during active service, may be considered for recruitment if the Department employing such a personnel is satisfied that he shall be able to perform the basic duties of the post for which he is to be recruited.
(3) Each Released Indian Armed Forces Person shall produce a certificate from such competent authority, as may be specified by the Punjab Government in this behalf from time to time to the effect that he is a Released Indian Armed Forces Personnel.
6.
Seniority and Pay.
- (1) Seniority and pay of the persons who are appointed against the vacancies reserved under rule a shall be determined on the assumption that they joined the Service at the first opportunity they had after they joined the military service or training prior to their Commission.
(2) Seniority inter se of persons who are appointed against the vacancies reserved under rule 4 and allotted to a particular year shall be determined on the basis of their dates of birth, the persons older in age to be placed senior to the one younger: Provided that in the case of persons having the same date of birth, seniority shall be determined according to the merit list prepared by the recruiting authority on the basis of the result of the test or examination.
(3) All persons appointed against the vacancies reserved under rule 4 shall rank below the persons appointed by direct recruitment in the year to which the former are allotted."
6.
A conjoint reading of the Rules reproduced above shows that rule-making authority had made it mandatory for the concerned authorities including the Commission to reserve 20% of the posts in the service to be filled up by direct recruitment from among Released Indian Armed Forces Personnel, who were commissioned to or joined the Armed Forces on or after the 1st day of November, 1962, but before the 10th day of January, 1968 and were released on demobilisation.
Rule 5(1) postulates that the vacancies reserved for Indian Armed Forces Personnel shall be filled by selection on the basis of the record of their military service and performance at the written examination or test and interview as may be prescribed by the State Government and conducted by the Commission or Punjab Subordinate Services Selection Board or any other recruiting authority.
Admittedly, the petitioner had joined Indian Army on 2541966 and was released on 18111976.
Therefore, his case squarely falls within the definition of "Released Indian Armed Forces Personnel".
It is also an admitted position that he applied for recruitment against one of the seven vacancies reserved for Released Armed Forces Personnel which were advertised by the Commission in December, 1978 and was appointed on 551979 on the recommendation made by the Commission.
Thus, he will be deemed to have been appointed under the 1978 Rules.
Indeed, it has neither been pleaded in the written statement nor the learned Deputy Advocate General has suggested that the petitioner had been appointed de hors the 1978 Rules.
Therefore, the decision of the State Government not to give him the benefit in accordance with the provisions of the 1978 Rules cannot but be declared as wholly arbitrary and violative of his fundamental right to equality guaranteed under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
7.
In the course of hearing, learned Deputy Advocate General fairly conceded that if the petitioner had been appointed before 31.12.1978, he would have been given the benefits admissible to the Released Indian Armed Forces Personnel under the 1978 Rules, but she emphasized that the concerned authority rightly declined to extend those benefits to him because on the date of his appointment, those Rules were not in force.
In my opinion, the reason put forward by the respondents to deny the benefits of the service rendered in the Indian Army to the petitioner is wholly untenable.
The 1978 Rules were framed with a view to give benefit of military service to those who had served the nation during the hour of need.
Therefore, the same have to be so interpreted as to give benefit to the Released Indian Armed Forces Personnel, who are recruited to the civil services after their discharge and by adopting the rule of purposive interpretation, I have no hesitation to hold that the petitioner, who was appointed as Dental Surgeon on the basis of recruitment held by the Commission for reserved vacancies, cannot be denied the benefits admissible to the Released Indian Armed Forces Personnel under the 1978 Rules.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is allowed.
The decision of the State Government contained in Annexure P5 is declared illegal and quashed.
The respondents are directed to give all those benefits to the petitioner which are admissible under the 1978 Rules to the Released Indian Armed Forces Personnel.
The needful be done within a period of three months from the date of submission of certified copy of this order.
Petition allowed.