Surya Kant, J - In this Petition, the Petitioner has prayed for issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus for directing the Municipal Committee, Yamuna Nagar to pay him extra wages for the period he worked over time and to release arrears thereof from the due date.
2.
The brief facts are that the Petitioner is an employee of Municipal Committee, Yamuna Nagar and has been a car driver since the year 1979.
The Petitioner was posted as a driver with the octroi department of the Municipality where he was required to remain on duty for extra hours over and above hs normal duty of 8 hours a day.
On average basis, the Petitioner put in 4 to 6 hours of extra duty in a day.
The Petitioner, however, was paid @ Re.
1/- per hour for the over-time work though several other categories of employees like octroi Moharrar, peons, etc. are paid, at double the rate of their normal wages; that Respondent No. 1, namely, the State Government has already taken a decision on 1221981 (Annexure P-3) holding that the employees of the Respondent-Municipal Committee are entitled for payment for the over-time work in accordance with the provisions of the Minimum Wages Act, 1948, the operative part of which reads as under :-  "4.2 The next point for consideration is whether the petitioners are entitled to any over-time payment.
Rule 310 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules permit Government employees to be `employed in any manner as required by proper authority, without claim or additional remuneration...........'.
In terms of these Rules which are applicable to the petitioners as well they cannot claim any extra wages for over-time as matter of right.
However, since the petitioners are employed by a local authority and such employment is a `scheduled employment' in terms of Section 2(g) of the Minimum Wages Act, 1948, that Act is no doubt attracted and according to section 14 thereof they are required to be paid extra wages for the work put in by them in excess of the number of house constituting a normal working day.
The right to payment of extra wages which is a Central enactment cannot be taken away or diluted in any manner by the Civil Services Rules of the State.
The rules made under that Act define a normal working day to be of 9 hours in the case of an adult and require extra wages to be paid when a person works for more than 9 hours on any day or for more than 48 hours in any week.
The rates at which over- time wages are to be paid have also been specified with reference to the nature of employment.
In the circumstances I hold that the petitioners are justified in demanding payment for such over-time as they may have put in and direct the municipality to consider their demand in terms of the Act and the Rules made thereunder, and pay them to the extent they are entitled."
3.
Pursuant to the Government order (Annexure P-3), the Respondent- municipality also passed resolution No. 263 on 3111982 (Annexure P.4) resolving to implement the said government order in regard to the employees who worked over-time, allowing the over-time payment according to their salary as per the provisions of Section 14 of the Minimum Wages Act, 1948.
However, the government decision (Annexure P-3) and the resolution of the municipality (Annexure P-4) have become illusory as no such payment has been made to the Petitioner for the over-time work performed by him as driver in the octroi wing of the Respondent-Municipal Committee.
4.
In its written statement filed on behalf of the Respondent-Municipal Committee, the claim of the Petitioner has been contested primarily on the ground the neither the government decision (Annexure P-3) nor the resolution (Annexure P-4) passed by the Municipal Committee itself, are applicable in the case of the Petitioner as these decisions relate to Moharrar and peons only, whereas the Petitioner is working as a driver, therefore, the Petitioner is entitled to be paid at the rate of rupee one per hour for over-time work as per the previous government instructions dated 17121981 (Annexure R-1).
5.
I have heard Shri CB Kaushik, learned counsel for the Petitioner and Miss Monika, learned Assistant Advocate General, Haryana for Respondents No. 1 and 2.
6.
Shri Kaushik has submitted that during the pendency of the Writ Petition, the Petitioner has retired from service.
He, however, contends that the Petitioner is entitled to be paid wages for the over-time work in accordance with the government decision (Annexure P-3) as also the resolution of the municipality (Annexure P-4) as there could not have been artificial discrimination amongst the employees posted and working in octroi wing of the Municipal Committee.
Learned counsel argues that nature of post is of no consequence when it is admitted by the Municipal Committee in its reply that the Petitioner too was working in the octroi wing and had actually worked over and above his normal duty hours.
I find force in the submission made by the learned counsel for the Petitioner.
There is no rational or reasonable classification based upon sound legal principles to discriminate in the matter of payment of wages for the over-time work when all the employees are similarly situated for the limited purposes of working beyond their prescribed duty hours in a particular wing of the Municipal Committee.
7.
The Writ Petition is accordingly allowed.
Respondents No. 3 and 4 are directed to consider the claim of the Petitioner regarding payment of wages for the over-time work in the light of government decision dated 1221981 (Annexure P-3) and the resolution No. 263 dated 3111982 passed by the Municipal Committee, Yamuna Nagar by passing a speaking order within a period of two months of the receipt of a certified copy of this order and in case the Petitioner is found entitled for payment of wages for the over-time, he performed as driver, and till he worked as such in the octroi wing of the Municipal Committee, Yamuna Nagar, the arrears of such wages shall be paid to him within a period of next two months.
It is, however, made clear that the Petitioner will be entitled for arrears for a period of 3 years and 2 months preceding the date of filing of the present Writ Petition.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.