Satish Kumar Mittal, J - This order will dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 1688 and 1824 of 2003 as the question of law and fact involved in these petitions is the same.
The facts are taken from C.W.P.
No. 1688 of 2003.
2.
In the instant writ petition, the petitioner has impugned the order dated 1712003 (Annexure P-4) vide which he has been ordered to be reverted from the post of Lower Division Clerk to the post of Store Attendant.
3.
Initially, the petitioner was appointed as Store Attendant in the respondent-Nigam on 5.2.1996.
Subsequently, on 2352002 (Annexure P-1), the petitioner was promoted along with four other employees as Lower Division Clerk, as per the Recruitment and Promotion Policy of the Board/Nigam as he had completed 5 years regular service.
On 2792002, respondent No. 1 issued a show-cause notice to the petitioner for reverting him from the post of Lower Division Clerk to the post of Store Attendant by saying that the petitioner was promoted as Lower Division Clerk from the Store Attendant inadvertently on the basis of unamended Recruitment and Promotion Policy circulated vide office order dated 2321989 read with Memo dated 10.5.1989.
It has been mentioned that later on, it came to the notice of the respondent-Nigam that an amendment was made in the Recruitment and Promotion Policy of the technical staff vide Memo dated 9.4.1993 wherein the Store Attendants were not eligible for promotion to the post of Lower Division Clerk/Meter Reader.
On the basis of those facts, the aforesaid show-cause notice was issued to the petitioner for his reversion to the post of Store Attendant.
4.
The petitioner submitted a detailed reply to the above-said notice but respondent No. 1 without properly appreciating the contentions raised by the petitioner, passed the impugned order of reversion against him.
5.
The case of the petitioner is that he was promoted on the post of Lower Division Clerk on 2352002 keeping in view the Recruitment and Promotion Policy dated 471978 (Annexure P-8) which provides that the Store- mates/attendants working in the Store organization were also eligible for their promotion as Lower Division Clerks provided they fulfilled the requisite qualification for the said post.
it is further the case of the petitioner that respondent No. 1 reverted him by saying that the Recruitment and Promotion Policy dated 2321989 is not applicable in case of Store Attendants.
This Policy provides that 80% posts of Lower Division Clerks/Meter Reader shall be filled-up by direct recruitment and 20% posts of said category shall be filled-up by promotion from amongst the Peons/DMA/Restorers/Havildars, Daftaries/Photedars/Book Binders, Ferro Printer/Ferro Khalasis and Safai Karamcharis etc. etc.
The contention of the petitioner is that this Policy is also applicable in case of the Store Attendants as they being Class-IV employees can be covered in the words "etc. etc" referred to above.
6.
Learned counsel for the petitioner further submitted that the stand taken by respondent No. 1 in the written statement that the promotion channel in the Store organization is different and the same is governed by the Recruitment and Promotion Policy dated 19.6.1992 which provides that 50% posts of Store Munshis shall be filled up by way of promotion from amongst the Store Attendants on seniority-cum-merit basis and 50% posts shall be filled up by way of direct recruitment.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the Recruitment and Promotion Policy dated 2321989 and 19.6.1992 are two different policies and the Store Attendants are being governed by both these policies.
That is why the respondents before promoting the petitioner on the post of Lower Division Clerk had taken an undertaking from him that he shall forego his claim for promotion on 50% posts of Assistant Linemen/Store Munshis.
It was only after taking the said undertaking that the petitioner was promoted on the post of Lower Division Clerk.
This fact has not been disputed by the respondents in the written statement.
7.
After hearing the arguments of the learned counsel for both the parties and perusing the record of the case, we find force in the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
From the bare reading of Clause 10 of the Recruitment and Promotion Policy which has been amended vide office order dated 2321989, it cannot be held that no promotion from the post of Store Attendant can be made to the post of Lower Division Clerk.
Though specifically the word 'Store Attendant' has not been mentioned in Clause 10(b)(i) in the Recruitment and Promotion Policy yet this post can be read in this Clause for the words 'etc.
etc.' A different Recruitment and Promotion Policy in respect of the Store Keepers in Store organization is there which provides for 50% promotion to the post of Store Munshi from the post of Store Attendant.
But that does not debar the Store Attendant for promotion as Lower Division Clerk under the Policy dated 2321989.
In this case, before promoting the petitioner to the post of Lower Division Clerk, a specific undertaking was taken from him that he shall forego his claim for promotion on 50% posts of Assistant Linemen/Store Munshis.
This fact has not been disputed by the learned counsel for the respondents.
It is not the case of the respondents that promotion of the petitioner was in excess to the 20% quota of promotion provided in the office order dated 2321989.
In view of this, we are of the opinion that the reversion of the petitioner from the post of Lower Division Clerk is not justified and the same is liable to be quashed.
In view of the aforesaid, both the writ petitions are allowed and the impugned order dated 1712003 (Annexure P-4) is hereby quashed and the order of promotion of the petitioner dated 2352002 (Annexure P-1) passed by respondent No. 1 is hereby restored.
No order as to costs.
Petitions allowed.