Satish Kumar Mittal, J - Smt. Narpinder Kaur, petitioner has filed the instant writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for quashing the order dated 821988 (Annexure P-3), vide which she has been reverted from the post of Sub-Divisional Clerk to the post of Assistant Sub Divisional Clerk by respondent No. 2.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as a Clerk in the Public Works Department (B&R) Department of the State of Punjab in the year 1971.
She was placed in the senior scale by posting her as Senior Clerk in the grade of Rs. 510-1800 in the year 1978.
Though, according to letter dated 2121981 (Annexure P- 1/A) from 111978, the Punjab Government abolished the post of Sub Divisional Clerks while revising the grades of all the posts.
The cadre of Clerks was divided into the Clerks and Senior Clerks, but it was stated that the Sub Divisional Clerks were appointed from amongst the Senior Clerks only, as the post of Sub Divisional Clerk was considered to be more responsible.
For the post of Sub Divisional Clerk, a special pay of Rs. 40/- was also approved and as per the letter dated 16.12.1982 (Annexure P-1) only senior-most deserving Clerks were to be posted as Sub Divisional Clerks.
Since the petitioners was the senior-most Clerk, therefore, she was posted as Sub Divisional Clerk in the month of May, 1986.
Admittedly, respondents No. 3 to 7 are junior to the petitioner.
Respondent Nos. 3 and 4 were posted as Sub Divisional Clerks along with the petitioner.
However, respondents No. 5 and 7 were posted as such in the month of March, 1987.
Vide order dated 821988 (Annexure P-3), the petitioner was ordered to be posted as Assistant Sub Divisional Clerk.
The said order was passed to accommodate Shri Jagat Pal Puri, who was senior to the petitioner.
The petitioner has challenged this order in the instant writ petition on the ground that the petitioner is senior to respondents No. 3 to 7, however, she was posted on a lower post whereas her juniors were retained on higher posts.
In case of adjusting Sh. Jagat Pal Puri, the junior-most Sub Divisional Clerk should have been posted as Assistant Sub Divisional Clerk.
There was no justification to post the petitioner as Assistant Sub Divisional Clerk.
3.
Pursuant to the notice issued to the respondents, respondents No. 1 and 2 filed written statement.
It has not been disputed by them that respondents No. 3 to 7 are junior to the petitioner.
The claim of the petitioner has been contested on the ground that actually the impugned order does not amount to reversion as while posting the petitioner as Assistant Sub Divisional Clerk, her pay scale was not reduced.
It has been stated that there is no post of Sub Divisional Clerk in the Department.
The said post was abolished by the Punjab Government in the year 1978.
A Senior Clerk can be posted on any seat, even on the seat of Sub Divisional Clerk.
Therefore, when the petitioner was posted as Assistant Sub Divisional Clerk and Shri Jagat Pal Puri was posted as Sub Divisional Clerk, actually no reversion was made.
4.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties and have perused the record of the case.
5.
The letter dated 2121981 (Annexure P-1/A) clearly states that Sub Divisional Clerk was being posted from amongst the Senior most Clerks only.
The said post was paid to be more responsible amongst the Senior Clerks and only the senior-most Clerks were to be appointed as Sub Divisional Clerk keeping in view the whole seniority list of the Clerks.
In view of the aforesaid decision, a letter dated 16.12.1982 (Annexure P-1) was issued, which provided for posting of senior-most deserving Clerk as Sub Divisional Clerk.
It is also not disputed that special pay of Rs. 40/- was being paid to Sub Divisional Clerk.
In view of this policy decision, the petitioner was posted as Sub Divisional Clerk being the senior-most Clerk.
Admittedly, respondents No. 3 to 7 are junior to her.
In case Shri Jagat Pal Puri, who was senior to the petitioner as well as to respondents No. 3 to 7, was to be adjusted on his return after availing leave, the Senior Clerk who was posted as Sub Divisional Clerk at the later point of time should have been displaced.
There was no justification for displacing the petitioner from the post of Sub Divisional Clerk to accommodate the aforesaid Jagat Pal Puri.
Since the stand taken by respondents No. 1 and 2 is contrary to the policy decisions dated 2121981 (Annexure P-1/A) and dated 16.12.1982 (Annexure P-1), therefore, the same cannot be accepted.
6.
In view of the aforesaid factual position, the posting of the petitioner as Assistant Sub Divisional Clerk vide impugned order dated 821988 (Annexure P-3) was wholly illegal and unjustified.
While issuing notice of motion, it was directed by way of interim arrangement that Shri Jagat Pal Puri may be allowed to join the place whereas the petitioner may be posted as Sub Divisional Clerk at any of the stations on which respondents No. 3 to 7 are working or any other station and junior-most amongst them should be reverted to make place for the petitioner.
In compliance of the said order, the petitioner was posted as Sub Divisional Clerk at Morinda against junior-most Senior clerk, namely Shri Bhajan Singh, respondent No. 7.
Since the part of the impugned order was stayed and the petitioner was allowed to be posted as Sub Divisional Clerk at the station where respondent No. 7 was working, therefore, the petitioner is not entitled to any consequential relief.
In view of the aforesaid, part of the impugned order dated 821988 (Annexure P- 3) to the extent of reversion of the petitioner is hereby quashed.
7.
With the aforesaid observations, the instant writ petition stands disposed of with no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.