Swatanter Kumar, J (Oral) - Learned counsel appearing for the petitioner contends that the impugned action of the respondents reducing the pension of the petitioner from Rs. 4,000/- to Rs. 3,000/- is in violation of the principles of natural justice.
The petitioner was getting pension since 1982 and suddenly 2002, the pension has been reduced to Rs. 3,000/- on the basis of the instructions which have no application to the present case.
2.
It is not disputed before us even by the learned counsel appearing for the State that the impugned action of reducing the pension has been taken without affording any opportunity to the petitioner either by way of service of show cause notice or personal hearing for that matter.
3.
The respondents have placed reliance upon the letter of the government dated 20th March, 1980 denying continuation of ad hoc benefit to the pensioners.
Neither any circumstances stated in the written statement nor any other record has been brought to our notice, during the course of arguments, which could show that the petitioner would be covered by the said circular.
In any case, the petitioner had the right to be heard before the benefit granted to her is withdrawn, particularly when she was drawing the pensionary benefits since 1983.
It is not necessary for us to embark in any detail upon the discussion in this regard, as apparently, there is violation of principles of natural justice.
4.
In the circumstances afore-stated, we allow this writ petition, direct the respondents to serve a show cause notice upon the petitioner before withdrawing any part of the pension which has been awarded to the petitioner since 1983 and then pass an appropriate order in accordance with law.
5.
We may also notice that it is even alleged that the petitioner had not made any mis-representation to the concerned authority.
Therefore, we restrain the respondents from deducting a sum of Rs. 1,000/- per month from the pensionary benefit till the passing in appropriate order in accordance with law and keeping in observation, as afore-noticed.
6.
Writ petition stands disposed of.
Petition allowed.