MM Kumar, J - This petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of India seeks issuance of a writ of mandamus directing respondent No. 1 i.e. Punjab State Cooperative Supply and Marketing Federation Ltd Chandigarh popularly known as "Markfed" to consider the case of the petitioner for promotion from the post of Field Officer to the post of Branch Officer in the quota meant for members of the backward class category.
The afore mentioned claim is founded on the instructions dated 451974 (Annexure P.2) making reservation for the members of the backward class category to the extent of two percent in case of promotion.
According to the instruction, the post of falling at roster point Nos. 26 and 78 are to be treated as reserved for the members of the backward class category.
The petitioner had claimed that he is the senior most Field Officer belonging to the backward class category and is thus entitled to be considered for promotion as no promotion from backward class category has been made since 1974.
Reliance in this regard has been placed on the seniority list (Annexure P.3) wherein the name of the petitioner appears at serial No. 51 and that of respondent No. 2 appears at serial No. 19.
It has also been claimed that as Judhbir Singh, respondent No. 2 has been shown to be a member of the backward class community as there is no remarks in the remarks column of the seniority list whereas similar remarks have been made in respect of the petitioner.
Therefore, respondent No. 2 cannot be considered as a member of the backward class category.
2.
Respondent No. 1 has filed reply stating that respondent No. 2 has been considered and promoted in June 1988 at roster point No. 26 in lieu of the vacancy meant for a candidate belonging the scheduled caste category because no candidate belonging the scheduled caste category was available.
According to instructions dated 2061974 (Annexure P.4) posts belonging to scheduled castes and backward classes categories are exchangeable.
When no candidate belonging to scheduled caste category is available then the post is offered to the member of the backward class category and by the time the post belonging to the backward class category was to be filled, the same has been given to the candidate belonging to the scheduled caste category.
Therefore, roster point at No. 26 has been exchanged with the member of the scheduled caste category and the same stands exhausted as the vacancy belonging to scheduled caste has been filled up by the candidate belonging to the backward class category.
It has also been explained that respondent No. 2 belongs to backward class category and, therefore, the status of respondent No. 2 that he belongs to backward class category cannot be doubted.
It has further been averred that the petitioner had been facing many departmental enquiries and punishments had also been awarded to him.
3.
In a separate reply filed by respondent No. 2, it is claimed that respondent No. 2 belongs to backward class category as per the backward class certificate issued by the SDO Kharar on 521988.
It is certified that he belongs to `Lobana' caste which has been declared to be a backward class by the Panjab Government.
It has further been averred that the fact of petitioner belonging to backward class category has been brought on record only on 21.2.1982.
There is no dispute with regard to the roster points reserved for the backward class category namely 26 and 78.
4.
Shri SS Brar, learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that firstly respondent No. 2 cannot claim that he is a member of backward class category as there was no record on the basis of which reservation in law can be given to him and secondly, that he merely belongs to backward class would not entitle him to avail the benefit of reservation.
The learned counsel has further argued that in any case roster point has been given to respondent No. 2 which belongs to scheduled caste category and respondent No. 2 cannot be deemed to have exhausted the quota meant for backward class category.
Therefore, according to the learned counsel the claim made by the petitioner is meritorious and deserves to be allowed.
5.
Shri Gurnam Singh, learned counsel for respondent No. 2 has pointed out that as long as respondent No. 2 is a backward class candidate it does not make any difference whether the information about his status is given in 1982 or earlier because the basic object of policy of reservation is to give incentive to the members of the reserved category in accordance with the instructions issued by the Welfare Department.
6.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and examining the record, I am of the considered view that no illegality has been committed by respondent No. 1 by granting promotion to respondent No. 2 because he has been offered promotion on the post of Branch Officer which was meant for scheduled caste category and in turn the candidate belonging to backward class has become entitled to the vacancy which was meant for scheduled caste candidate.
For all practical purposes the roster point for the backward class category stood exhausted.
Therefore, roster point at 26 cannot be offered twice to the member of the backward class category.
Moreover, there is sufficient material on record like annexure R2/10 showing that respondent No. 2 belongs to backward class category.
The stand of both the respondents in their written statement have not controverted by filling any replication by the petitioner.
Therefore, there is no legal infirmity in the promotion of respondent No. 2.
Moreover, the petitioner is facing disciplinary enquiries and certain punishments have also been awarded to him.
In the face of such a record, the claim of the petitioner deserves to be rejected.
For the reasons recorded above, this petition fails and the same is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.