JS Narang, J - The petitioner had been working as Sub Divisional Clerk (SDC) under the administrative control of the General Manager/Project, Irrigation Department Haryana.
In pursuant to communication dated January 6, 1997 issued by the Director, Mines and Geology, Haryana, applications were invited from eligible employees for consideration to be posted as Legal Assistant.
The petitioner accordingly applied and in pursuant thereto he was considered and was appointed as Legal Assistant in the pay scale of Rs. 1600- 2660 for a period of one year vide office order dated 11121997, copy Annexure P1.
However, after about nine months the petitioner was repatriated to his parent department vide order dated 1591998, on the premises that his services were no longer required.
Again applications vide letter dated 15121998, addressed to all the Heads of the Departments in Haryana were invited.
The requisite qualifications and experience had also been notified which reads as under :-  1.
Degree of Bachelor of Law of a recognized University.
2. Who has worked - (i) for a period of not less than five years as Assistant in any Government Office or held a position equivalent or higher scale in any Government Officer or  (ii) for a period of not less than three years on an (assignment) involving legal work in any Government Office."
(Extract taken from copy Annexure P4) 2.
The petitioner submitted a representation for considering the period of service of SDC equivalent to Assistant on the premises of responsible duties performed during his tenure as SDC, no reply in response thereto was received.
Subsequently, another representation dated November 2, 2000, was addressed which met the same fate.
Yet another representation dated 2312002, was sent which was rejected vide letter dated June 22, 2002 with the observations that "the case does not fall under the rules/instructions of the Government".
Being dissatisfied, the impugned order copy Annexure P9 vide which the representation has been rejected has been made the subject matter of challenge in the present writ petition.
3.
Notice of motion was issued vide order dated January 7, 2003 and that the petition has been contested by way filing detailed written statement.
The stand of the Government is that the two posts i.e. SDC and Assistant are quite distinct from each other as the pay scale of SDC is Rs. 4000-100-4800-EB-100- 6000 whereas the pay scale of Assistant is Rs. 5000-150-EB-150-7850.
The eligibility qualification as spelt out in the letter dated 15121998, it is crystal clear i.e. the person applying for the post of Legal Assistant must have acquired degree of Bachelor of Laws from the recognised university and that he has experience of five years as Assistant in any government office or held a position equivalent or higher scale in any Government office or he should have worked for a period not less than three years on an assignment not less than the rank of Assistant involving legal work in any Government office.
Thus, by no stretch of imagination, the petitioner fulfils the qualifications and, therefore, is not eligible to be considered.
Resultantly, the representation of the petitioner has been correctly rejected.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that the petitioner had been earlier selected to work as Legal Assistant and, therefore, it cannot be said now that he does not fulfil the qualifications.
It is also an admitted fact that he had been appointed as such, for a period of one year but before the expiry of the period of one year he had been repatriated on the premises that his services are no longer required.
It is also the case of the recommending authority i.e. Superintending Engineer, Vigilance Circle, ID Haryana that the post of Sub-Divisional Clerk is not less than an Assistant.
No doubt, the pay scale is less than Assistant, responsible duties are ascribed to the post of Sub-Division Clerk which have been successfully performed by the petitioner.
Therefore, the petitioner is entitled to be considered for appointment as Legal Assistant.
5.
On the other hand, learned Assistant Advocate General, has argued that there is no rule of equivalence which can be read in favour of the petitioner.
The two posts i.e. Sub Divisional Clerk and Assistant are distinct from each other, the pay scales are different and the work and responsibilities are different.
Thus, the post of Sub Divisional Clerk cannot be read into an Assistant.
For appointment of Legal Assistant, the eligibility criteria has been definitely and specifically spelt out in the letter dated 15121998.
Admittedly, the petitioner does not fulfil the eligibility conditions and, therefore, the representation has been correctly rejected.
6.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, we are of the view that the petitioner does not fulfil the eligibility criteria as spelt out in the letter dated 15121998 and, therefore, the representation has been correctly rejected.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has not been able to show any instruction or rule of equivalence to read that the post of Sub Divisional Clerk and that of Assistant are equivalent.
There is no doubt that the source of promotion/recruitment to the post of Sub Divisional Clerk and Assistant is that of a Clerk but that would not mean that both the posts are equivalent.
It is also the admitted case that the pay scales are different.
7.
Resultantly, we are not inclined to grant any indulgence.
The petition is, therefore, dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.