Satish Kumar Mittal, J - Sube Singh petitioner has filed the instant writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for issuance of writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to consider and promote him to the post of District Welfare Officer in the department of Scheduled Castes & Backward Classes and to remove the illegal appointee on the said post as the vacancy of the District Welfare Officer was to be filled up from promotion quota.
2.
On the date of filing of this petition, the petitioner was serving in the aforesaid department on the post of Tehsil Welfare Officer for the last more than six years.
His claim in the instant writ petition was that one post of District Welfare Officer occurred in the department due to promotion of one official.
That vacancy was to be filled up from the promotion quota, but instead of promoting one Tehsil Welfare Officer, the respondents filled up that post by way of direct recruitment.
One Shri Shiv Nandan Sharma was appointed on the said post.
The appointment was alleged to be mala fide and his appointment on the post of District Welfare Officer was sought to be set aside.
The petitioner sought his own promotion to the said being the senior- most Tehsil Welfare Officer.
3.
In the written statement, the respondents stated that the recruitment to the post of District Welfare Officer is being governed by Haryana Welfare of Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes Department (Group B) Service Rules, 1985.
According to the said Rules, 50% posts of District Welfare Officers were to be filled in by direct recruitment and 50% by promotion.
Out of 50% quota of promotion, 30% posts were to be filled up from amongst Tehsil Welfare Officers and 20% from amongst Male Social Workers.
It was further averred that one post of District Welfare Officer fell vacant on 1541987 due to promotion of one District Welfare Officer to the post of Deputy Director.
At that time out of 12 posts of District Welfare Officers, 3 posts were filled up by direct recruitment and 8 posts were filled up by promotion, out of which 6 were amongst Tehsil Welfare Officers and two were amongst Male Social Workers.
Since the promotion quota posts were already in excess, therefore, it was decided to fill up the said vacancy by way of direct recruitment; and in direct recruitment, Shri Shiv Nandan Sharma was appointed as District Welfare Officer.
It was further stated that the petitioner was not the senior-most Tehsil Welfare Officer.
One Shri Chunni Lal was the senior-most Tehsil Welfare Officer at that time.
It was also stated that case of the promotion of the petitioner to the post of District Welfare Officer would be considered at appropriate time when a promotion quota post meant for Tehsil Welfare Officer would be available in their department.
4.
In view of the aforesaid averments made in the written statement, I do not find any merit in the claim of the petitioner for setting aside the appointment of Shri Shiv Nandan Sharma on the post of District Welfare Officer.
The petitioner has neither impugned the appointment of the aforesaid person nor impleaded him as a party in the instant writ petition.
Even otherwise, the aforesaid person was appointed against the direct recruitment quota which was not in excess of that quota as provided under the Rules.
Since the promotion quota post meant for Tehsil Welfare Officer was not available at the relevant time, therefore, the claim of the petitioner to promote him on the post of District Welfare Officer was not sustainable.
5.
In view of the aforesaid discussion, there is no force in the claim made by the petitioner in the instant writ petition.
Since no body is present on behalf of the petitioner, therefore, the instant, writ petition is dismissed in default.
No order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.