NK Sodhi, J - Petitioner had been working as a Salesman with the Dholan Co-operative Agricultural Service Society Ltd (for short the Society) which is registered under the provisions of the Punjab Co-operative Societies Act, 1961 (hereinafter referred to as the Act).
By resolution dated 1521985 the Society removed him from service.
He filed an appeal under Bye-law No. 38(xvii) of the registered Bye-laws of the Society before the Assistant Registrar, Co-operative Societies, Jagraon against the order of the Society terminating his services.
The appeal was allowed and the petitioner was ordered to be reinstated with effect from the date when his services were terminated.
Feeling aggrieved by the order of the Assistant Registrar, the Society filed a petition before the Registrar under Section 3(4) of the Act with a prayer that the order impugned therein be set aside and the termination of the services of the petitoiner be upheld.
The Registrar by his order dated 1221986 dismissed the petition as not maintainable and made the following observations :-  "Admittedly the appeal has been heard/decided by the Assistant Registrar Cooperative Societies Jagraon under Bye-law No. 38(xvii) of the registered Bye-laws of the Dholan CASS.
The Bye-laws of the society do not provide for a further appeal or revision against appellate order of the Assistant Registrar.
Besides the power of general superintendence and control under Section 3(4) of the Punjab Cooperative Societies Act, 1961 canot be construed as a power to hear a second appeal or a revision against appellate order of an Assistant Registrar under Bye-laws of Cooperative Society.
In view of the foregoing consideration, the petition is dismissed as not maintainable."
Not satisfied with the order of the Registrar, the Society filed a revision petition before the State Government udner Section 69 of the Act which was allowed on October 20, 1986 and it was held that the Registrar in the exercise of his right of general superintendence and control under Section 3(4) of the Act could entertain the petition filed by Society.
The case was remanded to the Registrar to decide the petition on merits.
It is against this order that the present petition has been filed under Article 226 of the Constitution  2.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and am of the view that the writ petition must succeed.
It was strenously urged by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the power of general superintendence and control conferred on the Registrar under Section 3(4) of the Act does not give him a right to hear an appeal against the order of the Assistant Registrar setting aside the order of termination passed by the Society and that the powers of the Registrar are very limited.
The learned State counsel, on the other hand, contended that the power of general superintendence conferred on the Registrar is wide enough to allow him to examine the merits of the order passed by the Assistant Registrar even though the appeal lay before him under the Bye-laws and not under the Act.
3.
From the rival contentions of the parties, the question that requires consideration is whether the power of general superintendence conferred on the Registrar over the officers appointed to assist him would entitle him to hear an appeal against the order of one of the officers setting aside the order of termination of the services of an employee of a society.
Since the answer to the questions depends upon the interpretatin to be placed on the provisions of Section 3 of the Act, it is necessary to refer to those provisions which read as under :-  "3.
Registrar and other officers and their powers.
-  (1) The Government may appoint a person to be the Registrar of Co- operative Societies for the State.
(2) To assist the Registrar in his function udner this Act the Government may appoint such number of Additional Registrars, Joint Registrars, Deputy Registrars, Assistant Registrars and other persons with such designations as it may think fit.
(3) The Government may, by general or special order, confer on any person appointed udner sub-section (2), all or any of the powers of the Registrar under this Act.
(4) Every person appointed under sub-section (2) shall exercise his powers subject to the general superintendence and control of Registrar.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, where any power of the Registrar is exercised by any person by virtue of the order issued by the Government under sub-section (3), the order passed or decision made by such person shall, for the purposes of appeal be deemed to be the order or decision of that person and not of the Registrar."
According to Section 3 of the Act, the State Government in exercise of its power appoints a Registrar of Co-operative Societies for the State and also appoints such other officers as it may think fit to assist him for the discharge of his functions under the Act.
The State Government also has the pwoer to confer on such officers all or any ofhte powers of the Registrar under the Act and every person appointed to assist the Registrar has to exercise his powers subject to the general superintendence and control of the Registrar.
It is, thus, clear from the provisions of Section 3(4) of the Act that the Registrar has the power of general superintendence and control over all the officer appointed by the State Government to assist him.
In the exercise of his powers of general superintendence, the Registrar is enjoined to ensure that persons appointed to assist him exercise only such of the powers as have bene conferred on them by the State Government under sub- section (3) of Section 3 of the Act.
This power casts a duty on the Registrar to keep the officers within the bounds of their authority and to see that they do what their duty requires and do not exercise powers which are not conferred on them.
This power of superintendence does not vest in him any unlimited prerogative to correct all species of hardship or wrong decisions made by the officers within the limits of their power or jurisdiction conferred on them by the State Government uner Section 3(3) of the Act.
The power of general superintendence cannot be construed as a generral power to hear an appeal or a revision against any order which may have been passed in the exercise of jurisdiction.
In the instant case, the Assistant Registrar, Co-operative Societies, Jagraon had the authority under Bye-law No. 38(xviii) of the Registered Bye-laws of the Society to hear an appeal against the order of the Society terminating the services of the petitioner.
It cannot, therefore, be said that he exercised powers which were not vested in him.
If he had the power to decide the appeal, he could decide the same rightly or wrongly but in either case the Registrar could not interfere with such an order in the exercise of his powers of general superintendence.
In this view of the matter, the Registrar was right in rejecting the appeal filed by the Society as not maintainable.
The State Government was in errror in observing that since the Registrar is the father figure in the co-operative department and has been given the power of general superintendence, he must also be deemed to possess the power to hear an appeal against the appellate order of an Assistant Registrar even though the Bye-laws of the Act do not specifically given such a powers.
I am afraid, I do not agree with this reasoning.
An appeal is a creation of a statute and it would lie only if it so provides and not otherwise.
The power of general superintendence does not involve the power to hear an appeal against the appellate order of the Assistant Registrar when there is no provision to this effect in the Bye-laws or the Act.
The State Government acted illegally in setting aside the order of the Registrar.
4.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed, the impugned order of the State Government is set aside and that of the Registrar dated 1221986 restored.
The question posed in the earlier part of the judgment is answered in the negative and it is held that the Registrar in the exercise of his power of general superintendence under Section 3(4) of the Act, cannot hear an appeal against an order of an officer subordinate to him setting aside or affirming the order of termination passed by the Society.
There is not order as to costs.
Petition allowed.