Swatanter Kumar, J - Haryana Police Karamchari (Association) Sangh, has filed this writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India for issuance of an appropriate writ, order or direction commanding the respondents to pay ration money to all the employees of the police department.
2.
The contention of the petitioner is that with effect from 1991, the ration money has being given to the members of different units of police organisation as under :-  i) Rs. 150/- to all HAP personnel up to level of DSP.
ii) Rs. 100/- to all other police units up to level of DSP.
iii) Rs. 10/- per head per day i.e. Rs. 300/- pm to commando personnel.
3.
The petitioners had made a representation dated 1881998 to the concerned authorities to avoid this discrimination and pay uniform rates.
The Government vide its circular dated 922001 declared certain beneficial measures.
Vide this circular the HAP personnel of the police upto the rank of DSP were allowed ration money of Rs. 350/- per month while other police units upto the same rank were allowed Rs. 250/- per month and the diet money sanctioned for commandos was Rs. 20/- per day and Rs. 10/- per day to Class-IV posted at Commandos Wings.
According to the petitioners this is discriminatory and the respondents are obliged to pay similar amounts to different wings of the police.
4.
After hearing the learned counsel for the petitioners, we decline to issue notice, for the following amongst other reasons :-  a) The writ petition lacks complete particulars and no data-based averments have been made in the petition which could primarily show equality in pursuance of duties, responsibilities and obligations.
The petition lacks material particulars.
b) Such a decision is a policy decision of the Government which we suppose has been taken after due deliberation and consideration of various aspects of this matter.
The decision certainly has economic implications which are founded upon nature of the duties and element of risk performance involved in discharge of functions of the respective units.
Policy matters would normally fall in the exclusive domain of the executive and would hardly be open to judicial review unless it showed patent discrimination or arbitrariness.
The case as pleaded before us falls in none of these exceptions.
c) The decision was initially taken in the year 1991 which the petitioners accepted and took benefit thereof without protest for all these years.
Even now the circular was issued on September, 2001 and not even a whisper has been made in the petition to explain this delay of about two years.
d) To claim patent discrimination or arbitrariness, the petitioners must show that the hostile discrimination is reflected between the persons belonging to the same class performing same functions.
The onus to make such averments supported by due documents is upon the petitioners which they have utterly failed to do so event at this stage.
5.
Keeping in view the facts and circumstances of the case and what has been noticed by us above, we see no reason to issue notice to the respondents and dismiss this petition in limine.
Petition dismissed.