SS Nijjar, J - We have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length and perused the record of the case.
2.
The petitioner has challenged the order dated 08112002 (Annexure P-9) and 03122002 (Annexure-13), whereby respondent No. 1 has cancelled the admission of the petitioner to the Post Graduate Diploma in Computer Application (hereinafter referred to PGDCA), after declaring the same to be illegal.
3.
The petitioner has completed three years diploma course known as Modern Office Practice (with Honours) from the Government Polytechnic College, Amritsar run by the Punjab State Board of Technical Education and Industrial Training, Punjab, Chandigarh.
She passed the diploma course with first division scoring 2125 marks out of 2800 marks.
She was awarded the diploma certificate on 04042002 by the aforesaid Board.
On 09041999, the Punjabi University, Patiala, had resolved that the aforesaid diploma certificate be treated equivalent to Degree (Graduation) for the purpose of employment and admission to higher studies (MA) of the Punjabi University.
This recommendation was conditional upon the students passing compulsory subject of Punjabi (Part-I, Part-II and Part-III) or BA prescribed by the Punjabi University.
The petitioner appeared in the Punjabi paper of BA Part-I, Part-II and Part-III of the Punjabi University, Patiala, in the examination held in April, 2002.
She was declared to have passed in all the additional Punjabi papers.
Subsequently, she was granted admission in the PGDCA by respondent No. 2.
Under eligibility conditions in the Prospectus issued by respondent No. 2, it was inter-alia provided as under :-  "Those students who have passed the lower examination from some other board/university (other than Punjabi University, Punjab University and Punjab School Education Board) will have to obtain eligibility certificate from the Guru Nanak Dev University within one month of admission".
4.
At the time of interview and admission of the petitioner, she was awaiting the declaration of the result for BA Part-III examination.
As noticed earlier, she was ultimately declared pass in all the three additional papers.
The Punjabi University, Patiala, issued a migration certificate to the petitioner on 13092002, stating therein that the petitioner had appeared in BA Part-III examination of the University held in April, 2002.
Respondent No. 2 forwarded the admission papers of the petitioner to respondent No. 1 who, by order dated 08112002, directed respondent No. 2 to cancel the admission of the petitioner as diploma examination was not treated as equivalent to BA degree by respondent No. 2.
Against the aforesaid order, the petitioner filed a representation to respondent No. 1.
Respondent No. 2 also recommended on 12122002 that the case of the petitioner be considered sympathetically so that the student does not lose one precious year of studies.
The representation of the petitioner was rejected by respondent No. 1 by order dated 03122002.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that the decision of respondent No. 1 is without jurisdiction as all the examinations of the Punjabi University have been accorded automatic recognition by the Syndicate of respondent No. 1 in its decision dated 18011975.
In support of this submission, the learned counsel referred to Clause 134 of the List of Examinations issued by respondent No. 1 on the basis of the decision of the Syndicate taken on 18011975.
The relevant extract of the aforesaid decision is reproduced below :-  "Sr. No.
Awarding Authority Examination Recognised Name of the Corresponding Examination of this University/Punjabi University, Chandigarh.
134 Punjabi University, Patiala.
All Examinations Accorded Automatic recognition vide Syndicate decision dated 18.11975."
6.
Learned counsel further submitted that the petitioner has virtually completed the entire course and it would be unjust now to cancel the admission.
7.
Mr. DS Patwalia, learned counsel appearing for respondent No. 1 has on the basis of the averments contained in the written statement submitted that petitioner has completed Punjabi examination of BA Part-I, Part-II and Part-III in the month of April, 2002.
The admission to PGDCA course as per Ordinance No. 11 framed by the Syndicate in its meeting held on 19012000, is open to a candidate who fulfils the following qualifications :-  "Any graduate under 10+2+3 System with at least 45% marks in the aggregate".
8.
He has submitted that in view of the aforesaid condition, the petitioner is clearly ineligible for admission.
He has further submitted that respondent No. 1, does not recognise the three years diploma course in Modern Office Management as equivalent to BA The Equivalence Committee of respondent No. 1, has again taken a decision in its meeting held on 13012003 to the effect that three years diploma Course is not equivalent to BA Degree of respondent No. 1.
He further submitted that respondent No. 2 had been directed to cancel the admission of the petitioner long time ago.
Therefore, no equity can arise in favour of the petitioner.
9.
We have considered the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties.
10.
Undoubtedly, the petitioner has completed one year of studies in the PGDCA course.
This fact by itself would not be sufficient to regularise the admission which is otherwise not in accordance with applicable rules.
We find merit in the submission made by Mr. DS Patwalia that the petitioner having secured admission on the basis of three year diploma in Modern Office Management Course, cannot be permitted to claim that she was admitted on the basis of the BA Degree granted by the Punjabi University.
The Guru Nanak Dev University accepts/grants automatic recognition to all examinations conducted by the Punjabi University.
The three year diploma course in Modern Office Management Course has not been conducted by the Punjabi University.
The aforesaid certificate has not been granted recognition as equivalent to BA degree by respondent No. 1-University.
The admission to the PGDCA course can only be granted to a graduate in 10+2+3 system with at least 45% marks in the aggregate.
The petitioner does not possess the aforesaid qualification.
Mr. DS Patwalia, has rightly pointed out that the Equivalence Committee of respondent No. 1-University in its meeting held on 30012003 has again reiterated that the three years diploma in Modern of Technical Education and Industrial Training, Chandigarh, be not recognised as equivalent to BA Degree of respondent No. 1-University.
That being the position, the petitioner would have no legal right to be admitted to the PGDCA course.
The petitioner can also not claim any equity as respondent No. 2 had been informed in November, 2002, about the ineligibility of the petitioner.
Respondent No. 2 deliberately did not take any action against the petitioner.
The inaction on the part of respondent No. 2, cannot be permitted to be used as a tool of equity in favour of the petitioner.
In view of the above, we find no merit in the present petition.
Dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.