Viney Mittal, J - Petitioner, Smt. Pushpa Abrol, who had retired as Joint Director (Headquarters) from the Education Department of State of Haryana, has filed the present Civil Writ Petition under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India for the issuance of a writ of certiorari for quashing the order Annexure P4 and October 29, 1967 whereby, her pay has been re-fixed and the order Annexure P-6, dated January 24, 1989, whereby, the representation filed by the petitioner against the re-fixation of her pay has been rejected.
2.
It is not necessary to go into the detailed narration of facts at this stage.
Although, many grounds have been taken to challenge the order dated October 29, 1987, Annexure P-4 but at the outset Sh. Rameshwar Sharma, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has brought to my notice that the order Annexure P4 whereby the pay of the petitioner has been reduced, has been passed without affording any opportunity of hearing to the petitioner and without serving any show cause notice upon her in this regard.
Sh. Sharma submits that since the order dated October 29, 1987, Annexure P-4 has been passed in violation of the principles of natural justice, therefore, on that short ground, the same is not sustainable.
Sh. Sharma further submits that in case the petitioner had been afforded an opportunity of hearing in the matter, then she would have shown that her case is fully covered by Note 9 of Rule 4.4 (c) of Punjab Civil Services Rules, Vol. 1, Part 1 and her pay could not be reduced under any circumstances.
3.
Sh. Rajbir Sehrawat, learned Deputy Advocate General, Haryana has very fairly admitted that no opportunity of hearing was ever afforded to the petitioner before passing the order, Annexure P-4.
4.
In these circumstances, I allow the present petition and quash the orders Annexure P-4 and P-6.
However, the respondents would be at liberty to pass a fresh order in this regard by first issuing a show cause notice to the petitioner and affording her an opportunity of hearing in the matter.
Needless to say that if ultimately an order adverse to the petitioner was required to be passed, then the same would contain the reasons therefor.
No costs.
Petition allowed.