ML Singhal, J - Through this civil writ petition filed under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner has prayed for quashing of the adverse remarks recorded in his ACR for the year 1996-97 where he has been described to be an officer of doubtful integrity.
He had also prayed for the quashing of order Annexure P-6 whereby his appeal against the said adverse remarks recorded in his ACR for the year 1996-97 was rejected by the government.
2.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that he was ignored for promotion while juniors to him namely Balvir Singh, Satpal Singh and Ravinder Kumar were promoted to the post of Deputy Superintendent of Jail.
He submits that he was ignored for promotion because of the adverse remarks recorded in his ACR for the year 1996-97, as follows :  "He is an official of doubtful integrity.
A serious complaint alleging fraud in which Sh. Ram Murti in connivance with travel agents charged unemployed youth heavily for arranging their visa to foreign countries was recorded and the enquiry is in progress."
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the only basis for dubbing him as an "official of doubtful integrity" is the pendency of complaint against him in which the allegation was that in connivance with travel agents, he was fleecing unemployed youth by inducing them into the belief that they will be sent aboard.
He submits that in inquiry held into this allegation by Shri Dyal Singh Sekhon, PPS-1, Superintendent, Central Jail, Ferozepur, he did not find him guilty of his allegation and he came to the conclusion that the allegation levelled against him (Ram Murti) did not seem to be correct.
He ordered that the complaint against Ram Murti be filed.
4.
Grievance of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that when the allegation against the petitioner went unsubstantiated in the inquiry, there was no basis left for dubbing him as an official of doubtful integrity.
There was no other material on the basis of which he could be dubbed as an official of doubtful integrity.
Reporting officer is required to record remarks on the work and conduct of the official reported upon objectively with utmost care as adverse remarks on his work and conduct particularly "on honesty" might seal his career for all times to come.
It was held in State of Haryana v. Karan Singh, 2001(4) SCT 217 (P&H) : 2001(2) RSJ 109 that a judicious approach is required on the part of the reporting officer while recording remarks particularly on integrity, efficiency and honesty.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that in this case there appears to be no material on the basis of which these adverse remarks could be sustained in his ACR for the year 1996-97.
6.
Learned Additional Advocate General for the State of Punjab, on the other hand, submits that the petitioner's suitability for promotion was considered.
He was not promoted while juniors to him were promoted as the petitioner was found to be an official of doubtful integrity.
7.
Since, there was no basis for recording him as an official of doubtful integrity in his ACR for the year 1996-97, the remark that he is an official of doubtful integrity is ordered to be expunged.
He will be considered for promotion from the date when juniors to him were promoted keeping in his view his service record de hors the said remark in ACR for the year 1996-97.
Petition allowed.