MM Kumar, J - This petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of India challenges show cause notice dated 2831988 (Annexure P.1), order dated 2971989 (Annexure P.3) inflicting the punishment of recorded wearing; recovery of sum of Rs. 16,98950 and order dated 27.9.1990 (Annexure P.6) rejecting the memorial filed by the petitioner.
2.
Facts necessary for deciding the controversy raised in this petition are that before his retirement on 3171989, the petitioner was working as Superintending Engineer, PWD (B and R) in the respondent-State.
In the year 1981 he was posted as Superintending Engineer, Ambala Circle.
On 631981, the Executive Engineer working in his circle invited tenders for the construction of Bal Bhawan at Kurukshetra.
The lowest tender received was for Rs. 327 lacs which was submitted by one Shri Ved Parkash Contractor against the estimated cost of Rs. 325 lacs.
The Executive Engineer on his own re-invited the tender for 751981.
On this occasion, only a single tender was received with an offer of Rs. 352 lacs.
This tender was submitted by one Sh. Bodh Raj, Contractor.
This Contractor had on an earlier occasion quoted his offer at Rs. 333 lacs.
After negotiation by the Executive Engineer, Shri Bodh Raj, contractor brought his offer down to Rs. 340 lacs.
Accordingly, the case was referred by the Executive Engineer to the petitioner on 2751981 and the validity period fixed was upto 3151981.
When a back reference was made to the Executive Engineer on 861981 seeking his explanation for rejecting the earlier tender where offer was made for Rs. 327 lacs, the Executive Engineer on 1881981 resubmitted the case to the petitioner informing that Shri Bodh Raj Contractor has reduced his rate still further to Rs. 331 lacs and the validity period was upto 2581981.
The petitioner on 2481981 sent the case to the Engineer-in-Chief as he felt that he was not competent to accept such a tender because it was still higher than the lowest rate of Rs. 327 lacs received from Shri Ved Parkash Contractor when the tender was floated on 631981.
However, the Engineer-in-Chief, respondent No. 2 on 8111991 sent back the case to the petitioner directing him to deal with the file at his own level.
The validity period of the offer had expired on 2581981.
It was in these circumstances that on 2831988 a show cause notice was issued to the petitioner under Rule 8 of the Haryana Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1987 (for brevity the 1987 Rules) calling upon the petitioner to explain as to why he referred the case to the Engineer-in-Chief on 2481981 knowing fully well that the validity of the tender was to expire on 2581981.
The rate of the lowest tender quoted was Rs. 331 lacs by Shri Bodh Raj Contractor but on re-inviting tender by the petitioner on 2521982 it was allotted for Rs. 365 lacs which resulted into a loss to the public exchequer on account of inaction on the part of the petitioner.
The explanation tendered on 2011989 (Annexure P2) was rejected because it was found that complete file of the tender was not sent to the Engineer-in-Chief while submitting the case to him.
It was further found that he unnecessarily made reference to the Head Office and mixed up the issue of acceptance of tender and initiation of action against the Executive Engineer who had earlier rejected the lowest tender of Rs. 327 lacs offered by one Sh. Ved Parkash Contractor at his own level.
It has also been observed that those who were responsible for delaying the file in the Head Office have also been proceeded against and therefore that would not constitute a basis for the petitioner to take that defence.
As the tender was re-invited and the petitioner approved the tender on 2521982 for Rs. 3,65,329/-, a loss of Rs. 33,979/- was caused to the public exchequer.
On account of the lapse committed by the petitioner, a minor punishment of warning with a copy in the ACR file besides recovery of Rs. 16,98950 i.e. 50 percent of the loss caused to the Government was inflicted upon him.
The memorial (Annexure P.5) presented by him has been rejected vide Annexure P.6.
3.
The stand of the respondent-State in the written statement is that on account of the inaction of the petitioner in delaying the acceptance of tender submitted by Shri Bodh Raj who had offered to work at Rs. 331 lacs, the petitioner forced the Executive Engineer to re-invite tender and approved the same @ Rs. 3,65,327/- on 2521982.
It has also have pointed out that the petitioner was at fault because he kept the tender case with him upto 861981 when the offer was stated to be valid upto 3151981 when he sent back the case to the Executive Engineer seeking his explanation for rejecting the earlier tender submitted by one Sh. Ved Parkash, Contractor.
The Executive Engineer Still resubmitted the case on 1881981 when the offer for the contract was reduced to Rs. 331 lacs and the validity date fixed was 2581981.
This time, the petitioner submitted the case to the Head Office on 2481981 and retained the tender case file with him.
It was obvious that he intended the validity of the tender to expire on 2581981.
4.
Shri KK Jagia, learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that in reply to the show cause notice, the petitioner has prayed for grant of an opportunity of personal hearing which has not been granted to him.
According to the learned counsel withholding of gratuity to the tune of Rs. 16,98950 is palpably against his constitutional rights guaranteed by Article 300 A of the Constitution as right to receive retiral benefits is a right to property.
He has also placed reliance on Section 60(g) of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (for brevity the Code) and argued that no retiral benefits could be attached for the satisfaction of decree.
Learned counsel has also pointed out that no action has been initiated against the Executive Engineer and the petitioner has alone been made scape-goat.
He has urged that this is pick and choose method adopted by the respondent-State which is arbitrary and such an action is vitiated by Articles 14 and 16(1) of the Constitution.
5.
Shri NK Joshi, learned State counsel referring to various averments made in para 8 of the written statement has pointed out that on account of delay in processing the case at Head Office, the concerned officers/Officials who were involved have been punished.
It has further been pointed out that the Executive Engineer has also been held responsible for rejecting the tender at his own level although he was not competent to accept the rates of subsequent tender which were higher by Rs. 4166/- and no recovery on that account has been fastened on the petitioner.
The learned State counsel has further pointed out that no personal hearing was necessary because for inflicting minor punishment, show cause notice itself was sufficient.
Before issuance of show cause notice, the petitioner was called upon to explain his position vide memo dated 1271985.
His reply was found to be unsatisfactory which led to the issuance of show cause notice to him on 2831988.
The learned State counsel has further referred to Rule 6.16(6) of Punjab Civil Services Rules, Vol. 2, Part 2 to justify the recovery of Rs. 16,98950 from the gratuity of the petitioner.
6.
I have given my anxious consideration to the respective submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties and am of the view that this petition is liable to be dismissed.
Under Rule 5 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules 1970 a provision has been made for imposition of minor penalties on a Government employee for good and sufficient reasons.
Rule 5 reads as under :-  5.
"Penalties :- Following penalties may for good and sufficient reasons, and as hereinafter provided, be imposed on a Government employee, namely :-  MINOR PENALTIES i) Censure; ii) Withholding of his promotion  iii) Recovery from his pay of the whole or part of any pecuniary loss caused by him to the Government by negligence or breach of orders; (iv) withholding increments of pay without cumulative effect."
7.
Admittedly, show cause notice Annexure P.1 was issued to the petitioner under Rule 8 of 1987 Rules.
His explanation was also sought which was tendered by the petitioner by sending reply (Annexure P.2).
After taking into consideration his explanation, a well reasoned order has been passed after dealing with the defences raised by the petitioner.
The order passed by respondent No. 1 demonstrates application of mind by the competent authority leading to the conclusion that there was a lapse committed by the petitioner warranting inflicting of minor penalty of pecuniary loss caused to the Government on account of the negligence of the delinquent official along with warning.
The afore - mentioned order reads as under :  "The explanation dated 2011989 submitted by Shri KC Kapoor in reply to the charge-sheet served on him has been considered and found to be unsatisfactory as discussed below : In his defence Shri KC Kapoor has stated that he has already submitted his detailed report on 23.8.1986 in reply to the explanation called by the Engineer-in-Chief on 12785.
In the explanation he has brought out that the case was duly reported to the Head Office, but unfortunately the Head Office showed lukewarm attitude towards the same.
As a matter of fact, Head Office was always reluctant and afraid of taking any action against the officer.
The Head Office took more than two months in dealing with the case, further complicated the issue.
He has further stated that it is not correct that the tender case was not sent to the Chief Engineer.
The tender case was duly sent while submitting the case to the Engineer-in-Chief as mentioned in the explanation already given.
He has further stated that the whole responsibility for mala fide disposal of the case rests with the Executive Engineer (P1) Kurukshetra and there was no delay in the case.
The plea taken by Shri KC Kapoor has already been considered and after that he was charge-sheeted by Government.
The officers, officials of the Head Office who delayed the case were also charge-sheeted and their cases stand decided.
Shri KC Kapoor has not raised any new points in his defence but has re-iterated his earlier stand.
He unnecessarily made a reference to the Head Office and mixed up two issues i.e. acceptance of tenders and action against the Executive Engineer for calling tenders after rejecting the first offer.
Evidently he did not take the desired interest to decide the case at his own level in time with the result that the validity of the tender expired and the tenders had to be reinvited, which were approved by him for allotment on 2521982 for Rs. 365327/-.
Government thus suffered a loss of Rs. 33979/- on account of inaction in his part.
He thus failed to perform his duties properly failed to watch Government interest and thus caused a loss of Rs. 33979/- to the State Exchequer on account of higher rates approved by him at the subsequent call of tenders.
For the reasons given above, the explanation submitted by Shri KC Kapoor has been found to be unsatisfactory and the allegations stand substantiated against him.
After taking into consideration all the circumstances of the case the Governor of Haryana feels that it would meet the ends of justice if a minor punishment of warning with a copy in the ACR file besides recovery of Rs. 1698950 (Rupees sixteen thousand, nine hundred and eighty nine and paisa fifty only) i.e. 50% of the loss caused to the Government be inflicted on him.
It is, therefore, ordered accordingly."
8.
The argument of the learned counsel that personal hearing was required to be afforded has failed to impress me because no personal hearing was necessary and no rule has been violated.
Moreover, rule 8 dealing with the imposition of minor penalties provides for a less elaborate procedure which is required to be followed but in case major penalty is sought to be imposed elaborate procedure is provided by Rule 7.
Therefore, the grant of personal hearing before imposition of minor penalty was not mandatory and the order would not be vitiated on that account.
9.
The other argument that gratuity which is a retiral benefit constitutes right to property under Article 300-A of the Constitution would also not require any serious consideration because by making recovery from the gratuity the right itself is not snatched but is being regulated in accordance with the rules validly made like Rule 6.16A(6) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume 2, Part 2 (as applicable to Haryana).
Rule 6.16A(6) of the Rules which is self-speaking reads as under :  "B - Death-cum-Retirement-Gratuity 6.16A (1) to (5) xx xx xx (6) [The Government will have the right to effect recoveries from a gratuity sanctioned under this rule, in the same circumstances as recovery can be effected from an ordinary pension under Rule 2.2(b)] (Emphasis added) (7) No gratuity may be granted under this rule, if the officer was dismissed or removed for misconduct, insolvency or inefficiency.
Compassionate grants may, however, be made under this Rule in accordance with rule 25.
(8) A gratuity shall be sanctioned under this rule after giving due regard to the provisions of rule 64.
The existing rules, which apply to the grant of an ordinary pension, will also apply in respect of a gratuity that may be sanctioned under this rule in so far as such rules are not inconsistent with the provisions of rule 6.16A and 6.16B."
Therefore, I do not find any substance in this submission made by the learned counsel.
The constitutional validity of the rule has not been questioned.
The argument that pension cannot be attached under clause (g) of Section 60 of the Code is not relevant for deciding the controversy raised in the instant petition and therefore, this argument has no substance and is hence rejected.
10.
The other argument that petitioner has been singled out for harsh and discriminatory treatment while leaving others would not arise on the facts of the present case because the categorical stand taken in para 8 of the written statement is that delay in processing the case of the petitioner was caused at the Head Office and the concerned officers/officials involved were punished under the 1987 Rules.
It has further been stated that the Executive Engineer has also been held responsible for his lapse of rejecting the tender case at the initial stage which he was not competent to do and also by calling the tender subsequently which was higher by Rs. 4166/-.
It appears that the Executive Engineer as well as the Superintending Engineer, the petitioner, wanted to have the Contractor of their choice and in the process caused pecuniary loss to the public exchequer.
Therefore, there is no violation of Articles 14 and 16(1) of the Constitution.
For the reasons recorded above, this petition fails and the same is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.