Swatanter Kumar, J (Oral) - In the petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner prays for a direction to the respondents to grant him market rate of interest on delayed payments of pension, Gratuity and Commutation etc.  2.
The petitioner retired from service on May 31, 2001.
However, his pensionary benefits were disbursed to him on September 25, 2002, thus causing delay of nearly 16 months in payment of the retiral dues.
The petitioner claims that no fault was attributable to him and no delay has occurred as a result of non-compliance of any order on his part.
3.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the State contends that there were certain matters, which were being considered by the State and a final decision in that behalf which included withdrawal of some benefits from the petitioner in relation to December, 2001 and subsequently, even the petitioner had taken the House Rent Allowance advance, and `No Objection Certificate' was submitted in that regard only in August, 2002.
4.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties.
5.
The matter in regard to withdrawal of benefits alleged to have been wrongly granted to the petitioner was settled by the respondents themselves as back as in September, 2001.
Even thereafter the retiral benefits to the petitioner were not disbursed to him despite sanction.
To some extent, the respondents may be justified in with-holding the payments till clarification of certain questions.
But once they were settled, there appears to be hardly any justification with the respondents for non-payment of retiral benefits to the petitioner after September, 2001.
It is not disputed that petitioner was to receive a sum of Rs. 5,16,695/- which in fact were also paid to him but after a considerable delay.
In other words, the petitioner has been wrongly deprived of such substantial amount for a considerable period.
The amount was legally due and payable to the petitioner.
No fault what-so-ever was attributable to the petitioner.
6.
In the circumstances afore-stated, we award a sum of Rs. 25,000/- on account of costs and interest to the petitioner and the same shall be paid to him within one month from today.
7.
Petition stands disposed of.
Petition allowed.