HS Bedi, J - The petitioners were appointed as Assistant Engineers (Horticulture Branch) in the Public Works Department (Building and Roads) of Haryana State by way of direct appointment after being selected by the Haryana Public Service Commission.
Their appointment letter dated 2761973 is appended to the writ petition as Annexure P.1.
In this letter, the petitioners were informed under the heading "Regulation applicable to service" that their service would be regulated as per the Public Service of Engineers, Class-II, PWD (B&R) Branch Rules, 1965 (hereinafter to the referred as "the Rules") and also by the provisions of other service regulations as applicable to the employees of the Haryana State Government.
By a corrigendum dated 1641974, Annexure P-2, it was clarified that condition No. 1 under the heading "Regulations applicable to service" as mentioned in their letter of appointment be treated as deleted.
It appears that the petitioners thereafter represented to the State Government on which the State Government issued yet another clarification, Annexure P-3, dated 5/981974 informing the petitioners that their service would be governed by the rules and regulations as contained in their appointment letter till such time the Services Rules were not gazetted by the Government.
It is the conceded position that the petitioners were thereafter confirmed in service in the year 1976 under the letter of appointment.
The petitioners thereafter applied for the fixation of their seniority as per the Rules but finding no action on the part of the respondents, the petitioners filed the present writ petition.
In the meantime, the petitioners were also granted selection grade admissible the posts of Assistant Engineers.
The petitioners were thereafter promoted as Executive Engineers and have since retired (in the years 2003 and 2001 respectively).
2.
In the reply filed by the State Government, it has been pointed out that service conditions of the petitioners were not regulated by the Rules and as they had not been appointed under the Rules and as they had not been appointed under the Rules, they were not entitled for fixation of their seniority thereunder.
3.
At the very outset, the learned Deputy Advocate General, Haryana has pointed out that a new set of Service Rules have been gazetted in the year 1989 and the petitioners are now entitled to have their seniority fixed in accordance with those Rules.
4.
I have heard counsel for the parties and have also perused the records of the case.
It is clear from the offer of appointment made to the petitioners, Annexure P-1, letter dated 5/981974, Annexure P-3, and letter dated 27.2.1976, Annexure P-6 that the petitioners had been appointed under the Rules.
By letter dated 1641974, Annexure P-2, though condition No. 1 under the heading "Regulations applicable to service" contained in the offer of appointment, Annexure P-1 had been deleted but on the representation of the petitioners, the aforesaid clause was re-inserted by letter Annexure P-3.
It is also clear from Annexure P-6 that one of the petitioners, namely, Nirmal Singh had also been confirmed under the Rules.
It, therefore, does not lie with the State Government to now contend that the petitioners had not been appointed under the Rules.
In view of the above, the writ petition is allowed and the respondents are directed to re-fix the seniority of the petitioners in accordance with the Rules, within a period of six months from now.
They shall also be given all consequential benefits that may flow thereupon.
There will, however, be no order as to costs.
Dasti.
Petition allowed.