HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner on an application made to the Deputy Minister for Development and Panchayats, Punjab was appointed as a Panchayat Secretary in Abohar Block for a period of 89 days basis vide letter of appointment dated 221982 (Annexure P-1).
The copy of the letter of appointment was endorsed to the Director Panchayats, Punjab, Chandigarh and sanction was sought for the regularisation of the appointment.
The Director Panchayats, however, refused to grant sanction and directed that the services of the petitioner be terminated forthwith.
In the meanwhile, due to the intervention of the Deputy Minister afore-mentioned, the District Development & Panchayat Officer further extended the period of appointment of the petitioner for another 89 days vide order dated 3151982 (Annexure P-2).
It is the petitioner's case that he had worked satisfactorily from 221982 to 351982, i.e., for a period of three months.
It appears that the petitioner's services were yet again extended vide order dated 2091982 (Annexure P-4) for another period of 89 days.
In the meanwhile, respondent No. 3 Balraj Singh too was appointed on adhoc basis by the District Development and Panchayat Officer on 89 days basis on 2231982, i.e., about a month and 20 days after the petitioner.
His case too was referred to the Director Panchayats, Punjab for approval.
The petitioner's grievance is that whereas approval has been granted for the continuance of the services of respondent No. 3, the Director Panchayats had finally refused to grant approval to the petitioner's appointment.
He has accordingly challenged this action of the respondents by way of the present writ petition.
2.
Separate written statements have been filed by respondent Nos. 1 and 2 and it has been pointed out that as per the Punjab Panchayat Secretaries (Recruitment and Conditions of Service) Rules, 1979, the Director was the appointing authority in respect of Panchayat Secretaries on the recommendations of the Selection Committee, constituted by the Government and that it has been provided by the instructions issued by the Government to all the District Development and Panchayat Officers that while seeking the concurrence of the Director in the case of appointments on 89 days basis, it was to be ensured that a candidate has been recruited through the Employment Exchange and fulfilled the minimum educational qualifications prescribed for the post.
The inference that appears to be drawn is that as the petitioner had been appointed merely on the recommendation made by the Deputy Minister concerned and without following the prescribed procedure, his appointment was bad in law.
It has been argued by the learned counsel for the petitioner that (as has been spelt out in the written statement), the petitioner and respondent No. 3 had been appointed by the District Development and Panchayat Officer on the same terms and conditions and whereas respondent No. 3's appointment had been approved, the approval in the case of the petitioner had been declined.
I am of the view, however, that this argument of the learned counsel, in the circumstances, is misplaced.
Admittedly the selection of the petitioner and the respondent was not made in accordance with the rules/instructions.
The petitioner thus cannot claim to be appointed to the post.
At best, therefore, the learned counsel for the petitioner can contend that the appointment of respondent No. 3, which was clearly made in similar and irregular circumstances, should be quashed as well.
This prayer has in fact been made by the petitioner in the prayer clause.
I am, however, of the view that this prayer should not be granted at this stage as the respondent has now been in service for more than two decades and to dislodge him at this stage would cause him and his family immense hardship.
Dismissed.
Petition dismissed.