ML Singhal, J - Chattar Singh-petitioner joined Education Department of the State of Haryana as Clerk.
In the course of time, he was promoted to the post of assistant.
When he reached the age of 55 years, question of taking him beyond that age in service up to 58 years, came up for consideration.
Vide order Annexure P-1, he was ordered to be retired compulsorily under Rule 532(c) and note thereunder of the Punjab Civil Services Rules Vol. II as applicable to the State of Haryana.
He represented against the order Annexure P-1 whereby he had been ordered to be compulsorily retired at the age of 55 years.
His representation was accepted vide order Annexure P-3.
While accepting his representation and ordering his retention in service beyond the age of 55 years vide order Annexure P-3 what the Director of School Education, Haryana did was that the intervening period during which he remained out of job in the wake of order retiring him from service at the age of 55 years was ordered to be treated as the leave of the kind due.
Through this writ petition filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, he has prayed for the issuance of writ in the nature of mandamus directing the State of Haryana to refund the amount of Rs. 346685 which were recovered from him vide order Annexure P-4 as pay for the period for which earned leave could not be sanctioned to him.
He remained out of job for 360 days on account of order vide which extension in service beyond 55 years was refused to him.
296 days were treated as leave with full pay while 64 days were treated as half pay leave.
On objection being raised by the audit party of the Education Department that the maximum earned leave which could be granted to a Govt. employees should not exceed 120 days, he was called upon to pay Rs. 346685 which represented the excess amount received by him.
This amount was actually recovered from him.
The order of refusing him extension beyond the age of 55 years was withdrawn.
It is as if he remained on job with all the emoluments for the period from 1021984 to 221985.
He could not have been treated on any day's leave during that period.
He should have been treated on duty.
2.
In the written statement filed by the State of Haryana, it is stated that he was compulsorily retired because of his involvement in embezzlement case.
On his representation, he was found innocent.
It was found that he was not involved in the embezzlement case.
Consequently, order of refusing him extension in service beyond 55 years of age was withdrawn.
3.
Be that as it may, when the order refusing him extension beyond 55 years was withdrawn and he was allowed to continue beyond 55 years to 58 years, he was entitled to all the usual emoluments which we would have otherwise drawn for the period 1021984 to 221985 i.e. during which he remained out of job.
4.
This writ petition is therefore allowed and mandate is issued to the respondents directing them to pay him all the emoluments for the entire period i.e. 1021984 to 221985 during which period he remained out of job on account of order refusing him extension in service, which was later on withdrawn.
Petition allowed.