SS Saron, J - The petitioner is a retired employee of the respondent Kurukshetra University and has filed the present petition, seeking directions for the grant/release of his retiral benefits including pension, gratuity, commutation of pension and leave encashment etc.  2.
The petitioner was initially appointed as a clerk with the respondent University on 2261976.
Thereafter, he was promoted to the post of Semi Professional in February 1986 at the University Library.
He went on deputation to Mauritius through the Indian Council of Cultural Relations through proper channel as Yoga Instructor.
He remained at Mauritius on deputation from 1881992 to 18.11.1992.
He came back to the respondent University and joined on the same post of Semi Professional.
The petitioner again went to Mauritius on deputation as Yoga Teacher through the Indian Council of Cultural Relations.
His second stint was from 20.2.1993 to 271996.
This was duly approved by the respondent University.
After completion of his deputation period, he again joined the respondent University as Semi Professional.
He worked upto 3121998 and sought voluntary retirement which was accepted.
He, thus retired from the University from the post of Semi Professional on 3121998.
The petitioner claims that he has the necessary qualifying service and is entitled to the grant of pension as per the Kurukshetra University Employees Pension Scheme, which came into force in respect of the University employees in 1995.
3.
Notice in the case was issued to the respondents, who filed their reply.
The factual position of the petitioner being employed as Semi Professional and his going to Mauritius on deputation for the period indicated above is admitted.
It is, however, stated that as per Clause 16 of the Kurukshetra University Employees Foreign Service Rules, when an employee is on foreign service, contribution towards his Provident Fund, Gratuity and Leave Salary are to be paid to the University by the foreign employer, failing which the same are to be paid by the employee himself.
The employer of the petitioner has not made contributions wards the contributory Provident Fund and, as such, it is averred that the petitioner is not entitled to the relief claimed.
It is stated that it was incumbent upon the foreign employer to have paid the contribution within 15 days from the end of the Financial year and this having not been done, the petitioner is not entitled for the relief as claimed.
Although, it is admitted that the petitioner sought voluntary retirement which has been granted.
4.
It, is also stated by the respondent-University that the petitioner is governed by Rule 1010 of the Punjab Civil Service Rules, Vol.
I, as applicable to Haryana Employees, and there has been a clear violation of the said Rules, which disentitles the petitioner to pension and only entitles him to contributory provident fund.
It was also submitted by the learned Senior Counsel Shri SC Sibal that the petitioner having retired, he is not entitled to now come on the pension scheme as claimed in the petition.
It is, however, stated that the gratuity amounting to Rs. 64,294/-, leave encashment amounting to Rs. 16,264/- have already been paid to the petitioner and that the only contribution made by the petitioner towards contributory provident fund remains, to which he is entitled to.
However he is not entitled for pension.
We have considered the contentions raised by the learned counsel for the parties.
5.
Foreign service has been defined for the Kurukshetra University Employees Service Rules, as follows:  "Foreign service means service on deputation with Central or State Government Departments, other Universities and autonomous organisation within India and abroad."
The perusal of the above definition of 'foreign service'shows that foreign service on deputation also includes service with autonomous organisation within India and abroad.
The petitioner, having gone to Mauritius under the aegis of the Indian Council of Cultural Relations through proper channel as Yoga Instructor; he was on foreign service/deputation.
6.
The relevant part of Clause 16(a) of the Kurukshetra University Employees Foreign Service Rules, which is necessary for the consideration of the matter in this petition reads as follows :  "16 (a) While an employee is on foreign service, contributions towards his contributory provident fund, gratuity and leave salary, shall be paid to the University by the Foreign Employer, failing which the same shall be paid by the employee himself, (b) The contribution, on account of leave salary in respect of an employee in foreign service, shall be payable to the University at the following rates as amended from time to time - (i) XXXX XXXX (ii) XXXX XXXX The contribution may be paid annually within fifteen days from the end of the financial year or at the end of foreign service, if it expires or is terminated earlier, failing which interest on unpaid amount of contribution shall be payable to the university at the rate of three paise per day per Rs. 100/- from the due date upto the date on which the amount is finally paid by the employee or the foreign employer as the case may be.
The perusal of the above rule shows that while an employee is on foreign service, contribution towards his contributory provident fund, gratuity and leave salary are to be paid to the University by the foreign employer, failing which by the employee himself.
The contribution, on account of leave salary in respect of an employee in foreign service, are payable to the University at the rates indicated therein i.e. contribution is to be paid annually within 15 days from the end of the financial year or at the end of foreign service, failing which interest on unpaid amount of contribution shall be payable to the University at the rate of three paise per day per Rs. 100/- from the due date upto the date on which the amount is finally paid by the employee or the foreign employer as the case may be.
It is the case of the petitioner that pension scheme was implemented in the University w.e.f.
141995, in which the gratuity and the University share of Provident Fund was merged.
The petitioner had opted for pension scheme.
The period spent on deputation is to be counted towards qualifying service for the purposes of pension under the Kurukshetra University Employees Pension Scheme.
The relevant part of the provisions of Kurukshetra University Employees Pension Scheme reads under :  "(iv) QUALIFYING SERVICE.
XXX XXX XXX (viii) The period spent on deputation under University rules shall count as qualifying service for the purpose of pension if the pension contribution for such period is deposited in corpus fund at the rates prescribed in Annexure 'C' referred to rule 1010 of Punjab CSR Volume I, Part-I, applicable to Haryana Govt. employees and amendments from time to time."
The above rule also shows that the period spent on deputation under the University rules is to be counted as qualifying service for the purpose of pension if the pension contribution for which such is deposited in corpus fund at the rates prescribed in Annexure 'C' referred to rule 1010 of Punjab Civil Service Rules, Volume I, Part-I, as applicable to Haryana Government employees.
Rule 1010 of the Punjab Civil Service Rules, Volume I, Part I which has also been referred to by the respondents, so as to dis-entitle the petitioner for the grant of pensionary benefits reads as under :-  "1010 (a) The rates of contributions, payable on account of pension and leave salary, shall be such as the competent authority may by general order, prescribe.
(b) The rates of pension contribution are designed to secure to the Government employee the pension that he would have earned by service under Government if he had not been transferred to foreign service.
(c) The rates of contribution for leave-salary are designed to secure to the Government employee leave-salary on the scale and under the conditions applicable to him.
In calculating the rate of leave-salary admissible, the pay drawn in foreign service, less, in the case of Government employees paying their own contributions such part of pay as may be paid as contributions, shall count for the purpose of rule 8122 as paid on the last day of duty.
Note 1.
The rate of contributions prescribed under this rule and the method of their calculation are given in Annexures B and C to this Chapter.
Note 2.
For determining the monthly pension contributions payable during foreign service, the amount of non-practising allowance appropriate to the maximum of the scale of pay of the post, shall be taken into account."
The perusal of the above rule 1010 shows that the rates of contributions payable on account of pension and leave salary are to be such as the competent authority may, by general order prescribe.
The rates of pension contribution are designed to secure to the Government employee, the pension that he would have earned by service under Government if he had not been transferred to foreign service.
Besides, the rates of contribution for leave-salary are designed to secure to the Government employee leave-salary on the scale and under the conditions applicable to him and in calculating the rate of leave- salary admissible, the pay drawn in foreign service, less, in the case of Government employees paying their own contributions is to count for the purpose of Rule 8122 as pay on the last day of duty.
Annexure C gives the rates of contribution prescribed by the Government for the purposes of rule 1010(a).
7.
The provisions of rule 1010 of the Punjab Civil Service Rules, Vol.
I (Part I), as applicable to the Haryana Government Employees, is a piece of beneficial legislation for the employees.
It is designed to secure pension to the government employee that he would have earned by serving under the Government even if he had not been transferred to the Foreign Services.
Therefore, the stand that Rule 1010 disentitles the petitioner to the grant of pension, as urged on behalf of the respondents, is clearly not tenable.
Besides, it is the admitted position that in terms of letter dated 211993 issued at the time of proposal for sending the petitioner on deputation, it was indicated by the Indian Council for Cultural Relations that contribution towards contributory provident fund of the petitioner while on deputation, would be paid to the University by the foreign employer, failing which the same would be paid to the University by the petitioner himself.
The stand of the University that neither the foreign employer nor the petitioner had paid the amount to it in time, according to the rule is not of any consequence.
The contributory provident fund was initially not paid by the foreign employer or the petitioner.
It is after the petitioner had sought voluntary retirement that he pursued his case for the release of pension and other retiral benefits.
The respondent University addressed a Memo dated 542000 (Annexure P-3) to the petitioner stating that the University office, in terms of its earlier letter dated 832000, had directed the petitioner to deposit a sum of Rs. 22,784/- in the University account so as to enable the office to process the case of pension.
However, the petitioner had not deposited the balance amount in the University account and he was again directed to deposit the said sum in the University account by 1142000 positively, failing which, it would be presumed that he would not be interested to take pension.
The petitioner, in view of the said letter, made a payment through cheque on 2542000 and it was requested that the provident fund account as well as pension and gratuity etc. may be settled immediately.
Despite the deposit of the desired amount by the petitioner in the University account, the case of the petitioner for release of retiral benefits, was not processed.
The petitioner, therefore, made representations dated 1552000 (Annexure P-5), 1892000 (Annexure P-6), 25102000 (Annexure P-7) and 16112000 (Annexure P-8).
In the last representation, it is submitted that the Indian Council of Cultural Relations vide its letter dated 2111993, had agreed to pay the amount of contribution to the University and that because the University did not claim the same, the case of the petitioner had been delayed and was still pending.
Thereafter the petitioner received communication from the Indian Council for Cultural Relations dated 922001 (Annexure P-9) in pursuance of which, the petitioner was informed that a cheque for an amount of Rs. 26,752/- towards provident fund contribution for the period from 20.2.1993 to 3131995 and pension contribution from 141995 to 271996 with respect to the petitioner, had been sent to the University.
The petitioner, therefore, on receipt of the said letter, approached the University, informing them that the requisite amount towards provident fund contribution of the petitioner, has been paid by its foreign employer and that the case of the petitioner for his pension and other retiral benefits, may be decided.
Despite this position, the respondents-University has not decided the pensionary benefits of the petitioner.
8.
The only serious objection raised by the University in the present petition is that the provident fund and pension contribution in respect of the petitioner has not been made within time.
It is the admitted case of the University that letters were sent by it, asking the petitioner to deposit a sum of Rs. 22,784/-.
It is also accepted by the University that the petitioner was contributing to the provident fund and the amount, in his account, was to the tune of Rs. 1,02,076/- and the contribution of the University was Rs. 84,447/-.
In this manner the share of the petitioner was Rs. 1,629/-.
The petitioner had opted for voluntary retirement and a sum of Rs. 40,413/- had to be recovered on account of three months salary and the balance amount he was asked to deposit.
This amount was deposited by the petitioner on 2542000, although, he retired on 31121998.
Thereafter, the case was being processed.
9.
In the circumstances afore-referred, in our view, the question of the case being time barred or that the amount was not deposited within the stipulated period, is wholly baseless.
Clause 16(a) of the Kurukshetra University Employees' Service Rules, envisages that contribution may be paid within 15 days from the end of the financial year or at the end of foreign service, if it expired or if terminated earlier, failing which interest on unpaid amount of contribution shall be payable to the University at the rate of three paise per day per Rs. 100/- from the due date upto the date on which the amount is finally paid by the employee or the foreign employer as the case may be.
Therefore, there is no stipulation of any limitation for the payment of the amount of contribution towards contributory provident fund etc. As such, there is no violation of the rule and neither is rule 1010 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules Vol.
I Part I as applicable to the Haryana Government employees been violated.
It may also be noticed that the contribution which has been paid by the employer of the petitioner to the University has been accepted by the University.
The petitioner has also by way of replication placed on record letter dated 11122000 (Annexure P-11) addressed by the Indian Council of Cultural Relation to the Registrar of the respondent University.
In terms of said letter the University has been intimated that the petitioner vide his letter dated 16112000 had requested for the payment of Council's share towards contributory provident fund contribution for the period he was on deputation with it.
The University was requested to send a statement showing the Council's share of Contributory Provident fund to enable it to remit the payment to the University.
In consideration of the said letter, the Assistant Registrar (Establishment) of the University wrote to the Finance Officer of the University on 29122000 (Annexure P-12).
It was informed that the Vice Chancellor had considered the letter of the Indian Council for Cultural Relations, New Delhi and he had ordered to claim provident fund contribution of deputation period in respect of the petitioner from the said Council.
The Finance Officer was requested to take further action in the matter accordingly.
The Finance Officer accordingly wrote a letter dated 1712001 (Annexure P-13) to the Indian Council for Cultural Relations, with regard to the claim of University Provident Fund/pension contribution in respect of the petitioner.
In the said communication the Council was informed with reference to its letter dated 11122000 (Annexure P-11), that the University had introduced pension scheme w.e.f.
141995.
However, due to oversight the University contribution for the above period could not be claimed.
It was requested for releasing provident fund/pension contribution in respect of the petitioner as per claim enclosed with the said communication.
The said amount was asked to be remitted in the name of the Registrar, Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra.
It is in response to this letter of the University that the Council vide its letter dated 922001 deposited a cheque for Rs. 26,754/- towards the Provident Fund Contribution from 20.3.1993 to 271996 and pension contribution for the period from 141995 to 271996.
In this view of the matter, the entire stand of the respondents that the claim of the respondents is barred or that the petitioner is not entitled to the same after his retirement is without any substance.
10.
The petitioner has also made a claim for the grant of interest on the delayed payment of pension.
The petitioner's request for voluntary retirement was accepted on 312,1998.
It is after his retirement on 3121998 that he started pursuing his case in 2000.
The respondent University informed the petitioner vide letter dated 832000 followed by letter dated 542000 (Annexure P-3) to deposit a sum of Rs. 22,789/- so as to enable the office to process the case for pension.
The said amount was deposited on 2542000.
It is then that the petitioner made representations Annexures P-5, P-6, P-7 and P-8, during the year 2000.
The Indian Council for Cultural Relations, gave a cheque, depositing the amount towards provident fund contribution in respect of the petitioner on 922000.
Therefore, we find that the petitioner has also been somewhat lax in claiming his pensionary benefits from the date of his retirement i.e. 31121998 till the year 2000.
Besides, the University had contributed a sum of Rs. 84,447/- towards the provident fund contribution.
As such, in the facts and circumstances of the case, we find that the petitioner is not entitled for any interest on the delayed payments.
11.
Resultantly, writ petition is allowed and the respondents are directed to calculate the pensionary benefits of the petitioner and pay the same to him, preferably within four months of the receipt of certified copy of the order.
The petitioner, however, would not be entitled to any interest on the delayed payments.
No costs.
Petition allowed.