SS Nijjar, J (Ora) - The petitioner seeks a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to fix seniority of the petitioner by giving him benefit past service rendered by him in the office of the Project Officer (Industries), Malerkotla.
2.
The petitioner was initially appointed as a Clerk on 04.11.1963 in the office of the Project officer (Industries), Malerkotla.
He was regularly appointed on the post of Clerk on 27.1.1964.
Thereafter, on 10.03.1966 he was promoted as Steno-Typist (Punjabi) on ad hoc basis.
This promotion was also in the office of the Project Officer (industries), Malerkotla.
By order dated 22.10.1966, the petitioner was confirmed on the Post of Clerk in the grade of Rs. 60-4-80/5-120/5-175, with effect from 12101966.
In the year 1969, the post of Steno-Typist, in the office of the Project Officer, Malerkotla, was kept in abeyance and on 01091969, the petitioner was transferred as Steno- Typist in the office of the District Industries Officer, Ferozepur.
This Project Office was closed on 01031979.
The employees working in the aforesaid office were then appointed in the newly created District Industries Centre, Ferozepur.
The tentative seniority list of Steno-Typists, Clerks and Assistants, was prepared and circulated.
The petitioner in this tentative seniority list was shown at serial No. 7.
He had not been given the benefit of the service rendered by him since 04.11.1963.
In fact, he had not been even given the benefit of regular service with effect from 27011964.
Against the tentative seniority list, the petitioner made a representation which was rejected on 11021981.
The petitioner again made a representation which was rejected on 25031987.
Thus, the petitioner was constrained to file the present writ petition.
3.
The respondents have filed the written statement.
In paragraph 3 of the written statement, it has been stated that the post of Steno-Typist on which the petitioner was working, was abolished with effect from 31.8.1969 as the office of the Project Officer, Malerkotla, had been closed.
The petitioner was, thereafter, adjusted in the office of the District Industries Centre, Ferozepur.
This office was also closed down on 28021979.
The staff of this office ws merged in the office of the District Industries Centres, Malerkotla/Hoshiarpur.
4.
Mr. Sharma has submitted that, all along, the petitioner was an employee of the Industries Department in the State of Punjab.
The projects in which the petitioner remained posted were directly under the control of the Director of Industries.
The petitioner had been posted as Clerk/Steno-Typist in different places in the exigencies of service.
Therefore, the petitioner cannot be denied the benefit of entire service rendered by him for the fixation of seniority and for consideration for further promotion.
5.
Mr. HS Sran, learned Additional Advocate General, Punjab, has, however, submitted that since the post of clerk had been declared surplus with effect from 31081969, the petitioner cannot claim continuity in service.
Although, the petitioner was confirmed as a Clerk with effect from 12101966, yet he was offered a fresh appointment on the closure of the respective projects.
6.
Having considered the entire matter, I am of the considered opinion that denial of benefit of service rendered by the petitioner is arbitrary and unreasonable.
At no stage, the petitioner made any voluntary request for being transferred from one office to another.
He was shifted from one office to another in the exigencies of service.
His initial appointment on the post of Clerk was subsequently regularised.
Thereafter, he was confirmed on the post of Clerk.
Consequently, I do not find any justification for denial of service rendered by the petitioner for computing the seniority on the post of Clerk and Assistant.
7.
In view of the above, this petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to fix the seniority of the petitioner from the initial date of appointment on the post Clerk i.e. 01111963.
The respondents are also directed to re-fix the seniority of the petitioner on the higher posts .
The claim of the petitioner for promotion to the higher posts be also considered on the basis of the re-fixed seniority.
8.
At this stage, it is pointed out by Mr. Sharma that during the pendency of the present petition, the petitioner has retired from service.
In this view of the matter, the respondents are directed to consider the case of the petitioner for promotion on the higher posts and to release the retiral benefits by making necessary amendments on the basis of any promotions that may be due to the petitioner.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to all consequential benefits, such as, arrears of salary etc. Let the necessary exercise be done by the respondents within a period of three months from today.
No costs.
Petition allowed.