SS Nijjar, J. (Oral) - I have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length and perused the record of the case.
2.
The husband of the petitioner was employed with the State of Punjab from 23.5.1958 to 561984 on which date he unfortunately expired.
The widow- petitioner made necessary application for the grant of GPF, Deposit Linked Insurance, Death-cum-Retirement Gratuity, House Rent allowance and pensionary benefits to her as her two major sons had already relinquished their claim in favour of the widowed mother.
3.
It is submitted by Mr. Gupta that during the pendency of the petition, according to the written statement balance amount of GPF amounting to Rs. 14945/- has been paid to the widow-petitioner.
In the written statement it is further stated that the other retiral benefits are held up for "No Demand Certificate" due to shortage of material against him.
The cost of material is to be adjusted from his death-cum-retirement gratuity and Deposit Linked Insurance amount.
But for the plea that certain amounts were to be recovered from the deceased, the respondents have not denied the admissibility of the retiral benefits.
4.
I am of the considered opinion that the husband of the petitioner having died during service, it would not be open to the respondents to now initiate any proceedings for recovery.
It is settled proposition of law that any order which would have the effect of causing civil consequences, can only be passed after observing rules of natural justice.
Therefore, of necessity, an opportunity of hearing would have to be given to the person against whom the order is sought to be passed.
Since the deceased employee is no longer available, it would not be possible for the petitioner to put up a defence in any proceeding that may be initiated against the deceased-husband for recovery.
5.
Consequently, I am of the considered opinion that present petition has to be allowed and necessary directions have to be issued to the respondents to pay the entire retiral benefits to the petitioner without resorting to any recovery proceedings.
6.
In view of the above, the present petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to pay entire retiral benefits to the petitioner within a period of three months from today with interest at the rate of 7% per annum.
Needless to say, the interest on GPF amount shall be admissible only upto 2911988.
No costs.
Petition allowed.