ML Singhal, J - Petitioner's son Kulwinder Singh was in PCMS-I.
He joined PCMS-I on 2351982 and ad hoc basis.
His services were regularised on 2131983.
He served at various places.
Unfortunately, he died on 111998.
At the time of his death, he was unmarried.
Both his parents, i.e. his father and mother were dependent upon him.
His mother, however, died.
His father Vasdev Singh petitioner herein is surviving.
Vasdev Singh has no income of his own and was fully dependent upon his son.
He applied for dependency certificate to Deputy Commissioner, Hoshiarpur and the Deputy Commissioner, Hoshiarpur issued him dependency certificate Annexure P-4 vide letter dated 2761988.
He knocked the door of the authorities several times so as to obtain family pension as also death-cum-retirement gratuity.
Family pension was not released to him.
Death-cum-retirement gratuity was also not released to him.
His claim to family pension and death-cum-retirement gratuity was kept pending for want of legal heir certificate by the authorities vide Annexure P-5.
2.
Through this writ petition filed by Vasdev Singh under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India, he has prayed for the issuance of a writ, order or direction especially in the nature of mandamus directing the respondent State of Punjab to grant him family pension and death-cum-retirement gratuity on account of the death of his son upon whom he was dependent.
3.
Respondent State of Punjab contested this writ petition urging that the petitioner is not entitled to family pension as he is not covered in the definition of "family" as given in Rule 6.17(3) of Punjab civil Services Rules Vol. II and so far as gratuity amounting to Rs. 38160/- is concerned, the same was paid to him.
4.
In this petition, the question to be considered is "whether the petitioner is covered in the definition of family as given in Rule 6.17(3) of Punjab Civil Service Rules Vol. II, Chapter 8" ?
Rule 6.17(3) reads thus :  "6.17(3) "Family" for purposes of this scheme will include the following relatives of the Government employees : (a) wife in the case of a male government employee and husband in the case of a female government employee; (b) a judicially separated wife or husband, such separation not being granted on the ground of adultery, provided the marriage took place before the retirement of the government employee and the person surviving was not held guilty of committing adultery; and  (c) minor sons; and  (d) unmarried daughters below the age of 21 years.
5.
Learned Deputy Advocate General submits that as the petitioner was father, he is not covered in the definition of family as given in Rule 6.17(3) and as such no family pension could be sanctioned in his favour.
He further submits that the definition of family was revised vide notification dated 1671998 vide sub-clause 43. of Rule 16.7 (ibid).
Vide the revised definition of family which took place on 1671998, parents are also covered within the definition of family provided they were fully dependent on the government employee when he or she was alive and if he did not leave behind any widow or child.
He further submits that this definition came in force on 1671998.
He submits that the said definition of family became effective with effect from 111996 through notification dated 1671998.
Since the petitioner's son died in 1988, the petitioner is not entitled to any family pension.
6.
Ours is a welfare state.
Where should the petitioner go if he has none to look upon ?
His son Kulwinder Singh was the only ray of hope for him.
Destiny played foul with the petitioner when it snatched the only source of his livelihood from him.
His son was the only source of livelihood for him.
In my opinion, the revised definition of family which came into force with effect from 111996 will enure in favour of every parent whether father or mother who happens to be alive after 111996 irrespective of the fact his/her son died before or after 111996.
7.
It was held in State of Punjab and another v. Kharak Singh Kang and another, 1998(1) SCT 556 (P&H) (DB) : 1998(1) RSJ 412 that the parents of the deceased employee cannot be excluded from the definition of family or denied the benefit of family pension.
This is a beneficent measure namely the grant of family pension which is to be interpreted liberally.
It is well settled that every executive action and in particular a legislative measure like a statutory rule governing the grant of pensionary benefits should meet the test of reasonableness as contemplated under Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
Parents of a deceased employee are eligible for the grant of gratuity.
They are also eligible for the grant of certain kinds of pension.
In the case of an employee who is not even married, they are not entitled to the grant of family pension.
The rule has no rationale.
It is totally arbitrary.
It will be unreasonable to hold that parents of a deceased employee are not entitled to the grant of family pension particularly when they do not have any source of their own to maintain themselves.
8.
For the reasons given above, this petition is allowed and the respondent State of Punjab is directed to pay to the petitioner family pension with effect from 111996 i.e. the date when the petitioner's son died.
Petition allowed.