SS Nijjar, J. (Oral) - We have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length and perused the record of the case.
2.
The pay of the petitioner was brought at par to her junior, namely, Sunita Rani, on account of acquiring higher qualification of MA Subsequently, the department found out that Sunita Rani had passed the MA examination with Second Division.
Therefore, she was granted benefit of three advance increments on 11.09.1978.
The very same benefit had been given to the petitioner although she had passed the Post Graduate Examination with third division.
Therefore, according to the instructions, the petitioner was only entitled to two advance increment as on 11.09.1978.
However, it appeared that instead of withdrawing one increment by the impugned order dated 18062001, the respondent have withdrawn the entire benefit of advance increments i.e. all the three advance increments have been withdrawn from the pay of the petitioner.
3.
We have considered the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties.
4.
We are of the considered opinion that the impugned order is illegal to the extent that it has withdrawn all the three advance increments from the pay of the petitioner.
The petitioner was entitled to two advance increments on acquiring higher qualification of MA with third division.
Therefore, the respondent were entitled to withdraw only one advance increment out of the three advance increments earlier granted to the petitioner.
5.
In view of the above, present writ petition is allowed.
The impugned order is quashed whereby all the three advance increments granted to the petitioner were withdrawn.
The petitioner is held entitled to two advance increments only on acquiring higher qualification of MA with third division.
Therefore, the respondents are directed to refix the pay of the petitioner by withdrawing only one advance increment and pay her the benefit of two advance increments from the accrued date i.e. 11.09.1978.
The respondents are directed to grant the necessary benefit to the petitioner with a period of two months from the date of receipt of certified copy of this order.
No costs.
Petition allowed.