SS Nijjar, J. (Oral) - We have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length and perused the record of the case.
2.
The petitioner seeks a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to frame a uniform policy for promotion of Junior Engineers to the post of Sub- Divisional Engineers/Assistant Engineers/P.S.E.
Class-II Services.
It is prayed that the respondents be directed to frame specific criteria to determine the scope of the word "outstanding" as set out in the Proviso to Rule 5 of the Punjab Service of Engineers Class-II (Punjab Public Works Department, Irrigation Branch) Rules, 1941.
3.
The petitioner claims that there is stagnation in the cadre of Junior Engineers due to non-availability of promotional posts in the Public Works Department.
The promotion on the higher post is governed by the Punjab Service of Engineers Class-II (Public Works Department, Irrigation Branch) Rules, 1941 (hereinafter referred to as `the Rules').
Rule 5 of the Rules, provides that members of the Overseers Engineering Service Irrigation Branch, and members of the Irrigation Branch (Provincial Draftsman & Tracers) service would be eligible for promotion to P.S.E.
Class-II, provided they fulfil the qualifications laid down in Rule 3.
The proviso to the aforesaid rule provides that these qualifications may be relaxed by the government on the recommendation of the Chief Engineer in order to admit the promotion of a member of the Overseer Engineering Service or Irrigation Branch (provided Provincial Draftsman and Tracers) service of outstanding merit, who may not possess the qualifications specified in Rule 3.
The grievance of the petitioners is that a large number of promotions have been made of the members of the aforesaid service who are simply styled as persons of outstanding merit for granting them out of turn promotion.
It is submitted by the learned counsel that there is no rationale criteria laid down which would be fair and applicable to all the eligible Junior Engineers/Overseers.
4.
We have considered the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties.
5.
In paragraph 10 of the writ petition, the petitioner has reproduced Chapter 114 of the Manual of Administration which provides criteria for giving current duty charges on the higher post.
According to the learned counsel for the petitioner, even this procedure has not been followed while giving regular promotions.
We are of the considered opinion that in order to implement the proviso to Rule 5 of the Rules in its letter and spirit, it is necessary for the respondents to establish a proper criteria that would be fair and just to all aspirants.
Once a criteria is laid down, it would reduce, to a large extent, any aspirations which may otherwise be cast upon the competent authorities for making the promotions arbitrarily or for extraneous considerations.
A well defined criteria, uniformly applicable, would ensure transparency, in the promotion made under the proviso.
6.
In view of the above, present writ petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to formulate a criteria which would be suitable for adjudging the "outstanding merit" for Junior Engineers for onwards promotions to P.S.E.
Class-II.
The respondents are further directed to fix the criteria within a period of three months from the date of receipt of certified copy of this order.
No costs.
Petition allowed.