SS Nijjar, J. (Oral) - The petitioners are seeking direction to the respondents for regularisation in the State of Punjab.
They were all deputed as SPOs under Section 17 of the Punjab Police Act to meet a peculiar situation which had arisen in the State of Punjab.
2.
Written statement has been filed.
It has been stated that the petitioners were appointed as Guards with different Banks from the year 1987 till 1994.
The payment of salary to the petitioners were made by different Banks.
In similar circumstances, a large number of Bank Guards had filed Civil Writ petition No. 5280 of 1988 which was decided on 971991.
The claim of the petitioners for regularisation was rejected.
The claim for equal pay to the Regular Guards in the Banks or Constable, which ever is less, was accepted.
However, L.P.A. No. 209 of 1992 was filed against the judgment dated 971991, which was allowed and it was specifically held that SPOs are not entitled either to regularisation of their service or to pay and allowances at par with those of Guards of Banks.
The Division Bench observed as follows :-  "As regards regularisation of the services of Special Police Officers, by the very nature and purpose of their appointment as such, no occasion arises to warrant such regularisation.
As mentioned earlier, there is no regular cadre for such posts, nor have any particular number of posts been created for this purpose.
These factors clearly mitigate against such services being regularised.
In the result, we hereby over-rule the judgment of learned Single Judge except to the extent that the Special Police Officers were held not entitled to regularisation of their services.
In other words, Special Police Officers are not entitled either to regularisation of their services or to pay and allowances at par with those of guards of banks.
The judgment of the learned Single Judge is consequently hereby modified to the extent indicated and this appeal is, thus, accepted.
In the circumstances, however, there will be no order as to costs.
Sd/-  (S.S. Sodhi)  Judge, Sd/-  (Ashok Bhan)  Judge," 6.9.1993.
3.
In view of the above, we find no merit in this writ petition which is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.