SS Sudhalkar, J - The petitioner applied for admission to Diploma in Education in accordance with the prospectus published for the session 2000- 2002.
The petitioner belongs to the category of dependent of Freedom Fighters.
The admission notice mentions the reservation of various categories as under :-  "RESERVATION Reservation to different categories will be given as under :- 1.
Schedule Casts 10% A Block 10% B Block 2.
Backward Classes 16% A Block 11% B Block 3.
Physical Handicapped (disability not less than  40%)1% + 4.
Dependent of Freedom Fighters.
1% 5.
Ex-servicemen and their wards.
1% 1% Horizontal reservation would also be given to widows/legally deserted/legally divorced ladies."
+ + 2.
The petitioner was allocated roll number but her name did not appear in the select list.
It is the contention of the petitioner that as per the result of selection, 3235 candidates have been selected and out of these candidates, only 14 persons of the category of Freedom Fighters have been selected.
3.
It is further the case of the petitioner that as per one per cent reservation, 32 seats were available in the said category and, therefore, the respondent have, by not filling up the seats from the available candidates of the reserved category, wrongly denied admission to the petitioner.
4.
The stand of the respondents is that reservation to the ex-serviceman and their wards 1% and the dependants of freedom fighters 1% is to be given in the event of the quota reserved for physically handicapped remaining unutilized due to non-availability for suitable category for handicapped candidates.
5.
Learned State Counsel has argued that the persons from other reserved categories, who were more suitable than the petitioner, have been given admission.
In view of the reservation policy quoted above, we find that the stand taken by the respondents is not correct.
The persons from the particular category were available and only because others were more suitable, it does not bar the rights of the dependents of freedom fighters, if they are not unsuitable for the same.
The stand taken by the respondents, therefore, is misconceived.
6.
No further ground has been argued.
We therefore, allow this writ petition and direct the respondents to consider the suitable persons from the category of freedom fighters for the admission in the 1% quota as prescribed for reservation and give admission accordingly.
Needless to say that if the petitioner competes with the other candidates in the said quota, she shall be entitled for admission.
Petition allowed.