Viney Mittal, J - Petitioner Parkash Singh has filed the present petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for the issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari for quashing the order dated December 13, 1993 passed by the Superintendent of Police, Kaithal, order dated February 2, 1996 passed by the Deputy Inspector General of Police-respondent No. 3 and the order dated May 30, 2000 passed by the Inspector General of Police (Law and Order).
The aforesaid orders have been appended as Annexures P/4, P/6 and P/8 with the present petition, respectively.
2.
The case of the petitioner is that he was enrolled as a Constable in Haryana Police on April 3, 1973.
Subsequently, because of the petitioner remaining absent, he was dismissed from service by the Superintendent of Police, Yamuna Nagar vide order dated August 27, 1991.
The petitioner filed an appeal.
The aforesaid appeal was allowed by the Deputy Inspector General of Police and the petitioner was ordered to be re-instated in service.
The petitioner after reinstatement joined his duties in District Kaithal on July 17, 1992.
3.
The case of the petitioner is that after he joined back service in District Kaithal on his re-instatement, an enquiry which had been ordered prior to his dismissal was again started for the period of absence for 36 days ie from 2271991 to 2781991.
The petitioner has averred that this enquiry was started vide order dated August 22, 1991 passed by the Superintendent of Police, Yamuna Nagar.
On that basis, the petitioner had averred that whereas orders for initiation of enquiry were passed by the Superintendent of Police, Yamuna Nagar on August 22, 1991, the charge against him in the aforesaid enquiry was with regard to his absence from duty for the period from July 22, 1991 to August 27, 1991.
On that basis, the petitioner had averred that apparently the order has been passed mechanically inasmuch as on August 22, 1991 ie the date of initiation of the enquiry it could not be anticipated that he would remain absent upto August 27, 1991.
4.
It is further stated in the petition that the charge-sheet against the petitioner was got approved by the Superintendent of Police, Kaithal vide order dated October 2, 1993 and even in the aforesaid charge sheet the absence of the petitioner was mentioned from July 22, 1991 to August 27, 1991.
According to the petitioner, the enquiry was conducted without following any procedure laid down in the Punjab Police Rules as according to him, neither any service of the show cause notice was effected upon him nor the notice of the enquiry was ever served upon him.
The Enquiry Officer after recording the evidence for proving the charges against the petitioner submitted his report to the competent authority along with enquiry file and in the aforesaid report submitted by the Enquiry Officer, the petitioner was held guilty of habitual absenting himself, wilfully.
On the submission of the aforesaid enquiry report, the Superintendent of Police, Kaithal-respondent No. 4, issued a show cause notice dated November, 4, 1993 for his dismissal from service.
He was given 15 days time for submitting his defence.
Ultimately, on the basis of the documents on record and the report of the Enquiry Officer, the Superintendent of Police, Kaithal-respondent No. 4 found that the petitioner has absented himself from duty and, therefore, passed an order dismissing him from service.
A copy of the aforesaid order has been attached as Annexure P/4 with the petition.
5.
An appeal was filed by the petitioner against the dismissal order Annexure P/4 before the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Ambala Range, Ambala on January 13, 1994.
Vide order dated February 2, 1996, the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Ambala Range-respondent No. 3 also dismissed the aforesaid appeal of the petitioner.
A copy of the aforesaid order dated February 2, 1996 has been appended as Annexure P/6 with the petition.
6.
The petitioner has averred that he submitted a review/revision-cum-mercy petition before the Director General of Police.
The aforesaid revision/mercy petition has been dismissed by the Inspector General of Police vide order dated May 30, 2000.
A copy of the order dated May 30, 2000 passed by the Inspector General of Police (Law and Order), Haryana has been appended as Annexure P/8 with the petition.
7.
The petitioner is aggrieved against the orders Annexure P/4, annexure P/6 and P/8 and has filed the present petition, assailing those orders.
8.
Upon a notice of the writ petition issued to the respondents, they have put in appearance.
A written statement has been filed by respondent Nos. 1 to 4.
The claim of the petitioner has been contested and the validity of the orders Annexure P/4, P/6, and P/8 has been reiterated.
The action of the respondents in dismissing the service of the petitioner has been defended.
9.
The stand taken by the respondents in the written statement is as follows :  "That during the course of regular departmental enquiry for his previous wilful absence of 1 year, 3 months, 4 days, 22 hours and 20 minutes, petitioner was placed under suspension and again ordered to be dealt with departmentally for his continuously wilful absence since 22791 vide Superintendent of Police, Yamuna Nagar order No. 45576-82 dated 22891.
The petitioner did not join his duty till 27891 i.e. the date of his dismissal from service in an earlier enquiry.
Therefore, he was no more in service from 2781991 to 17.7.1992.
So the departmental enquiry of other wilful absence for 36 days from 22791 to 27891 was kept pending due to his dismissal and the same was started after his reinstatement/joining his service in district Kaithal vide the then Superintendent of Police, Kaithal order dated 2581992."
The respondents have further stated that the charge was duly approved by the Superintendent of Police and delivered to the petitioner in October 3, 1993 but still he did not join the enquiry.
Subsequently, the Enquiry Officer submitted his findings dated October 27, 1993 holding the petitioner guilty of the charges levelled against him.
A show cause notice was issued to the petitioner on November 4, 1993 proposing the penalty of dismissal from service along with a copy of the finding of the Enquiry Officer and also affording him a personal hearing.
A specific plea raised by the respondents is that although the aforesaid notice was duly received by the petitioner, at his home, but neither he submitted the reply to the notice nor availed of the opportunity of personal hearing.
The punishing authority even issued a reminder dated November 17, 1993 to the petitioner for submitting his reply.
The punishing authority even issued a reminder dated November 17, 1993 to the petitioner for submitting his reply.
The notices were also got published in the newspapers "Dainik Tribune" on November 28, 1993 and "Punjab Kesri" on November 27, 1993.
Even then the petitioner neither submitted any reply nor availed any opportunity of personal hearing.
Thus, the respondents have submitted that the punishing authority was left with no other option except to pass the order of dismissal Annexure P/4.
The respondents have submitted that the order of dismissal dated December 13, 1993 has been passed by the Superintendent of Police, Kaithal after taking into consideration all the circumstances of the case and also the fact that the petitioner was found to be habitual defaulter since he was found to be habitual of remaining absent.
10.
We have heard Shri IS Balhara, learned counsel for the petitioner and Shri Rajbir Sehrawat, learned Deputy Advocate General, Haryana appearing for the respondents.
We have also taken into consideration the entire record of the case.
11.
Shri IS Balhara, learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that it is apparent that the charge against the petitioner was that he had remained absent from duty for the period July 22, 1991 to August 27 1991.
He submits that in fact the aforesaid charge-sheet was issued and an enquiry was ordered to be conducted on the basis of the order dated August 22, 1991 passed by the Superintendent of Police, Yamuna Nagar.
On the basis of this, Shri Balhara submits that it is apparent that when the initiation of the disciplinary proceedings against the petitioner was ordered vide order dated August 22, 1991, then it was unimaginable that he was charged for absence from duty for the period July 22, 1991 to August 27, 1991.
On the basis of this, Shri Balhara submits that the order of enquiry was passed without application of mind and that there has been a manipulation of record.
12.
On the other hand, Shri Rajbir Sehrawat, learned Deputy Advocate General submits that vide order dated August 22, 1991, the Superintendent of Police, Yamuna Nagar ordered the initiation of departmental proceedings against the petitioner for his continuous wilful absence from duty with effect from July 22, 1991.
Shri Sehrawat further submits that the petitioner had in fact not joined the duties till August 27, 1991 when he was ordered to be dismissed from service in an earlier enquiry.
In these circumstances, when he was no more in service with effect from August 27, 1991, the departmental enquiry against him could not be conducted any further.
Subsequently, on his reinstatement with effect from July 17, 1992 and his rejoining in District Kaithal, the aforesaid enquiry was ordered to be resumed vide order dated August 22, 1991 passed by the Superintendent of Police, Kaithal.
On the basis of the aforesaid record, Shri Rajbir Sehrawat submits that in fact since the petitioner had remained wilfully absent from duty with effect July 22, 1991 and thereafter, therefore, on the resumption of the enquiry the petitioner's absence was taken from July 22, 1991 till August 27, 1991 ie the date of his earlier dismissal.
According to Shri Sehrawat there is no anomaly in the charge sheet nor can it be suggested from the same that any order has been passed against the petitioner without any application of mind or in a mechanical manner.
13.
We have given our thoughtful consideration to the rival pleas raised by the learned counsel for the parties.
We find that as per the record, the petitioner had remained absent from duty with effect from July 22, 1991.
In view of the earlier enquiry, he was ordered to be dismissed from service with effect from August 27, 1991.
The order of the Superintendent of Police, Yamuna Nagar dated August 22, 1991 ordering initiation of the departmental proceeding against the petitioner had to remain in abeyance because of the dismissal of the petitioner, in the meantime, with effect from August 27, 1991.
However, on his reinstatement vide the appellate order and his joining duty with effect from July 17, 1992, the aforesaid order dated August 22, 1991 passed by the Superintendent of Police, Yamuna Nagar became operative and the aforesaid proceedings commenced.
Thus, the submission of Shri Balhara that there was no application of mind or there was some anomaly in the dates is totally without any basis and the said plea has no merit.
14.
The next submission made by Shri Balhara, learned counsel for the petitioner is that while passing the order Annexure P/4 the Punishing Authority did not take into consideration the provisions of Rule 162 of the Punjab Police Rules (as applicable to Haryana).
Learned counsel submits that in fact as per the provisions of Rule 162, the punishment of dismissal from service can be awarded only for the gravest act of misconduct or as a cumulative effect of continued misconduct proving incorrigibility and complete unfitness for police service and in making such an award the regard was required to be had to the length of service of the offender and his claim to pension.
On the basis of the aforesaid position, Shri Balhara submits that the petitioner had 20 years of service to his credit and in such a situation neither the order of dismissal from service was justified nor punishing authority had kept in mind the claim of the petitioner for pension.
15.
Even this submission of the learned counsel is without any merit.
We have gone through the order Annexure P/4.
From a perusal of the aforesaid order, we find that while passing the order of dismissal, the Superintendent of Police (Punishing Authority) has gone into the minutest details with regard to the finding recorded by the Enquiry Officer during the course of enquiry and the report submitted by him.
While passing the aforesaid order the punishing authority has observed as follows :  "On careful perusal of the past record of the defaulter it was found that he is generally habitual of remaining absent.
For remaining absent two annual increments were stopped with temporary effect in the year 1987, two annual increments were stopped with permanent effect in the year 1991 and in the year 1993 two annual increments were stopped with permanent effect.
It is clear from this that the defaulter is a habitual absentee.
Defaulter is a member of a disciplined force who is supposed to do every work remaining in discipline.
It is a sensitive matter for a police force a disciplined member absented himself without any reasons or permission, this also violates the Police rules.
If lenient view is taken in regard to the misconduct of the defaulter then it will certainly have bad effect on other members of the force.
Employee who cannot work by remaining in discipline, then he cannot be kept in force.
In these circumstances I had left with no alternative for which I can show sympathy with the defaulter nor any fact is available with me to show sympathy.
In addition to it defaulter is absenting himself from duty since 2431993 till today and on enquiry it has been found that defaulter is at his residence in good health and is absenting himself wilfully.
From this fact it is also clear that defaulter is not willing to remain in the force nor he is able to be kept in force.
Therefore keeping in view the above factual position, I am passing this order dismissing defaulter Const.
Parkash Singh No. 577 from govt. service for his misconduct of absence."
Thus, we find that while passing the order of punishment, the Punishing authority has taken into consideration the continued misconduct of the petitioner and all other circumstances as required to be considered under the provisions of Rule 162 of the Punjab Police Rules.
No exception can be taken to the aforesaid detailed order passed by the punishing authority.
16.
The last submission made by Shri Balhara, learned counsel for the petitioner, is that in fact after the dismissal of the appeal filed by the petitioner vide order Annexure P/6, the revision petition/mercy petition was filed by him to the Director General of Police.
However, the aforesaid revision petition/mercy petition has been dismissed by the Inspector General of Police (Law and Order), Haryana.
Shri Balhara submits that as per the provisions of Rule 1632 of the Rules, after the review of the appeal an aggrieved officer had a right to file a revision.
Shri Balhara submits that the powers of the Inspector General of Police under the aforesaid Rule 1632 now stood vested in the Director General of Police.
On that basis Shri Balhara submits that the revision petition/mercy petition filed by the petitioner, although filed to the Director General of Police, has been disposed of by the Inspector General of Police (Law and Order) and therefore, the same was contrary to Rule 1632.
17.
We find that even this contention raised by Shri Balhara has no merit.
From the perusal of the appellate order dated February 2, 1996 (Annexure P/6) we find that the aforesaid appellate order was passed by the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Ambala Range, Ambala Cantt.
In these circumstances, the revision petition/mercy petition filed by the petitioner was to be considered by an authority next above the prescribed appellate authority.
Admittedly, on February 2, 1996, when the appellate order Annexure P/6 was passed, Deputy Inspector General of Police was the Appellate Authority in the case of the petitioner.
The order Annexure P/6 had been validly passed by the aforesaid Deputy Inspector General of Police in the exercise of his appellate powers.
Thus, under the circumstances, the revision filed by the petitioner had been validly disposed of by the Inspector General of Police (Law and Order) who was "authority next above the prescribed Appellate Authority".
Therefore, in our view, there is no violation of the provisions of Rule 1632 as well.
18.
In view of the above discussion, we do not find any merit in the present writ petition and accordingly the same is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.