RL Anand, J - Shri Harbans Singh petitioner has filed the present writ petition under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India against the official/private respondents and it has been prayed that a writ of certiorari/mandamus be issued against the respondents declaring the action of respondent No. 1 in not promoting the petitioner to the post of Sub-Divisional Engineer from the date he allegedly became eligible despite availability of the posts is illegal and that the action of respondent No. 1 in prompting respondents No. 2 to 5 to the said post of Sub-Divisional Engineer, who had rendered less regular service than the petitioner is also illegal.
The petitioner has further made a prayer that the decision of respondent No. 1 rejecting his representation vide order Annexure P-18 is illegal, arbitrary, mala fide as it violates Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution and lastly the petitioner made a prayer that writ of mandamus be issued to respondent No. 1 directing it to promote him to the post of Sub-Divisional Engineer from the date when he became entitled to as per its policy.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he belongs to Backward Class and possesses 3-Years Diploma in Civil Engineering.
On 2041972 he was appointed as Sectional Officer (Civil) at Beas-Sutlej Link (BSL) Project and he was posted in Township Division in the Department of Construction of Buildings, roads and maintenance.
While serving as Sectional Officer he applied for the post of Sectional Officer (C) through proper channel in the Punjab Housing Development Board (now renamed as Punjab Urban Planning and Development Authority) (PUDA).
The petitioner was appointed and he joined the Board on 4111980.
In the year 1980 respondent No. 1 framed a policy of promotion vide Agenda Item No. 5325 dated 7.10.1980 for making promotions of technical as well as ministerial staff by giving benefit of past service rendered by the incumbent(s) under Government/Semi-Government/Government Undertaking with the rider that the incumbent must have rendered three years service with the respondent No. 1.
The case of the petitioner is that he has already rendered more than 11-1/2 years service as Sectional officer in the Government Department as against 9 years service required as per the policy decision and, therefore, he has become eligible for promotion to the post of Sub-Divisional Engineer.
In order to achieve that end the petitioner started representing to respondent No. 1 for considering him for promotion to the post of Sub- Divisional Engineer.
Three posts of Sub-Divisional Engineer were lying vacant on the date of eligibility of the petitioner but respondent No. 1 did not consider his case for promotion.
On the contrary, it started making promotions of the juniors.
As per the petitioner Shri BR Bawa joined his service of the respondent No. 1 on 15.9.1978 and promoted to the post of Sub- Divisional Engineer vide office order dated 15101984 by giving him the benefit of his past service rendered in Environmental Research and Planning and Design Organisation, Punjab.
Shri Bawa, who was given promotion in the light of the policy decision Annexure P-1, still felt dissatisfied and he made representation for the grant of retrospective promotion and his request was accepted and he was given retrospective promotion w.e.f.
1591981 vide order dated 1021989.
Still further, the respondent authority even on 791994 reiterated that all the officials who had joined its service between 7.10.1980 to 1041986 would be entitled to the counting of past service rendered in Government/Semi-Government/Public Undertakings in the matter of promotion.
It is also the case of the petitioner that respondent No. 1 even called the record of the petitioner in order to ascertain whether the past service rendered by him was regular or ad hoc.
The petitioner maintains that his past service was on regular basis and this fact was also confirmed by BSL Project Authorities.
The grouse of the petitioner is that in spite of the fact that posts were available, the respondent authority did not consider the case of the petitioner for promotion to the post of Sub-Divisional Engineer and that it had been promoting number of persons junior to the petitioner by giving them the benefit of the past service.
It is a case of victimisation.
Respondent Nos. 2 to 5 are junior to the petitioner but they have been given the promotion.
With this background the petitioner has made a prayer that direction be issued to the respondent No. 1 to consider his case for promotion to the post of Sub-Divisional Engineer and the decision of respondent No. 1 in rejecting his representation be quashed.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
Respondent No. 1 filed the written statement and denied the allegations.
Respondent No. 1, however, admitted that the Punjab Housing Development Board in its Agenda item No. 5325 made a promotion policy in which it was decided that if any official has worked in any other Government Department or Semi-Government Undertaking before joining the Housing Board, the benefit of previous service would be counted towards his experience in case the employee did not fulfil the requisite experience in the Board/authority.
However, when the petitioner joined the Board, after considering his experience, he was kept at Sr. No. 94 in the final seniority list and besides him there were many other officials who were senior to him and were fulfilling the condition of required experience and qualification for promotion.
The petitioner was junior, therefore, he did not fall in the selection zone.
Respondent No. 1 categorically denied the allegations of the petitioner and it was pleaded that Shri Bawa was at Sr. No. 13 in the list and the petitioner was at Sr. No. 94 and as such Shri Bawa was senior to the petitioner and thus he was considered for promotion.
Shri Bawa was given the benefit after due consideration by the competent authority after considering the case in detail and the policy remained in force up to 1986.
Further, the decision taken by the Board vide Agenda item No. 5325 was withdrawn vide Agenda Item No. 7920 in the meeting held on 1041986.
By denying other material averments of the petitioner it was prayed that the writ petition may be dismissed.
4.
A re-joinder was also filed by the petitioner in which he reiterated the allegations made in the writ petition by denying those of the written statement.
5.
Along with the pleadings, the parties have also placed on record certain documents for our consideration.
6.
We have heard Mr. Arun Jain, Advocate on behalf of the petitioner, Mr. NS Boparai, Advocate, who appeared on behalf of PUDA and with their assistance have gone through the record of the case.
7.
There is no dispute with the case set up by the petitioner that earlier he was serving as Sectional Officer (Civil) in BSL Project and he joined the Board (respondent No. 1) on 4111980.
Also there is no dispute with the case of the petitioner that respondent No. 1 in the year 1980 framed a policy of promotion vide Agenda item No. 5325 dated 7.10.1980 for making promotions of technical as well as ministerial staff by giving benefit of past service rendered by the incumbent(s) under Government/Semi-Government/Government Undertaking with a condition that such candidate must have rendered three year service with the respondent authority.
Since the petitioner joined the respondent No. 1 on 4111980, therefore, he was certainly to be governed by the policy decision dated 7.10.1980.
During the course of submissions we were also given to understand that the decision dated 7.10.1980 remained in force up to 1986 i.e. precisely up to 1041986 when fresh decision was taken vide Agenda item No. 7920.
8.
The grievance of the petitioner is that he is eligible to be considered for promotion for the post of Sub-Divisional Engineer in view of the policy decision dated 7.10.1980 and office order dated 2111980 which was issued by the Board.
Our attention has been invited to Annexure P-1 where as per Clause 2, 3 and 4 it has been stated as under :-  "2) No employee shall be considered for promotion unless he successfully completes the probation period as per rules; 3) Before considering any employee for promotion he should have worked in the Board for at least 3 years.
4) Past service benefit of the regular service rendered in previous department(s) will be given if that official has been working in any Govt/Semi-Govt. or public Undertaking and their duties were such as he does in the Board and his record in the previous Department has been good."
8A.
As we have stated earlier that the grievance of the petitioner is that in spite of the fact that posts of Sub-Divisional Engineer were available for the purpose of promotion and that the case of the petitioner is fully covered by Clauses 3 and 4, yet his case was not considered for promotion and that the promotion benefit has been given to those persons who were juniors but otherwise similarly situated like the petitioner.
Is it so, is the only point which requires determination.
9.
Mr. Boparai, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent No. 1 submitted that the decision taken vide Agenda item No. 5325 was not circulated amongst the staff and has not even been uniformly applied.
In some cases persons were promoted by giving them the benefit of past service and they also got further promotion in the next higher rank by virtue of experience, while in other cases the persons did not claim the benefit of past service in terms of the decision dated 7.10.1980 and in some cases a condition was imposed that the persons being promoted by giving them the benefit of past service would be reverted to the original post, therefore, respondent No. 1 thought it proper that the existing policy may be amended and a fresh decision was taken vide Agenda item No. 7920 and as per this Agenda Item it was resolved that the cases in which the benefit of the past service has been given in view of Agenda Item No. 5325 may not be disturbed.
It was further resolved that if in a particular cadre eligible persons are not available, the promotions may be made in exceptional circumstances (sic) date when he was allegedly ignored.
The present petition has been filed in 2001, after a lapse of 15 years or so, therefore, it will not be proper on our part to exercise our jurisdiction under Article 226/227 of the Constitution.
10.
Be that as it may, let us now appreciate the stand of the petitioner by giving him all advantages that he had the right of consideration to be promoted to the post of Sub-Divisional Engineer after 4111983.
In order to seek promotion it was always obligatory on the part of the employee to show his good reports to the satisfaction of the employer.
If a candidate earns bad report or has poor service record, he cannot claim promotion.
During the course of hearing Mr. Boparai has placed before us the order dated 2121995 passed by the Housing Commissioner when the cases of several employees like the petitioner were being considered for promotion.
The reading of the order dated 2121995, which was shown to us during the course of submissions, would show that the learned Housing Commissioner was fully cognizant of the fact about the poor service record of the petitioner and the following observation would be relevant for us and we would like to incorporate the same in this judgment.
While considering the case of the petitioner the officer stated : "This official has claimed past service (in the B.S.L.
Project, Sundernagar) from 20472 to 4111980 i.e. for a period of about 8 years.
Accordingly, he would have been eligible for consideration for promotion to the post of S.D.E.
in the Board after 20482.
However, in view of the requirement of three years service in the Board, his date for eligibility for consideration for promotion would on 6.11.83.
After 6111983 next promotion was of Sh. Santokh Singh Sandhu made on 8584 from the general category Diploma Holders Quota (to which Sh. Harbans Singh also belongs).
Although Sh. Harbans Singh's record in the B.S.L.
Project prior to joining the Board was `Average' his A.C.R.
record after joining the Board is as follows :-  31.3.81 Hardly Average (conveyed) 1981-82 Average (conveyed) 1982-83 Average 1983-84 Average On the basis of the record above it would not have been possible to promote Sh. Harbans Singh on merits."
Thus we can say with a bit amount of confidence that as on 851984 if the case of the petitioner is considered for promotion to the post of S.D.E.
by following the guidelines of Agenda Item No. 5325, still the petitioner could not get the promotion.
In other words, we can also say that he was considered for promotion for the post of S.D.E.
as on 851984.
The office order further says as follows :  "The next promotion in the same category that took place was that of Sh. Ashok Kumar Sharma on 15101984.
Sh. Harbans Singh would have been considered again on this date but since the A.C.Rs.
position is unchanged he would again have been ignored.
Meaning thereby that the petitioner was again considered for promotion.
The order further runs and it has been stated as follows : "The next promotion in the same category was that of Sh. NS Kalsi on 17988.
(Sh. Kalsi's promotion was considered in the general category but subsequently Sh. Kalsi was given the benefit of BC and his position in the seniority list was given against a BC point).
Sh. Harbans Singh's case is again to be considered on this date.
However, on this date his remaining A.C.Rs.
are as follows :- 1984-85 Good 1985-86 Fair 1986-87 Fair (conveyed) 1987-88 Average (conveyed)  On the basis of the above record again it would not be possible to promote Sh. Harbans Singh w.e.f.
171988.
Subsequent to this no promotion in this category has been made and Sh. Harbans Singh will now be considered only when the next promotions are made."
Thus we are of the opinion that as per Agenda Item No. 5325, the petitioner could not have been promoted to the post of S.D.E.
and now after 1041986 a new decision has been taken as per Agenda Item No. 7920.
Therefore, the rights of the petitioner have to be governed now by the latest policy decision for promotion to the various posts including that of S.D.E.
11.
Faced with this difficulty, the learned counsel for the petitioner invited our attention to the letters dated 8.4.1983 and 9.5.1998 and submitted that the remarks conveyed to the petitioner for the year 1981-82 have been withdrawn and those were not intended to be derogatory in nature.
Those remarks were advisory.
Similarly, the remarks conveyed to the petitioner for the year 1987-88 were treated advisory in nature.
Therefore., the writ petition deserves to be allowed by giving directions to respondent authority to consider the case of the petitioner for promotion to the post of S.D.E.
as per the old policy.
We are not convinced with this submission.
We have already highlighted above by making a reference of the original that it was the observation of the competent authority that even the past record of the petitioner when he was serving in the BSL Project was average.
So much so, the records for the years 1982-83, 1983-84, 1986-87 and 1987-88 was either average or fair.
There was only one good report of 1984-85 to the credit of the petitioner.
12.
The material point for determination for our purpose would be that while exercising our powers under Article 226/227 of the Constitution, it may not be fair on our part to give directions to the respondents in the year 2002 to re-examine the case of the petitioner for promotion as the same was not done in the year 1984.
Our reply is that it will be a futile exercise altogether as the record of the petitioner for the relevant years too was poor and the cause of action, it any, arose to the petitioner in the year 1983 or 1984 and, therefore, to exercise our extra-ordinary powers in the year 2002 would be counter-productive.
Had the record of the petitioner been up to the mark justifying his promotion as per the old policy coming through Agenda item No. 5325, we would have asked respondent No. 1 to make mends.
With the poor record enjoyed upon the petitioner we are not inclined to issue any direction.
Therefore, we have no hesitation in dismissing the present writ petition which is hereby dismissed without any order of costs.
Petition dismissed.