RL Anand, J - Mrs Meena Gupta petitioner has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India against the respondents by making a prayer that order dated 2872001 Annexure P-9 placing her under suspension be quashed and order dated 2872001 Annexure P-10 vide which she has been charge-sheeted may also be quashed as both the orders have been passed in a mala fide manner.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that respondent No. 1 is a State/instrumentality of State within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution of India and the impugned orders have been passed by the respondent-authorities with a mala fide intention so much so there was a clear bias on the part of the respondents as she was a rival candidate of the wife of the Enquiry Officer who is inquiring into the charges against the petitioner.
The petitioner has made a prayer for quashment of impugned orders Annexures P-9 and P-10.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents who filed the reply and denied the allegations.
It is the case of the contesting respondents that respondent No. 1 does not fall within the definition and meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution of India.
The petitioner committed certain act of insubordination while she was posted as Principal of Air Force School at Halwara.
She is facing an enquiry before the Enquiry Officer before whom she has made certain applications and those applications were decided in favour of the petitioner.
There was thus no bias on the part of the Enquiry Officer.
The petitioner is conceiving apprehension on unfounded basis.
3.
Replication was filed by the petitioner in which she has reiterated that respondent No. 1 is a State/Instrumentality of State within in the definition and meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution.
4.
A rejoinder has been filed by the respondents reiterating the stand taken in the written statement.
5.
An additional affidavit to the rejoinder has also been filed reiterating the stand of the petitioner.
6.
It may be mentioned here that during the pendency of the writ petition, Shri HS Sethi, Advocate, was appointed as Local Commissioner to enquire into the allegations of the petitioner against the management to the effect that as she did not succumb to the pressure of the management, therefore, the action of the respondents in charge-sheeting and placing her under suspension is mala fide.
7.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance have gone through the record of the case including the Article of Charges which have been framed against the petitioner.
The Article of Charges runs as follows :-  "ARTICLE-I Smt. Meena Gupta, Principal AF School Halwara while functioning as Principal of Air Force School, AF Stn.
Halwara, belitted Mrs. Yagnaraman in front of the class IV employees by speaking to her in harsh tone by asking her to call the librarian, not being her job.
Also demeaning the teacher in front of students by asking a student sent out of the class for misbehaviour to rejoin the class without consulting the teacher.
Smt. Meena Gupta, Principal AF School Halwara insulted Mrs. Rita Choudhary, PRT on 25 Jul 01 by shouting at her in front of the students while teaching.
Smt. Meena Gupta, Principal AF School Halwara, unnecessarily harassed Mrs. Rita Choudhary PRT English by casting aspersions on her work without any substantial reasons thereby demoralising her and hampering smooth performance in her duties.
ARTICLE-II Smt. Meena Gupta, Principal AF School Halwara while you were counselled verbally and advised by the Chairman School Management Committee to mend your arrogant behaviour, autocratic style of leadership and disregard towards your superiors and subordinates, you failed to adhere to the prescribed code of conduct.
Smt. Meena Gupta, Principal AF School Halwara was also advised not to make any derogatory comments against organisation and superiors.
You failed to observe the decorum and made loose comments like complain to anybody, Chairman or CA Dm O, they cannot do anything to me, I do not care about them."
8.
A reading of the above would show that the charges on the face of it did not constitute very serious charges justifying the suspension of the petitioner.
Though suspension is not a punishment, however, in the peculiar circumstances of this case and without commenting upon the merits of the enquiry, we quash the impugned order dated 2872001 Annexure P-9 vide which the petitioner was placed under suspension.
The petitioner is facing enquiry which is at an advanced stage, therefore, we are not inclined to interfere in the charge-sheet Annexure P-10 dated 2872001 but give a direction to the Enquiry Officer to dispose of the enquiry according to law within a period of six months from the date of receipt of copy of this order.
It will be open to the petitioner to place on record the report of the local commissioner before the Enquiry Officer in order to substantiate her case.
9.
With regard to objection of the respondents as to maintainability of the present writ petition, the same is kept open.
10.
Resultantly, the present writ petition is partly allowed.
The impugned order Annexure P-9 dated 2872001 is set aside and a direction is hereby given to the respondents to make the posting of the petitioner on the same post which she was holding as on 2872001 forthwith on presentation of a copy of this order.
The period of suspension of the petitioner shall be considered as leave of the kind due.
Petition partly allowed.