ML Singhal, J. (Oral) - Petitioners who are 22 in number were working as masters, mistresses and lecturers in different government schools being run by the State of Punjab.
For imparting higher training, the Director of Public Instructions (Schools), Punjab (for short "DPI(S), Punjab") nominated masters, mistresses and lecturers to the Regional Institute of English, Chandigarh for post graduation course, which was of four months' duration.
The masters, mistresses and lecturers working in different government schools who are selected for this course are viewed as intelligent Teachers.
Whoever was selected for this higher training, it was compulsory for him to attend this course.
DPI(S) Punjab, Chandigarh had issued letter to all the District Education Officers of the State of Punjab, stating therein that five candidates out of masters, mistresses and lecturers working in different districts be selected and their names be intimated to the office of DPI(S) Punjab, Chandigarh so that they could be sent for the said course.
It was further stated in this letter that this course was compulsory for the selected teachers and the selected teachers should attend the course by all means and no leniency would be shown to the selected teachers who do not turn up for attending this course.
It was also stated in the letter that the teachers selected for the said course will be paid TA/DA.
Copy of the letter dated 2451984 is Annexure P-1.
Petitioners who were working as masters, mistresses and lecturers in different schools of the State of Punjab were selected by their respective District Education Officers and their names were sent to DPI(S) Punjab, Chandigarh for nominating them to undergo higher training in Regional Institute of English, Chandigarh.
Petitioners attended course from 1121984 to 3131985.
Petitioners pray for the grant of daily allowance to them for the period of training, which was of 4 months' duration, on which they were sent by DPI(S) Punjab, Chandigarh.
2.
In support of this prayer, they have quoted Rule 288 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules Volume-III which reads as under :  "288(a) - when a Government employee or a student not already in Government service, is selected to undergo a course of training or a work study course irrespective of the duration of training period, he shall draw :- (i) - Full daily allowance for the entire period of training subject to the condition that where free food or lodging is provided at Government expense and also in the case of un-married officers, this allowance shall be reduced to half.
Where both food and lodging are provided free to the trainees by the training institute, etc., the daily allowance shall be reduced to one-forth.
(ii) - Travelling allowance for the original journey to and the last journey from the place of training.
(iii) - In the case of training at a school, college or similar institution, travelling allowance for similar journeys on the occasion of holidays and vacations.
(iv) - Travelling allowance for journeys during the course of training.
(b) - T.A.
may be allowed at tour rates."
3.
Respondent-State of Punjab has contested this prayer and stated that in para-2 of Annexure P-1 it had been made clear that the participants will be paid TA/DA for coming and going from Chandigarh, meaning thereby that the petitioners-participants would not be paid DA for staying at Chandigarh during the course.
During the period of course, they were provided free residential accommodation by the institute.
They were also paid stipend at the rate of Rs. 70/- per month each and they were charged only at the rate of Rs. 2/- per month as electricity and water charges and not the rent of the accommodation.
They cannot claim any daily allowance for stay at Chandigarh for the period during which they under-went that course because they were provided rent free accommodation and stipend of Rs. 70/- per month for the duration of the course.
4.
In view of the Rule 288 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules (Volume-III) ibid, petitioners are entitled to full daily allowance for the period of training, subject to the condition that if free food or lodging was provided at Government expenses and also in cases of un-married official, this allowance shall be reduced to half and if both food and lodging was provided free to the trainees by the institute, etc., the daily allowance shall be reduced to one-fourth.
State of Punjab is directed to work out the amount of daily allowance, to be disbursed to the petitioners for the period of training with the Regional Institute of English, Chandigarh on these lines and then disburse the amount to them.
Writ petitions stands allowed.
Petition allowed.