VS Sirpurkar, J - This writ petition is on behalf of the Railway administration against the order of the Central Administrative Tribunal (hereinafter referred to as 'the tribunal'), whereby the tribunal directed the reinstatement of the respondent, but without any backwages.
The only charge that was reflected in the charge sheet was unauthorised absence of some spells, the total of which comes to about 5 months.
It seems that after the charge sheet was served, the respondent has left his address and he did not attend the departmental enquiry proceedings and therefore he was proceeded exparte.
It seems that one witness was examined in those exparte proceedings and the respondent was removed on the basis of the enquiry report in which he was found guilty.
That enquiry report also does not seem to have been served on him because, it is the admitted case that the enquiry report was sent on the last address known to the department and that came back with the endorsement "left".
Be that as it may.
2.
The respondent filed an appeal against this order and in his appeal memo, he gave the following reasons.
He contended that he was frequently ill, and that his wife had deserted him and his two children who were below 5 years of age, and had absconded.
He therefore had to leave his son and the daughter in custody of his mother-in-law, probably meaning thereby that the wife had not gone to her parents also.
He then pointed out that his mother also could not help him as she was away at Bangalore and his sister was in Indonesia.
He then pointed out that he was suffering from ill health and therefore could not attend the duties, though he had made all the efforts to send the leave application by post.
He pointed out that he had applied for the leave by post for the stretches from 1461994 to 1181994, then 19.8.1994 to 6.11.1994 and from 621995 to 12.2.1995.
He pointed out that after 13.2.1995, he continued to be present in the office and worked upto 261995.
It seems that thereafter the appellate authority dismissed his appeal, firstly on the ground that there were no merits.
The appellate authority merely paraphrased the findings of the disciplinary authority and dismissed the appeal.
3.
Thereafter, the respondent filed a revision under the rules.
But, even that revision was dismissed by the revisional authority.
The tribunal has found that as a matter of fact the respondent had very genuine reasons and at no point of time were those reasons ever considered.
Even we have gone through the appellate order and find that the appellate order does not make any reference to the various reasons given.
It is not found by the appellate authority that the reasons given were either false or not genuine.
In fact, the respondent was not heard at all by the appellate authority and it seems that the appellate authority merely mechanically confirmed the order of dismissal.
The same thing ensued during the revision also and the revision also has been dismissed without hearing him and the revisional order is also nothing but a precis of the appellate order.
There does not appear to be anything suggestive of application of mind and consideration of the reasons given by the petitioner.
In short, before the disciplinary authority, the respondent remained absent because after the service of the charge memo, that too in July 1995, the other communications have returned back with the endorsement "left" and he was not heard by appellate and revisional authorities.
4.
Even if we hold that he was at fault on account of his absence, that does not absolve the authorities to find out as to whether he had, in reality, sent any leave application or not.
We have seen the whole record ourselves to note that the inward register of the office has not been produced, which would have either supported or falsified the case of the respondent.
All that has been done is to examine the witnesses to suggest that he did not attend on the particular days.
Be that as it may.
We do not wish to go into the findings of facts, but the further fact remains that even at the appellate stage the respondent was not heard at all.
We have gone through the order of the appellate authority, which is totally oblivious of the points raised in the appeal memo.
We can understand the trauma that the respondent must have suffered because his wife absconded leaving in lurch himself and his two children, who were aged below 5 years.
He had then nobody to look after the children, not even his own mother or his sister, who were away in Bangalore and Indonesia respectively.
Under such circumstances, in our opinion, the appellate authority was bound to enquire into reasons and if found genuine to show some compassion.
The same thing occurred with the revisional authority, which had dealt with the matter in an identical mechanical manner.
If under such circumstances the Tribunal had intervened and held that the punishment of removal was out of proportion, we do not think that the tribunal has erred in any manner.
The tribunal has also observed that the total absence without any salary for a period of about 5 years would by itself be a great punishment to the petitioner and we agree with this observation of the tribunal.
5.
Learned counsel for the Railways very strenuously argued that here was a case where the employee in the know of all the rules and regulations, had absented himself from the service unauthorisedly.
There could be no doubt about the absence because that appears to be an admitted case.
But, whether that absence was justifiable or not was for the railway authorities to examine, which they have failed to do.
We have therefore deliberately referred to the appeal memo and in our opinion, both the authorities i.e., the appellate authority and revisional authority have gravely erred in not even offering an opportunity of hearing to the respondent.
Learned counsel submits that the appeal itself was filed after two years.
We find that the appeal was not rejected on the ground of limitation, but on merits.
If that was so, the appellate authority was bound to give reasons as to why the grounds raised in the appeal were not being accepted.
In short, the writ petition has no merits and it is dismissed.
Consequently, connected W.P.M.P.
No. 55185 of 2002 is also dismissed.
Writ petition dismissed.