ML Singhal, J - Nirmal Singh was constable in the Punjab Police on the rolls of District Police, Amritsar.
His constabulary number was 2506/Amsr.
He joined the police force on 1141966.
In September, 1983, he was put on general duty at Police Lines Amritsar.
On 491983 at 815 PM when roll calls took place, he was found absent.
Factum of his absence was recorded in he daily roznamcha against report No. 39 at 815 PM dated 4983.
He reported back for duty on 4.2.84 i.e. after he had remained absent from duty for a period of 5 months 1 day 22 hours and 15 minutes.
On the charge of absence from duty, he was departmentally dealt with.
There was regular inquiry into his conduct.
On the conclusion of the regular inquiry, he was found guilty of the charge of absence from duty.
SSP, Amritsar vide order dated October 25, 1984 dismissed him for service.
Order passed by the SSP, Amritsar dated 251084 dismissing him from service is highly laconic as he has not adverted at all to the provisions of rule 162 of the Punjab Police Rules.
According to Rule 162, dismissal shall be awarded only for the gravest acts of misconduct or as the cumulative effect of continued misconduct proving incorrigibility and complete unfitness for police service.
In making such an award, regard shall be had to the length of service of the offender and his claim to pension."
2.
In this case, there was no charge that he was ever absent from duty earlier.
It is true that a single act of misconduct can also entail dismissal of the member of a police force from service but it should be a grave act of misconduct.
In this case, single act of absence from duty cannot be viewed as a grave act of misconduct.
There is nothing on the record to suggest that he was incorrigible and had rendered him self completely unfit for police service.
Although he had put in about 17 years of service on the date of absence from duty, SSP, Amritsar did not advert at all to his eligibility to the grant of pension for having put in the said member of years of service.
3.
In State of Haryana v. Lakhan Lal, 1991(2) SCT 718, it was held that even a single act of misconduct if it is gravest will attract rule 162.
Dismissal under rule 162 without recording finding that act of misconduct proved the employee completely unfit for police service - order of the punishing authority will be bad in law.
4.
It was held in State of Punjab v. Parkash Chand, Constable, 1992(1) SCT 123 (P&H) : 1992(1) SLR 174 that where in the impugned order the punishing authority has not recorded any finding that the act of the delinquent amounts to the gravest act of misconduct, the impugned order cannot be sustained.
It is essential for the punishing authority to apply its mind and record a specific finding as to whether the act of the delinquent official which has been complained of is of such a grave nature that it must lead inflexibly to his dismissal.
Gravest act of misconduct must imply a matter of utmost seriousness.
5.
Since the impugned order passed by SSP, Amritsar dismissing the respondent constable from police service does not satisfy the requirement of rule 162, in my opinion, the learned Additional District Judge was well within his jurisdiction to set aside the dismissal of the suit and instead pass a decree decreeing the suit and declaring that the impugned order passed by SSP, Amritsar is illegal, null and void and against the principles of natural justice with consequential relief inclusive of all allowances etc. State appeal fails and is dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.