Viney Mittal, J - The present petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India has been filed by the petitioners with a prayer to issue a writ of mandamus for directing the respondents to release the revised pay scale alongwith two advance increments as recommended by the Pay Commission and as provided under the Haryana Civil Services (Revised Scales of Pay) Rules, 1980 as amended by the Haryana Civil Services (Revised Scales of Pay) First Amendment, Rules, 1980.
A further prayer has been made to quash orders dated December 18, 1980.
February 12, 1981 and also orders dated August 6, 1981.
The aforesaid orders have been appended ass Annexures P/5, P/6 and P7, respectively, with the petition.
2.
The case of the petitioners is that they were selected by the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana for the post of Technical Assistants in the office of the Economic and Statistical Adviser, Government of Haryana and they joined the aforesaid posts on various dates from 1969 to 1974.
At the time of the filing of the petition, whereas some of the petitioners were still working as Technical Assistants in the office of the Economic and Statistical Adviser, Haryana, Chandigarh, some others had been promoted and some had been working on deputation with some other departments.
Further specific case of the petitioners is that they held their lien against the posts of Technical Assistants in the parent department and are entitled to the fixation of their salary as Technical Assistants.
The petitioners have averred that they possess the degree of MA First Class.
Originally the petitioners were recruited in the pay scale of Rs. 300-25-600 and at the time of recruitment, all the petitioners were given the benefits of one advance increments as per the rules then existed being MA First Class.
3.
Subsequently, the State of Haryana revised pay scales of all the categories of posts in all the departments with effect from April 1, 1979 on the recommendations of the Pay Commission and the rules were framed which were called Haryana Civil Services (Revised Scales of Pay) Rules, 1980 (hereinafter called the "Rules").
The aforesaid amended rules came into force with effect from April 1, 1979.
Under the aforesaid amended rules, the Technical Assistants on revision of pay were entitled to the pay scales of Rs. 700-1250 with two advance increments for possessing the qualification of MA First Class.
The relevant extract of the Rules pertaining to the Economic and Statistical Organisation is attached as annexure P/1 with the petition.
4.
It is averred in the petition that although as per the amended Rules the pay scale of Technical Assistants was revised from Rs. 300-600 to Rs. 750- 1250 and since all the petitioners who were working as Technical Assistants possessed the qualification of MA First Class and, therefore, were entitled to be given the benefit of two advance increments but while fixing the pay of the petitioners, they were denied the benefit of aforesaid two advance increments.
Respondent No. 1, the State of Haryana through the Secretary to Government, Haryana, Economic and Statistical Department, Chandigarh passed an order dated August 28, 1980 fixing the pay of various persons according to the revision of pay scales.
An extract of order of the revision of pay of various persons has been appended as Annexure P/2 to the petition.
The name of petitioner No. 3, PC Rajora appeared at serial No. 18 and his pay was fixed at Rs. 1060/- with effect from April 1, 1979 and the benefit of two advance increments was not given to the aforesaid petitioner.
The aforesaid petitioner submitted a representation on September 9, 1980 and brought it to the notice of the Government that he was MA First Class and, therefore, he should be given the benefit of two advance increments under the Rules.
A copy of the aforesaid representation has been appended as Annexure P/3 with the petition.
This representation was accepted and the pay was fixed at Rs. 1060/- + Rs. 90/- vide orders dated August 28, 1980.
A copy of the aforesaid orders dated August 28, 1980 has been appended as Annexure P/4 to the petition.
In this manner, the aforesaid petitioner No. 3 was allowed two advance increments being MA First Class.
5.
The specific case of the petitioners is that similar benefit was also granted to all other petitioners granting them the benefit of two advance increments as per the amended rules.
6.
However, subsequently respondent No. 1 sought some clarification from the Finance Department regarding the grant of two advance increments to MA First Class and the Finance Department vide communication dated December 18, 1980 gave clarification that the benefit of the two advance increments be given only to such Technical Assistants who had been appointed by the direct recruitment after February 29, 1980.
It was further clarified that the Technical Assistants appointed by way of promotion are not entitled to this benefit because such Technical Assistant MA First Class, had already drawn such benefit on the lower posts of Statistical Assistants/Investigators.
A copy of the aforesaid communication dated December 18, 1980 has been appended as Annexure P/5 with the petition.
7.
As per the aforesaid clarification Annexure P/5, the benefit of the aforesaid two advance increments given to the petitioners was withdrawn vide orders dated February 12, 1981 passed in the case of petitioner No. 3 Parkash Chand Rajora.
A copy of the aforesaid order dated February 12, 1981 is appended as Annexure P/6 with the petition.
It is the case of the petitioners that a similar order withdrawing the benefit of two increments in the cases of all other petitioners was also passed.
8.
The petitioners submitted a representation to respondent No. 1 on February 13, 1981 requesting for the grant of benefit of aforesaid two increments on the basis of their educational qualification of MA First Class as per their entitlement according to the amended rules.
Vide orders dated August 6, 1982, the respondents conveyed to the petitioners that the Finance Department had rejected their representation and, therefore, the benefit of the two advance increments could not be granted to them.
9.
The petitioners being aggrieved against the orders Annexure P/5, P/6 and P/11 have filed the present writ petition.
10.
In pursuance to the notice issued in the writ petition, the respondents put in their appearance.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents No. 1 and 2.
The claim made by the petitioners has been controverted.
The validity of the orders Annexures P/5, P/6 and P/11 has been reiterated and it has been stated by the respondents that the benefit of two advance increments is to be given to MA First Class Technical Assistants appointed on or after February 29, 1980 ie the date of notification of the Rules.
It has been averred by the respondents that the revision of pay scales implies revision both for existing government staff as well as for future recruitment and the schedule appended to the notification indicated that the revision of pay scales applicable from April 1, 1979, but so far as existing Government servants are concerned, while revising their pay scales, the pay fixation benefit was to be and, therefore, limited to the extent admissible under the above said rules.
With regard to the claim of the petitioners it is stated as follows;  "As far the petitioners are concerned, they were appointed under the earlier pay scales of Rs. 300-600 when only one advance increment was available for MA Ist Class.
After pay revision, they pay was fixed according to a formula specified in Rule-6 of the above said rules.
For new recruits appointed on or after the date of publication of the said rules (i.e. 29280) the benefit of advance increments was revised to two increments (instead of one) in the new pay scale of Rs. 700-30-850/900-40-1100-EB-50- 1250.
Thus effectively the new pay scale started at Rs. 760/- for MA Ist Class.
Consequently those appointed earlier are not entitled to the facility of two advance increments.
Moreover they have already availed of the facility under the old rules., Since the pay of none of the petitioners has been fixed below this level of Rs. 760/-, it cannot be said that they have been subjected to any discrimination of injustice....." 11.
I have heard Shri Deepinder Patwalia, learned counsel for the petitioners and Shri Rajbir Sehrawat, learned Deputy Advocate General, Haryana appearing for the respondents.
12.
Shri Patwalia submits that in fact a bare perusal of the amended rules would show that the same were of universal application could not be treated to be operating only for the benefit of Technical Assistants who were to be appointed/recruited after the enforcement of the aforesaid rules i.e. after February 29, 1980.
Shri Patwalia further submits that if any such interpretation was to be given to the aforesaid rules, as was being suggested by the respondents, while issuing the clarification annexure P/5 or the stand taken by them in the written statement, then the same would result in creating the discrimination between the persons similarly situated and would also be violative of the principles enshrined under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
13.
On the other hand Shri Rajbir Sehrawat, learned Deputy Advocate General submits that in fact the petitioners had already availed of the benefit of one advance increment prior to the amended rules and were not entitled to two additional advance increments as per the amended rules.
On that basis Shri Sehrawat further submits that since prior to coming into force the amended rules, the incumbents working in the department had already availed of the benefit, therefore, it was apparent that the amended rules operated for future recruitments.
14.
At this stage, it may be relevant to reproduce the amended rules as below :  "1.
(1) These rules may be called the Haryana Civil Services (Revised Scales of Pay) First Amendment Rules, 1980.
(2) These rules shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st day of April, 1979.
2.
In the Haryana Civil Services (Revised Scales of pay) Rules, 1980 (hereinafter called the Rules) in the Schedule, the following entries shall be added at the end, namely :-  .... ...... ....  .... ...... ....  Name of the Department : Economic & Statistical Organisation.
Sr.No.
Name of the Post Existing pay Revised pay scale ... .... .... ...... 6.
Technical Assistant 300-600 700-1250 with two advance increments for MA Ist Class.
.... .. ... ..."  15.
A perusal of the aforesaid amended rules makes it abundantly clear that there is absolutely nothing contained in the aforesaid rules which can lead to any interpretation that the operation of the aforesaid rules would remain limited to such persons who were to be recruited after the enforcement of the said rules and that the said rules would not apply to the persons who had already been serving prior to coming into force of the aforesaid rules.
The stand adopted by the respondents while issuing the clarification annexure P/5 and also taken by them in the written statement is absolutely based upon an imaginary classification and cannot be legally sustained.
If the interpretation suggested by the respondents were to be adopted then the same would actually lead to a very anomalous situation whereby the persons who were otherwise similarly situated, would be treated differentially.
Such a diffrentiation, being without any justifiable reasons would be a clear case of hostile discrimination and would be hit by the principles of equality enshrined under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
16.
Faced with such a situation Shri Rajbir Sehrawat, the learned D.A.G., has submitted that since the petitioners have already drawn an advance increment on the basis of their educational qualification i.e. MA First Class prior to the amendment of the rules, therefore, granting of further two advance increments as per the amended rules would give them undue benefits, to which they were otherwise not entitled in law.
This submission of Shri Sehrawat has force.
Under these circumstances, it would be just and fair that while granting them the benefits of the two advance increments as per the amended rules of 1980, the respondents are granted a liberty to withdraw the earlier one advance increment granted to the petitioners on the basis of their being MA First Class.
When any such increment granted to them earlier on the basis of educational qualification is withdrawn, then the granting of the two advance increments as per the amended rules would not result in granting any undue advantage to the petitioners.
Even Shri Patwalia has no objection to the aforesaid course being adopted by the respondents, while granting and calculating the two advance increments to the petitioners on the basis of the amended rules.
17.
As a result of the aforesaid discussion, the present writ petition is allowed and while quashing the orders Annexures P/5, P/6 and P/11, the respondents are directed to refix the pay of the petitioners by granting them two advance increments with effect from April 1, 1979.
While refixing the pay of the petitioners as per the aforesaid amended rules, the respondents would be at liberty to withdraw any advance additional increments granted to the petitioners on the basis of their educational qualification prior to the coming into force of the amended rules.
18.
It is further directed that if on such refixation the petitioners are found entitled to any arrears of pay then the same would be released to them within a period of four months from the date of certified copy is delivered to them.
No costs.
Petition allowed.