RL Anand, J - The present writ petition was filed by Smt. Kamla Vati, who made a prayer that a writ in the nature of mandamus be issued against the respondents for the release of her salary w.e.f.
151993 and further direction be issued to the respondents to allow her to continue with her duty as no termination order whatsoever has been passed by respondent No. 3 against her.
2.
She made out a case by stating tha she was appointed on 311992 as a teacher in a private aided school by proper selection and she continued working up to 20.12.1993 when suddenly she was not allowed to come on duty and so much so the authorities of the school did not allow her to mark her presence.
She has also raised the grievance that she has not been paid the salary w.e.f.
151993.
It is also the case of the petitioner that she had been making representations to the final authorities i.e. respondent No. 2 and the Education Minister, Haryana but in spite of that she has not been allowed to join the duty nor the salary has been released to her, as a result of which she served a legal notice which too did not yield and fruit and hence the present writ petition.
3.
On the contrary, the stand of the respondents was that the petitioner was working on probation and during her stay in the institution her work was not found satisfactory.
On account of unsatisfactory record of the services of the petitioner, her services were terminated with effect from 3012.1993.
In this regard the following stand of the respondent-authorities can be quoted :-  "Even while replying to the legal notice dated 311994, vide its reply dated 1711994 to the said notice it has been especially stated that she can collect her salary at any time.
In sum and substance the Management do not dispute with the claim of the petitioner in respect of her salary and rather is ready and willing to make the payment at any time."
Further it has been stated by the institution as follows :-  " It is further replied and highlighted here that the services of the petitioner were terminated on 3012.
1993 due to her performance in every sphere during the probation period in the meeting held by the managing committee and the respondent No. 4 was only authorised to relieve the petitioner of her charge."
Also it was stated by respondents No. 3 and 4 as follows :-  "During the probation period, her results were not up to the mark, she was habitual in coming late to the school and absenting herself occasionally without any sufficient cause.
It is also not out of place to mention here that the Management received numerous complaints from the parents of the students against the working of the petitioner.
In this way, the Management had no other alternative left except to dispense with the services of the petitioner."
4.
As per Rule 8 of the Haryana Aided Schools (Security of Services) Rules, 1974, the persons appointed to any post in the service shall remain on probation for a period of two years, if appointed by direct recruitment and one year, if appointed otherwise.
Meaning thereby that Smt. Kamla Vati was on probation as on 3012.1993 when her services were terminated.
There were valid basis for the institution for terminating the services of Smt. Kamla Vati.
5.
Be that as it may, one of the relief claimed by Smt. Kamla Vati petitioner cannot be granted at this juncture because during the pendency of the writ petition she had expired and vide order dated 25.2.2002 passed in C.M.
No. 4976 of 2002 her LRs have been brought on the record.
With regard to the second relief of wages, the cause of action survives to the LRs of the deceased.
I have already quoted above the stand of the management wherein they have admitted that the deceased was entitled to the wages.
It is the case of the petitioner that she had not been paid the wages w.e.f.
151993.
Therefore, I partly allow this writ petition by giving directing to respondents No. 3 and 4 to pay the wages to the LRs of the petitioner in equal proportion w.e.f.
151993 up to 3012.1993.
Directions are also given to respondents No. 1 and 2 to release the grant-in-aid to respondent No. 3 so that the legitimate dues of the deceased may be paid to her LRs.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Appeal party allowed.