Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - Can the Inspector General of Police enhance the penalty awarded to an employee without the grant of an opportunity ?
This is the short question that arises for consideration in this bunch of four cases.
Counsel for the parties have referred to the facts as appearing on the record of CWP No. 13032 of 1999.
These may be briefly noticed.
2.
The petitioner was working as a Sub-Inspector.
Disciplinary proceedings were initiated against him.
Ultimately, vide order dated February 12, 1998, the fourth respondent had awarded a penalty of forfeiture of two years' service.
Aggrieved by the order, the petitioner filed an appeal.
It was part by accepted by the Deputy Inspector General of Police.
The penalty was reduced to `Censure' instead of forfeiture of two years' service.
Thereafter, vide order dated July 12, 1999, Inspector General suo motu reviewed the matter and set aside the order passed by the Deputy Inspector General.
The penalty of forfeiture of two years' service as awarded by the fourth respondent was restored.
The order was passed in the purported exercise of the power under Rule 1628 of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934, Volume 2.
3.
The petitioner complains that the action was per se arbitrary and violative of the provision of the rule.
He also alleges that there was violation of the principles of natural justice.
Thus, the petitioner prays that the order dated July 12, 1999, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P.4 with the writ petition, be quashed.
4.
The respondents contest the petitioner's claim.
It has been inter-alia averred that the order passed by the Inspector General of Police is in conformity with the rule.
5.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
6.
The short question that arises for consideration is - Has the Inspector General of Police acted in conformity with the provisions of Rule 1628 ?
7.
It would be apt to notice the provision of Rule 1628.
It provides as under :-  "Powers to review proceedings - (1) The Inspector General, a Deputy Inspector-General and a Superintendent of Police may call for the records of awards made by their subordinates and confirm, enhance, modify or annul the same or make further investigation or direct such to be made before passing orders.
(2) If an award of dismissal is annulled, the officer annulling it shall state whether it is to be regarded as suspension followed by reinstatement, or not.
The order should also state whether service previous to dismissal should count for pension or not.
(3) In all cases in which officers propose to enhance an award they shall, before passing final orders, give the defaulter concerned an opportunity of showing cause, either personally or in writing, why his punishment should not be enhanced."
8.
A perusal of the above provision would show that in a case where the authority wants to enhance a penalty, it has to give the defaulter an opportunity of showing cause "either personally or in writing" before it passes the final order.
In the present case, the opportunity was not given.
The rule embodies an elementary principle of fairness.
It ensures compliance with the elementary principles of natural justice.
The purpose is to ensure that the employee is heard before an order to his prejudice is passed.
In the present case, there was a complete violation of the provisions contained in the rule.
Thus, the order is contrary to the provisions of Rule 1628.
It cannot be sustained.
Counsel for the parties are agreed that the factual and legal issue as arising in the other connected cases is identical.
Thus, there writ petitions are allowed.
The impugned orders are set aside.
It is, however, clarified that it would be open to the competent authority to proceed afresh after giving notice to the petitioners as contemplated under Rule 1628.
In the circumstances of these cases, there will be no order as to costs.
Petitions allowed.