Viney Mittal, J - The present petition has been filed by the petitioner- Ashok Kumar under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India praying therein for the issuance of a writ of mandamus for directing the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner for appointment on compassionate grounds due to the death of his mother.
2.
The petitioner has stated in the petition that the father of the petitioner Suraj Parkash was working as Social Studies Master in District Karnal and died on September 15, 1990 while in service.
On the death of his father Suraj Parkash, the elder brother of the petitioner, namely Mukesh Kumar was given appointment against the post of a clerk on compassionate grounds w.e.f.
January 11, 1993.
It is further stated that Mukesh Kumar got married and due to the family circumstances, he began living separately since 1996 in a separate house and stopped supporting the family.
Subsequently, on August 4, 1998, the mother of the petitioner Smt. Pushpa Devi, who was working as J.B.T.
teacher in Govt. Primary School, Prem Nagar, Karnal died while in service.
The petitioner has specifically stated that he was dependent on the deceased for the purpose of bread and educational expenses.
The petitioner has stated that he being the dependent of his father as well as mother was getting family pensions of both his father as well as his mother but would cease to get the aforesaid pensions after September 4, 2002, when he would attain the age of 25 years.
It has been stated that after the stoppage of the aforesaid pensions, the petitioner would have absolutely no source of income.
3.
The State of Haryana had issued instructions and framed a policy for granting appointment to the dependent of the deceased employee if he/she was duly qualified.
As per instructions, Annexure P-4, issued on August 31, 1995, the dependent of the deceased employee was to be offered the appointment on ex-gratia basis if he was duly qualified and had monthly family income of Rs. 2500/- excluding family pension.
On the basis of the aforesaid instructions, the petitioner claims that he was eligible to be appointed as clerk on compassionate grounds.
His case was duly recommended by the authorities as per the aforesaid instructions.
However, vide orders dated May 21/24, 1999 passed by the Chief Secretary, Haryana and sent to the Director, Primary Education, Haryana, the claim to the petitioner for his appointment on compassionate grounds were rejected.
A copy of the aforesaid orders dated May 21/24, 1999 has been appended as Annexure P-6 with this petition.
The petitioner has made a grievance against the aforesaid orders, Annexure P-6 on the ground that the aforesaid orders are totally non-speaking and do not contain any reasons for rejection of the claim of the petitioner.
4.
The petitioner is making further claim to the effect that on September 15, 2000, the State Government of Haryana issued a revised policy vide which the upper ceiling of the monthly family income of Rs. 2500/- was raised to Rs. 6000/-.
The aforesaid revised policy has been appended as Annexure P-8 with this petition.
As per this policy also, the income of the family of the deceased government employee was to be taken into account and not just the income of the dependent who had applied for appointment on compassionate grounds.
5.
The claim of the petitioner in the present petition is two fold.
Firstly, he is aggrieved against the orders, Annexure P-6 dated May 21/24, 1999 whereby the claim of the petitioner for appointment on compassionate grounds had been rejected.
The second claim of the petitioner is that as per the revised policy, the petitioner was also entitled to be considered for appointment on compassionate grounds since he had not been given/offered any appointment on compassionate grounds earlier after the death of his mother.
The petitioner has submitted that in fact, there could not be any distinction between the cases prior to the policy of the year 2000 and the cases which were to come up for consideration after the year 2000.
A further grievance has been made by the petitioner that in fact while, computing the family income of the petitioner, the respondents have taken into consideration the income of his elder brother Mukesh Kumar who was given an appointment on compassionate grounds on the death of his father Suraj Parkash but who was living separately since 1996.
The case of the petitioner is that the concept of family income could not be construed to mean that the income of his elder brother, who was maintaining a separate family and was separately living, was to be clubbed with the family income of the petitioner.
6.
Upon notice issued to the respondents, a written statement contesting the claim of the petitioner has been filed by respondents No. 1 to 3.
The respondents have justified the passing of the orders Annexure P6.
Although a grievance has been made in the writ petition with regard to non-disclosure of the reasons for rejection of the claim of the petitioner but even the written statement is silent in this regard and no reasons whatsoever have been given in the written statement also as to why the claim of the petitioner has been rejected.
7.
We have heard Shri HN Khanduja, learned counsel for the petitioner and Shri Amol Rattan, learned Assistant Advocate General for the respondents and with their assistance have gone through the record.
8.
We find that the claim made by the petitioner in the writ petition deserves to succeed.
A perusal of order Annexure P6 shows that no reasons whatsoever have been given for rejecting the claim of the petitioner for his appointment on compassionate grounds on the death of his mother Smt. Pushpa Devi.
A single line cryptic order has been passed wherein it has been simply stated as follows :-  "Ref.
your letter No. 8.10.98 (2) dated 10.2.99.
You are hereby advised/directed that Ashok Kumar s/o Late Smt. Pushpa Devi, J.B.T.
cannot be appointed on compassionate grounds."
9.
It is, thus, clear that since the order Annexure P6 is totally non- speaking order and does not even consider the facts and circumstances of the case, therefore, the same cannot be sustained being in violation of the principles of natural justice.
10.
The second grievance of the petitioner with regard to the application of the new policy dated September 15, 2000 raising ceiling of family income from Rs. 2,500/- to Rs. 6,000/- per month also seems to have merit.
In fact, the raising of the ceiling limit would come for the benefit of all persons whose cases are pending and who have not been offered an appointment under the original policy.
Since the rejection order, Annexure P6, is being quashed by us, being a non-speaking order, the case of the petitioner will have to be considered by the competent authority afresh.
Therefore, now while considering the claim of the petitioner, the instructions of September 15, 2000 (Annexure P8) would be kept in mind by the competent authority.
Even the grievance of the petitioner that while computing the family income, the income of his elder brother was also taken into consideration, would have to be kept in mind by the competent authority and as per the aforesaid instructions, the income of Mukesh Kumar who is the elder brother of the petitioner, who is stated to be living separately and maintaining his own family, cannot be legally clubbed with the family income of the petitioner.
11.
In view of the observations made above, we allow the present petition and while quashing order, Annexure P6, we direct respondent No. 2 to reconsider the claim of the petitioner for his appointment on ex gratia basis because of the death of his mother Smt. Pushpa Devi, and if the petitioner is found eligible for appointment in accordance with policy dated September 15, 2000, then he would be offered an appointment as per his entitlement.
The respondent No. 2 is directed to process the matter and pass a fresh speaking order within a period of three months from the date a certified copy of this order is received.
Petition allowed.