TS Doabia, J - Petitioner Romesh Chander Sharma was performing the duties of Cashier-cum-Clerk in the Jammu Central Cooperative Bank Ltd He was dismissed from service on 2591995.
This was on the ground that a case of embezzlement of a sum of Rs. 53,520/- stood proved against him.
The respondent-Bank, it is stated, held an enquiry and it was only after the charges of embezzlement stood proved, the order of dismissal was passed.
It is further alleged by the respondent-Bank that the petitioner submitted number of representations to the Management of the Bank.
The plea taken by him was that a sympathetic view be taken.
He be given a chance to serve the Bank.
It is stated that the petitioner gave an undertaking that he would join as a fresh entrant and this entry would be on compassionate grounds.
It is stated that after he joined the respondent-Bank, he preferred an application under Sections 63 and 64 of the J&K Cooperative Societies Act.
In this his basic grievance was that period of service during which he remained out on account of an enquiry having been completed and after he was dismissed from service and the period during which he was submitting the representations should be taken note of.
In a nut-shell in the arbitration application he wanted to have benefit of 14 years of service during which period he remained out of service.
This petition preferred under Sections 63 and 64 of the J&K Cooperative Societies Act was taken up by the Addl.
Registrar, Cooperative Societies and an award was given against the respondent-Bank.
The respondent-Bank preferred a petition before the J&K Special Tribunal.
2.
When the petition preferred by the Bank was pending before the J&K Special Tribunal, the respondent-Bank passed another order on 22121997.
This aspect of the matter was brought to the notice of the J&K Special Tribunal.
The Tribunal was of the view that during the period the matter was pending before the Tribunal, the respondent-Bank should not have again terminated the services of the petitioner.
The respondent-Bank was directed to consider this issue.
This aspect of the matter was considered by the respondent-Bank.
An order was passed on 2771998.
Petitioner was re-instated.
At the same time it was observed that disciplinary proceedings could be taken by the Bank.
Order dated 2771998 (Annexure-K) is re-produced as under :-  "The Jammu Central Cooperative Bank Ltd No. Adm/9504-08 Dated 2771998 Order In compliance to order issued by the Hon'ble Chairman, J&K Special Tribunal, Jammu dated 1771998 and 22.7.1998, the termination order of Shri Romesh Chander Sharma, Cashier-cum-Clerk, issued under this office order No. Adm/18484-88 dated 22121997 is hereby rescinded with immediate effect and he is posted back to Branch Ram Nagar as Cahsier-cum-clerk.
He shall be entitled for the salary as was being drawn by him prior to issuance of bank order as referred to above and shall draw the arrears accordingly w.e.f.
22121997 till date.
However, disciplinary proceedings for indulging into the act of indiscipline in accordance with the rules shall be re-initiated against him separately in compliance to the said order issued by the Chairman, J&K Special Tribunal, Jammu.
Entry to this effect shall be recorded in his service book.
Sd/-  Managing Director" 3.
The matter was further taken up by the J&K Special Tribunal.
The earlier issue with regard to dismissal on the ground of embezzlement and later reinstatement was taken note of.
The Tribunal was of the view that the petitioner was re-instated on compassionate grounds and therefore, the decision of the Bank to treat the petitioner as a fresh entrant could not bee taken exception to.
What has been observed by the Tribunal in this regard is being noticed below :  "The plea of the Addl.
Registrar in holding the Bank's order as harsh one seems to be based on some mis-conceptions.
Shri Romesh Chander had never been doubly punished as has been claimed by the Addl.
Registrar.
He was only removed from service after he had clearly admitted his guilt regarding the theft of money.
His re-appointment at a lower pay scale is not another way of punishing the respondent as has been held by Additional Registrar Cooperative, rather it is an act of mercy on the part of the J.C.C.
Bank.
I cannot agree with the Additional Registrar Cooperative that by making a fresh appointment order the Bank has indirectly conceded that the penalty imposed by them is harsh.
The Bank was absolutely within its rights to remove him from service and they were also within their rights to show some mercy on him later on due to starvation in the family.
xxxxxxx" 4.
Taking this view of the matter the Tribunal was of the view that the Additional Registrar Cooperatives took cognizance of the matter under Sections 63 and 64 of the J&K Cooperative Societies Act.
He was not right in his opinion in concluding that the petitioner was entitled to get the intervening period of service of 14 years counted.
It was accordingly held that the petitioner is to be treated as a fresh entrant.
So far as the second lapse is concerned, the Tribunal was of the view that this can be examined.
The only observation which was made was that the Bank should hold a fair enquiry in this matter.
It is this order which is subject-matter of challenge in this petition.
5.
Some other facts be also noticed.
The earlier order with regard to his termination when he was found to have embezzled a sum of Rs. 53,520/- was passed on 2591995.
The operative part of the order reads :  "Therefore, keeping in view all the factors, Shri Romesh Chander Sharma, Cashier-cum-Clerk is hereby terminated from the service of the Bank as Cashier-cum-Clerk with immediate effect."
6.
The further fact is that the respondent-Bank considered the prayer of the petitioner for re-indusction into service.
An order dated 2791997 was passed.
The operative portion of that order reads as under :  "Whereas, the Competent Authority in all considerations and on account of humanitarian grounds felt that the ends of justice are enough met by terminating the services of Shri Romesh Chander Sharma in case he is re- employed in the Bank employment afresh as Cashier-cum-Clerk.
With these factors in view, Shri Romesh Chander Sharma S/o Shri Chajju Ram R/o Ward No. 11, House No. 123, Parliwand, Kathua is hereby re- appointed as Cashier-cum-Clerk in the sale of Rs. 890-50-990-75-1290-100-1690-110-2020-120-2860 plus usual allowances as admissible under Bank Rules subject to the condition that he will furnish a fresh surety bond on a non-judicial stamped paper to the extent of Rs. 10,000/- and also deposit the required cash security of Rs. 2000/- together with an affidavit that the termination order as also the re-employment order is acceptable to him in totality.
His posting orders shall be issued separately after the above formalities are completely by him."
7.
Effect was given to this order by passing yet another order on 14101995.
It was this re-instatement which was subject matter of challenge in terms of sections 63 and 64 of the Act.
The award went in favour of the petitioner.
This as indicated above was challenged before the J&K Special Tribunal.
The Tribunal was of the view that the order by which the petitioner stood re- employed is to be read as it is.
Petitioner cannot claim benefit of the previous service.
8.
Petitioner submits that he stood punished when order of termination was passed.
Passing the second order another punishment has been imposed upon him and that this could not be done.
9.
I am of the opinion the arguments put across by the petitioner cannot be accepted.
The departmental enquiry was held against him.
It was found established that the petitioner was guilty of having embezzled a sum of Rs. 53520/-.
His services were brought to an end.
Thereafter his prayer for re- induction in service was considered.
He was ordered to be re-instated as a fresh entrant.
The petitioner was supposed to furnish his security and also an undertaking that he accepts the factual position noticed in the order of termination.
The petitioner furnished the requisite security bond and undertaking.
If this be the position he is estopped from challenging the earlier order of termination in terms of re-appointment.
Therefore, the Additional Registrar Cooperative Societies, Jammu was not competent to set aside the order dated 2591995 by which the services of the petitioner were brought to an end.
The Special Tribunal rightly intervened in the matter and up-held the action of the respondent-Bank and rightly reversed the decision of the Additional Registrar Cooperative Societies, Jammu.
There is yet an additional reason for sustaining the order of the Special Tribunal.
When a contract of service is brought to an end then this action strictly speaking would not be covered by sections 63 and 64 of the J&K Cooperative Societies Act.
The order by which the services of the petitioner were brought to an end is not a matter which falls within the definition of the contract dispute touching the business of the society.
Thus, looking from any point of view the order passed by the Tribunal cannot be faulted.
The respondent-Bank is now contemplating to take further action on the basis of fresh material and fresh lapses which have come on the record.
Petitioner is at liberty to face the proceedings under law.
This petition is as such, found to be without any merit and is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.