Viney Mittal, J - The present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution has been filed by Gurmail Singh, Assistant Sub Inspector of Police praying therein for issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari for quashing the order dated April 2, 2002 whereby he has been ordered to be compulsorily retired from service.
A copy of the aforesaid order has been appended as Annexure P/8 with the present writ petition.
2.
The petitioner states that he was initially recruited as Constable in the Haryana Police on May 1, 1975 and subsequently he was promoted as a Head Constable.
On November 30, 1993, the petitioner was further promoted as Assistant Sub Inspector of Police.
During the course of his service, the petitioner has earned 39 commendation certificates for doing outstanding work, industry and highest sense of devotion towards duty and further the petitioner was awarded Class-I Commendation Certificates.
On January 29, 1999, an FIR dated January 29, 1999 under Section 384 of the Indian Penal Code was registered against the petitioner in GRPS Ambala Cantt.
However, during the course of investigation, the allegations levelled against the petitioner in the said FIR were found to be false and the police submitted a cancellation report before the Special Railway Magistrate, Ambala Cantt.
Vide orders dated July 25, 2001, the Special Railway Magistrate, Ambala Cantt accepted the cancellation report submitted by the police and cancelled the FIR No. 28 dated January 29, 1999 registered against the petitioner.
However, in the meantime adverse remarks were recorded in the A.C.R.
of the petitioner for the period June 20, 1998 to January 14, 1999 to the following effect :  "20.6.1998 to 14199 He snatches money from the people and a case FIR No. 28 dated 29199 under section 384 IPC has been registered against him in Police Station, Ambala Cantt for misappropriating the amount of Jama Talashi."
3.
On being conveyed the aforesaid adverse remarks the petitioner made a representation, to the Director General of Police-respondent No. 2 and the D.I.G.
Railways Haryana-respondent No. 3, that the adverse remarks were totally false and without any basis and, therefore, liable to be expunged.
it was further brought to their notice that since the police had already submitted the cancellation report and the Special Railway Magistrate vide order dated July 25, 2001 had accepted the cancellation report, therefore, the aforesaid adverse remarks in the A.C.R.
of the petitioner were totally baseless and were liable to the expunged.
It was further mentioned in the representation that the petitioner had 26 years of service in the department without any complaint and all through his work and conduct and integrity were found to be without any blot and he had received various commendation certificates for rendering good service.
4.
Even though the aforesaid representation filed by the petitioner against the adverse remarks contained in the aforesaid ACR was pending, the Director General of Police-respondent No. 2 issued a memo dated December 20, 2001 to the respondent No. 3 Deputy Inspector General, Railways, Haryana to intimate as to whether any departmental or criminal enquiry was conducted or otherwise.
It was further intimated that the decision on the representation of the petitioner would be taken after receipt of the report from the office of the DIG-respondent No. 3.
On February 4, 2002 the Superintendent of Police (Railways), Ambala Cantt ordered the initiation of departmental enquiry against the petitioner in the facts mentioned in the case FIR No. 28 of January 29, 1999 and appointed an enquiry officer to conduct the regular departmental enquiry.
It is the case of the petitioner that the aforesaid departmental enquiry has still not been concluded nor any report has ever been submitted so far by the aforesaid enquiry officer.
5.
However, respondent No. 2, Director General of Police, Haryana has passed the order dated April 2, 2002 compulsorily retiring the petitioner.
It is the aforesaid order retiring the petitioner compulsorily which has been impugned in the present writ petition.
6.
Upon a notice of the present writ petition having been received, the respondents have put in appearance and filed a written statement contesting the claim of the petitioner.
While it has been admitted in the written statement that the representation of the petitioner against the aforesaid adverse remarks is still under consideration and also that FIR No. 28 dated January 29, 1999 has ended in cancellation vide order dated July 25, 2001 passed by the Special Railway Magistrate, Ambala Cantt but still the order dated April 2, 2002 ordering the compulsorily retirement of the petitioner is sought to be defended.
It has been stated in the written statement that a regular departmental enquiry has been ordered against the petitioner and an Enquiry Officer has been appointed to conduct the aforesaid enquiry to investigate the charges levelled against him in the aforesaid criminal case.
7.
We have heard Shri RK Gupta, learned counsel for the petitioner and Shri Amol Rattan, learned Assistant Advocate General appearing for the respondents and with their assistance have also gone through the record of the case.
8.
Shri RK Gupta, learned counsel for the petitioner has vehemently argued that in fact a perusal of the order Annexure P/8 passed against the petitioner would show that the only ground/material on which the petitioner has been ordered to be retired compulsorily was adverse remarks in the Annual Confidential Report of the petitioner for the period June 20, 1998 to January 14, 1999 in which the adverse remarks regarding the registration of FIR No. 28 dated January 29, 1999 have been noticed and recorded.
Shri Gupta has submitted that in fact after the cancellation of the aforesaid report, the very basis of the order compulsorily retiring the petitioner has fallen and now there was absolutely no basis to sustain the said order.
Shri Gupta has further submitted that in fact the representation filed by the petitioner against the adverse remarks contained in the aforesaid ACR of the petitioner is still pending and under consideration.
On the other hand Shri Amol Rattan, learned Assistant Advocate General appearing for the respondents has submitted that in fact the order Annexure P/8 was perfectly legal and valid because a regular departmental enquiry had been ordered against the petitioner to investigate into the charges contained in the aforesaid FIR.
Shri Amol Rattan has submitted that in fact although the aforesaid FIR had been ordered to be cancelled but still the conduct of the petitioner leading to the aforesaid course was still under enquiry and, therefore, the petitioner was ordered to be compulsorily retired.
9.
We have given our thoughtful consideration to the controversy involved in the case and find that in fact the present writ petition deserves to succeed.
It is the admitted case between the parties that FIR No. 28 dated January 29, 1999 registered under Section 384 of the Indian Penal Code against the petitioner has ultimately ended in cancellation and a cancellation order has been passed by the Special Railway Magistrate, Ambala Cantt on July 25, 2001.
Thus, the main basis of the aforesaid order of compulsorily retiring the petitioner has fallen and, therefore, the aforesaid ground was not available to the respondents while ordering the compulsory retirement of the petitioner.
As far as the order of holding the regular departmental enquiry against the petitioner is concerned, it is also the admitted case that the aforesaid enquiry has not been completed by the Investigating Officer so far and no report has been received by the respondents from the Enquiry Officer in this regard.
Moreover, the respondents have admitted in the written statement that the representation of the petitioner for expunging the adverse remarks contained in the ACR is still under consideration.
10.
In these circumstances, when the very basis of the order Annexure P/8 passed by respondent No. 2 has become non est by the cancellation of the FIR and when representation of the petitioner for expunging the aforesaid adverse remarks is still pending and stated to be under consideration, then the order Annexure P/8 cannot be legally sustained.
As regard the pendency of the enquiry against the petitioner, the same would not furnish any ground to order the compulsory retirement of the petitioner at this stage.
In fact that would amount to pre-judging the entire matter even before the enquiry has been completed.
11.
In this view of the matter, we allow this petition and quash order dated April 2, 2002 passed by respondent No. 2 whereby the petitioner has been ordered to be compulsorily retired from service and direct that the petitioner be treated to be in service with continuity thereof.
The petitioner would also be entitled to all consequential benefits arising from the quashing of the aforesaid order of compulsory retirement.
However, the respondent would be at liberty to pass fresh order in accordance with law if and when any material is found against the petitioner at a later stage.
No costs.
Petition allowed.