Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - Is the provision contained in Rule 8(1)(b)(iii) of the Punjab Prisons State Service (Class-II) Rules, 1978 illegal and ultra vires the Constitution of India ?
This is the short question that arises for consideration in this petition.
2.
Mr. CL Goyal, learned Counsel for the petitioner, contends that under the impugned provision 12-1/2% posts of Deputy Superintendents (Jails) have been allocated to the category of ministerial establishment.
The members of the Ministerial establishment have no experience in management of Jails.
Thus, the provision is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
3.
Initially, the State Government had promulgated the Punjab Prisons State Service (Class-II) Rules, 1963.
On September 15, 1978 these rules were replaced by the Punjab Prisons State Service (Class-II) Rules, 1978.
It is conceded that the provision for promotion of members of ministerial establishment existed in the 1963 Rules.
It was continued under the 1978 Rules.
In other words, the provision regarding the promotion of the members of ministerial establishment to the post in the Class-II service has been in existence for the last about 39 years.
Should it now be annulled ?
4.
It is apt to notice the impugned provision.
Rule 8 provides as under :-  "8.
(1) The posts in the Service shall be filled in the following manner :- (a) In the case of posts specified in section 1 of the Appendix `A' -  (i) by promotion from amongst the officers mentioned in Section II of Appendix `A' who have an experience of working on any one or more of the posts held by such officers for a minimum period of five years; (ii) by transfer or deputation of a person serving in any other department of the Government or any other State or Union of India if no suitable candidate is available by the method specified in sub-clause (i).
(b) In the case of posts specified in Section II of Appendix `A' - (i) by direct appointment; or (ii) by promotion from amongst the Assistant Superintendents Jail or Welfare Officers who have an experience of working on either or both of these posts for a minimum period of seven years and have passed the departmental examination in the required standard; or (iii) by promotion from amongst persons who have an experience of working on the ministerial posts in the Department for a minimum period of ten years and possess the educational qualifications and physical standard as specified in rule 9; or (iv) by transfer or deputation of a person serving in any other Department of the Government, if no suitable candidate is available by the method specified in sub-clauses (i), (ii) and (iii) : Provided that 37/1-2% of the total number of posts shall be filled by the method specified in sub-clause (i) of clause (b) and 12-1/2% of the total number of posts shall be filed by the method specified in sub-clause (iii) of Clause (b) : Provided further that the first three vacancies would be filled by direct appointment, the next four vacancies would be filled by promotion and the eighth vacancy would be filled by promotion from amongst the ministerial staff of the Department.
(2) If no suitable candidate is available for appointment to any post through the specified method of appointment, the appointing authority shall decide by which alternative method that post shall be filled.
(3) All promotions to the posts in the service shall be made purely by selection on the basis of merit-cum-seniority and no person shall claim promotion on the basis of seniority alone."
5.
The service consists of the posts like Superintendent District Jails, Chief Probation Officer, Deputy Superintendent Grade-I and Deputy Superintendent Grade-II.
The posts of Superintendent, Chief Probation Officer, Deputy Superintendent Grade-I and Chief Welfare Officer form Section I The posts of Deputy Superintendent Grade-II, District Probation Officer and Probation Officer are included in Section II.
The method for recruitment to the post of Section II of the Service has been laid down in sub-clause (b).
The post can be filled up by direct appointment, by promotion and by transfer.
12-1/2% of the total number of posts are to be filled up by promotion of persons from the ministerial establishment.
The petitioners are aggrieved by the provision providing for the promotion of the members of ministerial establishment.
6.
Mr. Goyal contends that the Clerks working in Jails or in the department are not fit to handle or administer the Jails.
Thus, allocation of quota for 12-1/2% to the ministerial establishment is unfair.
Learned Counsel points out that the 4th pay commission had specifically recommended that the provision in the Rule allocating the share of posts to the members of the ministerial establishment should be modified.
7.
Admittedly, the Rules have been framed by the State Government in exercise of its legislative power under Article 309.
Laying down the method of recruitment and the sources for appointment is the prerogative of the Rule making authority.
So long as the provision is not arbitrary and does not offend the Constitutional provision, it cannot be declared ultra vires.
It may be possible to contend that persons dealing with Jail administration like the Assistant Superintendents are better trained to man the posts of Deputy Superintendent Grade-II.
It is a possible view-point.
However, the sources for filling up the posts of Deputy Superintendent have to be laid down by the appropriate authority.
It is basically a question which has to be decided by the rule making authority.
It is the best Judge of the needs of the administration and if on the basis of experience it has considered it appropriate to allocate 1/8th of the posts in the service to the members of ministerial establishment, it cannot, without anything more, be said to have acted illegally.
In any event, the view propounded by the Pay Commission was one of the possible ones.
Equally, while enacting the provision, the Rule making authority could have thought it proper to allocate some posts to the members of the ministerial establishment.
Since, the authority has taken a possible view we are not persuaded to hold that it is arbitrary or unfair.
8.
Mr. Goyal contends that Assistant Superintendents are better equipped to administer the Jails.
Thus, the members of the Ministerial establishment should not be promoted to these posts.
9.
A perusal of clause (3) of the Rule, as reproduced above, shows that the posts have to be filled up "purely by selection".
Merit is the primary consideration.
Still further, Clause (2) postulates that in case a suitable candidate is not available from a particular category, the competent authority can fill up the posts by an alternative method.
Thus, the rule embodies a sufficient safe-guard.
It gives enough moving space to the competent authority.
In case, it is found that none of the members of the ministerial establishment is suitable for appointment to the post of Deputy Superintendent, it can fill up posts by an alternative method.
Still further, a member of the ministerial establishment is not to be promoted from merely the post of clerk.
It is admitted that the Clerks are promoted to various higher posts.
It is only on the basis of seniority in the cadre that the promotion has to be made.
On a consideration of the matter, we are satisfied that the Rule embodies sufficient safe-guards so as to ensure that only the best are promoted to the Class II service.
10.
Mr. Goyal submits that the provision violates Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
The contention is misconceived.
It is not disputed that normally persons working as Senior Assistants or those holding higher posts are considered.
Their scales of pay are equivalent to those of the Deputy Superintendent Grade-II.
Thus, unequals are not being treated as equals.
The contention based on Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution cannot be sustained.
11.
Mr. Goyal contend that various Commissions have recommended Jail reforms.
One of the recommendations relates to the appointment of personnel.
Members of the ministerial establishment are not suitable to man the posts in jails.
12.
This is a matter which lies primarily within the province of the Rule making authority.
If on the basis of the experience and reasons made manifest by day to day observation, the authority has chosen to provide an avenue to the members of the ministerial establishment, it cannot be said to have acted illegally.
Still further, the recommendations made by the Commissions are only meant for the consideration of the appropriate authority.
These are not binding statutes which may be enforceable in Courts of law.
13.
Mr. Goyal submits that the recommendation of the Pay Commission was not considered by the State Government.
Admittedly, the Rules had been promulgated initially in the year 1963.
These were replaced by the 1978 Rules.
For 39 years, the Rules have held the field.
It is true that the Pay Commission had made its recommendations in the year 1998.
It is not disputed that the report given by the Commission was examined by the Government.
The pay scales of various posts were revised in view of the recommendations.
The report was accepted in certain matters.
In others, it was not.
There is noting before us to show that the Government had not considered the report in its entirety or that the recommendation in respect of the personnel was over looked.
No other point has been raised.
In view of the above, we find no merits in this writ petition.
It is consequently dismissed in limine.
Petition dismissed.