Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner had joined service as a Junior Engineer.
Initially the petitioner had been appointed in the Electrical cadre in April 1972.
While working as a Junior Engineer he had qualified Sections A & B of AMIE in Civil Engineering.
He competed for recruitment to the post of Junior Engineer (Civil) and was appointed as such in March 1982.
Vide order dated May 22, 1987 the petitioner was promoted as a Sub Divisional Engineer on temporary basis.
The petitioner has not produced the copy of the order.
However, in the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents it has been pointed out that the appointment was on purely temporary basis for a period of six months.
The petitioner is continuing on this post.
He has filed the present writ petition with the prayer that the respondents be directed to grant him regular promotion as Sub Divisional Engineer (Civil) "on regular basis from the due date, when the regular post of S.D.E.
became available" viz. January 1, 1985 with all consequential benefits.
2.
The claim made by the petitioner has been controverted by the respondents.
3.
The short question is - Was the petitioner eligible for appointment to a post in the Punjab Service of Engineers, Class-II on January 1, 1985 ?
4.
Recruitment to the Class-II service is governed by the provisions of the Punjab Service of Engineers, Class-II P.W.D.
(Buildings and Roads Branch) Rules, 1965.
Rule 7 prescribes the qualifications for appointment to the post in the service.
In respect of the members of the subordinate services viz.
Junior Engineers etc. the relevant provision is contained in Clause 3.
It inter-alia provides as under :-  "3.
In case of appointment by promotion from source 4 under rule 6(1) -  (i) a member of the Punjab P.W.D.
(B&R) Sectional Officers Engineering Service or a Draftsmen member of the B&R Branch Draftsman and Tracer Service; (ii) Possesses any of the qualifications included in Appendix `B' and has put in five years service in case he possesses AMIE qualification and two years service in case he is a degree-holder."
5.
A perusal of the above provision shows that a Sectional Officer (which post has been admittedly re-designated as Junior Engineer) possessing the qualification of AMIE is eligible after he has put in five years of service.
The petitioner had been admittedly appointed as a Junior Engineer (Civil) in March 1982.
Thus, he had not completed the requisite period of 5 years on January 1, 1985.
Consequently, he was not eligible on that date.
In this situation the claim as made by the petitioner cannot be sustained.
6.
There is another aspect of the matter.
The petitioner's claim is primarily based on the existence of a vacancy.
In the present case, it is the admitted position that no one junior to the petitioner has been promoted from an earlier date.
Thus, it cannot be said that the petitioner has been denied the equality of opportunity.
Still further, the mere fact that a vacancy exists confers no right on a person to claim appointment or promotion thereto.
The employer has a right to either fill up a vacancy or keep it vacant.
The employer is the best judge of its needs.
The employee, unless the rule specifically lays down, has no right to claim that the vacancy should be filled up.
7.
Faced with this situation, Mr. Dadwal contends that in a case of persons possessing the qualification of AMIE, the condition of eligibility is 2 years of experience and not 5 years.
This contention cannot be accepted.
The Rule categorically provides for 5 years of experience in case of persons possessing the qualification of AMIE In case of degree-holders the requirement of experience is confined to 2 years.
The contention raised by the counsel is contrary to the plain language of the Rule.
8.
Mr. Dadwal submits that AMIE has been considered as equivalent to a degree.
Thus, differential treatment between degree-holders and others possessing the qualification of AMIE is unjustifiable.
9.
Nothing has been pointed out to show that there is no qualitative difference between the persons who have studied in an Engineering College and qualified a University examination viz.-a-viz. those who merely appear in an examination and pass it any time without undergoing any training.
In the absence of relevant material the contention that the provision is violative of Article 14 of the Constitution cannot be sustained.
10.
No other point has been raised.
In view of the above, we find no merit in this petition.
It is, consequently, dismissed.
However, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.