RL Anand, J - Shri RP Singla is the retired Additional Superintending Engineer and he has filed the present writ petition under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India against the State of Punjab and Punjab State Electricity Board and it has been prayed that a writ of mandamus be issued against respondent No. 2 directing them to count his service which he rendered with respondent No. 1 treating it as qualifying service for the purposes of pensionary/retiral benefits w.e.f.
2061960 to 21.6.1973.
In the alternative it has also been prayed by the petitioner that directions be issued to respondent No. 1 to count the aforesaid period and make payment of pension with effect from the date of superannuation of the petitioner i.e. 3181997.
2.
The facts in this case are not much in dispute, but are repeated in short for the purpose of disposal of present writ petition.
The petitioner joined as Apprentice Sectional Officer in the Irrigation Branch, P.W.D.
Punjab at Bathinda Division, Sirhind Canal, Bathinda on 2061960.
He proceeded on study leave to USA on 17.1.1968 and remained there till 3171972.
The whole leave period was sanctioned by respondent No. 1 as is evident from the different annexures filed by the petitioner.
After availing study leave the petitioner was posted as Sectional Officer in the Irrigation Department of respondent No. 1 on 12.10.1972 where he submitted his joining report but he was allowed to join duty only on 20.10.1972.
In the year 1973 respondent No. 2-Board gave an advertisement in the newspaper and invited applications for the post of Asstt.
Engineer (Civil).
The petitioner applied for the said post through proper channel and he was also allowed to appear in the interview for the said post which took place on 27.2.1973.
He was selected and appointed Apprentice Assistant Engineer.
Consequently, he joined the duties of the Board on 21.6.1973.
3.
Before retirement the petitioner made a request to respondent No. 2 that the period spent by him from 2061980 to 21.6.1973 with the P.W.D., Irrigation Department as Sectional officer may be considered as qualifying service for the purpose of pension.
The request of the petitioner was not accepted.
The prayer made by the petitioner is that the period from 2061960 to 21.6.1973 may be considered as qualifying service and he should be given the benefit of this service for the purpose of retiral/pensionary benefits and directions be given to respondent No. 2 or in alternative to respondent No. 1 to give the benefit of above period for the purpose of pension, etc.  4.
Notice of the writ petition was given the respondents.
It was contested by respondent No. 2 and the defence of the said respondent is that the petitioner for the first time made the request for commuting service rendered by him in the State Government along with pension papers which was not entertained being a matter of later stage.
It was pleaded that even the adoption of instructions vide order dated 25111985, the petitioner had not applied for any such benefit though he had put in about 12 years service.
Moreover, as per the instructions, the benefit of past service is allowed on reciprocal basis and the petitioner neither got his pensionary liability of his previous service deposited by his previous department nor he himself deposited the pensionary liability which is a pre-requisite for the grant of benefit of previous service.
Besides this there are other formalities regading the completion of record which has not been fulfilled by the petitioner.
5.
I have heard Mr. Rajiv Atma Ram, Senior Advocate on behalf of the petitioner, Ms. Rupinder Wasu, Deputy Advocate General, for respondent No. 1 and Mr. Sukhbir Singh, Advocate, for respondent No. 2 and with their assistance have gone through the record of the case.
6.
The short point for determination before me is whether the petitioner is entitled to the benefit of previous service for the purpose of retiral/pensionary benefit and if so, who are liable to pay that benefit and on what terms.
The learned senior counsel for the petitioner vehemently submitted that as per instructions Annexure P-15, the previous service performed by the petitioner in the State Government has to be reckoned by respondent No. 2 for the purpose of calculating the retiral benefits.
He further submitted that the instructions Annexure P-15 have been adopted by the Board vide letter Annexure P-16.
Para No. 2 of the instructions Annexure P-15 lays down as follows :-  "2.
This benefit will be admissible only to the following categories of employees :-  1) ..... ..... ..... .....  2) Those who while holding temporary posts under Central/State Government apply for posts under State/Central Government through proper channel with proper permission of the administrative authority concerned."
7.
These instructions had been adopted as is evident from the document Annexure P-16 and the operative portion of the decision runs as follows :-  "The Punjab State Electricity Board have adopted the aforesaid letter of the Govt. and also the instructions expressed along with conditions and the date of its implementation i.e.
3131982."
8.
Thus, there is no manner of doubt that the Board was bound to reckon the previous period of service of the petitioner when he performed his duties in the State Government in order to calculate the retiral/pensionary benefits.
9.
Faced with this difficulty, the learned counsel for respondent No. 2 submitted that the Board was liable to reckon the previous service on reciprocal basis between the Board and the State Government.
Since there was no reciprocal arrangement, therefore, the Board is not liable to count the benefit of previous service.
He submitted in the alternative that even if it is assumed that the Board is liable to pay, still the State is also supposed to discharge its liability for the service rendered by the petitioner from 1960 to 1973.
10.
After considering the rival contentions of the parties, I am of the opinion that the petitioner joined the service of the Board after performing about 13 years service in the Punjab Government and, therefore, that service has to be counted by the Board on the basis of shared liability and respondent No. 1 i.e. the State of Punjab cannot escape from its liability from depositing the pension contribution for the period rendered by the petitioner in the State service.
11.
Resultantly, this writ petition stands allowed and directions are given to respondent No. 1 to pay to respondent No. 2 the pension contribution towards the service rendered by the petitioner from 2061960 to 21.6.1973 within three months from the receipt of copy of the order and further directions are given to respondent No. 2 that in the event of receipt of said amount they shall count the said period for the purpose of qualifying service and shall prepare a case of revised pension and the revised pension shall be released within three months from the receipt of the share of contribution from the State Government.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.