RL Anand, J - Shri Chander Bhan Baildar has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India against the respondents and he has sought the directions against them by stating that he should be promoted to the post of Road Mate from the date when the services of respondents No. 3 and 4 were regularised as Road Mate and promoted as such in the pay scale of Rs. 950-1500.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he belongs to Mirassi Caste which was declared as Backward Class.
He was appointed as Baildar on 1111991.
Respondent No. 2, however, assigned him the duties of Road Mate.
The petitioner was looking after the work of road when the carve channel was being made of the cement slabs in the year 1996.
The petitioner completed more than five and half years of service on 2751997.
The services of the petitioner were regularised as Baildar in the scale of Rs. 750-940.
The petitioner fulfilled all the terms and conditions of the letter dated 2751999.
The petitioner has also completed the probation period of one year.
The petitioner made a representation to respondent No. 2 stating therein that juniors to him had already been promoted as Road Mate, therefore, he should also be considered for promotion as Road Mate.
Respondent No. 4 was appointed in January 1993 as Baildar.
He was performing the duties as such from time to time as Chowkidar.
Respondent No. 4 was given regular promotion as Mate on 1931997, whereas, the case of the petitioner was cleared only on 2751997.
Moreover the initial appointment of the petitioner was made on 1111991 and, therefore, respondent No. 4 is junior to him and, he has been regularised as Road Mate.
The petitioner deserves to be considered for promotion being senior and duly qualified.
Moreover, the services of the petitioner deserve to be regularised with effect from 121990.. Respondent No. 2 is resorting to the appointment of pick and choose when respondent No. 3 has been promoted to the post of Road Mate though he was junior to the petitioner in the category of Baildars.
In short, the stand of the petitioner is that respondents No. 3 and 4 were junior to him as Baildars and since they have been promoted in the cadre of Road Mate, therefore, the petitioner's claim should also be considered for promotion as Road Mate and he should also be promoted from the date when respondents No. 3 and 4 were regularised as Road Mate.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
There are two written statements on the record : one filed by respondents No. 1 and 2 and the other by respondent No. 3 and the stand of these respondents is elaborated in paras No. 4 and 5 of the written statement filed by respondents No. 1 and 2, which are reproduced as under :-  "4.
That in reply to the contents of para No. 4 of the civil writ petition, it is submitted that the services of the petitioner were engaged only as Baildar on daily wages.
It is wrong and vehemently denied that his services were engaged as Road Mate.
It is also wrong and denied that he was assigned the work of the Road Mate at any point of time.
The fact of the matter is that from the very beginning the services of the petitioner were engaged as Baildar on TMR as is evident from the true copy of the TMR annexed with the written statement as Annexure R-1.
It is denied for want of knowledge as to what qualifications the petitioner is possessing.
It is wrong and denied that the petitioner had been performing the duties to look after the maintenance of newly constructed Houses in Sectors 15 and 15A, Faridabad.
Since his services were engaged only as a Beldar and he worked as such, so there was no question of the satisfaction of the respondents regarding performance of his duties to look after the maintenance work.
5.
That in reply to the contents of para No. 5 of the civil writ petition, it is admitted that the services of the petitioner were regularised as Beldar with effect from 2751997 and he had submitted his joining report as such on the said date.
Since his services were engaged as Beldar from the very beginning, so the petitioner was regularised as Beldar.
As the services of the respondents No. 3 and 4 were engaged from the very beginning as Road Mate, so they were regularised as Road Mates.
It may not be out of place to mention here that no objection whatsoever was raised or taken ken by the petitioner at the time of submitting his joining report on 2751997 regarding his regularisation as Beldar and not as Road Mate, true translated copy of the joining report dated 2751997 submitted by the petitioner in the office of the respondents is attached herewith as Annexure R-2.
It was only on 30.9.1998 that such a representation was made by the petitioner which on finding no merit was filed".
In short, the stand of these respondents is that since the services of the petitioner was only engaged as Baildar so there is no question of considering his case for being regularised as Road Mate.
As per respondent No. 3 he was working as a Road Mate, therefore, he was regularised as such on this post.
However, in the letter of regularisation the name of the post was wrongly written as Baildar, therefore, he made a representation to make the desired correction.
Finally the respondent modified the order of regularisation and designated him as Mate instead of Baildar.
Answering respondent, was regularised as Mate with effect from 1931997 whereas the petitioner was regularised as Baildar with effect from the said date.
The answering respondent is senior to the petitioner as per the date of joining the department.
The inter se seniority of daily wages employees after regularisation is to be determined in accordance with the date of joining their post on daily wages basis.
Respondent No. 3 joined in May 1991 while the petitioner joined as daily wager in November 1991.
Thus, respondent.
No. 3 has made a prayer for the dismissal of the writ petition.
4.
A rejoinder was filed by the petitioner to the written statement of respondents No. 1 and 2 in which he reiterated the averments of the writ petition by denying those of the written statement.
5.
I have heard Shri RS Sihota, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner, Shri OP Sharma, Advocate, appearing on behalf of respondents No. 1 and 2 and Shri S.K.
Garg, Advocate, appearing on behalf of respondent No. 3 and with their assistance have gone through the record of the case.
6.
The case set up by the petitioner in short is that he is entitled to be considered for the post of Road Mate from the date when respondents No. 3 and 4 were designated as Road Mate in the scale of Rs. 950-1500.
Before the petitioner may succeed in this matter he has to show firstly that respondents No. 3 and 4 were also appointed as Baildars like the petitioner.
The onus is upon the petitioner to make a prima facie case in his favour.
The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner invited my attention to the document Annexure R-3/1, the office order dated 261997, issued in the name of respondent No. 3.
Shri Ved Parkash Baildar and submits that from this letter it is clear that Shri Ved Parkash was a Baildar.
Since he was junior to the petitioner, therefore, the petitioner also deserves to be promoted as Road Mate or at any rate he deserves to be designated as Road Mate instead of Baildar as it has been done in the case of respondent No. 3 vide letter dated 3.9.1998 Annexure R-3/2.
Learned counsel for the petitioner further submitted that respondents No. 1 and 2 have withheld the vital documents on record to show that the appointment of Shri Ved Parkash respondent No. 3 or that of respondent No. 4 was as Road Mate instead of Baildar.
7.
On the contrary, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents submitted that petitioner was appointed as Baildar, whereas, respondent No. 3 was appointed as Mate which is a total independent cadre from that of the Baildar.
There was a mistake on the part of the authorities when they issued the letter Annexure RE-3/1 promoting Shri Ved Parkash as Baildar and when this mistake was brought to the notice of the authorities a case was made out and it was recommended to the Executive Engineer vide Office Memo No. 702 dated 971998.
Resultantly, the order dated 261997, bearing Memo No. 4581 was modified and Shri Ved Parkash respondent No. 3 was designated as Mate instead of Baildar.
There is a merit in the contention raised by the learned counsel, for the respondents.
The initial onus is upon the petitioner to show that Shri Ved Parkash respondent No. 3 or Shri Shamshudin respondent No. 4 were Baildars like the petitioner and that they were juniors to the petitioner.
8.
On the contrary it is the consistent stand of respondents No. 3 and 4 that respondent No. 3 was Road Mate and, therefore, as per the policy of the Government, his services have to be regularised.
Of course, the petitioner and respondent No. 3 were regularised from the same date but the cadres of petitioner and respondent No. 3 were totally different.
9.
In this view of the matter, I am of the considered opinion that present writ petition lacks merits and cannot be allowed.
Resultantly, the writ petition is dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.