Amar Dutt, J - The petitioner was marred to CFN Darshan Singh, who while serving the Indian Army died on 5.8.1985.
After his death, the respondents started disbursing ordinary family pension to the petitioner.
The pension, which was given with effect from 681985, continued till 211986, when the same was stopped, apparently, on account of the petitioner have remarried.
The petitioner seeks to assail the view taken by the respondents on the ground that as she had married the younger brother of her deceased husband, her case would fall within the exception provided in Regulation 219 of the Pension Regulations for the Army, 1961 (hereinafter referred to as "1961 the Regulations").
2.
In the written statement filed by the respondents, the maintainability of the writ petition was challenged on the ground that the order of the Chief Controller of Defence Accounts (Pensions) is appealable before the Secretary, Ministry of Defence.
It is also submitted that the claim of the petitioner was rejected on 9121986 and the present writ petition, which was filed on 1591999 is highly belated.
On merits, it was submitted that the widow's entitlement to draw ordinary family pension stood on a different footing from her entitlement to receive special family pension and as the provisions of Regulation 219 of the 1961 Regulations would be applicable only to the special family pension, therefore, no fault could be found with the order Annexure R-2 passed by the Controller of Defence Accounts (Pensions), Allahabad stopping the payment of family pension to the petitioner.
3.
I have heard Shri Ajay Pal Singh, on behalf of the petitioner and Shri MS Guglani, Additional Central Government Standing Counsel, on behalf of the respondents.
4.
The objection to the maintainability of the petition on account of delay and laches need not be gone into because the claim put forward by the petitioner has to be rejected even on merits.
5.
A perusal of the 1961 Regulations, shows that the same refer to two kinds of pensions i.e. ordinary family pension and special family pension.
The grant of ordinary family pension is regulated by A I 51/80.
The relevant provisions regarding family for the purpose of family pension and the persons to whom it is admissible are mentioned in paras 6 and 7 of A I 51/80, which read as under :-  "6.
Family for the purpose of Family Pension means:  (i) Wife/Husband provided the marriage took place before retirement, and also judicially separated wife/husband if the judicial separation was granted not on ground of adultery and the person surviving was not held guilty of committing adultery.
(ii) Sons below the age of 25 years.
(iii) Unmarried daughters below the age of 25 years.
(iv) Sons and daughters adopted legally upto the age limit (ii) and (iii) above.
Note :- Sons or daughters born after retirement and also a posthumous child are entitled to Family Pension.
7.
The pension will be admissible :-  (a) to a widow or widower upto the date of death or disqualification whichever is earlier;  (b) to a son until he attains the age of 25 years.
(c) to an unmarried daughter until she attains the age of 25 years or marriage whichever is earlier :  Provided that if a son or daughter is suffering from any disorder or disability of mind or is physically crippled or disabled so as to render him or her unable to earn a living even after attaining the age of 25 years, the ordinary family pension shall be payable to such son or daughter for life.
[MOD letter No. A/49601/AG/PS4(e)/3363/B/D (Pens/Serv) dated 7887]."
Para 8 reads as under :-  "8.
The Family Pension, 1964 is payable to only one member of the family at a time except in cases where it is payable to more widows than one or where it is payable to twin children.
It is first payable to the widow/widower till the date of her/his death or re-marriage whichever is earlier and thereafter to children in the order of priority."
6.
Special family pension is dealt with in Regulation 213 of the 1961 Regulations, which reads as under :-  "Special Family Pension.
213.
A special family pension may be granted to the family of an individual if his death was due to or has hastened by -  (a) a wound, injury or disease which was attributable to military service,  OR (b) the aggravation by military service of a wound, injury or disease which existed before or arose during military service."
and the person eligible to receive the same are indicated in Regulation 216 of the 1961 Regulations, which reads as follows :-  "Eligible members of the family.
216.
The following members of the family of a deceased individual shall be viewed as eligible for the grant of a special family pension, provided that they are otherwise qualified :-  (a) widow/widower lawfully married.
It includes a widow who was married after individual's release/retirement/discharge/invalidment.
(b) Son actual and legitimate/including validly adopted.
(c) Daughter, actual and legitimate/(including validly adopted).
(d) Father.
(e) Mother.
(f) Brother.
(g) Sister  Note 1 : The term "widow" used in the above or any other regulation in this sub-section in respect of special family pensionary awards shall be deemed to include such a widow who was married after the individual's discharge/invalidment.
Note 2 : The term "child" used in the above or any other regulation in this sub-section in respect of special family pensionary awards shall be deemed to include such a child born out of a marriage after discharge/invalidment of the individual.
Note 3 : The term "father" and "mother" or "parents" used in the above or any other rule in this sub-section shall also be deemed to include such putative parents (or surviving parents as the case may be) as had not contracted a lawful marriage, but were living as husband and wife at the time of, or got lawfully married subsequent to, the conception of deceased member of the forces."
7.
According to the conditions of eligibility for family pension, as provided under Regulation 219 of the 1961 Regulations, a widow, who has not remarried, would be eligible for grant of family pension subject to the exception incorporated therein, which reads as under :-  "This condition shall not apply to a widow who remarried her deceased husband's brother, and continues to live a communal life with and/or contributes to the support of the other living eligible heirs."
According to the petitioner, it is Regulation 213 of the 1961 Regulations, which would govern her case and, therefore, the order passed by the Controller of Defence Accounts (Pensions), Allahabad denying her payment of family pension has got to be set aside.
This argument, I am afraid, cannot be sustained, when appreciated in the light of the provisions reproduced hereinbefore.
Regulation 219 of the 1961 Regulations clearly talks of the conditions of eligibility for family pension as per Regulation 216 of the 1961 Regulations, which in turn, deals only with special family pension as envisaged in Regulation 213 of the 1961 Regulations.
The case of the petitioner's husband admittedly was not one which entitled the petitioner to special family pension, nor is it the case of the petitioner that she was ever receiving the same.
She was only found entitled to and given ordinary family pension and the provisions regulating the grand and continuance of such a pension would be contained in A I 51.
According to para 8 thereof, the pension so granted would be payable to the widow or widower till the date of his/her death or remarriage whichever is earlier and thereafter to the children in the order of priority.
The exception incorporated in Regulation 219 of the 1961 Regulations entitles a widow if she gets remarried to the brother of her deceased husband to receive special family pension would, in my opinion, not be attracted to the facts of the present case, even though apparently there appears to be no rational for the exceptions sought to be incorporated in the Regulations and the denial of its benefit to the petitioner.
No other point has been urged.
For the reasons recorded above, this petition fails and is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.