RL Anand, J - We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance have gone through the record of this case.
2.
The challenge in this writ petition has been given by Smt. Renu Bala to the order dated 3111999 Annexure P-16 passed by respondent No. 3 vide which respondent No. 3 refused to give the approval to the appointment dated 2121998 of the petitioner against the vacant post of JBT sanctioned under the Grant-in-Aid Scheme and it has also been prayed by the petitioner that a writ of mandamus be issued against respondent No. 3 to accord the necessary approval to the appointment of the petitioner.
3.
Some facts can be noticed in the following manner.
Vide Annexure P-2 an advertisement was given by the institution of Arya Kanya Vidyalaya, Kharar which appeared in the Sunday Tribune dated 18.1.1998 vide which applications were invited from the general public for the post of JBT/ETT The advertisement runs as follows :-  "Arya Kanya Vidyalaya Kharar (Ropar)  Wanted JBT/ETT teachers against permanent aided post as per Govt. Grade.
BA BEd/B.Sc.
BEd.
can also apply.
Arya Samajist will be given preference.
Apply to manager up to 2511998."
4.
The reading of the above advertisement would show that the persons with qualification of BA BEd/B.Sc.
BEd.
were also eligible.
The petitioner did not conceal anything.
She was B.Sc.
BEd and in response to the said advertisement she applied for the post.
She was selected by the Selection Committee.
When her selection was sent for approval, it was not approved by the respondent No. 3 mainly on the ground that petitioner is not JBT Teacher.
The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner submitted that there was no concealment on the part of the petitioner.
The policy of the Government as contained in Annexure P-5 was never the condition in the advertisement.
It was never brought to the notice of the petitioner and in these circumstances the petitioner cannot be allowed to suffer specifically when she had already served for more than one year.
5.
It was also argued on behalf of the petitioner that his client is still in service and at this juncture to pass any adverse order against her will not be only against the equity but also will be a harsh and inequitable order.
6.
On the contrary, learned counsel for the respondents invites my attention to the instructions contained in Annexure P-5 vide which the decision was taken as back as in the year 1995 by the Government that in future the persons with JBT/ETT qualifications will be eligible for the post of the JBT teacher.
The instructions contained in Annexure P-5 were never incorporated in the advertisement Annexure P-2.
Even otherwise a reading of the instructions, Annexure P-5, would show that the Government had allowed the persons of BEd.
qualification, to be accommodated after the adjustment of the persons having the qualification of JBT It was also submitted on behalf of the respondents that the advertisement Annexure P-2 has been given by the college authorities which has not taken note of the Government instructions (Annexure P-5).
For the inaction of the college authorities, petitioner cannot be allowed to suffer.
7.
Be that as it may, we are of the opinion that this writ petition must be allowed as the petitioner did not conceal anything from respondent authorities.
She was allowed to join the duties.
She was duly selected by the selection committee.
She is already in service and any adverse order at this juncture would be against the principles of equity.
8.
Resultantly we allow this writ petition without creating any precedent for the future and set aside the order Annexure P-16 dated 3111999 and directions are also given to respondents No. 1 to 3 to grant the approval to the appointment of the petitioner against the vacant post of JBT Teacher.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.