Aftab Alam, J - The father of the petitioner namely Ram Bilas Yadav worked as an Assistant Teacher in a government girls primary school.
He died on 621997 while still in service.
Following his death, the petitioner made an application for appointment on compassionate ground.
The petitioner's request for appointment was considered by the District Compassionate Committee, Sitamarhi in its meeting held on 891997 and having regard to the fact that the petitioner had two wives it was decided to seek guidance in the matter from the department of Administrative and Personnel Reforms.
The Dy.
Secretary, in the department by his letter No. 7382, dated 10.7.1998 gave the direction that the petitioner's appointment would not be valid because of his two marriages.
A copy of the letter was forwarded to the District Superintendent of Education (through whom the petitioner's application was received) for necessary action.
At that stage the mother of the petitioner, the widow of the deceased government employee made a detailed application protesting against the decision not to give appointment to her son, the present petitioner, on the ground of bigamy.
She tried to explain that the first wife of the petitioner was not being able to bear a child and it was she who forced and persuaded the petitioner to take a second wife.
After the second marriage, however, the first wife of the petitioner bore a child.
The mother in her application further stated that neither the first nor the second wife of the petitioner was making any complaints and the second wife had also joined in the request for his appointment on compassionate grounds, stating that she would have no concern with her husband's employment either now or at any time in future.
In support of the statements made in the application submitted by the petitioner's mother the affidavits of his two wives were also enclosed.
In the affidavit of the first wife it was stated that it was on her repeated requests that the petitioner took Kamla Kumari as his second wife whom she had herself selected and found suitable being the second wife of her husband.
In the affidavit of Kamla Kumari, the second wife of the petitioner, it was stated that on his being appointed on compassionate grounds his first wife should be made his nominee and further that she would have no concern with the petitioner's employment either now or in future.
2.
On the basis of the application received from the matter of the petitioner the District Compassionate Committee requested the Dy.
Secretary in the Government to reconsider the matter, in reply to which the District Compassionate Committee was directed to take a decision on the question of petitioner's appointment on compassionate grounds in the light of the departmental circular No. 13293, dated 5101991 and the department's letter No. 2822 dated 2741995.
Finally the case of the petitioner was considered in the meeting of the District Compassionate Committee dated 1872000 in which his request was turned down on the ground of his having two wives.
3.
This writ petition has been filed challenging the decision of the District Compassionate Committee taken in its meeting dated 1872000.
4.
It may be noted that commission of bigamy is a misconduct for a government employee.
That being the position, the impugned decision seems quite unexceptional because it would appear quite anomalous to induct into government employment someone who even before his appointment is in a position which is a misconduct for a goverment employee.
5.
In exercise of the powers under the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution the State Government framed rules called the Bihar Government Servants' Conduct Rules, 1976 in order to regulate the conduct of government servants.
Rule 23 of the Conduct Rules deals with restrictions regarding marriages and is in the following terms :-  "23.
Restriction regarding marriages.
- (1) No Government servant shall enter into, or contract, a marriage with a person having a spouse living; and  (2) No Government servant, having a spouse living shall enter into or contract, a marriage with any person :  Provided that Government may permit a Government servant to enter into, or contract, any such marriage as is referred to in clause (1) or clause (2) if it is satisfied that -  (a) such marriage is permissible under the personal law applicable to such Government servant and the other party to the marriage; and  (b) there are other grounds for so doing.
(3) A Government servant who has married or marries a person other than of Indian Nationality shall forthwith intimate the fact to the Government."
6.
Bigamy is thus undeniably a misconduct for a government servant.
7.
Apart from this a person selected for appointment before being allowed to join, is required to make certain declarations in writing which also include declaration regarding his marital status.
In terms of government circular No. 13293, dated 5101991 a person being appointed on compassionate grounds too is required to make the same declarations as any other person being appointed in the normal course.
In other words a person being appointed on compassionate grounds is required to make declaration in writing regarding his marital status.
The petitioner obviously cannot make a declaration that he has a single wife and the moment he states that he has two wives, he would land himself in the position of an employee guilty of a misconduct.
Thus, his position would be that of a delinquent even before he joins the service.
8.
Further, public policy is strongly opposed to bigamy and the courts, therefore, should take a view discouraging the practice of bigamy.
9.
For the reasons discussed above, I am unable to find any infirmity in the decision not to appoint the petitioner on compassionate grounds.
No relief can be granted to the petitioner.
This writ petition is dismissed but with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.