RL Anand, J - The controversy in this writ petition during its pendency has become a little bit short.
2.
The petitioner is seeking regularisation of his services on the post of a Supervisor since July, 1987 merely on the ground that he had been working on work-charged basis and the respondent-authorities have adopted the instructions dated 27-5-1993 first time in the year 1994 and thereafter in the year 1996.
Challenge has been given by the respondents merely on the ground that petitioner is holding a diploma in Mechanical Engineering.
There is no mechanical cadre or wing in the respondent-department.
There are only two cadres i.e. civil wing and electrical wing.
For civil wing, a candidate is required to possess diploma in Civil Engineering and for electrical wing, a candidate is required to possess diploma in Electrical Engineering.
Since the petitioner is not qualified to be considered in the civil or electrical wing, therefore, his services cannot be regularised.
It is also the stand of the respondents that only a casual work was being taken from the petitioner sometimes in the civil and sometimes in the electrical wing.
Since the basic qualifications are not being fulfilled by the petitioner, therefore, his case for regularisation is not made out even as per the policy of the State Government.
3.
After applying my mined to the.
contentions raised by the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the opinion that there is no merit in the stand taken up by the learned counsel for the respondent for the simple reason that the petitioner is working on work charged basis since July, 1987 precisely since 14-7-1987.
Whatever work was assigned to him, there is no complaint on behalf of the respondents.
No departmental enquiry is pending.
Work and conduct is also not found unsatisfactory.
With the lapse of 15 years, the petitioner must have attained sufficient experience to discharge the duties if assigned in the civil or electrical wing.
4.
In these circumstances, I allow this petition and give directions to the respondent-authorities to regularise the services of the petitioner as per the policy Annexure P-8 and subsequent policies and pass appropriate orders within 3 months from the date of receipt of the copy of this order.
It is also made clear that he shall be given the regular pay-scale from the date of his regularisation.
Petition allowed.