Swatanter Kumar, J - This is a petition under Articles 226 of the Constitution of India wherein the petitioner prays for issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to consider the claim of the petitioner for promotion to the post of clerk from the post of peon with effect from the date his junior were promoted.
The petitioner was promoted as a peon on 2591985.
In the year 1990, the petitioner passed his matriculation examination from Varanasi.
The petitioner on 1161991 in pursuance to the instructions of the Government, which are annexed to the writ petition as Annexure P-5, applied for being considered for promotion on temporary basis to the post of clerk and subject to approval of the then Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana.
The Board did not accord approval.
The petitioner was, thus, reverted to the post of peon on 24111994.
The petitioner also passed the additional subject to English in Matriculation in September, 1997, and thereafter submitted his application to the same effect on 291997.
His juniors, namely, Vinod Kumar and Krishan Lal, peons, were promoted with effect from 30.9.1997, but request of the petitioner was rejected on 4111997 vide Annexure P-7.
The petitioner submitted representation against his wrongful rejection on 25.5.1998.
It is this action of the respondents which is challenged in this writ petition as the petitioner was reverted by the existing rules when his juniors were promoted.
The action of the respondents is stated to be violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
2.
Upon notice, the respondents filed detailed reply.
The facts are not really in dispute.
What is stated is that when in September, 1997 the petitioner passed his matriculation examination he had failed in English and as such he was not eligible to be considered for promotion.
It is even admitted by the petitioner that he passed his additional subject in English at a subsequent stage and, thus, he does not possess the requisite qualifications for promotion to the post of clerk.
On 2021998 there was no vacancy in the office for the category of the petitioner and as such he could not be promoted.
It is not disputed that juniors to the petitioner were promoted, but it is averred that they were fully qualified and eligible in terms of the qualifications provided by the post of clerk.
3.
We are primarily concerned to see whether the prescribed qualifications or eligibility criteria specify that a candidate should pass his matriculation examination with English as a compulsory subject.
It was conceded before us that the qualifications for promotion to the post of Clerk, wherein peon is the feeder cadre, is that a person should be a matriculate.
Vide circular dated 2031997 the office of the Chief Secretary to the Government of Haryana issued complete instructions in regard to appointment of Class-IV employees on the post of Clerks on regular basis.
In the said letter the above position was reiterated.
The relevant extract of the said letter reads as under :-  "........After consideration on this matter the Govt. has decided to promote them on the post of Clerk to encourage them but they have to fulfil the following conditions :-  1) He should be matriculate.
2) He had worked for atleast 2 years on any post of Class IV.
3) Such promotions can be made by the Deptt.
on adhoc basis for six months.
In case during this period the work of the employee is found satisfactory, then approval may be taken from the Board for regular appointment but after regular appointment they shall be put on probation for one year and if during probation period then he may be appointed on permanent basis on the available permanent post.
In case during probation period his work and conduct is not found to be satisfactory then he may be reverted to the post of same class.
4) It is not essential for such employee to pass the examination for the post of Clerk being conduct by the Board.
5) When Class IV employee is promoted on adhoc basis on the post of Clerk then he shall be given the pay scale of Clerk and for which period he works on the post of Clerk that shall be included for grant of increment.
6) Such promotions shall be on the basis of seniority-cum-fitness."
4.
It was further stated that the Government had taken a decision that appointment should be made in accordance with rules and the instructions should be carefully complied with.
The petitioner has placed his matriculation certificate on record as Annexure P-2.
The certificate has been issued by the Punjab School Education Board.
As per the norms prevailing at the relevant time, a person was entitled to be declared passed despite the fact that he failed in any one of the subjects.
The petitioner got 22 out of 100 marks in English, but in other subjects, the petitioner had secured marks bearing 48 to 91 and had got 315 marks out of total of 650.
The certificate declared him passed.
As such the Government is not the competent authority to treat him as failed or having not passed matriculation examination in accordance with norms.
Unless the qualifications had specifically provided that the applicant should pass matriculation with English as compulsory subject, the respondents are not justified in rejecting the candidature of the petitioner for consideration.
5.
We may also notice that in September, 1997, the petitioner even passed the English subject as additional paper and got 51 marks out of 100.
Even if we assume for the sake of arguments that the stand of the respondents has any merit, even then with effect from September, 1997, the petitioner was qualified to be promoted as he possessed the prescribed qualifications.
6.
On the basis of the above reasoning, we are not impressed with the statement made on behalf of the respondents that there were no vacancies in the year 1998.
The petitioner became eligible for promotion in September, 1997 and even prior thereto as he was fully eligible to be promoted as Clerk being matric pass.
Thus, the respondents were under obligation to consider the case of the petitioner and in any case from September, 1997 when his juniors were promoted.
For the reasons afore-stated we allow this writ petition and direct the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner for promotion to the post of Clerk in accordance with rules, treating him as eligible (matric pass) in any case as in September, 1997.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.