RL Anand, J - We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance have gone through the record of the case.
2.
The principal argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that petitioner was exonerated for charge No. 1 by the Inquiry Officer yet it has been held by the Punishing Authority that charge No. 1 along with charge No. 2, stands proved against the petitioner.
3.
The contention raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner is totally erroneous.
It is true that the finding of the Inquiry Officer shows that charge No. 1 has not been proved but the punishing authority disagreed with the findings of the Inquiry Officer and vide Annexure P-2, came to the conclusion by writing a note of disagreement according to law that charge No. 1 also stands proved.
In this regard it would be appropriate for us to reproduce the contents of letter, Annexure P-2 as under :-  "A departmental enquiry was conducted against you by Shri Birendra Kumar, Commissioner for Departmental Inquiries, Central Vigilance Commission, New Delhi.
The report of the Inquiry Officer is enclosed.
The disciplinary authority do not agree with the findings of the Inquiry Officer as far as it relates to Article-1 of the charge and held the Article-1 of charge levelled against you as proved due to the following reasons/facts :  " The imputation under charge-1 levelled against you has been corroborated by Shri R Jagdish Chandran, Addl.
DIG.
CRPF (SW-1).
In this connection the deposition of Shri R Jagdish Chandran, ADIG (SW-1) is significant in as much as he has confirmed your indulgence in getting the illegal gratification of Rs. 5,000/- which was received by you and brought by you and then counted (as confirmed by Dr. SS Patra CMO (SW-2) and Shri LS Negi, Dy.
Commandant (SW-3 also) and kept in the custody of Shri C Arumugham, Inspector and sent even a signal to headquarters to send another officer for recruitment in place of you etc. Shri Jagdish Chandran Addl.
DIG (SW-1) held his ground even in cross-examination.
2.
The disciplinary authority will take a suitable decision after considering the report and reasons for disagreement with the findings of the Inquiry Officer as stated above.
If you wish to make any representation or submission.
You may do so in writing to the disciplinary authority within 15 days of receipt of this letter."
4.
The punishing authority has a right under the law to disagree with the findings of the Inquiry Officer.
The only requirement on the part of the punishing authority is that it should give the reasons for disagreement, which has been done in the present case.
Resultantly, there is no merit in this writ petition and the same is hereby dismissed.
Petition dismissed.