RL Anand, J - Shri Vishwa Mittar Mahajan, petitioner has filed the present writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India and it has been prayed by the petitioner that directions be issued against the respondents to release the post retiral dues to the petitioner by setting aside the order dated 2492000.
2.
During the course of submissions, the dispute is only with regard to the interest on the delayed payment.
As the learned Counsel for the parties submitted jointly before us that the retiral benefits have since been paid to the petitioner, therefore, we confine the case of the parties with the following facts :  3.
Shri Vishwa Mitter Mahajan, petitioner, retired from service on 31st October, 1998.
Retiral benefits were due to the petitioner, but he was paid the retiral benefits by way of instalments and the first instalment of Rs. 2 lac was paid to the petitioner on 21st March, 2001, the second instalment of Rs. 125 lac was paid on 23rd April, 2001 and the remaining amount of Rs. 1,84,904/- was paid to the petitioner on 10th September, 2001.
4.
The learned Counsel for the petitioner submitted that since there was no fault on behalf of the petitioner; that nothing was required to be done on the part of the petitioner, therefore, directions should be given to the respondents to pay interest on the delayed payment.
5.
Shri Nagpal, the learned Counsel appearing on behalf of respondent Nos. 3 and 4, submitted that, in fact, all payments have been released by respondent Nos. 3 and 4 from its own account.
So far, the State Government has not reimbursed to respondent Nos. 3 and 4.
With regard to the dates of payments, it is not disputed by respondent Nos. 3 and 4 that the first instalment was paid on 21st March, 2001 as stated by the learned Counsel for the petitioner.
6.
The retiral benefits are the legal right of the retiree.
Such retiral benefits should ordinarily be released to the retiree within a reasonable time of his retirement so that he may be able to survive himself along with his family members.
7.
After considering the submissions raised by the learned Counsel for the parties, we are of the opinion that there is no justifiable reason on the part of respondent Nos. 3 and 4 to withhold the retiral benefits.
Thus, we given directions to respondent Nos. 3 and 4 to pay interest at the rate of 6% per annum which shall be calculated with effect from 1st April, 1999 up to the dates on which the part payments were made.
The arrears shall be released to the petitioner within three months from the receipt of a copy of this order.
The writ petition stands disposed of accordingly.
Dasti order.
Petition disposed of.