RL Anand, J - Smt. Roshani Devi, petitioner has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India and it has been prayed by her that order 1212000 Annexure P-9 be quashed.
It has been further prayed by the petitioner that directions be issued to respondents to reimburse the actual medical expenses incurred on the treatment of his husband along with interest.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that her husband Shri Om Parkash joined as Clerk/Auction Recorder with respondent No. 4 on 951989.
He was suffering from the disease of Cirrohosis and Portal Hypertension.
He was referred by the Medical Officer, Government Hospital, Fatheabad to P.G.I.M.S.
Rohtak.
The condition of her husband became very serious on 3071999.
He was taken to Hisar where he was not attended by any doctor.
Rather it was advised verbally to go to P.G.I.M.S.
Rohtak or Apollo Hospital, New Delhi.
Resultantly, the deceased Shri Om Parkash was taken to Apollo Hospital, New Delhi on 3011999.
The husband of the petitioner remained admitted in the said hospital from 3071999 to 1081999.
On the treatment of the deceased, a sum of Rs. 4,17,890/- was spent.
The petitioner was discharged from the Apollo Hospital on 1081999.
After discharge he was taken to Hisar where he was admitted in Ravindra Hospital.
Unfortunately, he died on 191999 at 200 pm The petitioner also spent a sum of Rs. 17240/- when the deceased was lying admitted in Ravindra Hospital, Hisar.
3.
It is the case of the petitioner that a sum of Rs. 4,43,930/- in all was spent on medicines and treatment of the deceased.
The petitioner requested respondents No. 3 and 4 for the reimbursement of the actual amount but the request was declined mainly on the ground that since Apollo Hospital is not recognised by the Government of Haryana, therefore, the amount cannot be sanctioned.
It is further alleged by the petitioner that vide Government instructions dated 30.11.1993 the Government of Haryana has approved Hospitals, like Batra Hospital, New Delhi, Escort Hospital, New Delhi and Navedic Prothotic Centre, Zirakpur.
The case in short of the petitioner is that the order of rejection dated 1212000 Annexure P-9, is illegal, null and void and unconstitutional.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
A joint written statement was filed on behalf of respondent No. 3 and 4 and it was pleaded that since the Apollo Hospital has not been recognised by the State Government, therefore, any expenses of the treatment taken by the employee of the Government in this hospital were not to be reimbursed.
4.
I have heard the learned Counsel for the parties and with their assistance have gone through the record of the case.
5.
It is the admitted case of the parties that an employee of the State Government is entitled to medical reimbursement.
Otherwise also, if an employee during service falls ill, he can seek treatment and such treatment is to be reimbursed by the State Government which of course can formulate the policy at any time controlling the expenditure which might be incurred by a patient.
However, arbitrariness on the part of an employee in getting medical treatment is not permissible and that is the reason that the Government of Haryana has formulated a policy vide which Batra Hospital and Escort Hospital have been given the recognition.
We all know that the treatment is a matter of confidence between the patient and the doctor.
Apollo Hospital is also a hospital of repute in the Northern India.
It provides specialised treatment.
Some specialities are peculiar to a particular hospital.
If a patient opts to go to in Apollo Hospital in order to get the genuine treatment, expenditure on getting such treatment should not be scuttled down on the technical ground that he had got the treatmnet from a hospital which is not recognised.
Health is equal important not only to the public servant but also to his family members.
6.
In my opinion the Government did not act in a rational manner while rejecting the case of the petitioner for medical reimbursement.
At the most it could say that the petitioner or the husband of the deceased would be given the medical expenses as per the rules applicable in PGI, Chandigarh or AIIMS, New Delhi.
To reject the genuine claim of medical reimbursement of an ex- employee, which is his legal right, will be an act of arbitrariness.
As per the policy Annexure P-10, if an employee gets treatment from the recognised hospital, he is entitled to reimbursement equivalent to the rates of AIIMS, New Delhi/PGI, Chandigarh.
If the expenses exceed the said rates, in such a situation, 75% of the same is liable to be reimbursed by the Government and remainder 25% shall be borne by the patient himself.
7.
In this view of the matter, I allow this writ petition by setting aside the order Annexures P-9 dated 1212000 and give directions to the respondents to sanction the medical reimbursement claim of the deceased and pay the same at the rates of AIIMs, New Delhi or PGI, Chandigarh, whichever is lower, within two months from the receipt of the copy of the order.
If the money is not released within two months; as stated above, the respondent authorities shall pay interest at the rate of 9%.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Order dasti to both the parties for implementation.
Petition allowed.