RL Anand, J - Meena Bhamra and three others (petitioners) have filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India against the respondents and it has been prayed that the orders dated 542001 have been passed by respondent No. 4 vis-a-vis each one of the petitioners without issuing any show cause notice, chargesheet, evidence, or opportunity of hearing and without complying the principles of natural justice.
Therefore, these orders cannot stand in the eyes of law.
2.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents who filed the reply and denied the allegations.
According to the respondents the petitioners were ad hoc employees and the appointing authority had passed the impugned orders within the domain of conditions of service.
3.
Re-joinder was filed by the petitioners in which they contradicted the stand of the respondents by reiterating that the principles of natural justice have not been complied with by the respondents.
4.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance have gone through the record of the case.
5.
In my opinion all the four impugned orders cannot be sustained in the eyes of law on the short ground that these have been passed without complying the principles of natural justice.
To proceed further, it will be appropriate for me to reproduce one sample order in order to appreciate the contention raised by the learned counsel for the petitioners, as under :-  "The State Government constituted an inquiry committee to look into the working of the University including the matter regarding the leakage of the question papers in the examination held in December 2000/2001.
The inquiry committee conducted the inquiry and gave its recommendations which have been accepted by the government.
In the light of recommendations of Enquiry Committee, Sh. Harjinder Saini is hereby removed from the University service with immediate effect i.e. from 5042001 afternoon."
6.
The reading of the above order would show that each one of the petitioners has been indicted.
The order is stigmatic and it can affect the future career of each one of the petitioners.
Before passing this type of order, which is stigmatic prima facie, it is obligatory on the part of the punishing authority at least to call for the explanation of each one of the petitioners.
This rule of natural justice has not been complied with by the punishing authority vis-a-vis anyone of the petitioners.
7.
Resultantly, the writ petition is hereby allowed.
The order dated 542001 vis-a-vis each one of the petitioners is hereby quashed and directions are given to respondents No. 3 and 4 to reinstate each one of the petitioners into service.
A declaration is also given in favour of the petitioners that each one of them will be deemed to be in service on 542001 and they shall also be entitled to back wages and consequential benefits.
It is further observed that it will always be open to the punishing authority to pass a fresh order but only after complying the principles of natural justice.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.