RL Anand, J - Petitioners have filed this writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India against the respondents and have sought the quashment of the order dated 24/2582000 vide which petitioner No. 3 was transferred from Municipal Corporation, Amritsar to Municipal Corporation, Jalandhar.
It has been further prayed that a writ in the nature of mandamus be issued against the respondents directing Municipal Corporation, Amritsar to consider the claims of the petitioners for promotion against the nine vacant posts of Chief Sanitary Inspectors as it existed prior to 1472000 and were supposed to be filled at the level of the Corporation as these posts were non-provincialised.
2.
The case of the petitioners lies in a small compass.
They were Sanitary Inspectors and the next channel of promotion was Chief Sanitary Inspector.
Earlier the cadre of Sanitary Inspectors and Chief Sanitary Inspectors was localised and the posts of Chief Sanitary Inspectors were supposed to be filled by the Corporation at its own level.
Subsequently, vide notification dated 1472000 the cadre of Chief Sanitary Inspectors became a provincialised cadre of the employees of all the Corporations.
Similarly the Government made notification and provincialised the posts of Sanitary Inspectors like Chief Sanitary Inspectors.
3.
The controversy in the present writ petition revolves when the petitioners alleged that the posts of Chief Sanitary Inspectors which were lying vacant prior to 1472000 ought to have been filled by the Municipal Corporation at its own level as by the cut-off date i.e. 1472000 there was no provincialised cadre of a (sic) the Corporations.
It is also the case of the petitioners that their case for promotion to the posts of Chief Sanitary Inspectors has to be governed by the old rules.
4.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
A joint written statement was filed on behalf of respondents No. 1 and 2 and the case of these respondents runs as under :-  "It is submitted that promotions from one provincialised post to next higher promotional line are to be made at the Government/Directorate level as per the provisions of the service rules governing the posts in question, on receipt of a reference dated 14.9.1999 (Annexure P-3) referred to in the para, from Municipal Corporation, Amritsar, promotion of Sanitary Inspectors could not be effected as the post of Chief Sanitary Inspector, which is the next higher promotional post, was yet to be provincialised by the Government and also that the joint seniority list of Sanitary Inspectors of all the Municipal Corporations has not finalised to facilitate promotions to the post of Chief Sanitary Inspector.
Furthermore, the Department of Local Government was in the process to revise the Municipal Corporation Service Rules including the posts of Sanitary Inspector and Chief Sanitary inspector, therefore, it is submitted that due to the aforesaid reasons promotions of the petitioners could not be considered up till now.
However, it is submitted that the matter is under consideration and same is likely to be finalised in due course of time."
5.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance have gone through the record of the case.
6.
It is not disputed that prior to 1472000 the channel of promotion for the post of Sanitary Inspector to the post of Chief Sanitary Inspector was to be completed by the Corporation at its own level and there was no common cadre of the employees of all the Corporations, meaning thereby there was no provincialised cadre.
It is the case of the petitioners that 9 posts of Chief Sanitary Inspectors were lying vacant prior to 1472000.
If this is the position, then the petitioners had the right to be considered for promotion against those posts and this exercise was supposed to be done by the Corporation at its own level.
The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents No. 1 and 2 fairly submits that old posts have to be governed by the old rules.
7.
In this view of the matter, this writ petition is hereby disposed of by giving directions to respondent No. 3 to reconsider the matter of promotions to the posts of Chief Sanitary Inspectors and if the posts were in existence prior to 1472000, the petitioners shall be considered for promotion subject to their suitability etc.
The petitioners shall also be entitled to all the consequential benefits in case respondent No. 3 decides to implement the present order.
The entire exercise shall be completed by the respondent No. 3 within four months from the receipt of the copy of the order.
No order as to costs.
Order accordingly.