RL Anand, J - Shri Bawa Dass son of Shri Banarsi Dass has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/22 of the Constitution of India and it has been prayed by the petitioner that the writ in the nature of the manomus be issued against the respondents to grant him a post of Peon or any other suitable post on compassionate grounds in lieu of death of his mother Smt. Giano.
It has also been prayed by the petitioner that a writ in the nature of certiorari be issued and the letter dated 552000 be quashed.
2.
Some facts can be noticed in the following manner :  Smt. Giano deceased was the mother of petitioner and she was working as a Sweepress in Basti Jodhewal Branch of the Punjab National Bank, Ludhiana, w.e.f.
351982.
She expired on 5th January, 1999.
An application was made to the Senior Manager, Punjab National Bank, Basti Jodhewal Branch, Ludhiana by the husband of the deceased to give employment to his son Shri Bawa Dass on compassionate ground.
Some information was sought which was also supplied by the father of the petitioner.
Later on, vide communication dated 552000 the request for compassionate appointment was declined on the ground that the financial position of the family was sound and could bear the burden on account of the death of Smt. Giano.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents, who filed reply and denied the allegations.
The stand taken up by the respondents can be summed up in the following manner :  (i) Brother of the petitioner is already in employment of the Oriental Bank of Commerce and having sizeable income near about Rs. 12,000/- P.M.;  (ii) Another brother of the petitioner namely Baljeet Kumar is also employed in some private firm;  (iii) The petitioner is residing with his father and brother as joint family;  (iv) The family condition of the family of the deceased was not as such which would have warranted compassionate appointment to the petitioner.
4.
We have heard Shri Harsh Aggarwal Advocate on behalf of the petitioner and Shri G.S.
Bajwa Advocate on behalf of the respondents and with their assistance, have gone through the record of the case.
5.
The stand taken up by respondent Nos. 1 and 2 in their written statement would show that the case of the petitioner is primarily being declined on the ground that the condition of the family of the deceased was not as such which could have warranted compassionate appointment to the petitioner.
While rejecting the case of the petitioner, the respondents have primarily held that the brother of the petitioner is already in employment of the Oriental Bank of Commerce and having sizeable income near about Rs. 12,000/- per month; yet another brother of the petitioner, namely, Baljeet Kumar is also employed in some private firm.
This stand taken up by the respondents is not tenable.
There is nothing on the record to show that the petitioner was constituting a joint family with his two brothers.
The third stand taken up by the respondents is that the petitioner is residing with his father and brother as joint family.
There is nothing on the record again to show that the petitioner or the father of the petitioner were constituting a joint family with the brother of the petitioner.
Also there is no evidence to suggest on the record that the condition of the family of the deceased was such that the compassionate appointment could be deprived to the petitioner.
6.
Since it has not been established on the record that Shri Bawa Dass and his father were constituting a joint family which is another circumstance, we allow this writ petition by giving directions to respondent Nos. 1 and 2 to consider the case of the petitioner for compassionate appointment according to the Policy and pass an appropriate order within six months from the receipt of copy of this order.
No order as to costs.
Dasti order.
Petition allowed.