RL Anand, J - Shri Ravinder Singh has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India praying that a writ of mandamus be issued against the respondents directing them to consider him for employment on compassionate grounds as per his entitlement against a suitable post.
2.
Some facts can be noticed and described as under:-  Shri Dharamvir Singh was the father of the petitioner.
He died on 451996.
At the time of death of his father the petitioner was a minor.
His mother Smt. Sharda Rani made a request the bank authorities for the grant of compassionate appointment to her son.
The request was made after one year of the death of said Shri Dharamvir Singh i.e. on 1771998.
It was declined by the respondent authorities mainly on the ground that the request of Smt. Sharda Rani seeking employment of her son has come after a lapse of one year, therefore, the petitioner cannot be considered for appointment on compassionate grounds.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents, who filed the reply and denied the allegations.
The stand taken up by the respondents is that the request of Smt. Sharda Rani has been received in their office after one year of the death of Shri Dharamvir Singh, therefore, the application has been filed.
4.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance have gone through the record of the case.
5.
The policy of the respondent-bank contains a proviso for the relaxation of the conditions of the policy.
It lay down as follows :-  "Provided that the Executive Committee of the Central Board may consider the relaxations in the following cases subject to the condition that such requests are received by the Bank within a year from the date of death of the employee :  i) In case, the defendant to be offered appointment is a minor, the offer of appointment may be kept open beyond a period of four years upto a maximum period of six years from the date of death of the employee."
Admittedly, in this case this angle of the case has not been examined by the bank authorities.
Since Smt. Sharda Rani has already relinquished her right of consideration for compassionate appointment in favour of her son, who was minor at the time of death of his father, therefore, we allow this writ petition and give directions to the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner for compassionate appointment according to the policy of the bank and necessary orders shall be passed according to law within six months from the receipt of the copy of the order.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.