RL Anand, J - Smt. Lajwanti widow of Shri Babu Ram, has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India and it has been prayed by the petitioner that a writ of mandamus be issued to respondents No. 3 and 4 to release the pension to the petitioner as admissible to her as the retired from service on 3061998 after completion of 15 years of casual service and about 12 years of confirmed service as a Safai Sewak with Municipal Council Kurali.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that she had rendered more than 15 years part-time service with respondent No. 4 and since the year 1121986 she was made permanent and regular employee.
She retired from service on 3061998.
She is entitled to the pension because according to rule if an employee renders more than ten years regular service he is entitled to the relief of pension.
According to the petitioner she had rendered more than 11- 1/2 years regular and confirmed service but she has been deprived of the benefit of pension on the plea that deductions towards her Contributory Provident Fund was started in the month of June 1989 and as such she is not qualified for pension as she has not completed her ten years of service.
She earlier filed a writ petition which was disposed of with the directions to the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner for pension but it has been illegally rejected.
The petitioner cannot be penalised for the action of respondent No. 4 when it did not deduct the money for the Contributory Provident Fund from the salary of the petitioner with effect from the date when her services were regularised.
The action of respondents No. 3 and 4 in depriving the benefit of the pension of the petitioner is illegal.
Hence the present writ petition.
3.
Notice of writ petition was given to the respondents.
A joint written statement was filed on behalf of respondents No. 1 to 3.
According to respondents No. 1 to 3, the petitioner was neither a Government employee nor her pension is being paid by the State Government out of State Exchequer.
Till June 1994, her services were covered under the Contributory Provident Fund Rules and no pension scheme was in existence.
The Department of Local Government, on the demand of Municipal employees notified a pension scheme in lieu of Contributory Provident Fund Rules titled "the Punjab Municipal Employees Pension and General Provident Fund Rules, 1994".
These rules were made applicable retrospectively from 141990.
In these rules, the basic criteria regarding the eligibility for the pension, period of service and the source of funding were defined.
As per pension rules, a retiree should have at least 10 years qualifying service for pension at the time he or she superannuates.
Since the qualifying service for pension of the petitioner falls short of the minimum of 10 years, she is not eligible for pension and as such the writ petition is liable to be dismissed.
4.
The stand of respondent No. 4 has been highlighted in para No. 2 of the written statement which can be described in the following manner :-  "That in reply to the para No. 2 of the petition, it is submitted that the petitioner Lajwanti w/o Babu Ram was working as part time Safai Sewak up to 30111986 on fixed daily (DC Rate) and thereafter she was appointed on regular basis in pay scale of Rs. 300-430 w.e.f.
01121986 vide Adm. Order No. 140 dated 18111986 (Annexure RE-4/1).
She retired from service on 30061998.
Deduction of Contributory Provident Fund from her salary was started on 01.06.1989".
5.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance have gone through the record of the case.
6.
The sole point for determination before me is whether the petitioner was eligible to the benefit of pension as per the pension scheme on the date of the retirement or not ?
7.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has invited my attention to para No. 2 of the written statement of respondent No. 4 and submits that it is the admitted case of respondent No. 4 that the service of the petitioner was regularised and she was given the regular pay scale of Rs. 300-400 with effect from 01121986.
The petitioner retired from service on 3061998 and she had already completed ten years service as a regular employee and, therefore, she is entitled to the benefit of the pension.
8.
On the contrary, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the contesting respondents submitted that though the petitioner was appointed on regular basis with effect from 1121986 but the petitioner did not opt for the pension scheme and her deductions towards Contributory Provident Fund started with effect from 1.6.1989 and, therefore, as on 3061998 the petitioner has less than ten years regular service at her credit.
9.
The submission of the learned counsel for the respondents cannot be accepted; firstly it is not the defence set up in para No. 2 of the written statement and secondly as per the provisions of the scheme an employee is entitled to the benefit of the pension on completion of ten years regular service.
The petitioner has completed ten years regular services as on 1.12.1996.
She retired from service on 3061998.
In these circumstances, she had more than 12 years of the service as a regular employee, therefore, she was entitled to the benefit of the pension.
There is not an iota of evidence on the record to suggest that the petitioner was ever asked to exercise her option as to whether she wants to switch over the pension scheme or to the Contributory Provident Fund Scheme.
10.
In this view of the matter, the writ is allowed and directions are given to the respondents No. 3 and 4 to prepare the pension papers of the petitioner within six months from today.
The petitioner shall co-operate with the department and fill up all the necessary papers.
On completion of the necessary papers, the petitioner shall be entitled to the benefit of pension according to rules and regulations.
If any amount is required to be deposited by the petitioner she will deposit the same along with interest at the rate of 6%.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.