RL Anand, J - Shri Satpal petitioner has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India and it has been prayed by the petitioner that directions be issued to the respondents to consider and appoint him as Class-IV employee on compassionate ground as his father died in harness while in service of respondent No. 3.
It was also prayed that a declaration be given in his favour that his non-appointment by the respondents on compassionate ground is an act of arbitrariness and is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
2.
It is alleged by the petitioner that he is unemployed and able-bodied young man.
His father Shri Parkash was a Sweeper in GGS Medical College and Hospital, Faridkot and was working under respondent No. 3.
He died on 661997 while in service.
The petitioner, after the death of his father, made an application for appointment on compassionate ground to the respondents.
As per the instructions of the Government, respondent No. 3 has not considered the petitioner for appointment on compassionate grounds as Class IV employee.
The petitioner again submitted an application dated 1392000 along with the documents for considering his previous application which was submitted to respondent No. 3.
He also submitted a memorandum through Punjab Subordinate Services Federation dated 8102000.
It is alleged by the petitioner that respondent authorities are not considering his case for compassionate appointment.
This action on the part of the respondents is arbitrary and discriminatory.
Respondent No. 3 has already appointed Prem Kumar, Satinder Singh, Balraj, Balwinder Kaur etc. on similar grounds and circumstances but by not doing so vis-a-vis the petitioner they have violated the provisions of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents and the stand of the State is that the petitioner is a major.
He is married.
His mother Smt. Lajwanti is employed in the office of the Principal, Guru Gobind Singh Medical College, Faridkot.
So much so even the wife of the petitioner is also employed as Class IV employee in the department of Pathology, Guru Gobind Singh College, Faridkot.
The petitioner applied for employment on compassionate grounds.
As per the Punjab Govt. instructions dated 521996, the petitioner was not entitled for such appointment as he was not dependent upon which deceased father.
Shri Parkash deceased was not only the bread- winner of the family.
The mother and wife of the petitioner are working as Class IV employees in Guru Gobind Singh Medical College, Faridkot under respondent No. 3.
Moreover, the petitioner was asked to submit the dependent certificate from the Deputy Commissioner concerned.
He failed to submit the requisite certificate.
The application of the petitioner was considered and rejected by the respondents vide office letter dated 222001.
4.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance have gone through the record of this case.
First of all, I would like to refer to the order Annexure R-1, passed by the respondent authorities which runs as follows :-  "As you have failed to produce dependent certificate from the Deputy Commissioner, Faridkot and since your wife Smt. Niki Devi is already employed in Guru Gobind Singh Medical College, Faridkot, you cannot claim to be dependent on your deceased father Sh. Parkash, your application for compassionate employment is rejected as it is not covered under the policy guidelines on compassionate employment contained in Punjab Govt. letter No. 11/27/94-2PPI/2364 dated 521996."
5.
Thus, from the reading of document Annexure R-1, it is abundantly clear that petitioner was not the dependent upon his father.
So much so, his wife is in service.
His mother is also in service.
The object of compassionate appointment is to tide over the financial difficulty which might be faced by the family of the deceased.
There are two earning hands in the family of the petitioner.
It is not even the case of the petitioner that he is residing separately from his mother or wife.
6.
Faced with this difficulty, learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that as per the guidelines of the Government, the dependent member of the family of the deceased government employee, in deserving cases, can apply for compassionate appointment.
He further submitted that the case of the petitioner was deserving one.
He had no income.
He was dependent upon the income of his father Shri Parkash.
Instructions P-3 relied upon by the learned counsel for the petitioner do not advance the case of the petitioner; firstly, the petitioner has to show that he was dependent upon the income of his father and he has not produced the certificate from the Deputy Commissioner and secondly it is established on the record that the wife of the petitioner is in service.
So much so, the petitioner has not given the challenge to the letter dated 222001 (Annexure R-1).
7.
Resultantly, I am of the considered opinion that petitioner has not been able to make out a case for compassionate appointment as per the policy of the Government.
The writ petition is hereby dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.