RL Anand, J - Dr Archana Sud (petitioner) has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India and she has prayed for the issuance of a writ of certiorari against the respondents that the cut-off date i.e. 30th June/1st July as given in paragraph 5 of the Assessment Promotion Scheme (Annexure P-8), may be quashed and directions be given to the respondents to count seniority of the petitioner for promotion to the post of Associate Professor w.e.f.
22nd July, 1999 when she completed four years.
2.
Some facts can be noticed in the following manner:  The petitioner was appointed as an Assistant Professor on 31st March, 1994 in the department of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh, (for short the 'P.G.I.').
It may be mentioned here that at the time of appointment of the petitioner on adhoc basis, he was appointed against leave vacancy and the authorities never advertised that post to the public at large so as to adopt the principle of equality.
Be that as it may, the tenure of the petitioner on adhoc basis was extended from time to time firstly for a period of three months up to 31st March, 1995, and thereafter, for a further period of six months.
The post was advertised for the first time by adopting the principle of equality on September 2, 1994.
In pursuance of that advertisement everybody got the chance to compete.
The petitioner was placed at waiting list No. 1.
Dr. Amita Aggarwal who was recommended for the post, did not join duty, as a result of which the authorities issued appointment letter to the petitioner on 21st July, 1995 and in pursuance thereof the petitioner joined duty as Assistant Professor on regular basis for the first time on 22nd July, 1999 (?
22nd July, 1995).
As per the Assessment Promotion Scheme, the petitioner was promoted to the post of Associate Professor and her seniority was counted w.e.f.
July, 2000.
The grievance of the petitioner is that her seniority should be counted w.e.f.
22nd July, 1999 when she completed four years under the Scheme itself and that the cut off date given in paragraph 5 of the Scheme is arbitrary and has no nexus to be achieved.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents who filed the reply and denied the allegations.
According to the respondents the Scheme is valid.
The petitioner has been given seniority w.e.f.
1st July, 2000 though the recommendation made by the selection committee was in the month of April, 2001.
4.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance, have gone through the record of this case.
5.
Para No. 5 of the Assessment Promotion Scheme runs as follows :  "The assessment Board will meet once in a year and consider the fitness of all persons who have completed the eligibility service of four years as on 30th June of that year.
All promotions, under the scheme will be effective from 1st July."
6.
The learned counsel for the petitioner vehemently submitted that since it was an Assessment Promotion Scheme and the petitioner joined service on 22nd July, 1995 on regular basis, therefore, the petitioner deserves to be considered on completion of exact four years and, thus, she should be given seniority w.e.f.
22nd July, 1999.
I am not in a position to subscribe to the arguments raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
As stated above, it is an Assessment Promotion Scheme depending upon the suitability of a person.
As per the Scheme, the Assessment Board was to sit once in a year.
In the present case, the Board met between 17th April and 19th April, 2001.
There is no evidence on record at all to suggest that the Board did meet in the year 1999 though in the connected C.W.P.
No. 12959 of 2000 (Dr. Sanjeev Handa v.
P.G.I.)
there is a reference that the Board assembled in October, 2000.
Rather, the benefit of the scheme was given to the petitioner.
In the present case, the Board met in April, 2001.
If the language of the clause is to be interpreted then, perhaps, the petitioner might get the seniority in 2001.
The PGI authorities were quite fair when the date of regular appointment of the petitioner was taken as 1st July, 2000 in pursuance of the Scheme.
In this view of the matter, I am not inclined to give any relief to the petitioner and, therefore, she has no merit.
The writ petition is, therefore, dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.