RL Anand, J. (Oral) - I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance, have gone through the record of this case.
2.
The challenge in this writ petition has been given by Shri BS Sirohi to the order Annexure P-4 dated 11/1551987 vide which the penalty of reduction in rank to the post of Technical Assistant Grade-I was passed.
The operative portion of the punishment runs as follows :  "Now, therefore, the undersigned in exercise of the powers conferred under Regulation 56 of the FCI (Staff) Regulations, 1971 hereby imposes on the said Shri BS Sirohi, Assistant Manager (QC) (under suspension) the punishment of reduction in rank to the post of Technical Assistant Grade-I for a period of five years.
He will join at the bottom of the cadre of Tech.
Assistant Grade I for his seniority for further promotion.
On revocation Shri BS Sirohi is posted as Tech.
Asstt.
Grade 1 in Hoshiarpur Distt."
The learned counsel for the petitioner vehemently submitted that the order Annexure P-4 passed by Shri Bikramjit Singh, Senior Regional Manager is without jurisdiction.
In support of his contention the learned counsel for the petitioner refers to the promotional order of the petitioner dated 16th June, 1972 (Office Code No. 170/1972) and on the basis of this document it was pleaded that the Zonal Manager (North) promoted the petitioner and therefore, the impugned order could only be passed by the Zonal Manager, which is higher in authority and rank than that of the Senior Regional Manager.
3.
The learned counsel for the petitioner relies upon Krishna Kumar v. Divisional Assistant Electrical Engineer and another, 1979(2) S.L.R.
291 and Munna Lal Gupta v Delhi Municipal Corporation of Delhi, 1967 S.L.R.
57.
The judgments cited by the learned counsel for the petitioner are not helpful to me keeping in view the specific regulation.
4.
On the contrary, Shri Hemant Kumar, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the Food Corporation of India submitted that the amendment in the regulations were brought w.e.f.
16th October, 1987 whereas the impugned order Annexure P-4 was passed on 11/1551987.
Therefore, the amended regulation could not be looked into as on 15.5.1987 the Senior Regional Manager was competent to impose penalty of reduction in rank and, therefore, the order is not without jurisdiction.
Regulation 56 of the Staff Regulations, 1971 of the Corporation runs as follows :  "Disciplinary authorities : The Board or the authority specified in Appendix 2 in this behalf or any other authority (higher than the authority specified in appendix 2) empowered in this behalf by a general or special order of the Board, may imposed any of the penalties specified in Regulation 54 on any employee.
(1) The Board or the authority specified in Appendix 2 in this behalf or any other authority (higher than the authority specified in Appendix 2) empowered in this behalf by general or special order of the Board may : (a) institute disciplinary proceedings against any employee of the Corporation ; (b) direct a disciplinary authority to institute disciplinary proceedings against any employee of the Corporation on whom that disciplinary authority is competent to impose under these Regulations any of the penalties specribed in Regulation 54.
(2) A diciplinary authority competent under these regulations to impose any of the penalties specified in Clauses (i) to (iv) of Regulation 54 may institute disciplinary proceedings against any employee of the Corporation for the imposition of any of the penalties in Clauses (v) to (ix) of Regulation 54 notwithstanding that such disciplinary authority is not competent under these regulations to impose any of the latter penalties.
5.
The above quoted regulation is un-amended.
The reading of the same would show that in the case of category II employee, like the petitioner, the Board or the authority specified in Appendix 2 in this behalf or any other authority (higher than the authority specified in Appendix 2 empowered in this behalf by a general or special order of the Board may impose any of the penalties specified in Regulation 54 of any employee.
The reading of the above provisions would clearly show that appointment has become irrelevant for the purpose of imposing the penalty with regard to the category II employees.
If the petitioner has been promoted by the Zonal Manager, still the authority, which is otherwise competent to impose penalty like the one in hand, is not debarred in exercising its powers under Regulations 54 and 56 coupled with Appendix 2.
Appendix-II lays down as follows : Category II  Posts Appointing authority Authority competent to relax age limit and qualifications Authorities competent to impose penalties---------------------Authority Penalties + Appellate Authority Zone Dy.
Zonal Manager Dy.
Zonal Regional Manager/Jt.
Manager Dy.
Zonal Manager, Regional Manager.
Minor Dy.
Zonal Manager.
6.
Thus, the reading of the Appendix 2 would make it clear that the Senior Regional Manager was competent to impose the penalty of reduction in rank.
I have to interpret the language of Regulation 56, which I have already quoted above and the reading of the same leaves no manner of doubt that the Senior Regional Manager was not competent to impose the penalty as imposed in the present case.
Therefore, the impugned order cannot be set aside.
The writ petition is without any merit.
Dismissed.
Petition dismissed.