RL Anand, J. (Oral) - Smt. Sudarshan Kumari petitioner has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India seeking directions against the respondents and it has been prayed by the petitioner that the respondents be directed to release the retiral benefits as, according to the petitioner, she retired from the service of respondent Nos. 4 and 5 on 15th February, 1995.
2.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
One set of the written statement has been filed by respondent Nos. 1 to 3 and the stand of these respondents is that since respondent No. 4 had not deposited their shares of CPF in the Government Treasury in respect of the petitioner which was a condition precedent, so the case of the petitioner for pension could not be considered.
Moreover, the petitioner was not co-operating with the department and, therefore, her case could not be finalised.
On merits, the stand of these respondents is that the petitioner had retired as a teacher on 15th February, 1995.
The case of respondent No. 4, with which there is a main contest between the petitioner, is that the present writ petition is barred by the principle of res judicata.
She had earlier filed a civil suit for the similar relief and it was withdrawn by her without any permission to file either a new suit or to file a civil writ petition.
On merits, the stand of respondent No. 4 is that the petitioner had abandoned her job from the School.
w.e.f.
1st September, 1988 which is run by respondent No. 4.
Thereafter she did not attend the school nor did she deliver any lecture to the students.
She only marked her presence in the attendance register maintained by herself.
The petitioner is not entitled to the benefit of pensionary scheme as it came into force in the year 1989.
3.
Respondent No. 5 has filed a separate written statement.
This respondent has admitted that the petitioner was relieved from her duties w.e.f.
15th February, 1995 on account of superannuation and she was issued the relieving chit with.
No due Certificate against her.
The petitioner had been marking her presence in the Attendance Register meant for the teachers which was started by Shri Darshan Singh, Deputy District Education Officer (Primary), Jalandhar, who was appointed as a Correspondent by the State of Punjab under the Grants- in-Aid Rules.
It was also the stand of respondent No. 5 that the petitioner remained in service throughout her life career from 4th October, 1961 till the date of her superannuation i.e. 15th February, 1995.
It was maintained that regular subscription of CPF was also deducted and deposited in the Oriental Bank of Commerce, Jalandhar, and subsequently it was being deposited in the Government Treasury.
In short, the stand of respondent No. 5 is that the petitioner retired from service wef 15th February, 1995.
4.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance, have gone through the record of this case.
5.
The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner relies on the written statement filed by respondent Nos. 1 and 2 and 5 and vehemently submits that it is established on record that the petitioner retired from service on 15th February, 1995 after attaining the age of superannuation from the Institution i.e. respondent Nos. 4 and 5 and, therefore, she is entitled to the pensionary benefits.
Shri Amar Vivek the learned counsel appearing on behalf of respondent No. 4 with which there is main contest between the petitioner and it, vehemently submits that in fact respondent No. 5 is colluding with the petitioner as Mr. Manoj Kumar is the real brother-in-law of the petitioner.
In fact, there is a conflict between respondent No. 4 and respondent No. 5.
The Institution is being governed by respondent No. 4 and, as per the record of the Institution, the petitioner abandoned the job in the month of September, 1988 and there is no proof on the record that the petitioner served the Institution upto 15th February, 1995.
6.
After considering the rival contentions of the parties, I am of the opinion that it is not established on the record that the petitioner served the Institution upto 15th February, 1995.
The written statement filed by respondents No. 1 to 3 is based on the derived information.
The petitioner has failed to place on record any satisfactory evidence in the shape of attendance register etc. that she had been serving and getting the salary from 1988 onwards upto 15th February, 1995.
What is appears to be that the petitioner unilaterally had been marking her presence in the attendance register being maintained by her.
The self serving statement will no help me to adjudicate that the petitioner had been serving upto 15th February, 1995.
7.
In this view of the matter, I am not inclined to give any relief to the petitioner.
Resultantly, the writ petition is dismissed with the directions to respondent No. 4 that in case the pension scheme is applicable in the case of the petitioner prior to 1988, her case for pension may be considered according to the law by treating her into service upto 1st September, 1988.
There is no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.