Amar Bir Singh Gill, J - The petitioner after doing his B. Com from Panjab University, Chandigarh and M.B.A. (Finance) from MD University, Rohtak applied for three years regular course in LL.B.
in the Department of Law, Kurukshetra University Kurukshetra well before the last date i.e. 2562001.
On 97 2001, merit list was displayed of all the eligible candidates.
However, on 1272001, an amendment was made in the prospectus for the year 2001-2002 in regard to eligibility condition No. 1, copy Annexure P-2.
Amendment subsequent to the declaration of the merit list was against the spirit of the prospectus for admission.
The petitioner assails the amendment as it gave advantage of 5 marks weightage to the students who passed the qualifying examination from Kurukshetra University.
According to the prospectus, weightage for the purpose of merit for LL.B.
and LL.M.
courses provided in clause VIII of the prospects reads as under :-  "VIII.
WEIGHTAGES FOR PURPOSE OF MERIT FOR LL.B AND LL.M COURSES.
Candidates who are eligible for admission will be entitled to weightages as given below :-  (A)(i) candidates who have passed the qualifying examination from Kurukshetra University.
= 10 marks (ii) Candidates who have passed the qualifying Examination from other University of Haryana State.
= 5 marks (B) Recipients of National Talent Award from the N.C.E.R.T = 5 marks (C) Candidates having consistently good academic record i.e. throughout First Class from First Public Examination to qualifying examination = 5 marks (D) N.C.C.
Cadets who have passed the C/G-II Certificates (No weightage will be given for Civil Defence Service).
= 5 marks xx xx xx xx xx xx  Provided that : (a) The weightage of marks for the purpose of the merit will be added to percentage of marks of qualifying examination.
(b) The total weightage for merit (A to D) above shall not exceed 10 marks.
(c) The number of students admitted under Clause (D) above shall not exceed 10% of the total enrolment of the course.
(d) xx xx xx xx xx xx  (e) xx xx xx xx xx xx  The impugned amendment changed the position as follows :- Present : Except MP Ed. in other Courses as per items 5 and 6 for eligibility total weightage for merit shall into be given more than 10 marks.
Amended : Except MP Ed. in other sources as per items 5 and 6 for eligibility no candidates shall be given more than two weightages, and those candidates who have passed qualifying examination from Kurukshetra University they shall be given maximum weightage of 15 marks and for other candidates having passed qualifying examination from other Universities maximum weightage of not more than 10 marks shall be given."
2.
The grievance of the petitioner is that the action of the respondents in making the admissions on the basis of the amended clause of weightage was totally illegal, arbitrary, against the prospectus and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution, more so, when the merit list was displayed on 972001 and the weightage condition was amended on 1272001 thereby depriving the petitioner of admission who was otherwise to get admission on the basis of his merit position and the amendment enabled the candidates who had passed the qualifying examination from Kurukshetra University to get illegal edge over the petitioner and other candidates who had passed the qualifying examination from other University of Haryana State.
3.
In the written statement filed by the respondents, it is claim that the amendment has been made by the Vice Chancellor in accordance with the University Calender Vol.
I Section 11(5) empowering him in this behalf and the prospectus very much carried out Sr. No. 3 of the mandatory conditions of prospectus at page 6.
Clause (iii) of the prospectus carried the following mandatory note :-  "Nothing contained in this prospectus would be construed to convey sanction or cited as an authority for which University Regulations in Calenders Vol.
I, II and the relevant rules in Calender Vol. III alone are applicable."
4.
The power of the Vice Chancellor as contained in Section 11(5), in so far as relevant, reads as under :-  "11(5) :- The Vice Chancellor may, if he is of the opinion that immediate action is necessary on any matter, exercise any power conferred on any authority of the University by or under this Act, except in the matters involving creation or abolition of a Faculty, Department, or post, the matters involving appointment or removal of an employee : Provided that the Vice Chancellor, before exercising powers under this section shall record in writing the reasons, why the matter cannot wait till the meeting of the authority concerned; xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx"  5.
It is further claimed that the amendment in the prospectus was made by notification dated 672001 and not on 1272001 as alleged by the petitioner.
The change in clause (b) as mentioned at page 13 of the prospectus was necessitated on account of the pointing out by Chairpersons of various departments that the present weightage system did no differentiate between meritorious candidates from others.
Earlier the matter was examined and it was decided by the Vice Chancellor to give weightage of 10 marks instead of 5 marks to be candidates who had passed their qualifying examination from Kurukshetra University and 5 marks were allowed to the students who had passed their qualifying examination from other Universities in Haryana.
The decision of the Vice Chancellor was approved in the meeting held on 542001 vide resolution No. 6 which was circulated to all the concerned.
The amended clauses provided a candidate the benefit of maximum two weightage.
The petitioner similarly was given the benefit of the weightages while calculating his marks for the purpose of admission as per the instructions contained in the prospectus.
6.
Heard learned counsel for the parties.
7.
It is not disputed that institutional reservation/concessions are acceptable on the basis of its classification.
The petitioner at the time of submission of his admission form very well knew, as per clause VIII, that the candidates who had passed the qualifying examination from Kurukshetra University were entitled to the weightage of 10 marks whereas the candidates who had passed the qualifying examination from other Universities of Haryana were entitled to the weightage of 5 marks.
The petitioner admittedly did not pass the qualifying examination from Kurukshetra University.
However, he passed M.B.A. (Finance) from MD University, Rohtak and was, thus, entitled to weightage of 5 marks as compared to 10 marks to those candidates who had passed the qualifying examination from Kurukshetra University.
By way of amendment, the weightage of marks for the students who had passed the qualifying examination from Kurukshetra University was increased from 10 to 15 marks whereas for the candidates who had passed the qualifying examination from other Universities of Haryana, it was increased from 5 to 10 marks.
As such, the petitioner has been equally benefited if he sought the admission on the basis of his Master Degree having been obtained from another University of Haryana.
The change in weightage criteria was equally applicable to all the students and as such the petitioner alone can not claim that he has been deprived of the admission on the basis of amended weightage clause.
The difference of weightage by way of amendment remained same with the students who passed the qualifying examination from other Universities.
The maximum weightage of marks with the students who passed the qualifying examination from Kurukshetra University was available upto 15 marks whereas in the case of students who passed the qualifying examination from other Universities of Haryana it was increased upto a maximum of 10 marks.
As such, even on merit, the petitioner does not suffer from any prejudice.
The main grievance that the amendment has been made subsequent to the prospectus is of no consequence since the amendment is of clarificatory in nature and does not change the basic merit criteria.
8.
There being no merit in this petition, the same is hereby dismissed.
Petition dismissed.