RL Anand, J - Shri Jai Singh petitioner who is working as Selection Grade Lecturer in Mathematics in the Regional Engineering College Kurukshetra, has filed the present writ petition against the Regional Engineering College, Kurukshetra, through its Principal under Articles 226 of the Constitution of India, and it has been prayed by the petitioner that a writ in the nature of mandamus be issued against the respondent and directions be given to the Principal of the respondent-College to call the petitioner for interview for the post of Professor in Mathematics for which the interviews were conducted on 7th July, 2001 and, as such, the action of the respondent in not calling the petitioner for interview is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
2.
In short, the case of the petitioner which is going to be briefed in the subsequent portion of the judgment is that he was fully eligible for the post but for mala fide reasons he has been ignored in order to accommodate somebody else.
3.
The case set up by the petitioner is that the respondent college issued an advertisement dated 22nd February, 2001, vide which applications for the post of one Professor in Mathematics and some other posts were invited.
The petitioner applied for the post of Mathematics on 8th April, 2001.
He was fully eligible for the said post as he was teaching in this very Institution as Lecturer since 1983.
He is M.Sc.
1st Class and Ph.D in Applied Mathematics and has the desirable qualifications of the post-doctoral work experience in Applied Mathematics.
He has 23 years teaching experience and 17 years research experience at University and National Level Institutions.
According to the petitioner, the qualifications and experience for the post of Professor in Mathematics as per advertisement is as under:  1.
(ii) For Humanities and Sciences  Good academic record with at least 55% marks or an equivalent CGPA at the Master level and PhD Degree in appropriate branch of Humanities and Science.
Desirable :- Post-Doctoral work in appropriate Branch of Humanities and Sciences.
Experience : 10 years experience of which at least 5 years should be at a senior level comparable to that of an Assistant Professor in Post-Graduate Teaching and/or experience in research at the University/National Level Institutions, including experience of guiding research at Doctoral level.
4.
The petitioner was fully eligible, but to his surprise he was not called for interview though the other candidates were sent the interview letters.
The petitioner made a representation dated 21st June, 2001 in which he has stated that he fulfilled the requisite qualifications and, therefore, he should be called for interview, but in response to the aforesaid representation, the respondent replied to the petitioner that his letter would be put up before the Senior Staff Selection Committee for being called for interview for the post of Professor in Applied Mathematics and if the said Selection Committee would take a positive decision, then he would be called for the interview.
As nothing was heard from the side of the respondent, the petitioner gave a reminder and in response to the reminder aforesaid, the respondent stuck to its earlier decision.
Resultantly, another reminder was given on 5th July, 2001 as the interview was fixed for 7th July, 2001, but despite the representation and the various reminders, the respondent authorities proceeded with the interview in order to ignore the petitioner who was fully eligible and meritorious for the post of Professor in Mathematics.
The petitioner maintains that he had 17 years experience in the research at University/National Level Institute and as such he was having the requisite qualifications which was required for the post of Assistant Professor.
Therefore, by virtue of his qualifications which are equivalent to Assistant Professor, he is fully eligible to the post of Professor.
The respondent authorities had violated the provisions of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India when the petitioner has not been given the chance to appear in the interview.
Hence the present writ petition.
5.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondent, which filed the reply and denied the allegations.
According to the respondent, the essential qualifications for the post of Professor in the Faculty of Humanities and Sciences which includes the Department of Mathematics is as follows :  "For Humanities and Sciences Good academic record with atleast 55% marks or an equivalent CGpa at the Master's level and PhD Degree in appropriate branch of Humanities and Sciences.
Desirable : Post-Doctoral work in appropriate branch of Humanities and Sciences.
10 years experience of which at least 5 years shold be at a senior level comparable to that of an Assistant Professor in Postgraduate teaching, and/or experience in research at the University/National level Institutions, including experience of guiding research at Doctoral Level."
6.
The respondent further pleaded that the petitioner is working as a Lecturer in the Department of Mathematics in the College of the respondent and he had not even a one day experience as Assistant Professor.
Whereas, the essential qualifications for being considered for the post of Professor is that a candidate must have 10 years experience for which at least 5 years should be at a senior level comparable to that of an Assistant Professor in Postgraduate teaching and/or experinece in research at the University/National Level Institution, including experience of guiding research at Doctoral level.
The petitioner is admittdly having no experience as Assistant Professor nor he is having any such experinece of research at the University/National level Institution, what to talk of at least 5 years such experience.
For the said post, seven applications including that of the petitioner were received.
The screening committee constituted as per the bye-laws of the College while scrutinising the applications, found the petitioner to be ineligible as he was not fulfilling the requisite qualifications.
Since the petitioner was not fulfillng the requisite qualifications, he was not called for interview.
It was also maintained by the respondent that one post of Assistant Professor in the specilisation Applied Mathematics was also advertised.
Since the petitioner fulfilled the requisite qualifications for the said post of Assistant Professor, the petitioner was called for the interview along with 13 others.
The Screening Committee recommended 10 candidates including the petitioner to be called for interview as the remaining 4 were not fulfilling the essential qualifications, the interviews for the posts of Professor as well as the Assistant Professor were conducted on 7th July, 2001.
The petitioner appeared before the Selection Committee for the post of Assistant Professor.
It was also maintained by the respondent that in the year 1995 also, one post of Professor in the Department of Mathematics was advertised.
The petitioner applied against the said post in the year 1995.
The petitioner was not called for interview as he was not Assistant Professor nor he was fulfilling the requisite qualifications.
The petitioner challenged the action of the answering respondent for not calling him for interview for the post of Professor.
He filed C.W.P.
No. 7682 of 1995.
It was dismssed as withdrawn on 25th May, 1995 without seekng any permission to file a fresh petition on the same cause of action.
After the selection was made against the said advertisement in the year 1995, the petitioner again filed C.W.P.
No. 16698 of 1995 which stands admitted for final adjudication.
7.
In short, the stand taken up by the respondent is that since the petitioner was not having the requisite qualifications as per the advertisement, he was not called for interview on 7th July, 2001.
8.
I have heard Shri Ramesh Kumar Advocate, on behalf of the petitioner and Shri AS Virk, Advocate on behalf of the respondent and with their assistance, have gone though the record of this case.
9.
In support of his case the petitioner has placed on record the advertisement and the requisite qualifications.
Annexure P-2 is the certificate issued by the Kurukshetra University, Faculty of Engineering and Technology, vide which it has been certified that the petitioner was admitted to the degree of Doctor of Philosophy in that University in the subject of Applied Mathematics and he submitted his thesis with the title.
"Some problems on queues and reliability"; Annexure P-3 is the certificate dated 9th January, 1970 given by the Vice Chancellor of University of Roorkee vide which it was certified that the petitioner was admitted to the Degree of Master of Science of that Univesity, having passed the examination in Applied Mathematics in First Division in the year 1969; Annexure P-4 is the Teaching Experience furnished by the petitioner which runs as follows :  P.G.
Classes - 2 years(Jan. 81 to Dec 82) Roorkee University (UP)Lecturer 2 years 1 month(Sept. 71 to Sep 73) SA TechnologyInstt.
Vidisha (M.P.) 1 years 6 months(Jan. 78 to June 79) UG Classes 2 years Rorkee Univesity 2yrs.
1 months SATI Vidisha 1 year 6 months GK University Haridwar  (Jan 78 to June 70) 17 years 6 months(Oct. 83 to March, 2001 Regional Engeering College, Kuruskhetra (Haryana)" The particulars given by the petitioner with regard to his research work in Annexure P-6 are as under :  1.
Research Asstt.
Three years at SA Tech.
Instt.
Vidisha (M.P.), (August, 1971 to Aug 1974) 2.
Research Scholar Worked for PhD degree at REC, Kurukshetra, (Sept 1974 to March, 1976) 3.
Independent Full Time Research Work a) 3 years, 3 months, (April 1976 to 1977 and July 1979 to Dec 1980) Research Associate b) 2 years 9 months at Roorkee University on Independent Research Project awarded by CSIR New Delhi (Jan 1981 to (Sept 1983).
4.
Part time research work.
19 years., (Jan 1978 to June, 1979 and Oct 1983 to present)."
10.
The above qualifications and experience at the command of the petitioner will again be examined as what was required by the respondent for the post of Professor.
The candidate should have good academic record with at least 55% marks or an equivalent CGPA at the Master level and PhD Degree in appropriate branch of Humanities and Sciences.
It was also desirable that such candidate should have Post Doctoral work in appropriate branch of Humanities and Sciences.
Also it was stated in the advertisement that the candidate should have 10 years experience of which at least 5 years should be at a senior level comparable to that a Assistant Professor in Postgraduate teaching and/or experience in research at the University/National level Institutions, including experience of guiding research at Doctoral level.
If the particular experience furnished by the petitioner is examined by the respondent through the advertisement, it will become clear that the petitioner has never worked against the post of Assistant Professor and he had no experience of 5 years out of 10 years at a senior level comparable to the post of Assistant Professor.
11-12.
The petitioner was working as a selection grade lecturer when he applied for the post of Professor/Assistant Professor.
Faced with this difficulty, the learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the post of selection grade lecturer is virtually equivalent to the post of Assistant Professor in some of the Institutions where the channel of promotions are Lecturer, then Reader and then Professor.
There is a fallacy in the arguments raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
The substantive rank of the petitioner was Lecturer.
In order to remove stagnation, the lecturers have been given the senior grade in the post of Lecturer and then the selection grade lecturer and thereafter they are promoted as Assistant Professor and thereafter as Professor.
13.
From my above discussion, I have tried to show that the petitioner was not having the requisite qualifications as laid down in the advertisement.
We all know that the employer has the absolute right to lay down the qualifications for an individual post and it is for the Selection Committee to ascertain as to whether a particular candidate has the requisite qualifications or not.
Of course, the decision of the Selection Committee is subject to judicial scrutiny.
14.
It was then submitted by the learned counsel for the petitioner that in the year 1994 the respondent wanted to fill the post of Lecturer and the petitioner applied for the said post and he was called for interview.
The counsel submitted that when the petitioner was eligible for the post of Professor in the year 1994 how he has become ineligible for the same post in the year 2001.
The submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner has no legs to stand.
In support of his contention, the learned counsel for the petitioner has invited my attention to the earlier interview letter which was issued to the petitioner.
The argument raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner has again no legs to stand.
The counsel for the petitioner has failed to produce on record the requisite qualifications required for the post of Professor when it was advertised in the year 1994.
Secondly, there can be a mistake on the part of the Selection Committee; and thirdly, this very post was advertised in the year 1995.
The petitioner applied for the post but he was not called for interview.
He challenged the action of the respondent when he was not called for interview vide C.W.P.
No. 7682 of 1996.
It was dismissed as withdrawn.
The petitioner again gave challenge to the selection of the year 1995 for which C.W.P.
No. 16698 of 1995 is still pending.
We have to see the qualifications of the petitioner for each selection individually.
If the petitioner has been called for interview for any reason in the year 1994, it does not debar the Selection Committee to re-examine the qualifications and experience of the petitioner in the light of the qualifications required for the post.
15.
In this view of the matter, I hold that since the petitioner was not having the requisite qualifications for the post of Professor, as advertised in the year 2001, for which the interview took place on 7th July, 2001.
Therefore, he has been rightly ignored by the respondent for not calling him for the interview.
Resultantly, there is no merit in this writ petition and the same is hereby dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.