RL Anand, J - We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance have gone through the record of the case.
The petitioner, through this writ petition, is seeking the quashment of the appointment of respondent No. 4 Smt. Renu Bala who was appointed as a Peon by respondent No. 3.
2.
The main challenge given by the petitioner is that Smt. Renu Bala, respondent No. 4 is not Middle Pass as advertised vide Annexure P-2 and that the petitioner was more qualified as compared to respondent No. 4.
3.
We are not convinced with the submission raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner as the petitioner himself participated in the process of selection and he was placed at serial No. 2, whereas, respondent No. 4, Renu Bala, was placed at serial No. 1 in the process of selection.
4.
With regard to the qualification of respondent No. 4, the mandate of the Rule is that no qualification has been prescribed for such post.
5.
Faced with this difficulty, the learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that once there is an advertisement, then the management is bound by that advertisement.
Even the language of advertisement (Annexure P-2) simply shows that the one Middle Pass female/male is needed.
Meaning thereby that it was the desire of the management to get an educated candidate.
Nevertheless, respondent No. 4 is 7th pass.
Respondent No. 4 was in service prior to this advertisement.
Meaning thereby that her experience could also be considered as a valid qualification.
She was appointed regularly on 111999.
After a lapse of 7 years, it will be not be desirable for us to set aside the appointment of respondent No. 4.
6.
During the course of submissions, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner submits that one post of Peon is still vacant under respondent No. 3.
In these circumstances while disposing of this writ petition, we give direction to respondent No. 3 that if any post of Peon is lying vacant, it shall be offered to the petitioner.
We also want to make it clear that if in future, any Post of Peon falls vacant or created in the College, the name of the petitioner shall be considered for that preferably by virtue of his past experience.
No order as costs.
Petition disposed of.