RL Anand, J - This petition has been filed by Ms Kiran daughter of Shri Chaman Lal.
The petitioner is 100% blind and she has filed the present writ petition against the respondents praying that a writ in the nature of certiorari be issued and the action of the respondents in filling up the post of Clerk and Peon amongst physically handicapped persons other than the blind persons, be quashed being wholly illegally and discriminatory.
The action of the respondents violates the Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
It was also prayed that directions be issued to the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner for her appointment to the post for which she had applied.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that she is a blind.
Her visual handicap is 100% as per the certificate of physically handicapped issued by Civil Surgeon, Faridkot.
She is post-graduate.
She passed MA in History by securing 328 marks out of 800 and she has also passed course of Typist in Punjabi from a registered Commercial College.
Respondent No. 4 issued a public notice inviting applications for filling up the post of Clerk, Peon and Safai Sewaks.
As per advertisement, number of vacancies advertised for the post of Clerk and Peon were one each which were specifically kept reserved for the blind persons and there were four posts of Safai Sewaks, out of which one was kept reserved for blind persons, two for deaf and dumbs and one for physically handicapped.
The petitioner who was possessing the minimum qualification prescribed for the posts of Clerk and Peon, which were specifically reserved for blind person, applied for the posts of Clerk and Peon by making due application within the period prescribed in the advertisement.
Her application was duly scrutinised by respondent No. 4 and the petitioner was found eligible for the post for which she had applied and called for interview held on 1592000.
She was the only blind candidate who appeared in the interview but respondent No. 4 did not consider her candidature on the ground that she had become over age and rejected her candidature on this ground alone.
The date of birth of the petitioner is 181963.
She was 37 years and 7 days old at the time of making the application and was within the age limit prescribed by the Punjab Government for the purpose of filling up various public posts, which is 45 years.
The instructions of the Punjab Government are equally applicable in the matter of filling up the advertised posts by respondent No. 4.
The action of the respondent No. 4 in rejecting the candidature of the petitioner on the ground of over age was highly arbitrary.
The petitioner has learnt that respondent No. 4 has not appointed any blind person against the post of Clerk or Peon.
Rather he has appointed the persons who are otherwise physically handicapped and this action of the authorities is illegal, arbitrary on the face of it.
With this background, the petitioner has sought the directions against respondent No. 4 that his action be set aside.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
It has only been contested by respondent No. 4.
According to this respondent, selection committee was constituted for filling up the post of Clerk and Peon meant for blinds who interviewed all the candidates.
The instructions of the Government dated 451996 were taken note of and as per those instructions, the selection committee selected Mr. Gurpal Singh for the post of Clerk who is having 40% visual disability according to the certificate issued by the Civil Surgeon, Muktsar and selected Mr. Umesh Kumar for the post of Peon who is also having 40% visual disability according to the certificate issued by the Civil Surgeon, Patiala.
The present writ petition is bad for misjoinder and non- joinder of necessary parties as Gurpal Singh and Umesh Kumar are not made party in this writ petition.
On merits, the stand of the respondents is that since the petitioner was having 100% disability of blindness, therefore, she could not be accommodation/selected by the selection committee for the post of Clerk or Peon as these posts are not covered under the said instructions.
With this defence, respondent No. 4 has made a prayer for the dismissal of the writ petition.
4.
I have heard Shri Harinder Sharma, Advocate, appearing on behalf of the petitioner and Shri JS Brar, learned DAG appearing on behalf of respondents No. 1 to 3 and Shri AK Khunger, Advocate, appearing on behalf of respondent No. 4.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has invited my attention to annexure P-1, and submitted that as per the certificate issued by Medical Officer, Civil Hospital, Faridkot, the petitioner suffers from 100% visual disability.
Her disability is permanent.
He further refers to the advertisement Annexure P-9 and submits that as per this advertisement, the post of Clerk was meant for blinds.
Similarly, the post of Peon was meant for blinds.
The third category of post was of four Safai Sewaks out of which one post was reserved for deaf and dumbs and one post was reserved for physically handicapped.
The educational qualification for the post of Clerk was Matric along with Punjabi and the candidate was also supposed to know Punjabi Typing with a speed of 30 W.P.M.
The petitioner has a good academic record.
She passed the middle standard examination in the year 1978 and she passed matric in the year 1980.
She further passed BA in June 1985 and thereafter she did MA in History in the year 1991.
She has a type speed of 35 W.P.M.
as has been certified by Arora Commercial College (Regd) Jaito.
Respondent No. 4 has rejected the case of the petitioner mainly relying upon the instructions R-4/1 which were issued in the year 1966 much before the passing of the Central Legislation i.e.
The Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995.
The post of Clerk/Peon was meant for blinds.
Since the blindness of the petitioner is 100%, therefore, she has a preferential claim to be considered for the post of Clerk/Peon.
The action of respondent No. 4 in rejecting the case of the petitioner should be quashed.
He further submitted that since his client is challenging the action of respondent No. 4 alone, therefore, the writ petition of the petitioner cannot be dismissed on the ground of non-joinder of necessary parties.
6.
On the contrary, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent No. 4 submitted that the candidate has been selected as per the advertisement and keeping in mind overall performance and educational qualifications.
No discrimination was made with the petitioner.
A suitable person in the blind category has been selected.
7.
After considering the rival contentions of the parties, I am of the opinion that this writ should succeed and directions should be given to respondent No. 4 to offer an employment to the petitioner in the category of Peon.
The reading of the advertisement would show that the post of Peon was meant for blind persons.
The disability of the petitioner was 100%.
She was fully qualified for the job.
Rather she was willing to perform the duties of the Peon.
If a handicapped candidate like the petitioner can succeed remarkably in getting the academic qualifications, how she cannot function against the post of the Peon?
The Act was passed by the Legislature in order to accommodate the handicapped persons who are an integral part of our society and to give representation to such handicapped persons in the public appointments.
Assuming for the sake of arguments, that petitioner in the event of her selection may not perform the duties of the post of clerk, as it requires reading etc. yet I am of the opinion that the petitioner can successfully perform the duties of a Peon.
She can be assigned such duties with which the office work of the respondent No. 4 may not suffer.
As the post of Peon was meant for blind persons, therefore, it was not open for respondent No. 4 to accommodate a person with less disability as compared to the petitioner.
8.
Resultantly, the writ is allowed and the action of respondent No. 4 in giving the vacancy of Peon to somebody else, is set aside and directions are given to respondent No. 4 to offer employment to the petitioner against the post of a Peon, within fifteen days from the receipt of the copy of the order.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.