RL Anand, J - Respondent No. 4, Principal, Mata Gujri College, Fatehgarh Sahib, has been served as per the report of he registry but nobody is present.
Respondents No. 3 and 4 are proceeded ex parte.
2.
I am disposing of his writ petition after hearing he learned counsel for the petitioner and learned counsel appearing on behalf of respondents No. 1 and 2.
3.
The petitioners have filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for the issuance of writ especially in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to release all the retiral benefits such as gratuity and leave encashment with interest to the petitioners.
According to the petitioners they joined the respondent college on different dates.
In the year 1976, the Punjab Government issued a notification to the effect that the employees of the privately managed aided institutions will be entitled to automatic pay revision and they will get all the benefits equivalent to that of their counter-parts working in the government institutions.
The petitioners retired after rendering flawless service in the college on different dates such as 3091994, 3151995, 25101997, 313998 and 31121998 respectively and are thus, entitled to the retiral benefits such as gratuity, provident fund, leave encashment admissible to them under Punjab Civil Services Rules and Punjab Govt. Circulars as adopted and applicable to the respondent college.
The petitioners further alleges that their work was very good throughout and there was no complaint against them.
After their retirement they have not been given the retiral benefits in spite of the fact that they have made repeated requests and representations to the college authorities.
Hence the present writ petition.
4.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
The retiral benefits are to be given by respondents No. 3 and 4.
The Principal of the institution did not appear in spite of service.
Hence proceeded ex parte.
5.
I have heard Shri Puneet Jindal, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner.
Shri JS Brar, DAG, Punjab, appearing on behalf of the respondents No. 1 and 2.
6.
The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the State rightly submitted that the retiral benefits are to be released by respondents No. 3 and 4 and therefore, there is no role of the State Government.
It is the case of the petitioners that they have retired from the service of respondents No. 3 and 4 and there was no adverse entry in the record against them.
The record of this case further shows that different representations were made by the petitioners to the Principal, Mata Gujri College, Fatehgarh Sahib for the release of the retiral benefits but in spite of several representations no action has been taken by the college authorities which in fact did not come forward to contest the present writ petition.
Relying upon the averments of the writ petition, the present writ petition is allowed and directions are given to respondents No. 3 and 4 to pay all the retiral benefits to the petitioners within one month from today along with interest at the rate of 18% per annum.
The interest will start accruing after two months of the date of the retirement of the petitioners.
There shall be no order as to costs.
It is also clarified that if respondents No. 3 and 4 had not received any grant from respondents No. 1 and 2 they shall be entitled to claim the amount from respondents No. 1 and 2 after making the payment to the petitioners.
Petition allowed.