RL Anand, J - Shri Om Parkash Kalia deceased now represented by his L.Rs.
has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for the issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to release the pensionary benefits to him as he was fully eligible for the release of the said benefits along with interest.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he joined the service under the control of the respondents on 24.6.1958 and he retired from service on 3131995 after attaining the age of superannuation.
The respondent authorities issued the Pepsu Road Transport Corporation Employees  Pension/Gratuity and General Provident Fund Regulations, 1992 and these regulations came into force w.e.f.
15.6.1992.
The petitioner alleged that he retired from service on 3131995 and as such after issuance of these regulations he submitted his option to adopt the pensionary scheme and he also made a representation dated 1621995 before his retirement.
Since he had already submitted his option for pension scheme and that he was ready to deposit the balance amount if any, therefore, he may be given the benefit of pensionary scheme after retirement but no action has been taken by the respondent authorities and as a result of which the present writ petition has been filed.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
They filed the reply and denied the allegations.
According to the respondents, though the petitioner submitted his option on 25111992, but he failed to deposit Corporation's share of Contributory Provident Fund taken by him in advance.
During September 1987 to October 1987 the deceased withdrew Rs. 18,000/- from the Provident Fund out of his own share and Rs. 15,000/- from the Corporation's share.
Since he failed to deposit the loan/advance taken by him from the Contributory Provident Fund, therefore, the petitioner could not be given the benefit of pensionary scheme.
Rather he was given the benefit under the Contributory Provident Fund amounting of Rs. 89,950/-.
4.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance have gone through the record of the case.
5.
As per the scheme it was obligatory on the part of the employee to refund the benefits which he had already received under the Contributory Provident Fund Scheme.
Since the deceased did not deposit the amount, therefore, he cannot claim the benefit under the Scheme of 1992.
6.
In this view of the matter, I do not find any merit in this writ petition and the same is hereby dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.