RL Anand, J - The petitioner through this writ petition is seeking regularisation of his services in the cadre of Carpenter w.e.f.
121985 on the plea that he is working against this post since that date and moreover his juniors have been regularised in this cadre.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he joined as Carpenter on 121985 in the respondent-Corporation (though he has been shown as labourer) on 89 days basis at DC rates and since then he is continuously working as a Carpenter on 89 days basis with notional breaks of one day between two consecutive appoints.
He has completed 11-1/2 years of service.
He made several requests to the respondents to regularise his services as a Carpenter but to no effect.
It is further alleged by the petitioner that the services of one Bal Krishan, who was junior to him, have been regularised on 24.5.1996 w.e.f.
1551985 i.e. the date of his first appointment.
Hence, this writ petition.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
According to the respondents, the petitioner was never appointed as Carpenter in the Corporation and ever since his initial appointment he has been working as a labourer on daily wages on the rates approved by the Deputy Commissioner.
He never worked as Carpenter.
According to the service conditions the qualifications as required for the post of a Carpenter are matriculation or its equivalent and I.T.I.
Certificate of Carpenter trade along with experience of four years.
These qualifications are required for direct requirement.
For promotion category the qualifications prescribed are that the candidate should be capable of reading any regional language and should have minimum three years experience as a helper.
4.
Admittedly, there is no document on the record to show that the petitioner was appointed as a Carpenter.
Rather, between the lines the petitioner himself admits that he was appointed as daily wager on the rates approved by the Deputy Commissioner.
The petitioner also does not possess the requisite qualifications for the post of Carpenter.
Therefore, his experience for regularisation of his services as Carpenter cannot be considered.
5.
Faced with difficulty, the learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that though the case of the petitioner may not be considered for regularisation of his services against the post of Carpenter but certainly can be considered for a junior post.
The lawyer further submitted that now the Government of Punjab has formulated a latest policy which only required an experience of three years against the post held by a person.
6.
In this view of the matter, I dispose of this writ petition by making observations that let the Corporation may examine the case of he petitioner for regularisation for any eligible post as per the latest policy framed by the State Government which has also been made applicable to all the Corporations, Boards etc.
The necessary action regarding consideration of regularisation of the petitioner subject to his eligibility etc. shall be finally decided by the respondents within six months from today.
No order as to costs.
Writ petition stands disposed of accordingly.
Order accordingly.