RL Anand, J - Shri Ram Murti Sharma has filed the present writ petition and it has been prayed by him that a writ in the nature of mandamus be issued against respondents No. 1 and 2 to fix his seniority as Senior Stenographer as per applicable Ordinance and with effect from the date when he passed the departmental examination for the post of Senior Stenographer above respondents No. 3 to 11 and it has been further prayed that the order dated 2451995 vide which his seniority has been affected be quashed.
2.
The petitioner was earlier Senior Steno-typist.
The next channel of promotion is to the post of Senior Stenographer.
Prior to 1983 and under the unrevised rules it was obligatory on the part of a Senior Steno-typist to clear the test in order to get the status of Senior Stenographer.
Subsequently the rule was amended and this amendment came into force w.e.f.
27.5.1983.
The amended rule of the Syndicate runs as follows :-  "The PA to the Vice-Chancellor, PA to Pro-VC, PA to the Registrar, Stenographers and Steno-typists shall form a separate cadre.
Appointments to the post of Stenographers shall be made amongst the senior Steno-typists on the basis of seniority with the condition that they will have to qualify the shorthand test at the prescribed speed within a period of six months in two chances, failing which they will be reverted to their original posts and they will not be considered for appointment to the posts of Stenographers for a period of one year from the date of their reversion.
After the expiry of this period, they would be considered for appointment as Stenographers only, if they qualified the shorthand test at the prescribed speed.
Appointments to the posts of PAs shall be made by promotion on the basis of the seniority-cum-merit and an interview by a committee appointed by the Vice- Chancellor.
Persons in this cadre shall be eligible to apply for higher posts outside the cadre to be filled by direct recruitment provided they fulfil the academic qualifications prescribed for the post and have put in atleast 10 years' service in a Govt/University affiliated College Office."
3.
The case in nutshell put up by the petitioner is that since he cleared the test for the post of Senior Stenographer on 1791983, therefore, he should be ranked senior to the private respondents.
4.
On the contrary, the stand of private respondents is two-fold.
So far as the stand of respondents No. 3 to 5 is concerned, they had already cleared the departmental test much prior to 1791983 i.e. on 161983.
Thus, they would be governed by the old rule and in these circumstances they would always be senior to the petitioner and other private respondents.
So far as the stand of other private respondents and University is concerned, since the University has given option to the private respondents to clear the departmental test by affording them the special chances and since they too had cleared the departmental test, therefore, they are also to be promoted to the post of Senior Stenographer and they shall retain their old seniority.
5.
The learned counsel Mr. Agnihotri argued that some of the private respondents had been ranked and placed senior to his client even they have not passed the departmental examination.
This contention is being refuted by the learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents No. 1 and 2.
Be that as it may, the backbone of the amended rule is that it is a condition precedent that to become a Senior Stenographer one has to clear the departmental examination.
Therefore, I give directions to the University to examine if any of the private respondents had cleared the departmental examination or not.
If he had not cleared, such candidate shall be reverted to his original seniority in the cadre of Senior Steno-typist.
If on examination the University finds that the private respondents had already cleared the departmental examination of Senior Stenographer even in special chances, such candidate shall be protected in the matter of his seniority.
The necessary exercise as directed by me shall be done by respondents No. 1 and 2 within three months.
In the case of any reversion, the seniority of the petitioner shall be re-fixed and he shall be allowed all consequential benefits.
There shall be no order as to costs.
.