RL Anand, J - The petitioner has filed this petition under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India and he has made a prayer that a writ in the nature of mandamus be issued to the respondents directing them to regularise the service of the petitioner to the post of Electrical Helper w.e.f.
3111996 in view of the State Government policy decision dated 731996 and 18.3.1996, Annexure P1 and P2 respectively with all consequential benefits.
2.
The case set up by the learned counsel for the petitioner is that the petitioner was initially appointed in the office of the HUDA-respondent on daily wages basis as Electrical Work Munshi by XEN, HUDA, Circle Gurgaon on 15121988.
He was assigned the duty of Electrical Helper and is working as such.
The petitioner has passed his matriculation examination and further he has passed the ITI Examination and Vocational Training Certificate of House Wiring (Electrical Technician) with the permission of the department.
The State Government framed a policy on 731996, vide which, it was decided to regularise the services of work charged/casual/daily wager employees, who have completed five years of service on 3111996.
Subsequently, the period of five years was reduced to three years by the State of Haryana.
It is also the case of the petitioner that the respondent-HUDA adopted the above said instructions issued by the State of Haryana in its letter and spirit.
The petitioner has completed three years services on 3111996 and he was working as Electrical Helper but the respondent-HUDA regularised his services on the post of Chowkidar vide letter dated 151997 He made several representations before the respondent-authorities to regularise him against the post of Electrical Helper but to no effect.
Hence this petition.
3.
Notice of motion was issued to the respondents, who filed written statement and denied the allegations made by the petitioner in this petition.
4.
According to the respondents, as per the government instructions, the service of the employee on daily wage/adhoc basis could be regularised only against the post on which he was originally appointed and not on the post on which he is actually working.
Respondents further averred that the petitioner was engaged as casual labour on T.M.R.
basis as a Chowkidar, hence he could not claim for the post of Electrician Helper as he has not fulfilled the requisite experience and qualification as per the instructions issued by the Government of Haryana and HUDA bye-laws.
Therefore, he is not entitled to be regularised against the post of Electrician Helper.
5.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance have gone through the records.
6.
Learned counsel for the petitioner, during the course of arguments, has not been able to convince us that the petitioner was appointed against the post of Electrician Helper nor we are convinced with the submission raised by the petitioner's counsel for the petitioner not having the requisite qualification, he can be given the benefit of regularisation of service in view of the policy framed by the State Government.
The petitioner has already been regularised against the post of Chowkidar vide order dated 151997 with effect from 19.3.1997.
No further relief is possible for the petitioner.
We do not see any merit in this petition and the same is, hereby, dismissed with the observations that if the petitioner wants back date regularisation in the cadre of Chowkidar, he can file fresh representation.
Petition dismissed.