Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - These three writ petitions raise a common issue relating to the validity of the Haryana State Central Cooperative Banks Staff Service (Common Cadre) (First Amendment) Rules, 1999.
By this amendment, it has been provided that the Secretaries Grade-A shall be entitled to a quota of 30% for promotion to the posts of Junior Accountants.
The question is - Is this amendment valid or violative of the Act as well as Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India ?
2.
Counsel for the parties have referred to the facts as averred in CWP No. 3665 of 1999.
These may be briefly noticed.
3.
There are three petitioners.
Petitioner No. 1 had joined as a Stenotypist on October 24, 1981.
Petitioner Nos. 2 and 3 had initially joined service as Secretaries.
They were, however, promoted as Clerks with effect from April 12, 1984 and October 8, 1988 respectively.
They were subsequently promoted to the posts of Cashier-cum-Clerks.
4.
The petitioners have made a two-fold grievance.
Firstly, they complain that the Registrar has no power to make a retrospective amendment of the rules.
Secondly, the petitioners allege that the rule which provides a quota of 30% for promotion of Secretaries Grade-A in supersession of the claim of the senior persons is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
The respondents contest the petitioners' claim.
The two questions that arise for consideration are :-  (i) Is the Registrar competent to amend the Common Cadre Rules with retrospective effect ?
(ii) Is the amendment violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution ?
Reg : (i) 5.
Counsel for the parties are agreed that the provision for constitution of Common Cadre and to make rules is contained in Section 37.
This provision reads as under :-  "Constitution of common cadre - The Registrar may require an apex society to constitute a common cadre of all or a specific class of employees in the service of that society or in the service of the Central Societies which are members of the apex society, or of the service of the primary societies or the aforesaid central societies.
(2) When a common cadre is constituted under sub-section (1), the Registrar shall make rule to regulate recruitment and the conditions of service of such employees, and their strength in consultation with the cadre society : Provided that the Registrar may add or delete any class of employees from the common cadre in consultation with the cadre society."
A perusal of the above provision would show that the Registrar is competent to ask an Apex Society to constitute a common cadre of all or a specific class of employees in the service of that society.
Equally, such a direction can be given in the case of the employees of the Central Societies also.
Still further, on constitution of the common cadre, the Registrar can make rules to regulate recruitment and the conditions of service of the employees.
The rules have to be made in consultation with the society.
6.
The `cadre society' under Section 2(c) has been defined to mean the `apex society'.
What is the position in the present case ?
7.
In exercise of the power under Section 37 and in consultation with the Apex Bank, the Registrar has made an amendment in the Common Cadre Rules of 1975.
This amendment has been made "with effect from 551995."
The relevant provision reads as under:-  "In the Haryana State Central Cooperative Banks Staff service (Common Cadre) Rules, 1975 in Annexure-II category No. 2, the following shall be substituted/added with effect from 551995 :- Rule No. /Anexure  Annexure-II  Percentage for 2.
Direct recruitment  By promotion (Junior Accountant/Executive Officer/Stenographer).
25% 45% (Amongst clerks/Su pervisor/Godown Keeper) 30% (Amongst Secretaries `A')."
8.
The question that arises is - can the Registrar make an amendment with retrospective effect ?
On a perusal of Section 37, it is clear that no such power has been conferred on the Registrar.
In fact, even the counsel for the respondents have not suggested that such a power is available to the Registrar under the provisions of the Act.
9.
A rule making authority is bound to act in conformity with the provision conferring the power.
Since the Statute does not authorise the Registrar to make rules with retrospective effect, the amendment of the rules w.e.f.
May 5, 1995 vide order dated February 10, 1999 cannot be sustained.
Reg : (ii) 10.
In the present case, we are concerned with three categories of posts.
These are of Secretaries, Clerks and Junior Accountants.
At the time of the constitution of the Common Cadre, these three categories of posts carried pay scales of Rs. 110-225, Rs. 150-350, plus special pay and Rs. 225-500 respectively.
These pay scales have been periodically revised.
With effect from January 1, 1986, the pay scales of the three categories of posts were Rs. 1200-2040, 1400-2600 and 16000-2650 respectively.
It is, thus, clear that the post of Secretary was at the lowest out of the three categories of posts.
It is also not disputed that Secretaries were promoted to the posts of Clerks who in turn are promoted to the posts of Junior Accountants.
11.
On April 29, 1995, the pay scale of the Secretaries was revised.
25% of the posts were designated as A-grade Secretaries and placed in the scale of Rs. 1400-2600.
Thus, in the matter of pay, they were brought at par with the Clerks.
It is also the admitted position that on the up-gradation of the posts of Secretaries, the concerned officials were placed at the tale of the seniority list of Clerks as it existed on April 29, 1995.
Thus, they were junior to the persons who were working as Clerks from dates prior to April 29, 1995.
12.
It is in the background of the above factual position that the issue of the validity of the amendment has to be seen.
13.
By the impugned amendment as noticed above, a quota of 30% has been given to the persons who were upgraded as Grade `A' Secretaries.
The result is that 30% posts of Junior Accountants have to be filled up from amongst the persons who were placed at the tale of seniority list of Clerks.
As a result, persons like the petitioners who had been working as Clerks from mid 80s have been superseded by persons who were given benefit of the amendment, in the rules and were promoted as Junior Accountants.
14.
The sequence of events clearly shows that unequals have been treated equally.
Persons who were working on inferior posts were granted a higher scale w.e.f.
April 29, 1985.
Thereafter, they were given an exclusive right to be considered for promotion to the posts of Junior Accountants in supersession of the claims of persons who were senior to them.
It is the admitted position that in the process persons like the petitioners who were senior were likely to be superseded.
This was a clear violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
Claims of persons who were senior in the cadre of clerks were liable to be ignored on the allocation of quota to the Grade `A' Secretaries.
15.
To illustrate, Mr. Mohinder Singh-respondent No. 5 in CWP No. 3665 of 1999 had joined service as Secretary on March 10, 1976.
He was upgraded as Secretary Grade `A' on April 29, 1995.
He was placed at Sr. No. 86 in the seniority list of Clerks.
As against this, the petitioners were at Sr. Nos. 5, 26 and 51 in the seniority list of Clerks.
Thus, he was 81 steps junior to petitioner No. 1.
Despite that, he became eligible to be considered for promotion to the post of Junior Accountant before all the three petitioners who were otherwise senior to him by virtue of the quota of 30%.
In any case, the juniors got a right to be considered for promotion before their seniors.
This was clearly an infraction of the guarantee under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
It cannot be sustained.
16.
In view of the above, both the questions are answered in favour of the petitioners.
Resultantly, the amendment to the Common Cadre Rules is declared illegal.
The notification at Annexure P.8 in CWP No. 3665 of 1999 is quashed.
The respondents shall now proceed to consider the claims of all the eligible persons in accordance with the Common Cadre Rules.
All the three writ petitions are disposed of in the above terms.
No costs.
Order accordingly.