RL Anand.
J - Shri Gurdial Singh petitioner has given challenge to the orders dated 1891992 (Annexure P-9) and 21.10.1992 (Annexure P-10).
He is making a prayer that he should be granted the pay and allowances of the post when he was working as Agricultural Marketing Development Officer.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he was promoted to the post of Agricultural Marketing Development Officer on 2121975 and earlier to that he was working as Senior Marketing Enforcement Officer.
Thereafter, he was promoted as Divisional Market Enforcement Officer w.e.f.
861977.
The grievance of the petitioner is that he worked against the post of Agricultural Marketing Development Officer w.e.f.
2121975 to 7.6.1977 but he has not been paid the wages/salary for this period in the grade of Agricultural Marketing Development Officer.
3.
The stand of the respondents is that they resolved and fixed the educational qualification for promotion to the post of Agricultural Marketing Development Officer as B.Sc.
Agriculture or BA Economics.
However, the said resolution has not been approved by the State Government.
So far as the qualifications are concerned, admittedly, the petitioner was having the same as suggested by the Board but those qualifications were not approved by the Government.
In these circumstances, the Government had the right to reject the resolution passed by the Board.
4.
Now the short point which survives for determination is whether the petitioner is entitled to the wages in the grade of Agricultural Marketing Development Officer when he actually worked.
The petitioner worked against this post under the orders of respondent No. 2.
If for any reason the Government has not approved the resolution, it is not the fault of the petitioner.
Since the respondent No. 2 has taken the work from the petitioner against the post of Agricultural Marketing Development Officer w.e.f.
2121975 to 7.6.1977, therefore, the respondent No. 2 is liable to pay the salary to the petitioner in the grade of said post, as applicable at the relevant time.
Resultantly, this writ petition is partly allowed and directions are given to respondent No. 2 to pay the salary to the petitioner for the post of Agricultural Marketing Development officer from 2121975 to 7.6.1977.
However, no interest shall be give to the petitioner.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition partly allowed.