Swatanter Kumar, J (Oral) - We have heard counsel for the parties at some length.
2.
The only contention of the petitioner in this writ petition under Article 226 of Constitution of India is for a direction to the respondents to pay him pay scale of Rs. 1200-2040 with effect from the date of his appointment i.e. 3071990 in accordance with Haryana Government instructions.
3.
The petitioner claims that he has been working as Electrician in the department of State of Haryana and had passed his Matriculation Examination from the Haryana School Education Board in the year 1983.
According to the petitioner, he joined the Vocational Training Course of Electrician and qualified the same subsequently.
Thereafter, he was employed as afore- mentioned.
On these facts, the petitioner claim relief.
4.
The basic contention raised on behalf of the respondents to repel the claim of the petitioner is that the post of Electrician was not considered to be a technical post by the State of Haryana and, as such, the petitioner is not entitled to the pay scale payable to the employees of equal rank holding technical posts.
5.
During the course of hearing, the learned counsel for the petitioner has produced notification of the State of Haryana issued on 1182000 wherein the Police rules have been amended and the post of Electrician has been accepted by the State of Haryana to be a technical post.
In the light of this notification, the respondents are obliged to consider the claim of the petitioner and to pay him in accordance with the notification in any case.
Thus, this petition is disposed of with the direction to the respondents to pass appropriate orders in accordance with the Rules and the notification afore-noticed within a period of two months from the date the certified copy of this order is brought to their notice.
The amount due to the petitioner in accordance with the notification shall be paid along with the order to be communicated to him.
This writ petition is disposed of with no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.