RL Anand, J. (Oral) - We have heard the counsel for the petitioners and with his assistance gone through the records of this case.
2.
The petitioners through this writ petition have challenged the orders of retrenchment annexures P-1 to P-7 passed by the Management against each one of the petitioners vide which their services were retrenched.
Before we deal with this submission made by the learned counsel for the petitioners, it will be appropriate for us to reproduced the relevant portion of the retrenchment order which we are taking from annexure P-1.
It reads as under :-  "It is made clear that the employees of CONFED from where the retrenchment is being effected are not covered by Chapter V-B of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, necessitating any permission under Section 25-N of the said Act.
Therefore, the retrenchment is being effected in accordance with Chapter V-A by employing with the Section 25-F and other provisions of the said chapter."
At page-30 of this writ in para-1 of the said order, it is mentioned as follows :-  "One month wages in lieu of notice and retrenchment compensation equal to 15 days wages for each completed year of services or a part thereof in excess of 6 months and gratuity is being rendered along with this order by way of cheque No. 447781 dated 11.01.02 for Rs. 190246/- drawn on the Haryana State Cooperative Apex Bank Ltd, Sector 17, Chandigarh.
3.
The learned counsel for the petitioners invites our attention to Regulation 35B and submits that as per this Regulation, the Management was supposed to pay 30 days wages by way of retrenchment compensation for each completed year of service or a part thereof in excess of 6 months, whereas it has only granted 15 days wages and in these circumstances, the impugned orders annexures P-1 to P-7 qua the petitioners are bad and illegal.
4.
We are not agreeable to the submission made by the learned counsel for the petitioners as we have pointed out above that retrenchment of the petitioners has been made in pursuance of the provisions of Section 25F of the Industrial Disputes Act.
Sub-clause (b) of Section 25F of the Industrial Act reads as follows :-  "(b) The workman has been paid, at the time of retrenchment, compensation which shall be equivalent to fifteen days average pay (for every completed year of continuous service) or any part thereof in excess of six months."
5.
In this manner, there is complete compliance of the provisions of Section 25F(b) of the Industrial Disputes Act.
In these circumstances, we are not inclined to issue notice to motion in the present writ petition and dismiss the same in limine.
Before we part with this order, we may also make it clear that the judgments relied upon by the learned counsel for the petitioners are not applicable to the facts of this case, because in the present writ petition, one month's salary in lieu of notice was given to the petitioners under Section 25F(b) of the Industrial Disputes Act.
Petition dismissed.