Mehtab S Gill, J - The petitioner has prayed for the issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari for quashing the order dated January 8, 2000 (Annexure P-6) passed by the Managing Director, Haryana Power Generation Corporation Limited, Panchkula (respondent No. 1), whereby Junior Officers to the petitioner were promoted from the post of Assistant Engineer (Civil) to the level of Assistant Executive Engineer (Civil) without consideration of the claim of the petitioner.
He has further prayed for the issuance of a writ/direction to the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 to consider the case of the petitioner for notional promotion from the due date of 1984.
2.
The petitioner has averred that he was engaged Graduate Technical Apprentice on April 15, 1980 under the Apprentices Act for a period of one year.
During the month of October 10, 1983, when he was posted at Panipat Thermal Power Project, Panipat, his work and conduct was reported by the Project Authorities to the Haryana State Electricity Board to be good.
A copy of the letter dated October 4, 1983 addressed by the Superintending Engineer, Civil Construction, Circle, PTPP, Panipat to the Chief Engineer (Construction), PTPP, Panipat, is attached with the writ petition as Annexure P-1.
Vide letter dated April 4, 1984 (Annexure P-2), the Secretary, Haryana State Electricity Board had informed the Chief Engineer, Thermal (Construction), PTPP, Panipat that the petitioner Shri RC Chug along with the two other officers, namely, S/Shri KL Chug and KD Taneja was due for promotion and their reports for the year 1983-84 were needed immediately for the purpose of their promotion.
It has been further averred that he submitted his representation dated February 12, 1998 to the Chairman, Haryana State Electricity Board, Panchkula, requesting therein that his promotion to the post of Assistant Executive Engineer may be made.
He also pointed out this fact that not even a single promotion from the post of Assistant Engineer (Civil) to the rank of Assistant Executive Engineer (Civil) was made for the last 14 years, i.e., from 1984 to 1998.
He also submitted two more representations dated March 14, 1998 and June 12, 1998 addressing the Chairman, Haryana State Electricity Board, Panchkula, which are attached with the writ petition as Annexure P-4 and P-5 respectively.
It has been further averred that ignoring his promotion, the Managing Director, Haryana Power Generation Corporation Limited, Panchkula (respondent No. 1) ordered the promotion of six Assistant Engineers (Civil) to the rank of Assistant Executive Engineers (Civil) vide order dated January 8, 2000 (Annexure P-6) though they were junior to him.
His promotion was shown to have been deferred, as is given in the note recorded in the said order.
3.
Notice of motion was issued.
4.
Written statement was filed.
5.
I have heard the petitioner in person and the learned Counsel for the respondents.
6.
The petitioner has stated that as his promotion has been deferred vide order dated January 8, 2000 (Annexure P-6) and no decision has been taken till today, thus, his interest has been prejudiced.
He has further stated that not only his promotion is being made, but also it has made a difference of Rs. 800/- per month in his emoluments, thereby putting him to a substantial loss every month.
7.
Learned counsel for the respondents has stated that the petitioner was not promoted because of his unsatisfactory service record whereas the other officers were promoted because they had good service record.
8.
Letter dated October 4, 1984 (Annexure P-1) issued by the Superintending Engineer, Civil Construction, Circle, PTPP, Panipato the Chief Engineer (Construction), PTPP, Panipat clearly speaks that "the work and conduct of the above cited officers has been found good."
Similarly, letter dated April 4, 1984 (Annexure P-2) issued by the Secretary, Haryana State Electricity Board, Chandigarh to the Chief Engineer, Thermal (Construction), PTPP, Panipat clearly states that the three officers, namely, S/Shri KL Chug, RC Chug (petitioner) and KD Taneja working under his administrative control were due for promotion.
The present petitioner has been shown at serial No. 11.
After this order dated April 4, 1984 (Annexure P-2), promotions of the private respondents Nos. 3 to 7 took place, but the petitioner was ignored.
In the impugned order dated January 8, 2000 (Annexure P-6), a Note has been given that "the promotion of Shri RC Chug, AE/Civil and Shri RK Garg, AE/Civil has been deferred."
After this order, no order has been passed.
Over a period of one year and 10 months has passed since the order dated January 8, 2000 (Annexure P-6) was passed by the competent authority, but no decision has been taken after deferring the promotion of the petitioner.
9.
Since a long time has elapsed and no decision has been taken, the order dated January 8, 2000 (Annexure P-6) passed by the Managing Director, Haryana Power Generation Corporation Limited, Panchkula (respondent No. 1) is quashed to the extent of deferring of promotion of the petitioner viz. Shri RC Chug, Assistant Engineer (Civil).
Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 are directed to pass a speaking order after taking the service record of the petitioner into consideration whether he should be promoted or not.
With the above directions, the writ petition is allowed.
Petition allowed.