SS Sudhalkar, J (Oral) - This petition was originally filed by Ashok Kumar (deceased-petitioner) who died on 981991 i.e. the very next month of the filing of the petition.
The wife of the petitioner get herself added as a petitioner in place of her husband.
The deceased-petitioner had prayed for the relief of promotion from the date his juniors were promoted, and the prayed for arrears of increment which were not paid to him.
The wife of the petitioner by the amendment has also prayed for consideration of promotion of her husband from the date his juniors were promoted, arrears of increments to which the deceased was entitled and the pension and gratuity benefits to which her husband was entitled to.
She has also asked for relief of compassionate appointment.
2.
Counsel for the petitioner argued that the deceased petitioner was appointed as a helper at Sonepat in the department of Haryana Roadways.
Then he was transferred to Yamuna Nagar and has worked at sub Depot at Naraingarh.
In 1983 he was sent to Faridabad.
After Faridabad he was sent to some other places also but his seniority is maintained at Faridabad Depot.
Learned counsel for the petitioner argued that in 1983 the petitioner was at serial No. 4 in the seniority list.
She also contends that the private respondents (deleted later on) were juniors to the deceased-petitioner and were promoted but the deceased-petitioner was not promoted.
She further stated that the names of private respondents were deleted from the array of respondents after the death of deceased-petitioner.
The deceased-petitioner and the petitioner has contended that all the helpers junior to the petitioner have been promoted and the deceased-petitioner has been throughout working to the full satisfaction of the authorities and no adverse remarks were ever given to him nor was he awarded any punishment and, therefore, he was entitled to promotion on the basis of seniority.
It is also contended that the deceased-petitioner was not given any increment from the date he joined service.
These contentions are in para 22(A) and 22(B) of the writ petition.
3.
Written statement has been filed by the respondents.
So far as Para 22(B) is concerned, there is no reply in the written statement from the side of the respondents.
However, regarding the allegations in para 22(A) of the petition, it has been contended as under :  "22.
That sub-para No. 22-A of the petition is absolutely wrong and hence is denied vehementally, the service record and annual reports of shri Ashok Kumar were absolutely unsatisfactory for the reasons as mentioned in the reply to para No. 12 of the reply.
His case for awarding increment was not considered appropriate.
4.
In view of the above reasons it will be necessary to refer to para 12 of the reply.
In para 12 of the respondents have stated as under :-  "12.
That para No. 12 of the petition is correct to the extent that the representation dated 9121990 was made to the answering respondent by Shri Ashok Kumar husband to the answering respondents.
Shri Ashok Kumar was habitual absentee from the duty.
The annual confidential reports of the official for the years 1980-81, 81-82, 83-84, 84-85, 85-86, 86-87, 87-88 and 88-89 were not good and were average and below average.
Hence the deceased was not awarded any promotion and increment because the matter of the promotion is considered on the basis of performance of an employee and other all assessments is reflected through annual confidential report which was absolutely unsatisfactory that is why Shri Ashok Kumar was ignored for promotion as well as increment."
5.
Therefore, for consideration of promotion, according to the respondents, the adverse reports of the decease-petitioner came into way.
Counsel for the petitioner has vehemently argued that the petitioner has mentioned in the original writ petition that no adverse remarks were ever given to him and he was not awarded any punishment.
In spite of this the respondents have not stated anywhere in the written statement that any adverse remarks were communicated to the deceased-petitioner.
The stand taken by the learned counsel for the State is that no replication is filed to the written statement.
From the order sheets it appears that notice of motion was issued for the first time after the petition was amended.
It was ordered to be issued on 3101991 for 14111991.
Therefore when the notice of motion was issued after the death of the deceased-petitioner, the question of filing replication by the deceased does not arise.
Moreover, the written statement is filed in the year 1995.
The respondents have stated regarding adverse remarks and the suspension of the deceased-petitioner but has nowhere stated that the adverse remarks were communicated.
In this case adverse inference cannot be drawn against the petitioner for not filing the replication because the replication being part of the pleadings has to be filed on verification and that verification can be done only by the person who has personal knowledge.
Counsel for the State has vehementally argued that when the petitioner could not file replication she has no right to continue with the petition.
With all respect to the learned State counsel, this argument has to be rejected.
A person who has right to estate of a deceased-petitioner can join herself as a heir of that person in the legal proceedings.
Therefore, personal knowledge and rights cannot be mixed.
The fact remains that the adverse remarks as alleged in the written statement are not conveyed to the deceased-petitioner.
The same are not placed on record of this case also.
So the allegation of adverse remarks cannot be considered against the petitioner in this writ petition.
Moreover though, it is alleged that the deceased petitioner was under suspension no details of the suspension were given.
No reason is given as to why increments were not given to the deceased petitioner.
This shows the callous attitude of the respondents in this case.
6.
As a result, the writ petitioner is found entitled to the reliefs she has prayed for the respondents are directed to consider the case of the deceased- petitioner for notional promotion from the date his juniors were promoted.
The respondents are also directed to release all the arrears of increments to the petitioner.
Of course they will be restricted to three years and two months prior to the date of filing of the original petition by the deceased- petitioner.
The respondents are also directed to given pension and gratuity to the petitioner because of the death of deceased-petitioner, in accordance with rules/law.
The respondent shall also consider the case of the petitioner for compassionate appointment if she is entitled to for the same according to the rules.
The respondents are also directed to pay interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum on the arrears of increments and retiral benefits which are available to the petitioner from date of accrue till the date of actual payment, let the needful be done within a period of four months from today.
7.
The petition stands allowed in the above terms.
Petition allowed.