SS Sudhalkar, J - By this writ petition, the petitioner claiming himself senior to respondents No. 3 to 5 for consideration for promotion as Deputy Superintendent, has prayed for a writ of mandamus directing respondents No. 1 and 2 to promote him to the post of Deputy Superintendent, w.e.f.
the date, respondents No. 3 to 5 have been promoted.
2.
Counsel for the petitioner argued that the petitioner and the private respondent were Assistant Superintendent Jail and on 1531986 the petitioner was promoted as Senior Assistant Superintendent Jail, and therefore, he should have been preferred to the private respondents in promotion, having already been promoted to a senior post than the post of Assistant Superintendent Jail.
The rule regarding promotion as Senior Assistant Superintendent Jail is rule 7(2) of the Punjab Prisons Service (Class-II) Rules, 1963.
It is as under :-  "7.
Method of appointment (1) xx xx (2) All promotions, whether from one grade to another or from one class of service to another shall be made by selection based on seniority-cum-merits and seniority alone shall not give any right to such appointment".
3.
In the written statement, para 251 of the Punjab Jail Manual is reproduced.
The same is also reproduced as under :-  "Para 251 : (1) Promotion to the appointment of Senior Assistant Superintendent shall be made by selection.
A thorough knowledge of the Laws, rules, directions and orders regulating the management of Jails and prisoners, efficiency in drill and ability to drill and guard, the possession of those qualities which enable an officer to command respect and maintain authority, energy in the discharge of his duties and good conduct shall be the qualifications for a Senior Assistant Superintendent.
(2) The grade shall be reserved for subordinates who in addition to the qualifications required by clause (1), appear to be likely with the opportunities, afforded them in a Central Jail, to become good and efficient Deputy Superintendents.
Every Senior Assistant Superintendent shall therefore, hold his appointment on probation only and if found to be wanting in any respect shall, be reason of his unsuitability for promotion, by reverted to his substantive appointment.
xx xxx xx xx xxx xx"  4.
Relying on this, learned counsel for the petitioner states that the posting on the post of Senior Assistant Superintendent Jail, which is made by selection, is a promotion from the post of Senior Assistant Superintendent Jail.
Learned counsel for the respondent has relied on the same rule and argued that if a person has same qualities, subordinate also can be promoted to the post of Senior Assistant Superintendent Jail, however, though it is termed as promotion, it cannot be taken as promotion and that the promotion to the post of Deputy Superintendent has to be made from the cadre of Assistant Superintendent Jail.
5.
Learned counsel for the respondent has further argued that the benefit of military service was given to the private respondents and after giving the said benefit to the respondents, the deemed dates of appointment of the private respondents and the petitioner are mentioned in para No. 8 of the written statement, which is as under :-  "Sh. Kanwal Singh, 22671.
(Respondent No. 3), Sh. Jagat Pal, 261170 (Respondent No. 4) Sh. Pal Singh, 22871 (Respondent No. 5), Sh. Om Parkash Kalia, 1861974 (Petitioner).
Learned State counsel further argued that in view of this position, the petitioner could not be said to be senior to the private respondents.
6.
Counsel for the petitioner argued that respondent No. 5 had suffered the remark of Integrity doubtful in his confidential report for the year 1980-81 and therefore, he should have not been promoted.
He has relied on the English version of Haryana Government letter No. 2759-4GSI-73/12854 dated 21st May, 1973.
According to this letter, if a doubt is expressed regarding honesty of the person, he should not be promoted.
7.
Learned State Counsel argued that this policy does not come to the rescue of the petitioner so far as his claim for promotion to the post of Deputy Superintendent is concerned.
The reason, according to her, is that after the seniority was changed because of grant of military service benefit to the private respondents No. 3, 4 and 5 are at Sr. No. 2, 1 and 4 respectively whereas the name of petitioner stands at Sr. No. 7.
This has been stated by the respondents in their written statement in paragraph No. 8.
Hence, according to learned State Counsel, even if respondent No. 5 is to be referred, the petitioner will not be the person who will get the benefit.
He has further argued that the petitioner accepted his seniority and did not challenge the seniority granted to the private respondents.
8.
The petitioner has relied on the above rule.
According the rule, it is clear that it is not only the seniority alone which has to be seen.
The appointment, though termed as promotion, has to be made by selection.
Otherwise, there was no purpose of using the word "selection".
9.
Moreover, in view of the benefit of military service, the petitioner cannot be treated as senior to the private respondents.
I also agree that even if respondent No. 5 was to be reverted, the petitioner will not have any chance of promotion.
Hence this writ petition is without merit and is hereby dismissed.
Petition dismissed.