Mehtab S Gill, J - The petitioner has prayed for the issuance of a writ in the nature of Certiorari for quashing the termination order, Annexure P3.
2.
The petitioner has averred that after an interview along with three other candidates, he was appointed as a peon by the Sub Divisional Officer (Civil) Dadri after having been sponsored by the Employment Exchange and he joined the service as a Peon in Tehsil Office, Dadri 191989.
He was appointed against a permanent post on regular basis against class IV vacancies.
He is working since 191989 and completed two years of continuous service on 3181991.
His services were terminated on 2881991 on the ground that his appointment was ad hoc and that Peons have been appointed on regular basis.
He has further averred that he was appointed on regular basis and, thus, termination of his services could not have taken place.
The other persons who were appointed along with the petitioner were at serial Nos. 2, 3 and 4 of the merit list and were being allowed to serve on the same posts.
Their names have been mentioned as Jhandu Ram, Satbir, Hari Krishan.
3.
It has been further averred by the petitioner that his services have been terminated only on the ground that he had been declared medically unfit by the Chief Medical Officer, Bhiwani though he claims that he was declared medically fit vide letter dated 29111990, Annexure P4.
The order of termination of his services was passed because of letter dated 851991 sent by the Chief Secretary to the Government of Haryana under the heading "policy and Procedure for making ad hoc appointments against the posts which are within the purview of HPSC/SSB".
This letter (Annexure P5) does not apply to him as he was holding a Class IV post which was outside the purview of Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana.
4.
Notice of motion was issued.
5.
Written statement was filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2.
6.
The counsel for the respondents has stated that as the petitioner was found medically unfit so his services could not be regularised.
His services could be only regularised if he was declared permanently fit to enter into Government service.
The medical certificates attached with the written statement show that the petitioner was being declared medically fit for two years after every medical examination.
Annexure P5 is a letter written by the Chief Secretary to Government Haryana to all the Heads of Departments which states that ad hoc appointments should not be made but in this case it was not a case of ad hoc appointment.
The petitioner was appointed against a regular post after his name was sponsored by the Employment Exchange and interview was held.
Vide appointment letter, Annexure P1, the petitioner was directed to get himself medically examined.
Annexure P4 is the medical certificate dated 29111990 of Dr. HS Narula, Civil Surgeon, Bhiwani whereby after his medical examination, he was declared medically fit for two years.
Further, it has been stated that he was suffering from heart disease but the heart was well compensated and he was declared medically fit.
Annexures R1 to R11 also show that after every two years, the petitioner was being medically examined and was found in a fit condition to do his job.
Since the petitioner on being medically examined was fit to do his job, i do not see any reason as to why his services were terminated vide order dated 2881991, copy Annexure P3.
7.
As the services of the petitioner were illegally terminated without any cogent reason, order Annexure P3 is quashed.
The respondents are directed to take the petitioner back into service on a regular post.
If there is no such regular post, the same be created.
The petitioner will be entitled to all the consequential benefits accruing to him.
With the above directions, this writ petition is disposed of.
Petition allowed.