GS Singhvi, J - This appeal is directed against the order dated 2.9.1992 passed by the learned Single Judge in Civil Writ Petition No. 3565 of 1991 by which he quashed the promotion of respondent No. 2 Prithi Singh on the post of Assistant Draftsman (Architecture) and directed the appellant to fill the post in accordance with the Haryana State Agricultural Marketing Board Service Rules, 1974 (for short the 1974 Rules) by promoting a person having five years experience as Tracer in the branch concerned.
The facts necessary for deciding the appeal are that respondent No. 2 joined service under the Haryana State Agricultural Marketing Board (for short the Board) as Tracer in the year 1980.
Respondent No. 1 also joined service of the Board as Tracer on May 4, 1985.
In the seniority list of Tracers, respondent No. 2 was shown above respondent No. 1.
He was promoted as Assistant Draftsman (Architecture) vide order dated 2621991 issued by the Chief Administrator of the Board.
2.
Respondent No. 1 filed Civil Writ Petition No. 3565 of 1991 with the prayer that the promotion of respondent No. 2 as Assistant Draftsman (Architecture) be quashed because he did not possess the qualifications prescribed under the 1974 Rules.
He averred that respondent No. 2 was working as Tracer on the civil side and, therefore, he was not eligible to be considered for promotion as Assistant Draftsman (Architecture).
3.
In their separate but similar written statements, the appellant and respondent No. 2 averred that the latter had been promoted because he was senior to the petitioner (respondent No. 1 herein).
According to them, the cadre of Tracer was common to civil and architecture wings of the service and a joint seniority of all the Tracers was being maintained by the Board.
They further averred that respondent No. 2 was promoted by applying the criterion of seniority-cum-merit.
4.
The learned Single Judge allowed the writ petition and declared that respondent No. 2 was not eligible to be considered for promotion as Assistant Draftsman (Architecture) because he did not have five years experience in the particular branch i.e. architecture.
Some of the observations made by the learned Single are reproduced below :-  "Keeping in view the fact that the nature of duties of the Assistant Draftsmen in the two branches are different, it appears reasonable to assume that at the time of promotion, the Tracer should have the experience of the particular branch in which he is being considered for promotion.
To illustrate, a Tracer for promotion to the post of Assistant Draftsman (Architecture) must possess 5 years of experience in the Architecture Branch and similarly he must possess experience of five years on the civil side for promotion to the post of Assistant Draftsman (Civil).
I cannot interpret the provisions of Appendix B to mean that a Tracer who has worked for 5 years in the Architecture Branch shall be eligible for promotion to the post of Assistant Draftsmen (Civil) and another Tracer who has worked for 5 years in the civil branch would be eligible for promotion to the post of Assistant Draftsman (Architecture).
This would make the working difficult and efficient performance of duties doubtful.
Accordingly, it appears that the requisite experience has to be in the particular branch.
It is the admitted position that prior to the issue of the order dated February 26, 1991 respondent No. 2 Prithi Singh was working as a Tracer in the Civil Branch.
He had not been posted in the Architecture Branch even for a day.
Accordingly, in my view, he did not have 5 years of experience as a Tracer which could entitle him for promotion to Assistant Draftsman (Architecture).
As such, his promotion vide order dated February 26, 1991 was wholly illegal and contrary to the rules."
(Underlining is ours)  5.
Shri Rajesh Mahajan invited our attention to Rules 7 and 10 and Appendix B appended to the 1974 Rules to show that cadre of Tracer is common to both the wings of the service i.e. Civil and Architecture and that there is no requirement of experience in the particular branch for promotion from the post of Tracer to the post of Assistant/Draftsman or Assistant Draftsman (Architecture).
Shri Sanjeev Kaushik supported the order under challenge by arguing that the learned Single Judge has rightly read the requirement of experience in the particular branch as a condition of eligibility for promotion to the post of Assistant Draftsman (Architecture).
6.
We have given serious thought to the respective arguments.
Rules 7 and 10 and extract of Appendix B to the 1974 Rules, which are relevant to the adjudication of the issue raised in the appeal, read as under :-  "7.
Qualifications- No person shall be appointed to the service, unless he is in possession of the qualifications and experience specified in column 2 of Appendix B to these rules in the case of direct recruitment and those specified in column 3 of the said Appendix in the case of recruitment other than by direct requirement.
10.
Method of recruitment.
- Recruitment to the Service shall be made in the manner as specified in column 4 of the Appendix B to these rules.
Note 1.
All promotions shall be made on the basis of seniority-cum-merit.
Note 2.
Recourse to direct appointment or appointment by transfer or deputation shall be made only if suitable candidates are not available from within the Service.
S. No.
Designation of post Academic qualifica tion and experience, if any, for direct recruit ment Academic qualificationsand experience, if any, for appointment other than by direct recruitment Method of recruitment  1 to 28 xx xx xx xx 29.
Assistant Draftsman Diploma in draftsman-ship (civil) Diploma in draftsman-ship (civil) i) by direct recruitmentii) by transfer or deputation 30.
Assistant Draftsman (Architecture) State Board diploma in architectural assistant ship State Board diploma in architectural assistantship or matriculate with five years experience as Tracer/Ferror-printer i) by transfer or deputation or;ii) by direct recruitment; or by promotion 31.
Tracer Matriculate with drawing as one of the subjects Matriculate with drawing as one of the subjects i) by transfer or deputation or ii) by direct recruitment xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xx xxx xx xx"  7.
A conjoint reading of the above extracted rules and entries of Appendix B show that the post of Tracer does not have adjunct, like civil or architecture.
the qualification prescribed for the post of Tracer is Matriculation with drawing as one of the subjects.
The 1974 Rules do not envisage recruitment of Tracer (Civil) and Tracer (Architecture) or posting of Tracer in the particular branch or wing of the Service.
Rather, the scheme of the 1974 Rules shows that the cadre of Tracer is common to Civil as well as Architecture Wings of the Service and a joint seniority list of Tracers is being maintained by the department.
Entries 29 and 30 of Appendix-B show that post of Assistant Draftsman can be filled by direct recruitment or transfer or deputation and the post of Assistant Draftsman (Architecture) can be filled by transfer or deputation or by direct recruitment or by promotion.
The qualification prescribed for promotion to the post of Assistant Draftsman (Architecture) is State Board Diploma in Architectural Assistantship or Matriculation with five years experience as Tracer/Ferro-printer.
There is nothing in column-3 of Entry-30 of Appendix-B from which it can be inferred that 5 years experience on the post of Tracer or Ferro-printer should be in any particular branch and in the absence of any express stipulation to that effect, we do not find any valid reason to read the requirement of experience in the particular branch as a condition necessary for promotion to the post of Assistant Draftsman (Architecture).
The learned Single Judge quashed the promotion of respondent No. 2 by assuming that 5 years experience required for promotion to the post of Assistant Draftsman (Architecture) must be in the particular branch and the said respondent did not have the required experience in Architecture Branch/Wing.
With great respect, we are unable to agree with him because the expression "in the particular branch" does not find mention in colum-3 of Entry-30 of Appendix-B and hold that a Tracer is eligible and his junior, who may have been allowed to work in particular branch/wing for a specified period, may become eligible for such promotion.
In this manner, the fortuitous factor of posting will become determinative of the eligibility for promotion.
In our opinion, if the eligibility is made dependent on the fortuitous factor of posting in a particular branch, section or wing, then the same would be rendered ultra vires to Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
8.
For the reasons mentioned above, the appeal is allowed.
The order of the learned Single Judge is set aside and the writ petition is dismissed.
Petition allowed.