RL Anand, J - Shri Jagdish Rai, Tehsildar (Sales) (since retired) has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India by making a prayer that a writ in the nature of certiorari be issued and the order dated 3rd August, 2001 (Annexure P-7) vide which a 5% cut has been imposed on the pension of the petitioner for a period of ten years may be quashed.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that on 27.1.1997 he was issued with the charge-sheet for commission and omission of certain acts when he was posted as Tehsildar (Sales).
The petitioner submitted reply to the charge- sheet on 2521997.
Respondent No. 1 appointed Under Secretary as an Inquiry Officer and the Inquiry Officer gave his report on 29101997 to the competent authority.
On 312000 the respondent No. 1 issued a memo to the petitioner vide which he was provisionally of the opinion that a penalty of 5% cut in pension for a period of ten years should be imposed.
The petitioner gave the reply on 2812000 and finally the order was passed on 382001 vide which the proposed penalty of 5% cut in the pension for a period of ten years was imposed.
3.
The petitioner has challenged the above-said order mainly on the ground that this order was passed on the basis of the charge No. 4, but the Enquiry Officer has exonerated the petitioner under that charge by holding that he does not find the rate of Rs. 20/- per sq.
yd charged for the transfer of the property as unreasonable.
4.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents who filed the reply and denied the allegations and according to the Government Policy dated 29121986, those rural evacuee houses/sites were to be transferred to the occupants where substantial constructions have been raised and that too, after getting the market price fixed by the Settlement Officer (Sales), besides charging the "use and occupation charges" from such transferees.
The vacant plots were to be disposed of by way of auction.
In the instant case, vacant plots were transferred by the petitioner to Shri Fazla and Bagh Khan on nominal price which could not be transferred at all on any price being vacant land.
Many serious irregularities were committed by the petitioner in the transfer of the plots in question.
It was an act of fraud on the part of the petitioner.
5.
The date on the application submitted by Fazla to the alleged occupant was tampered with and entered in the register ante-dated.
No convincing and bona fide efforts were made by the petitioner who was then working as Tehsildar (Sales) Ambala to establish the fact that Shri Fazla had now been in continuous and undisputed possession over the plot in question since 13121980 as required by Government Policy dated 29121986.
The whole process of transfer of the land to Shri Fazla was null and void and based on fake evidence.
It was also alleged by the respondents that the petitioner before passing the order for transfer of the land did not get the price of the land and "use and occupation charges" assessed from the competent authority i.e. Settlement Officer (Sales).
Kanungo of his office at her own level got deposited the nominal "use and occupation charges" in respect of plot in question for certain period.
The petitioner at his own level fixed the price of the land at the rate of Rs. 20/- sq.
yard instead of getting the market price assessed from the competent authority and ordered for transfer of the plot vide order dated 1041995 in favour of Shri Fazla in grave violation of the Government Policy.
He did not get the price fixed from the Settlement Officer.
The Kanungo Smt. Asha Rani has also been imposed punishment with stoppage of two annual grade increments with cumulative effect.
Narrating the procedure, it has been asserted by the respondents that where any land is to be transferred a proposal for fixation of price is drawn which is processed by the junior staff with necessary data of recent deeds to see average price of the plot in the vicinity keeping in view the market trend.
Thereafter the said proposal is dispatched by the Tehsildar (Sales) concerned to the concerned Settlement Officer (Sales) having jurisdiction of that sale unit.
The said proposal is duly entered in relevant register by the Settlement Officer (Sales), processed, examined and even spot inspection is made and thereafter an office order is passed.
No such exercise was carried out by the petitioner in getting the price of the plot fixed before passing the order for transfer of the plot.
The petitioner got the transfer approved from the Settlement Officer (Sales) on 2641995 and thereafter issued the sale deed on 351995 in favour of Shri Fazla.
One kanal of plot was transferred just for a paltry amount of Rs. 12100/- which is situated in village Billa, Tehsil Panchkula.
The plot in question was transferred by the petitioner to Shri Fazla in a hush-hush manner.
This very plot was sold for a sum of Rs. 1,50,000/- after few days on 1661995 by Shri Fazla.
Had the plot was put into auction it could have fetched much higher price.
Thus, the mala fide intention and extraneous consideration are proved on the part of the respondents when he ordered for the transfer of the plot in favour of Shri Fazla in collusion with his junior staff.
Moreover, the petitioner transferred another plot measuring 10 marlas to Shri Bhag Khan for a sum of Rs. 6,000/- in the same manner and Shri Bhag Khan also gifted that very plot on 2761995 by giving the valuation of the plot at Rs. 32,000/-.
The petitioner and the Kanungo were charged-sheeted.
In the inquiry report, the petitioner was found guilty of charges Nos. 1, 3, and 5 and specifically it was reported that the petitioner acted in a routine manner to get the formalities completed and did not make serious attempts in verifying the facts about the occupants before proposing the transfer of the properties to the transferees and that the petitioner did not examine the extent of "use and occupation charges" chargeable from the transferees.
Two annual grade increments with cumulative effect has been stopped in the case of Kanungo Smt. Asha Rani.
Since the petitioner has been retired from service on 382000, therefor 5% cut in pension for a period of ten years has been imposed vide order dated 382000 passed by the Commissioner and Secretary to Government of Haryana.
6.
I have heard the learned Counsel for the parties and with their assistance, have gone through the record of this case.
7.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the order has been passed on the basis of Charge No. 4.
He submitted that as per the inquiry report, the Officer himself has stated that he does not find the rate of Rs. 20/- per sq.
yard charged in the present two cases of transfer of property to be unreasonable and, therefore, the order should be quashed.
I am not in a position to subscribe to the argument raised by the learned Counsel for the petitioner.
The question for determination is as to whether the petitioner has complied with the departmental procedure or not.
If the petitioner has not complied with the departmental procedure, still he was guilty of mis- conduct and this aspect of the case has been totally examined in depth and it was found that the petitioner has not taken the necessary order from the Settlement Officer (Sales) before proposal for the transfer was made.
Even, under charge No. 1, the Inquiry Officer has stated that though the petitioner acted in a routine manner to get the formalities completed, but he did not make serious attempts in verifying the facts abut the occupants before proposing the transfer of the properties to the transferees.
Under charge No. 3 again a finding has been given against the petitioner that he was responsible for not properly examining the extent of the "use and occupation charges" chargeable from the transferees of the property.
In this view of the matter, when the petitioner has ignored the departmental procedure in order to specify the transfers, his conduct is definitely under cloud.
The very fact, that this very property was sold within few days to Shri Fazla for a sum of Rs. 1,50,000/-, shows that the property was under valued.
8.
Learned counsel for the petitioner drew my attention to the document Annexure R-2 and submitted that the proposal of transfer given by the petitioner was subject to the approval by the Settlement Officer (Sales).
This proposal was given on 10th April, 1995 after the transfer was approved by the Settlement Officer (Sales), therefore, the petitioner stands exonerated.
The submission of the learned Counsel for the petitioner for the petitioner cannot be accepted.
If the Settlement Officer (Sales) has been misled by the petitioner by making a false note and against the procedure, how the petitioner can be exonerated.
The reading of the impugned order Annexure P-7 would show that the punishing authority has clearly applied its mind.
It has been stated in the impugned order that the Inquiry Officer has not exonerated the petitioner of all the charges.
A provisional notice was given to the petitioner before imposing the cut.
The petitioner was heard.
The principle of natural justice has been complied with.
It is not a case without any basis.
The petitioner has tried to cause loss to the Government and has tried to give undue benefit to the alleged occupants and, therefore, the Government had right to impose a cut in the pension which is not on the higher side, excessive or arbitrary.
Only a 5% cut in the pension for ten years has been imposed.
Thus, I do not find any merit in this writ petition and the same is hereby dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.