SS Sudhalkar, J - The petitioner is seeking quashing of the adverse remarks and the consequential order at annexure P/6 and the appellate order annexure P/8.
The remarks annexure P/6 are conveyed by the Deputy Inspector General of Police to the Superintendent of Police vide letter dated 1911993.
The said remarks are as under :  "One corrupt and worst type of ASI.
Characterless also.
The grading is given `C'."
2.
The remarks are for the period from 681991 to 3131992.
Learned counsel for the petitioner relied on the said remarks of Superintendent of Police and the Deputy Commissioner which he has reproduced in para 9 of the petition.
They are as under :  "An intelligent, hard worker, sincere and reliable officer.
He is very sensible and popular in general masses."
I agree with the comments of Superintendent of Police."
3.
The above remarks are for the same period i.e. 681991 to 3131992.
There was an annonymous complaint against the petitioner and a preliminary enquiry was conducted.
The report of the preliminary enquiry is annexure P/5 dated 271992.
The regular departmental enquiry was conducted against the petitioner and in the same he was exonerated.
The charges in the preliminary enquiry against the petitioner were as under :-  (i) That during the life-time of his first wife Shon Devi, he had married with other lady, namely, Manjusha.
(ii) That he developed illicit relations with one lady Constable, namely, Kanta Dhanda of Distt.
Sirsa.
(iii) That he has taken bribe from the truck operators.
(iv) That on 11.4.1992 he took the tent articles without paying fare to oblige one Khairati Lal, Inspector Wireless."
4.
The relevant portion of the report by which the petitioner was exonerated is as under :  "I have carefully gone through the findings of the E.O.
This D/E against ASI Rohtas Singh No. 488/Jind and annonymous complaint.
In circular letter of the Ministry of Home Affairs, Govt. of India, bearing Ref.
No.
F.I.
(10/88 dated 9.5.1968 which says : "Annonymous complaints.
No note or action should be taken on any letter if the writer fail to give his name/address."
5.
Keeping in view the above instructions no action can be taken against the defaulter as the complaint is without name and address.
However, as per statements of PWs an DWs allegations levelled against ASI Rohtas Singh No. 488/Jind have not been proved.
Therefore, I am inclined to agree with the findings of the Enquiry Officer and this Departmental enquiry against ASI Rohtas Singh No. 488/Jind is hereby filed."
6.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner argued that the remarks of the Deputy Inspector General are based on the annonymous complaint and when he was charge sheeted for the said remarks and was exonerated, adverse remarks should be expunged.
Actually annonymous complaint should not have been given any attention while writing annual confidential report.
7.
The respondents have stated inter alia in the written statement as under :-  "...
While recording adverse report against the petitioner by respondent No. 4 no mention had been made of such a complaint.
The controlling officer who recorded the adverse remarks was well aware of the petitioner having illicit connection with the sellers of liquor and had also been noticed doing unauthorised traffic checking of vehicles."
8.
Is also mentioned in the written statement as under "  "...
It is pertinent to mention here that a case FIR No. 245 dated 371992 under section 7/13 of Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 was also registered against the petitioner in police station Jind but he was lucky to be exonerated in that case due to lack of evidence."
9.
If the corruption case against the petitioner was not proved, the respondents should not have based adverse remarks on the same.
Moreover, the case of the respondents is that the controlling officer who recorded the adverse remarks was well aware of the petitioner having illicit connections with the sellers of liquor.
When this information had come to the notice of the controlling officer atleast the petitioner should have been confronted with the same before recording of adverse remarks against him as held in the case of State of UP v. Yamuna Shanker Misra and another, 1997(2) SCT 234 (SC) : 1997(2) S.L.R.
311.
10.
In view of the above reasons, the adverse remarks against the petitioner annexure P/6 deserve to be quashed.
11.
In the result, this petition is allowed and the adverse remarks at annexure P/6 are quashed.
Consequently, the appellate order annexure P/8 also does not survive.
Petition allowed.