RL Anand, J - Shri Ram Sarup, Assistant has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India and has prayed that a writ in the nature of mandamus be issued against respondents No. 1 and 2 directing them to consider his case for promotion as Head Clerk as per the seniority from the date when his juniors were promoted to the said post.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that the was duly selected and appointed as Clerk with respondents No. 1 and 2 and he joined his duties on 311978.
He was duly selected and promoted as Assistant w.e.f.
23.1.1983 on the basis of his seniority and good service record.
Unfortunately for the petitioner, he suffered heart ailment and he made a request to the department that his further promotion as Head Clerk may be deferred till he recovers from his ailment.
The grievance of the petitioner is that in spite of the fact that he has a good service record to be considered to the post of Head Clerk, he is being ignored and his juniors have been promoted and, therefore, he should be promoted from the back date when his juniors were promoted with all consequential benefits.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
They filed the reply and denied the allegations.
The defence of the respondents is that the case of the petitioner for promotion for the post of Head Clerk/Deputy Superintendent was discussed in detail.
He earned five ACRs during the tenure of Assistant i.e., w.e.f.
7.3.1983 onwards.
Since he has not earned 70% good or better category reports, therefore, on the basis of the service record, the petitioner was ignored from the post of Head Clerk.
4.
I have heard Mr. Rameshwar Sharma, Advocate on behalf of the petitioner, Mr. OP Sharma, Advocate on behalf of respondents Nos. 1 and 2 and with their assistance have gone through the record of the case.
5.
Annexure P-1 is the letter written by the petitioner to the Secretary, HUDA in which he has clearly stated that since he was not properly fit on account of heart problem, therefore, his promotion as Head Clerk for the time being may be kept pending.
Annexure P-2 is the office order dated 2991989 vide which certain persons junior to the petitioner were promoted to the posts of Head Clerks.
Annexure P-3 is the representation of the petitioner vide which he requested the department to give him the promotion as he has fully recovered from the problem.
Similar is the request made by the petitioner in Annexure P-4.
Annexure P-5 is the copy of the office order vide which two persons were promoted as Head Clerks.
Annexure P-6 is yet another order dated 14111994 vide which certain officials of the department were promoted to the post of Head Clerks.
6.
The short point for determination is whether the petitioner is entitled to be considered for promotion as Head Clerk from the date when his juniors were promoted and whether the action of the department in ignoring the petitioner from the promotion of Head Clerk is justified or not.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has referred to Annexure R-2/1, the instructions dated 951985 issued by the Chief Secretary to Government, Haryana to all the Head of Departments in the State of Haryana in which it has been mentioned as follows :-  "The matter has been considered further by the State Government and it has been decided that in future only such officials/officer(s) who have obtained at least 70% or more reports of `good' or `better' categories during the last 10 years should be considered eligible for promotion to a higher post.
However, as before greater weightage shall be given to the reports earned on the higher post from which further promotion is being considered.
These instructions may please be noted for careful compliance and brought to the notice of all concerned."
7.
On the strength of the above instructions, the learned counsel for respondents Nos. 1 and 2 submits that the record of the petitioner when he was working as Assistant was not up to the standard as laid down in the instructions dated 951985.
Therefore, the petitioner cannot claim as of the right that he should be promoted as Head Clerk from the date when his juniors were promoted.
On the other hand, the learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the department was supposed to examine the record of the petitioner of last ten years and more weightage is to be given to that period from which the petitioner is seeking further promotion.
There is merit in the contention raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
The reading of the above instructions would show that firstly the department is to examine ten years record of the petitioner whether he remained in the feeder post or its junior post.
Thereafter, more weightage is to be given to the record from which the candidate is supposed to be considered for promotion.
Now let us examine what has been earned by the petitioner when he was discharging the obligation of Assistant :-  1983-84 Good 1984-85 Average 1985-86 Good 1986-87 Good 1987-88 Average  1988-89 Not available When the report of 1988-89 is not available, it will be considered as good in view of the decision Jagrup Singh v. State of Haryana, 1998(3) SCT 1.
Be that as it may, the service record of the petitioner for the ten years has not been considered by the department while ignoring the petitioner for the first time from promotion as Head Clerk, therefore, the action of the respondent authorities in ignoring the petitioner is to be considered as bad and has to be struck down.
I order accordingly.
Resultantly, this writ petition is allowed and directions are given to respondents No. 1 and 2 to consider the record of ten years of the petitioner before 1988-89 and if he has earned 70% reports good or above, he should be considered for promotion as Head Clerk when his juniors were first time considered and promoted.
In the event of the promotion of the petitioner, he will not be entitled to any arrears on the principle of "no work no pay".
There shall be no order as to costs.
Needful exercise shall be done by the department within four months.
Petition allowed.