SS Sudhalkar, J - The petitioner appeared in the Haryana Civil Services (Executive Branch) Examination, held by the Haryana Public Service Commission, respondent No. 2, in the year 1996.
In the subject of Hindi and Hindi Essay, he was given the remark "D" which mean `Disclosure of Identity' and he was not given any marks in any other paper.
2.
The petitioner, by this writ petition, has prayed for quashing of clause 3(a) of the instructions regarding disclosure of identity and also Note-I, page 12 (underneath the heading `Compulsory subjects') of the instructions as also the quashing of result with remark `D'.
3.
The relevant rule, which is sought to be quashed is Rule 3(a) which has been reproduced by the petitioner in the writ petition.
We also reproduce the same in this judgment.
It is as under :-  "3(a) Disclosure of identity in any form like use of ink other than blue or blue black, writing of roll number and name at places other than specified, writing of serial No. of the script or putting of any type of mark etc. will amount to use of unfair means and will be penalised by cancelling the paper and awarding zero marks".
Note 1, page 12 underneath the heading of the compulsory subjects, of the instructions is as under :- "Candidates who do not qualify in Hindi Compulsory subject, their answer sheet in the compulsory and optional subjects will not be evaluated."
So far as rule 3(a) is concerned, learned counsel for the petitioner argued that the rule is arbitrary in nature and not legal and, therefore, it should be quashed.
4.
We find it difficult to agree with this submission.
It is well known how unfair means are used in the examination by the candidates and if the examining authority provides rule for keeping the name of the candidate secret, there cannot be any arbitrariness or illegally in the same.
On the contrary it is an attempt to eliminate some of the many vices prevailing.
If any attempts is made to prevent the vice or an illegal unfair means in the conduct of the examinations, the said rule should be upheld and Courts cannot quash the same by giving a bonus to the persons who want to misuse the examinations.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has relied on the case of Mukul Kumar v. State of Haryana, reported as 1994(4) RSJ 654.
However, that judgment does not hold such a rule to be invalid.
In that particular case, it was found that the petitioner had written down the book number on the first page of the answer sheet and this was because of misleading print of the clipping supplied along with additional answer sheet.
It was held in the said judgment that the petitioner had not made any attempt to disclose his identity.
The DB observed in the said judgment as under :-  "8.
After considering the submissions of the learned Counsel for the parties and going through the record, we ware convinced that the petitioner did not make any attempt to disclose his identity.
He had written down the book number along with the page on the first page of his first answer sheet because of the misleading print of the clipping supplied along with additional answer sheets.
According to Shri Mehtani, book number which is referred on the top of the answering script is the serial number and, therefore, the petitioner could not have written those numbers on the first page of the first answer book.
In our view, the printing of the numbers on the clippings pasted on the additional answer sheets could definitely cause confusion in the mind of the petitioner as to whether the number was serial number or book number because the word Sr. is not written in front of the word `No.'.
In fact, even after considerable efforts, Shri Mehtani was unable to satisfactorily explain as to why gap was left between book number and serial number printed on the clippings pasted on the additional answer books.
In a confused state like this, the petitioner must have been misled in writing number on the clippings of the additional answer sheets.
In our opinion, he cannot be held guilty of having disclosed his identity and on the premise, his examination could not have been cancelled."
The judgment does not help the petitioner.
The next point argued before us was that the petitioner has not tried to disclose his identity.
Of course, the marks sheets, Annexure P/1, only mentions `D' in the column of marks obtained for Hindi and Hindi Essay.
However, the answer can be obtained from the reply to the representation made by the petitioner.
The reply is dated 852000 and copy of the same has been produced at Annexure P/2.
In the said reply, it is mentioned as under :-  "3.
Writing of a name and address in the answer script of Hindi and Hindi Essay' when answering the question relating to the writing of letter amounted to the disclosures of identity in terms of clause 3(a) of the aforesaid instructions and accordingly you have been penalised by cancelling the Hindi paper and awarding zero marks in the said paper."
If a letter is to be written in a language paper, the name of the candidate is not to be mentioned and when the petitioner is alleged to have mentioned the same nothing has been shown as to how the said reasons given are not correct.
As per averments in the writ petition, after the reply annexure P/2 was received, the father of the petitioner met the Chairman of the respondent- Commission for evaluating the answer sheets and declare the result.
He was directed to make an application for the same pursuant to which the petitioner made the application.
The application is at Annexure P/3.
Annexure P/4 is the reply to the same.
It is stated therein that the petitioner has disclosed his identity in the paper of Hindi and Hindi Essay.
It is not shown to have been stated in the writ petition that the petitioner has not written the name in the question relating to writing a letter, as mentioned in Annexure P/2.
6.
This being the position, there is no reason to interfere with the decision of the respondents in holding that the petitioner had disclosed his identity.
7.
The next ground argued before us is that even though the remarks `D' is found against the column of the subject Hindi and Hindi Essay, the respondents should be declared the result of other papers.
However, `Hindi and Hindi Essay' is admittedly a compulsory paper and when the petitioner could not pass in the said paper, because of the above reasons, no purpose will be served by directing the respondents to give result of other papers.
8.
In view of the above position, we find no merit in this writ petition.
It is hereby dismissed.
Petition dismissed.