JS Narang, J - The petitioner appeared in the Punjab Medical Entrance Test (PMET-2001) and passed the same by obtaining 486 marks and the rank as 339 (General Category).
She was called by Central Admission Committee of the University for admission/counselling on 1882001 alongwith documents/certificates as mentioned in the prospectus.
She was selected for BDS course but was denied BDS seat-free as she did not produce certificate having passed 10+1.
It is alleged that she had submitted her 10+2 certificate passed from State of Punjab and overall progress report of 10+1.
Since she could not produce the certificate as aforesaid, i.e. 10+1 certificate, her candidature was rejected.
However, she has been given admission in BAMS on 1982001 on submission of 10+1 certificate.
2.
It is the act of rejection of the candidature of the petitioner on the ground of non-production of 10+1 certificate which has been made the subject matter of challenge in this petition.
It is averred that in the brochure, no requirement has been indicated for production of 10+1 certificate, as such, the respondents have therefore, incorrectly rejected her candidature in BDS Free Seat.
3.
On the other hand, the stand of the respondents is that in pursuant to Public Notice (PMET-2001), copy Annexure R-2/1, the candidates had been duly notified that they should have passed 10+1 and 10+2 examination or above equivalent examination as a regular candidate of a recognised institution situated in State of Punjab.
It is apparent that the purpose and object of production of both the aforesaid certificates would indicate as to whether candidate has passed his/her examination from an institution situated in the State of Punjab or not.
The non-production of such certificate would cause a doubt in the mind of the Admission Committee in this regard, the non- production of aforesaid certificates becomes a valid ground for rejection of the candidature.
The Public Notice is stated to have been notified in the daily newspaper, "The Tribune" dated 1962000 and that the counselling took place on 1882001.
Resultantly, the petitioner had sufficient notice for producing the aforesaid certificates.
4.
We have heard learned counsel for the petitioner as also the respondents and we have pursued the provisions of the prospectus as also the Public Notice, copy of which has been appended as Annexure R-2/1.
We find that the petitioner has not been prejudicially affected in any manner as she had sufficient notice to produce the aforesaid certificate to corroborate the condition that candidate must have passed 10+1 and 10+2 examination from an institution situated in the State of Punjab.
Non-production of the relevant certificate at the relevant time before the Admission Committee has correctly resulted into rejection of the candidature of the candidate.
5.
We find no merit in the petition and the same is dismissed accordingly.
No order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.