RL Anand, J - Smt. Sheela Rani, the Chief Development Project Officer, as filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India against the respondents and she has prayed that directions be issued against the respondents from reverting her from the post of Chief Development Project Officer to the post of Supervisor by quashing the order dated 11th February, 1988 (Annexure P-12).
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that in the year 1978, she started her service career as Supervisor under the Social Welfare Department Haryana on adhoc basis.
Her services were regularised on 15th September, 1982 in the same cadre.
On 24th February, 1987, respondent No. 2 appointed her on a higher post i.e. Child Development Project Officer (for short the CDPO) against a vacant post for a period of four months on her own pay scale along with ten other supervisors.
On 25th September, 1987, the petitioner was given the additional charge of CDPO, Rajound, District Jind in addition to the work of CDPO Kalayat.
Vide promotion order dated 23101987, respondent No. 1 promoted the petitioner along with 27 others as CDPO from the post of Supervisors.
There are 29 temporary sanctioned posts of CDPO No post is permanent, so the petitioner was promoted on adhoc basis.
On 2111987, Messrs Sheoji Ram Suresh Kumar Anaj Mandi Jind supplied `Gur' under the supply of Nutrition Programme to the office of the petitioner.
Though the above-said firm supplied the bill for 70 quintals of Gur but on weighing of the bags, it was noticed by the Accountant as well as by the Supervisors that there was shortage of 4 quintals of Gur.
Shri Suresh Kumar partner of the said firm gave in writing to the petitioner that he will send the shortage of 4 quintals of `Gur' in 2-3 days to her office.
On 3rd November, 1987 the petitioner informed Smt. Sushila Rawal, Programme Officer, Jind (respondent No. 3) regarding the shortage of 4 quintals of Gur.
On 6111987 the petitioner also wrote a letter in her official capacity as CDPO to the said firm for the supply of shortage of the remaining 4 quintals of Gur.
3.
The grievance of the petitioner is that vide order dated 8th/9th December, 1987, respondent No. 1 passed the order vide which the petitioner was asked to hand over the charge of the post of CDPO to Smt. Bimla Kumari.
On 11121987 respondent No. 2 passed the transfer order of the petitioner and she was transferred to District Level ICDS Cell Jind.
The grievance of the petitioner further is that respondent No. 1 had issued the impugned reversion order of the petitioner on 11th February, 1988 vide which the petitioner has been reverted from the post of CDPO to the post of a Supervisor (Annexure P-12) and the said order is bad because this is a non-speaking order and it violates the provisions of Articles 311(2) of the Constitution of India.
4.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents who filed the reply and denied the allegations.
According to the respondents, no legal right of the petitioner has been encroached.
Therefore, she has no locus standi to invoke the provisions of Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
On merits, the stand of the respondents is that the petitioner was promoted to the post of CDPO on temporary basis in accordance with the provisions of Haryana Social Welfare Department and Relief Organisation Group `B' Service Rules, 1987 and as per those rules, such promotions are to be treated on probation for a period of one year, if appointed otherwise than direct recruitment.
The petitioner was to remain on probation for a period of one year.
On 2nd November, 1987 Messrs Sheoji Ram Suresh Kumar Anand Mandi, Jind supplied 66 quintals of Gur as against the supply order of 70 quintals, but the petitioner got 70 quintals and entry was made in the stock register issued to the Supervisors and obtained receipts in token of delivery of 70 quintals of Gur from the Supervisors.
Moreover, she passed the bill for the entire quantity of 70 quintals.
If there was any undertaking between the petitioner and the supplier to make good the shortage of 4 quintals of Gur, she was required to get the bill of 66 quintals from the supplier and get the receipt issued of the same quantity and passed the bill of the supplier accordingly.
Therefore, she is liable for maintenance of false record and cheating the department in connivance with the supplier.
Up to the date of passing of bill and making payment by the petitioner to the said firm, the quantity of Gur allegedly undertaken to be give by the firm was not received by the petitioner in the store.
Justifying the order of reversion, it was submitted by the respondents that as the petitioner was responsible in the matter for wrong maintenance of the official record, it was not considered appropriate to proceed against the petitioner by way of detrimental inquiry.
Since she was on probation, therefore she was reverted to her substantive rank of Supervisor.
With this broad defence, the respondents prayed for the dismissal of the writ petition.
5.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance, have gone through the record of this case.
It is the admitted case of the parties that before promotion as CDPO the substantive rank of the petitioner was Supervisor.
Annexure P-2 is the order vide which the petitioner was posted as CDPO against the vacant post and in her own scale and pay as a stop gap arrangement on purely temporary basis for a period not exceeding 4 months from the date of joining and on the condition that she will not claim her seniority over and above the officials/officers who are already senior to her and will not claim her experience on the new post for any purpose, though she will draw her salary.
Annexure P-3 is the order of the State Government vide which the petitioner was allowed to do the work of the CDPO for which she was not to be entitled to any remuneration; Annexure P-4 is the order vide which the Government or Haryana was pleased to promote the petitioner on temporary basis as CDPO As per the service rules, the petitioner was supposed to remain on probation for one year irrespective of the fact whether it is mentioned in the order Annexure P-4 or not.
The petitioner was never confirmed as CDPO It is her own case in the writ petition itself that there was no permanent post in the cadre and the post is temporary.
By promotion in the temporary cadre, the petitioner does not get the permanent status or lien in the post in which she was promoted.
In this situation, the employer can always revert a public servant to his/her substantive rank provided the order must not be arbitrary or mala fide.
It is the common case of the parties that Messrs Sheoji Ram Suresh Kumar was to supply 70 quintals of Gur whereas it supplied 66 quintals of Gur but entry of 70 quintals was made in the stock register and the bill was also passed for 70 quintals of Gur thereby causing loss to the government.
For this lapse, the government formulated the opinion that the petitioner should be reverted to her substantive post instead of taking departmental action against her as she was on probation.
In these circumstances, I do not find any illegality in the order dated 11th February, 1988 (Annexure P-12) vide which the petitioner was reverted to her substantive post.
There is no merit in this writ petition and the same is hereby dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.