NK Sud, J - The petitioner was recruited as a Clerk in the Department of Rural Development and Panchayats, Punjab with effect from 731960.
During the Indo-China War in 1963 he was relieved from his Department on 21.1.1963 when he joined the Military service.
He retired from his Military service on 121991.
Thereafter he made an application that he be taken back in service in his parent department according to the Govt. Policy and instructions.
The petitioner was, accordingly, absorbed as a Clerk in Block Cadre vide order dated 1151995, a copy of which has been annexed as Annexure P-21 with the writ petition.
The petitioner made a representation on 2051995 staking his claim to a higher post on the ground that he was entitled to the benefit of Military service in respect of seniority and promotion as per rules and regulations.
He was informed that his claim would be considered provided he reported for duty.
The petitioner, accordingly, reported for duty on 3111995.
The petitioner's claim was examined and vide order dated 371997 (Annexure P-35) he was found entitled to be posted as Senior Assistant Accountant after giving him the benefit of Military service.
He was ordered to be placed at Sr. No. 89-A in the seniority list between i.e. below Sr. 89 and above Sr. No. 90.
Since the person at Sr. No. 90 had been promoted from the post of Clerk to that of Accountant with effect from 11111965, the petitioner was also deemed to have been notionally promoted as Accountant with effect from the aforesaid date.
His pay was fixed on the basis of pay admissible to an Accountant with effect from 11111965.
The pay so fixed was ordered to be given to him w.e.f.
3111995 - the date on which he rejoined the duty.
However it was mentioned that he shall not be entitled to the consequential arrears for the period 11111965 to 3111995 because he had not actually worked during that period.
It is this finding which is under challenge in the present writ petition.
2.
Mr. Kasturi Lal appearing on behalf of the petitioner contended that the petitioner had been wrongly denied the arrears of pay for the period 11111965 to 3111995 vide the impugned order.
According to him, as per the orders of the Government dated 8th July 1963 and 3rd January 1966 he was to be treated in the same manner as a permanent State Government employee in respect of pay, seniority and pension having been absorbed in service after his release from the military service.
He specifically relied on para (iv) of the said order which has been reproduced in para 4 of the writ petition and reads as under :-  "iv Temporary Government Employees :- Temporary State Government employees, who after release from military service are absorbed in the post from which they proceeded on military service or are appointed to posts with equivalent or similar grades, will be treated in the same manner as permanent State Government employees in respect of pay, seniority and pension on their return, irrespective of whether or not the post on which they were working at the time of their joining the military service continued to remain in existence during the period of their military service.
Temporary State Government employees who do not return to the same post or to a post in an equivalent or similar grade shall be treated as if he did not hold any post under the Government prior to his joining military service."
Thus according to him, he could not be denied the arrears of pecuniary benefits arising to him on his deemed promotion with effect from 11111965 till he reported back on duty on 3111995.
He contended that during his military service he was to be treated as being on deputation and, therefore, the respondents were under obligation to grant promotions as and when the same became due with all the pecuniary benefits.
This claim of the petitioner has been controverted by the learned Deputy Advocate General Punjab.
It has been pointed out that the impugned order is strictly in accordance with the orders of the Government and the petitioner was making his claim on a misreading of relevant para.
3.
We have heard the rival contentions and gone through the relevant records.
4.
The petitioner has based his claim on para (iv) of the orders dated July 8, 1963 and January 3, 1966 which has been reproduced above.
A plain reading of the said para shows that the benefit envisaged for a person who is absorbed in the service of State Government after his release from the military service is only to the extent that he shall be treated in the same manner as permanent State Government employee in respect of pay, seniority and pension on his return.
This benefit has duly been granted.
It is not in dispute that his seniority was fixed on the basis of as if he had continued his service in the concerned department and his pay has also been fixed on that basis.
However, para (iv) cannot be read to mean that the petitioner is also entitled to the monetary benefits flowing from the deemed promotion even for the period when he was out of the Department.
The provision only ensures that an employee who rejoins the original service after release from military service is given the post and salary to which he would have been entitled to if he had continued in the original service.
Thus the petitioner cannot possibly be held entitled to any pay from the State Government for the period when he was in military service and was drawing his salary from the defence authorities.
Since he had reported back on duty on 3111995, the respondents were perfectly justified in holding that he was not entitled to any arrears of pay for the period of 11111965 to 3111995.
5.
No other point has been raised.
6.
In view of the foregoing discussion, we find no merit in this writ petition which is accordingly dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.