Dilip Kumar Seth, J - The petitioners contend that they have been sought to be medically examined through a special medical examination by the Purulia Zilla Parishad.
The petitioners objected to such medical examination on the ground that no employee can be subjected to medical examination unless he seeks premature retirement on medical ground and he seeks appointment of any of his dependents on account of his being incapacitated or permanently disabled and not otherwise.
Even if he is so subjected to medical examination in that event the medical board which can examine him shall be the Standing Medical Board of Medical College and Hospital at Calcutta and he cannot be examined locally.
2.
The learned counsel for the petitioners in support of his submission referred to a circular dated 22nd May, 1987.
I have heared the learned counsel at length.
3.
The petitioners are drivers.
They are due to retire according to their recorded age sometime in the year 2006.
Both of them have been asked to appear before the Zonal Medical Board at Bankura by a Memo dated 28th July, 2000.
The Chief Medical Officer, Bankura was also requested to constitute a Board for examining the petitioners.
The petitioners were thereafter asked to appear before the Board.
4.
The circular dated 22nd May, 1987 prescribes that in partial modification of earlier orders it was decided that in a case where employment of a dependent is asked for on account of permanent disablement or incapacitation of an employee, the employee may be examined by a Medical Board, constituted by the Chief Medical Officer of the District consisting of the Chief Medical Officer of Health and at least three specialist Medical Officers of three different disciplines, but in a case where such retirement is intended before two years from the date of normal retirement then the medical examination shall be made by the Standing Medical board of the Medical College and Hospital at Calcutta and shall not be examined locally.
5.
Thus, there has been a distinction.
In case the person sought to be examined who is going to retire within two years from the date of normal retirement on the ground of permanent disablement or incapacitation, in that event, he has to be examined by the Standing Medical Board of the Medical College and Hospital at Calcutta and not by the Local Medical Board.
In all other cases he may be examined by the Local Medical Board to be constituted by the Chief Medical Officer of Health consisting of himself and at least three specialist Medical Officers of three different disciplines.
6.
In the present case, admittedly, the petitioners are due to retire sometime in 2006.
Therefore, the question of their being examined by the Standing Medical Board of the Medical College and Hospital, Calcutta, does not arise.
They can be examined by the Medical Board locally.
Therefore, there is no difficulty in examining them by the Zonal Medical Board.
7.
It is contended that the petitioners are not seeking premature retirement nor they are seeking appointment of any dependent.
Therefore, they cannot be supposed to be examined by Medical Board.
The petitioner objected to such examination on the ground that unless the two grounds exist the petitioners cannot be subjected or compelled to get themselves medically examined by the Medical Board.
The counsel for the petitioners contends that the purposed medical examination is aimed at declaring the petitioners unfit the doing away with their service.
Therefore, they cannot be subjected to any medical examination.
8.
Such contention does not appear to be sound.
The employer may get the employees medically examined periodically.
The petitioners being drivers the question of such examination is one of the considerations which is involved in their performance of duty.
Therefore, they may be examined periodically.
In the present case, a special medical examination has been proposed.
The petitioners (sic) on the ground that they cannot be medically examined unless they come within the scope and ambit of the circular dated 22nd May, 1987.
It is always open to the employer to check up the health of his employee.
Thus, the petitioners cannot oppose the medical examination, proposed by the respondent-employer even though it may be unconnected with an examination in terms of the circular dated 22nd May, 1987.
The Zilla Parishad being the authority within the meaning of Art. 12 and a State it is not expected that the Zilla Parishad would be acting mala fide, or that the medical examination was being conducted with an ulterior motive.
The fact remains that the petitioners would be examined by persons other than the Zilla Parishad, viz. by a Medical Board.
It is not expected that the Medical Board would declare the petitioners unfit even though they are fit.
There is no reason to presume that the Medical Board will act mala fide and would put the petitioners at (sic) wrongs.
But then the apprehensions of the petitioners are based on surmises.
In case the petitioners may have any grievance if any adverse report is given by the Medical Board they may have a cause of action which the petitioners may agitate before the appropriate authority at an appropriate stage.
9.
In the facts and circumstances of the present case the petition appears to be premature and the petitioners cannot claim to have any cause of action until they are medically examined and there is an adverse report, as discussed above.
10.
The petition therefore fails and is accordingly dismissed without any order as to costs.
This will not, however, prevent the petitioners from agitating their cause, other than the competence to examine the petitioners medically, if there be any, at an appropriate stage.
Petition dismissed.