Swatanter Kumar, J - All the petitioners were appointed to the post of Clerks as their names were sponsored by the Employment Exchange from October, 1974 till 1977 on ad hoc basis, that too subject to the approval of the State Transport Controller, Haryana, Chandigarh, and till arrival of official candidates from the Haryana Subordinate Services Selection Board.
The services of the petitioners in terms of their appointment letter Ex. P.1 to the writ petition, could be terminated at any time and without prior notice.
Under the policy of the Government the services of the petitioners were regularised in the year 1980 in furtherance to the notification dated 111980.
Employees of 'C' and 'D' grade were given standard pay scale and increments on completion of 10/20 years or more of regular satisfactory service on 821994.
The petitioners also were granted such a relief.
It was stated that the ad hoc service rendered by the petitioners could not be counted as a regular service rendered by the petitioners for calculating the total length of service described under the rules.
In fact the State of Haryana on 2581999 also issued a letter that the period of ad hoc service is not to be counted for grant of higher standard pay scale and issued a circular on 3091999 directing all the General Managers of Haryana Roadways Depots to withdraw the standard pay scales granted to the employees after counting ad hoc service as a part of regular service and the excess amount paid should be recovered.
This decision of the Government resulted in issuance of the letters to all concerned authorities which, in turn, decided to stop the payment of higher standard pay scale to the petitioners and also directed recovery of excess amount paid in this regard.
Aggrieved from this action of the respondents, the petitioners have approached this Court.
2.
Upon notice, the respondents filed a detailed reply.
The facts are not at all in dispute.
It is stated that the Government decision as contained in the order dated 2581999, 3091999 and 2112000, Annexures P/6 to P/8 to the writ petition is valid in consonance with the rules and the Government is entitled to recover the said amount from the salary of the petitioners as the amounts were paid under a bonafide mistake.
The Government has corrected its mistake and is not liable to pay the above benefits to the petitioners.
The stand of the Government has already been held to be valid and legal by the Hon'ble Apex Court.
3.
Facts are not disputed in the present petition.
The only controversy requires consideration by the Court is whether the service rendered by the petitioners on stop-gap or ad hoc arrangement could be reckoned as part of their regular service for calculating the total service, which the petitioners have rendered for grant of the benefit of higher standard pay scale.
The Government scheme for grant of higher standard pay scale admittedly provided that an employee shall be entitled to such benefit only after 10/20 years of regular satisfactory service.
Under Rule 53 of Haryana Civil Services (A.C.) Rules, 1988, this concept was clear on the basis of which the Government issued different policy decisions Annexures P/6 to P/8 to the writ petition.
The expression "continuance regular service" by its very necessary implication would not include stop-gap or ad hoc service.
They are two different concepts and cannot be inter-mingled for grant of benefits to the petitioners.
4.
This contention of the petitioners that they were appointed upon being sponsored by the Employment Exchange is hardly of any consequence inasmuch as their letters of appointment (Annexure P/1 to the petition) make it abundantly clear that the petitioners were appointed only for a limited period i.e. joining of the regular incumbent through the Haryana State Subordinate Services Selection Board.
They meet no fair competition at the time of their initial appointment and were inducted into service not in strict consonance to the service rules.
In fact their services could be terminated without notice at any time.
5.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the case of The Southern Railways Co-op.
Bank Ltd v. A Swamy and another, 2001(2) SCT 125 (SC) : 2000(4) RSJ 167, while repelling the contention like the one raised by the petitioners now, held as under :-  "Rule 11 provides for continuation on probation for a period of 2 years and Rule 12 is the Rule for seniority.
"A combined reading of the aforesaid provisions of the Recruitment Rules puts the controversy beyond any doubt and the only conclusion which could be drawn from the aforesaid Rules is that the services rendered either on ad hoc basis or as a stop gap arrangement, as in the case in hand from 1980 to 1982 cannot be held to be regular service for getting the benefits of the revised scale of pay of the selection grade under the Government Memorandum dated 2nd June, 1989 and 16th May, 1990, and, therefore, the majority judgment of the High Court must be held to be contrary to the aforesaid provisions of the Recruitment Rules, consequently, cannot be sustained...... "In view of our conclusions, as aforesaid, the majority judgment of the Punjab and Haryana High Court and the directions contained therein, is set aside and it is held that 12 year's period of respondent Rakesh Kumar could be counted from year 1982 for being eligible to get the Selection Grade under the Government Circular, dated 2nd June, 1989, as well as Classificatory (Clarificatory) Circular, dated 16th May, 1990.
The Civil Appeal filed by the State of Haryana stands allowed."
In the case of State of Punjab and others v. Gurdeep Kumar Uppal and others, 2001(4) SCT 297 (SC) : 2001(3) R.S.J.
15, again the Hon'ble Supreme Court re- affirmed the above principle and held as under :-  "The main question that arises for consideration in these appeals is whether the period of ad hoe services rendered by the respondents is to be included for calculating the period of 8 of 18 years of service for giving higher scale of pay under the proficiency step-up scheme.
This question was considered by a three Judge Bench of this Court in the State of Haryana v. Haryana Veterinary and AHTS Association and another, 2000(4) SCT 644 (SC) : JT 2000(10) SC 561, wherein this Court took the view that for calculating 8/18 years service required for giving higher scale of pay and for determination of seniority only regular service rendered by the employee is to be counted and not ad hoc service.
Learned counsel for the respondent strenuously contended that the respondents who are doctors serving under the State of Punjab are governed by a set of Rules and circulars different from those which were considered in the decided case and, therefore, the ratio in that case will not be applicable in these cases.
We have carefully considered the said contention.
We have also considered the circular letter No. 4-15-81 IPP/16047 dated 14th December, 1981.
On a plain reading of the circular it is clear that the instructions contained therein were based on the decision of the Punjab and Haryana High Court taking the view that ad hoc service should be taken into account for the purpose......." "We do not feel it necessary to delve further into merits of the case in view of the decision of this Court in State of Haryana v. Haryana Veterinary AHTS Association and another (supra).
We are satisfied that the ratio in that case applied to the cases in hand.
The Resultant position that emerges is that the judgment/orders passed by the High Court holding that ad hoc service is to be included in calculating the period of service for giving the higher scale of pay are unsustainable and has to be vacated.
Accordingly, the appeals are allowed and the judgments/orders of the High Court under challenge are set aside."
6.
The stands taken by the respondents have been sustained in law by the Hon'ble Apex Court and there is no occasion for this Court even to consider the matter any differently.
The ad hoc service rendered by the petitioners is not liable to be reckoned towards total length of regular service rendered by the petitioners for the purposes of receiving the benefits aforementioned.
We cannot grant this relief to the petitioners.
The same is hereby declined.
7.
The ancillary question that requires consideration by the Court is whether the amounts already paid to the petitioners should be permitted to be recovered from their salary or not.
No doubt in law the petitioners were not entitled to receive this benefit of higher standard pay scale but equally true is that the petitioners made no misrepresentation to the respondents or in no way induced the respondents to make this payment in a wrongful manner.
If the respondents have committed the error, may be bonafide, they cannot be permitted to make the petitioners suffer for such consequences.
The bonafides of the petitioners can also not be doubted inasmuch as they rendered their service to the satisfaction of all concerned legitimately expecting that they were entitled to the upgradation of pay scales in terms of the policy decision of the Government and the scheme formulated.
Absence of any intentional error or misrepresentation on the part of the petitioners as well as no positive act intending to induce the respondents to make wrongful payment, the principle of equity would come to the rescue of the petitioners and they cannot be made to suffer and the orders of the respondents cannot be permitted to take retrospective effect.
In this regard reference can also be made to the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Sahib Ram v. State of Haryana, 1995(1) SCT 668, where the Hon'ble Court held as under :-  "However, it is not on account of any misrepresentation made by the appellant that the benefit of higher pay-scale was given to him but by wrong construction made by the Principal for which the appellant cannot be held to be at fault.
Under the circumstances the amount paid till date may not be recovered from the appellant."
In the case of Gurdeep Kumar Uppal and others (supra) also the Hon'ble Apex Court granted similar relief to the petitioner and rejected the contention of the respondents that they could recover the amount already paid and held as under -  "However, we make it clear that if any of the respondents has drawn any amount on the basis of the higher scale of pay under the proficiency step-up scheme granted to him by including the period of his ad hoc service then the State Government shall not recover the amount already drawn by the employee though for fixation of the cadre seniority, the position as laid down in this order will govern.
No costs."
Keeping in view the principles of equity and the law settled by the Hon'ble Apex Court, we are of the considered view that the respondents cannot be permitted to recover the amounts which have already been received by the petitioners.
The payment of further amount was obviously stopped in furtherance to the letters Annexures P/6 to P/8 in the year 1999-2000 itself.
The writ petitions have been filed subsequent thereto.
8.
In view of our discussion above, the writ petition is dismissed with a direction that the respondent-State shall not recover from the petitioners, the amounts already paid to them on account of higher/upgraded pay scale while counting service rendered by such employees as part of their regular service for grant of such benefit.
However, in the facts and circumstances of the case, there shall be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.