SB Sinha, J - This application is directed against a judgment and order dated 26.4.2000 whereby and whereunder the application filed by the petitioner-complainant was dismissed in limine by a Bench of the Central Administrative Tribunal in OA No. 18/A and N/2000.
2.
The basic fact of the matter is not in dispute.
The petitioner herein was a casual worker working in the office of the Forest Department.
A vacancy occurred in the post of light motor vehicle driver and in pursuance to a circular inviting applications from the departmental candidates, the petitioner applied therefor.
He was duly selected.
Allegedly on the ground that the petitioners has suppressed his date of birth to the effect that in stead and place of 2051966 it was shown to be as 2521969; a show-cause notice was issued to him as to why his selection shall not be cancelled.
The explanation submitted by the petitioner having been found to be unsatisfactory, the impugned order was issued which was the subject matter of application before the learned Tribunal.
3.
Before the learned Tribunal a contention appears to have been raised that the petitioner was entitled to relaxation of the age bar having regard to the fact that he was a departmental candidate.
Learned Tribunal held that the petitioner cannot be said to be a departmental candidate inasmuch as, he was merely a casual employee.
In any event, according to the learned Tribunal, as he has suppressed his date of birth, he is not entitled to any relief.
4.
Ms. S Ganguly, the learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner has raised two contentions in support of this application, viz :-  1.
There had been no actual suppression inasmuch as, the certificate as regard date of birth was annexed to the application, from a perusal whereof it would appear that the correct date of birth has been disclosed by the petitioner.
2.
In any event, as on the date of filing of the application the restriction with regard to the age bar did not come into effect, the petitioner was entitled to be considered for appointment.
Mr. Bahadur, the learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the Respondent has supported the impugned order.
5.
Having heard the learned Counsel for the parties we are of the opinion that in a case of this nature where petitioner's selection is sought to be withdrawn on the ground of suppression of material fact, he ought to have been given a personal hearing with a view to show that he did not intend to commit any fraud upon the employer but a genuine typographical mistake had crept in his application.
6.
Furthermore, a question as to whether relaxation with regard to age bar shall be given or not falls within the domain of the employer.
In the event it is found that there are genuine grounds for exercising discretion, the employer may in a given case do so.
Although on the aforementioned ground the matter ought to have been remitted back to the Central Administrative Tribunal but having regard to the fact that the petitioner is out of employment, we are of the opinion that interest of justice would be sub-served if the petitioner is given a personal opportunity of hearing by the Principal Chief Conservator of Forests, A & N Islands, Van Sadan, Haddo, Port Blair so that all aspects of the matter including the relaxation of age bar did not apply upon the petitioner.
7.
For the reasons aforementioned, this application is allowed.
The impugned order of the Tribunal is set aside and the application filed by the petitioner is disposed of with the direction upon the Principal Chief Conservator of Forests, A & N Islands, Van Sadan, Haddo, Port Blair to consider the grievances of the petitioner upon treating the writ application as his representation and pass an appropriate order after giving an opportunity of personal hearing to him as expeditiously as possible and preferably within a period of 4 weeks from the date of communication of this order.
We may place on record the submission made at the Bar that the petitioner is still continuing as a casual employee.
In the fact and circumstances of this case there will be no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.