JC Verma, J - The father of petitioner Kamal Kishore Saraswat, an employee of Municipal Council, Ajmer, was working as Nakedar.
He retired on attaining the age of superannuation on 31791 (Ann.
1), whose pension and gratuity is being claimed in the present writ petition.
For the convenience late Mr. Kamal Kishore Saraswat shall be referred to as Mr. Saraswat.
2.
Mr. Saraswat was involved in Anti Corruption case, but before the case could be initiated Mr. Saraswat died in 11382 and the proceedings before the Anti Corruption Department was dropped vide order dated 3682.
At the time of superannuation, Mr. Saraswat had requested the department to grant him the pension and gratuity.
On death of Mr. Saraswat his wife Smt. Sushila Devi continued to make requests to the department for release of retiral benefits, pension and gratuity, but without any result.
His wife had also died on 71282.
The present writ petition has been filed by the daughter Indra Kanta Saraswat, who is one of the legal representatives; other legal representatives of Mr. Saraswat are Chandra Prakash and Ram Prakash Saraswat.
The petitioner has also placed on record `no objection certificate' from other legal representatives of Mr. Saraswat if the pension benefits are released to petitioner.
3.
The respondents were informing the claimants that the pension case is being processed in the concerned department and vide letter dated 2283 (Ann.
6) the legal representative were informed that for the reason that Anti Corruption case is pending, therefore the case is being processed under Rule 170(A)(1) of the Rajasthan Service Rules, even though the case of Anti Corruption Department itself had been dropped in June, 1982, but still in February, 1983 the Commissioner of Municipal Council, Ajmer was under the impression that case of Anti Corruption against Mr. Saraswat was pending.
A succession certificate obtained for the amount of pension and gratuity and other retiral benefits was duly handed over vide letter 27291 (ann.
10).
The heirs of Mr. Saraswat were informed vide letter dated 29591 (ann.
12) that no amount can be released, aggrieved against the impugned orders dated 27291 (ann.
10) and 29591 (ann.
12) the petitioner had filed the present writ petition praying, therein, to issue writ of mandamus to respondents for release of the pension and other retiral benefits of Mr. Saraswat.
4.
In reply filed by the respondents it is stated that on 31.7.81 the employee was suspended for the act of misappropriation of funds.
It is admitted that Mr. Saraswat had superannuated on 31.7.81.
It is also admitted that the proceedings of anti corruption case were dropped, but it is stated that because of misappropriation of fund the employee was not entitled to the full amount of retiral benefits and that amount as recoverable and it has to be adjusted from the amount of retiral benefits.
In the written statement it is no where mentioned that the employee was not entitled to any pension and gratuity or other retiral benefit.
The only defence is that because of certain criminal proceeding pending against Mr. Saraswat, which stood dropped in June, 1982, the retiral benefits are not to be paid.
However, it is not denied that the employee was entitled to the release of retiral benefits otherwise.
5.
Notification published in Rajasthan Gazette, 4(GA)(1) dated 17987 page 213 provides pension benefits to employees of Municipalities for Ex-Ajmer Merwara area, wherein the employees appointed prior to 11156 are retired were entitled to pension benefits as applicable during the time.
In the present case the employee Mr. Saraswat was admittedly employed prior to 11156.
6.
In the present case non-commutation of gratuity and non-payment of pension even after dropping of the criminal proceedings against Mr. Saraswat is not understable.
Even the respondent has not come up with the detail of any such mis-appropriation as had been alleged.
However, it goes without saying that on death of Mr. Saraswat the criminal proceedings had come to an end in June, 1982.
Despite the criminal proceeding having been dropped the municipal Council still under the impression that there is no final decision of the criminal proceeding, as has been stated in the reply to writ petition.
No amount can be recovered from a dead person and even during life time of such person, the amount can only the recovered after proving the misconduct, which admittedly has not been done.
The department was at liberty to start the Disciplinary proceeding against the officer, concerned during his life time, which had not been initiated and after the death of such employee it is not possible to initiate the proceedings.
I find no reason with the respondents to have not accepted the request of the legal representatives of Mr. Saraswat for release of the retiral benefits of Mr. Saraswat.
For about 18 years, the amount of retiral benefits have not been released without any justified cause and has been retained illegally by the Municipal Council, Ajmer on unsustainable grounds, without there being any legal or moral basis.
7.
For the reasons and discussions mentioned above, the writ petition is to be allowed with a direction to respondents to immediately release all the retiral benefits of Mr. Saraswat i.e. penson/family pension, gratuity and other benefits which may due to Mr. Saraswat and his family.
The due amount be paid to petitioner within a period of two months from the date of receipt of copy of this order.
The petitioner shall also be paid the cost of Rs. 2,000/- of this writ petition by respondent.
8.
With the above observation, the writ petition is allowed with cost of Rs. 2,000/-.
Petition allowed.