PS Narayana, J - Heard Mr. Gulam Rasool and Mr. Sridharan, the counsel representing the respective parties.
2.
The writ petition is filed to issue a writ, order or direction more in the nature of writ of mandamus declaring the order of dismissal passed by the respondent through Reference FGPL KMM 96/4601 dt. 8-10-1996 as illegal and arbitrary and pass such other appropriate relief.
3.
The case of the petitioner in brief is as follows.
The respondent called the petitioner to appear for interview on 5-7-1994, selected him and engaged him as Apprentice Fitter for 12 months on payment of Rs. 610/-consolidated stipend per month.
After successful apprenticeship the petitioner was appointed as an Operator SS-1 Maintenance (Mech.)
on 15-7-1995.
According to the petitioner, he was absent from duty on 12-8-1996 and 13-8-1996 due to ill health and as such applied for leave for those two days after submitting medical certificate.
The respondent granted leave and permitted him to join duty.
Howeveir, a show cause notice was served upon him stating that he committed misconduct, fraud, dishonestly and acts subversive of discipline in addition to attempting to obtain leave on false pretext under clauses 2433, 24341 and 24.1.15 of the Company's Certified Standing Orders.
The petitioner was, therefore, found guilty of misconduct and in view of the same the extreme punishment of dismissal had been imposed.
It is also stated that though the charge attracts minor punishment, major punishment of dismissal had been imposed illegally.
Aggrieved by the aforesaid order of dismissal, present writ petition is filed.
4.
The respondent-Management had filed counter-affidavit stating that the respondent is a public limited company in the private sector having its registered office at Bombay and there is no governmental interest involved and hence it is neither a State nor an authority as contemplated under Article 12 of the Constitution of India and therefore a writ does not lie as against such company.
It is also stated that the petitioner is having an effective alternative remedy under the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 and the Labour Court is competent and empowered to consider the case of the petitioner and grant appropriate relief.
In Paragraphs 5 to 16 of the counter-affidavit the respondent also narrated several details and have justified the action even on facts.
The nature of inquiry conducted, the participation of the petitioner in the inquiry and the findings recorded thereon also had been narrated in detail.
5.
Heard the learned counsel and perused the material available on record.
6.
The first and foremost contention raised by the respondent-company is that it is a public limited company in private sector having no governmental interest and hence it is neither a State nor an authority as contemplated under Art. 12 of the Constitution of India.
Strong reliance was placed on the judgment of the Division Bench in WA Nos. 1262 and 1263 of 1996.
The respondent-Management is F.G.P.
Limited, Thimmapur village, Kothur Mandal, Mahaboobnagar District, which is a public limited company simpliciter in private sector having no governmental interest and hence I have no hesitation to hold that the respondent is not amenable to writ jurisdiction and the remedy availed under Art. 226 of the Constitution of India is misconceived.
7.
The principal contention advanced by the learned counsel for the petitioner is that even as per the Company's Certified Standing orders the misconduct is only minor and hence it cannot be treated as a major misconduct and award a major penalty of dismissal.
Strong reliance is placed on the Certified Standing Orders of the Company.
It is pertinent to note that the petitioner is a workman and he is questioning the illegality of the dismissal order passed against him.
In such a case, the appropriate remedy available to such a workman is to invoke jurisdiction of the competent Court under the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
In this view of the matter, no relief can be granted by this Court in the present writ petition.
The learned counsel for the petitioner placed also strong reliance on the judgment of this Court in Mirsabir Ali v. Commissioner of Police 1999(5) Andh LD 123 wherein it was observed :  "The availability of alternative remedy to a citizen does not debar this Court from exercising the discretion under Art. 226 of the Constitution of India in appropriate cases.
In this connection it is useful to refer to the latest ruling of the Apex Court in Whirlpool Corporation v. Registrar of Trade Marks, Mumbai, 1999(1) R.C.R.
(Civil) 220 : AIR 1999 SC 22 wherein their Lordships have held :  "Under Art. 226 of the Constitution, the High Court, having regard to the facts of the case, has a discretion to entertain or not to entertain writ petition.
But the High Court has imposed upon itself certain restrictions one of which is that if an effective and efficacious remedy is available the High Court would not normally exercise its jurisdiction.
But the alternative remedy has been consistently held by this Court not to operate as a bar in at least three contingencies, namely where the writ petition has been filed for the enforcement of any of the Fundamental Rights or where there has been a violation of the principles of natural justice or where the order or proceedings are wholly without jurisdiction or the vires of an Act is challenged."
8.
Reliance also was placed on the judgment in V Rajamallaiah v. High Court of AP, 2001(1) SCT 56 (AP) (DB) : 2001(5) Andh LT 228.
In Binny Limited v. Workmen, AIR 1973 SC 1403 : (1973 Lab IC 1119) it was held that when an employer loses confidence in the workman and when the latter avails of special leave without wages etc. on false representation and fails to resume his duties when he is intimated that his sanctioned leave has been cancelled and he is ordered to join immediately, the Labour Court's awards stands reversed.
In Air India Corpn.
v. V A Rebellow, (1972) 1 Lab LJ 501 : (1972 Lab IC 668) it was held that when once bona fide loss of confidence is affirmed the impugned order must be considered to be immune from challenge.
Reliance also was placed on decision in Gouripore Co Ltd v. State of West Bengal, (1975) 1 Lab LJ 247 (Cal).
In Rajasthan State R T Corporation v. Krishna Kant, 1995 (87) FJR 204 : (1995 Lab IC 2241) the Supreme Court held thus :  "It is evident from a perusal of the above decisions that while the first decision referred to the certified standing orders as constituting the statutory terms of employment they were described as 'conditions of service in a statutory form' and as 'binding on the parties at least as much, if not more as private contracts embodying similar terms and conditions of service' in the second decision.
The third decision reiterated the holding in the first decision.
So far as the two last mentioned decisions are concerned, it is obvious, they only purport to set out the purport of the earlier decisions.
Vaidialingam, J, used the very expression `part of the statutory terms and conditions of service0' while K Ramaswamy.
J stated more emphatically that `certified standing orders have statutory force'.
It must however, be said that in the decision rendered by Ramaswamy, J the question as to the nature and character of the certified standing orders did not arise for consideration; the said observation was made in another context.
The consensus of these decisions is, the certified standing orders constitute statutory terms and conditions of service.
Though we have some reservation as to the basis of the above dicta as pointed out supra, we respectfully accept it both on the ground of stare decisions as well as judicial discipline.
Even so, we are unable to say that they constitute 'statutory provisions' within the meaning of the dicta in Sukhdev Singh's case, 1975 (47) FJR 214 (1975 Lab IC 881) wherein it was held :  "The employees of these statutory bodies have a statutory status and they are entitled to declaration of being in employment when their dismissal or removal is in contravention of statutory provisions.
Indeed, if it is held that certified standing orders constitute statutory provisions or have statutory force, a writ petition would also (sic) in for their enforcement just as in the case of violation of the Rules made under the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution.
Neither a suit would be necessary nor a reference under the Industrial Disputes Act.
We do not think he certified standing orders can be elevated to that status.
It is one thing to say that they are statutorily imposed conditions of service and an altogether different thing to say that they constitute statutory provisions themselves."
9.
The main grievance, which had been ventilated by the writ petitioner, is that the misconduct alleged is only minor and imposition of major penalty of dismissal is unwarranted and is in contravention of the Company's Certified Standing Orders.
This aspect may not be gone into in the present writ petition since as observed supra, the remedy by way of writ petition itself is misconceived.
As against the impugned order, the writ petitioner ought to have approached competent Labour Court having jurisdiction seeking appropriate orders.
Even otherwise, the writ petition fails on the short ground that the respondent is a public limited comparry simpliciter having no governmental interest.
Viewed form any angle no relief can be granted to the writ petitioner-workmen.
However, in the light of the peculiar circumstances of the case, the writ petitioner is given liberty to invoke the jurisdiction of the Labour Court for the purpose of having appropriate relief under the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
Except making the above observation, no other relief can be granted to the writ petitioner in the present writ petition.
It is accordingly dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.