SK Jain, C.J.
- Heard Sri A.N.
Tripathi, learned Advocate for the appellant and Sri Ranvijai Singh, learned Standing Counsel for the respondents.
2.
The Special Appeal is directed against the order dated 442001 passed by the learned single Judge dismissing the writ petition.
The challenge in the writ petition was against the order of suspension.
The contention of the appellant is that the learned single Judge did not properly appreciate the question that suspension is not permissible unless enquiry is contemplated or enquiry is pending.
Learned counsel for the appellant referred to us sub-rule (1) of Rule 4 of the UP Government Servants (Discipline and Appeal) Rules 1999 which is set out herein below :  "4.
Suspension - (1) A Government servant against whose conduct an inquiry is contemplated, or is proceedings may be placed under suspension pending the conclusion of the inquiry in the discretion of the appointment authority : Provided that suspension should be resorted to unless the allegations against the Government servant are so serious that in the event of their being established may ordinarily warrant major penalty : Provided further that concerned Head of the Department by the Governor by an order in this behalf may place a Government Servant or class of Government Servants belonging to Group A and B posts under suspension under this rule : Provided also that in the case of any government Servant or class of Government Servants belonging to Group `C' and `D' posts the Appointing Authority may delegate its power under this rule to the next lower authority."
3.
From the said rule it appears that a Government Servant against whose conduct an inquiry is contemplated, or its proceeding may be placed under suspension pending the conclusion of the enquiry.
The impugned order of suspension does not refer to any contemplated inquiry or the fact that any inquiry is pending.
4.
In that view of the matter, we are of the view that the order of suspension is against the provisions of Rule 4 of the UP Government Servants (Discipline and Appeal) Rules, 1999 and the same cannot be sustained.
The learned single Judge has directed the inquiry to be completed within three months.
It was not within the scope of the learned single Judge to direct any inquiry to be made on his own.
We are of the view that since the order of suspension is contrary to Rule 4 of the said Rules, the same should be quashed and set aside.
5.
The Special Appeal is allowed and the order of suspension is hereby quashed.
Appeal allowed.