SB Sinha, CJ.
- This Letters Patent Appeal arises out of a judgment and order of a learned Single Judge of this Court dated 31st January 2002 passed in CWP 4465/01, whereby and whereunder, the writ petition filed by the appellant herein was dismissed.
2.
The appellant is a retired Officer of Indian Foreign Service.
The Indian Council for Social Science Research is a Society registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 (hereinafter referred to as the 'Society').
Its main object is to promote social science research and the utilization thereof in the country.
3.
The Society has its own Memorandum of Association.
In terms Rule 13 thereof, the, tenure of the office of the first Chairman was to be five years and three years in all subsequent cases.
Rule 8 of the Memorandum of Association stipulates withdrawal of the services of the Chairman in a situation such as (a) death; (b) resignation addressed to the Member Secretary in writing and accepted by the Council; (c) becoming of unsound mind or insolvent; (d) conviction for a criminal offence involving moral turpitude; or (e) failure to attend three consecutive meetings of the Council without obtaining proper leave thereof.
4.
The appellant was nominated as Chairman of the Indian Council for Social Science Research (in short 'ICSSR') on 14th October 1999.
On or about 18th July, 2001 a notification was issued by the Government of India withdrawing the nomination of Prof. ML Sondhi as Chairman, ICSSR with immediate effect.
It also pleased to nominate one Shri KS Sharma, Additional Secretary, Department of Secondary & Higher Education as Chairman, ICSSR as a purely temporary measure in the interest of work, pending nomination of a regular Chairman with immediate effect.
The said order was followed by a government press note dated 18th July, 2001.
5.
The writ petition was filed questioning the said order.
The contention of the petitioner was that the afore-mentioned purported action was taken by the government as he refused to be subservient to the political and ideological diktats of some members of the ruling party.
The impugned order, the appellant would contend, had been issued with a view to replace him with some other Chairman partisan to the agenda of the government or toe its line.
It was further contended that before passing the impugned order even the principles of natural justice have not been complied with although the same is stigmatic in nature.
It was urged that it is not a case where the pleasure doctrine is applicable and thus the first respondent must be held to have acted illegally and without jurisdiction, in passing the impugned order and in issuing the impugned notification in purported exercise of its power under the General Clauses Act.
He would submit that appointment to the said post, having a direct nexus with the qualifications to be held by the holder thereof and furthermore a tenure having been fixed therefor the appellant could not have been removed therefrom before expiry of the tenure.
6.
The respondents, on the other hand, raised a question as regard maintainability of the writ petition on the ground that the Society is not a State within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution of India.
It was submitted that the Memorandum of Association and Rules of the ICSSR do not prohibit withdrawal of nomination, having regard to the provisions of Section 16 of the General Clauses Act, inasmuch as the power to appoint would include power to remove.
It was urged that the removal of the appellant or withdrawal of nomination, of the appellant is non-stigmatic in nature and, in any event, he having been nominated by the Government because of his political personality, the principles of natural justice were not required to be complied with.
The respondents further raised a contention as regards maintainability of the writ petition on the ground that ICSSR has not been impleaded as a party in the writ petition.
7.
The learned Single Judge upon an elaborate discussions on the rival contentions raised by the parties held : (a) the writ petition is maintainable; (b) pleasure doctrine being applicable in the case of nomination, principles of natural justice are not attracted; (c) the power of the Central Government to nominate, having regard to the provisions contained in Section 16 of the General Clauses Act, would include the power to remove and thus in a case this nature principles of natural justice are not required to be complied with; and (d) the writ petition cannot be dismissed only because ICSSR has not been impleaded as a party.
8.
Mr. Prashant Bhushan, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant, inter alia, would submit that the learned Single Judge proceeded on a wrong premise that the post of Chairman of the Society is political in nature.
Learned counsel would contend that the appellant was nominated in the said post, having regard to the special qualifications possessed by him and not on any other consideration.
In the event it be held, urges Mr. Bhushan that the post in question is a political post, the same does not confer an arbitrary power upon the Central Government to act whimsically and capriciously, resulting in buse of power.
Such unbridled power in the hands of the Central Government cannot be countenanced in democracy.
The learned counsel would contend that spoil system in the government is not countenanced under the Constitution nor can be encouraged by the Court.
Keeping in view the fact that the post is a tenure post, Mr. Bhushan would argue, the pleasure doctrine cannot be invoked inasmuch as the terms whereupon a President can be removed has specifically been stated in the rules and any action taken beyond the same would be ultra vires.
Strong reliance, in this connection, has been placed upon :  (a) Kanta Devi and Another v. State of Rajasthan and others, reported in AIR 1957 Rajasthan 134; (b) The State of Kerala v. V.P.P.
Muhammed Kunhi, Trikarpur, reported in (1970)4 SLR 569; (c) Hindurao Balwant Patil and another v. Krishnarao Parshuram Patil and Others, reported in AIR 1982 Bombay 216; (d) Syed Shaukat, Imam and Others v. State of Bihar and Others, reported in AIR 1969 Patna 347; (e) Smt. Hira Devi and Others v. District Board, Shahjahanpur, reported in AIR 1952 SC 362; and (f) East India Film Studios v. PK Mukherjee and Others, reported in AIR 1954 Calcutta 41.
9.
Mr. Bhushan would argue that nomination cannot be equated with appointment so as to invoke the provisions of Section 16 of the General Clauses Act.
Reliance in this connection, has been placed upon Union of India and Another v. KS Subramanian, reported in AIR 1989 SC 662.
In any event, Mr. Bhushan would submit that the impugned notification although is a non-speaking one, the press release clearly goes to show that the impugned notification had been issued, having regard to the specific charges levelled against.
the appellant, which casts a stigma and, thus, it was incumbent upon the respondents to comply with the principles of natural justice.
Although a person, learned counsel would submit, may not have a statutory right for a post but in a case of this nature where he is entitled to hold the same for a period of at least three years, he could not have been removed prior thereto.
Reliance in this connection has been placed upon Kumari Shrilekha Vidyarthi and Others v. State of UP and Others, reported in (1991)1 SCC 212 : 1991(1) SCT 575 (SC).
10.
Mr. Kirti Rawal, learned Additional Solicitor General appearing on behalf of the respondent-UOI would submit that the question as regard stigmatic nature of the impugned notification having not been raised specifically and, in fact, ground (E) of the writ petition would suggest that the notification was questioned on the ground that thereby a summary and non-speaking order was passed without application of mind being devoid of any reasoning and only in that context the, contention noncompliance of principles of natural justice was refused.
11.
It was urged that by reason of nomination as Chairman of ICSSR, which is an honorary post, the appellant did not derive any legal right to continue therein.
The memorandum of association, he would submit, would clearly show a pervasive control of the Government over the functioning, policies and programmes of the council.
It was contended that the appointment being inter alia, within the discretion of the government and there being no prohibition in terms whereof the power of the government to withdraw or cancel such a nomination is expressly or by necessary implication is barred, the writ petition was not maintainable.
Rule 8 of the Rules, leaned counsel would argue, would have no application in the facts and circumstances of this case.
According to the learned counsel, the doctrine of "pleasure" is based on the durante Bene Placito ("during good pleasure" or "during the pleasure of the appointer") as opposed to an office held Idum bene se gesserit ("during good conduct").
It is also known as quadiu se bene gesserit ("as long as he shall behave himself well").
Such a "pleasure" doctrine, the learned Additional Solicitor General would submit has been upheld by the Apex Court in Union of India v. Tulsiram Patel, reported in (1985)3 SCC 398.
In a situation of this nature Mr. Rawal would urge the provisions of General Clauses Act would apply and in support of the said contention reliance has been placed on Union of India v. KS Subramanian, reported in AIR 1989 SC 662; Allahabad Bank Officers' Association v. Allahabad Bank, reported in 1996(3) SCT.
262 : (1996)4 SCC 504 and Krishna v. State of Maharashtra, reported in 2001(2) R.C.R.
(Civil) 483 : 2001(2) SCT.
628 : (2001)2 SCC 441.
Relying on the decision of the Apex Court in Dr. Bool Chand v. Chancellor, Kurukshetra University, reported in AIR 1968 SC 292, it has been contended that a similar question came up for consideration therein and the right of the State to remove a Vice Chancellor despite existence of a provision of Statute has been upheld.
Reliance has also been placed, in this connection on Shri B.D.
Wadhwa and Others v. Hardaya Devgan and Others, reported in ILR (1973) II Delhi 678.
12.
Even in a case, Mr. Rawal would contend, where the provisions of Section 16 of General Clauses Act would not be applicable, the provision in effect and substance being of general principles of law the principle akin thereto can be applied.
Reliance, in this connection, has been placed upon Lekh Raj v. Deputy Custodian, Bombay, reported in AIR 1966 SC 334 and Dr. S Duff v. University of Delhi, reported in AIR 1958 SC 1050.
13.
In a situation of this nature, learned Additional Solicitor General would further urge that the provisions of General Clauses Act would apply and in support of the said contention reliance has been placed on Union of India v. KS Subramanian, reported in AIR 1989 SC 1; Allahabad Bank Officers' Association v. Allahabad Bank, reported in (1996)4 SCC 504 and Krishna v. State of Maharashtra, reported in (2001)2 SCC 441.
14.
The core question which would arise for consideration in this LPA is the nature of the nomination made by the Central Government.
15.
For the aforementioned purpose we may notice some of the salient features of the Rules of the Society Rule 3 of the Rules empowers the Government of India to nominate an eminent social scientist as a Chairman.
In terms of the Rule 13, the term of the office of the Chairman shall be three years.
He may be eligible for re-employment but not for more than two consecutive terms.
However, the proviso appended thereto lays down that notwithstanding expiry of the said period the Chairman would continue in his office unless his successor is appointed.
Rule 7 of the Rules of the Society contains a Clause which is in pari materia to the afore-mentioned proviso.
Rule 8 of the rules of the Society provides that casual vacancies in the Council or its Committees would be filled up only in the event one or the other contingencies specified therein arise.
16.
The provisions of the Memorandum of Association and the Rules of the Society do not specifically state the nature of the appointment.
The President of the Society is not a holder of civil post.
No relationship of master and servant exists between the President and the Society/Central Government.
No procedure has been laid down for such nomination.
No requirement exists to advertise for the post and call for applications from eligible candidates.
Nomination to the post, whether on political consideration or otherwise, indisputably is based on subjective satisfaction.
Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India are not attracted in the sense that, by reason of such nomination, no legal right accrues in the holder of the post.
The post does not carry any salary.
It is honorary in nature.
Withdrawal of nomination ordinarily would not involve any civil consequences.
17.
The questions of law, which had been raised by the learned counsel for the parties, must be considered in the afore-mentioned backdrop.
18.
The appellant being not a holder of civil post does not acquire a legal right to continue therein.
A writ of or in the nature of mandamus can issue only when there exists a legal right in the writ petitioner and corresponding legal obligation on the respondent.
As no remuneration is payable by reason of withdrawal of the nomination no civil consequences ensue and no right is infringed.
19.
Only, because the post is a tenure post and furthermore no provision exists as regards power of the Government of India to remove the incumbent before expiry of the said tenure, can it be said that unless one or the other contingencies specified in Rule 8 afore-mentioned comes into being, the incumbent of the post of Chairman of the Society was entitled to continue for a period of three years ?
The answer to the said question must be rendered in the negative.
There exists more than one reason for coming to the said conclusion.
20.
A holder of the post may commit such misconduct which would render him unfit to hold the post.
He may be found guilty of improper or indecent behaviour with other employees.
Complaints of sexual harassment with women employees may be made against him.
He may issue press statement, condemning the government in general and the Society in particular.
There may be various other instances, which ordinarily would render the incumbent of such post unfit to hold the same.
21.
Thus although the provisions of Memorandum of Association and the Rules of the Society do not provide for any contingency for such removal, in our considered opinion, the Central Government cannot be said to be denuded of its power in taking such action.
There cannot be an absolute bar.
If it be held that in no situation, other than specified in Rule 8 aforementioned, the incumbent of the post can be removed and the government and the Society has to suffer him till the tenure comes to an end, irreparable damage may be caused not only to the Government or the Society but the cause and object for which the Society has been established may also irretrievably, suffer,  22.
The provisions of the General Clauses Act have been enacted with a view to meet such contingency.
Had the Parliament been able to foresee all situations, the provisions of the General Clauses Act as also the concept of delegated legislation might have become redundant.
23.
It may be true that political consideration should not be the only priteria for making nominations in such posts which are held by high dignitaries but when nominations are not made on undertaking a selection process and no exercise in that behalf is required to be undertaken.
The concept of 'social scientist' is vague and persons from various status of the Society can be termed to be a social scientist, particularly, when no specific qualification or criteria therefor has been laid down.
The object and purport of the Society is to promote research.
The opinion of the Central Government in such matters indisputably would be subjective.
Even no objective criteria therefor exists.
If in such situation appointments are made on political consideration, it cannot be said that thereby the spoil system is prevailing in the Government.
24.
It is a notorious fact of which judicial notice may be taken that nominations are made by the Government in such posts on political considerations.
25.
The Apex Court in Om Narain Agarwal and others v. Nagar Palika, Shahjahanpur and others, reported in AIR 1993 SC 1440, has laid down the law in the following terms :  "11.......
There is also no question of any violation of principles of natural justice in not affording any opportunity to the nominated members before their removal nor the removal under the pleasure' doctrine contained in the fourth proviso to Section 9 of the Act puts any stigma on the performance or character of the nominated members.
It is done purely on political considerations ................" 26.
As regards nomination for the members under Section 9 of the Act it was further held :  "12....... We are not impressed with the reasoning given by the High Court that the fourth proviso to Section 9 of the Act in any manner deprived the fundamental right of equality as enshrined in Article 14 of the Constitution.
It is well established that the right of equality enshrined under Article 14 of the Constitution applies to equals and not to unequals.
The nominated members of the Board fall in a different class and cannot claim equality with the elected members.
We are also not impressed with.
the argument that there would be a constant fear of removal at the will of the State Government and is bound to demoralize the nominated members in the discharge of their duties as a member in the Board.
We do not find any justification for drawing such an inference, inasmuch as, such contingency usually arises only with the change of ruling party in the Government.
Even in the case of highest functionary in the Government like the Governors, the Ministers, the Attorney General and the Advocate General discharge their duties efficiently, though removable at the pleasure of the competent authority under the law, and it cannot be said that they are bound to demoralize or remain under a constant fear of removal and as such do not discharge their functions in a proper manner during the period they remain in the office."
27.
This aspect of the matter has again been considered by the Apex Court in Krishna v. State of Maharashtra and Others, reported in (2001)2 SCC 441 in the following terms :  "Once doctrine of pleasure is applicable neither the principle of natural justice would step in nor any question of giving an opportunity before removal would arise.
It is significant when stigma is cast then sub-section (3) of Section 10 specially provides for giving an opportunity to such incumbent before passing an order of removal under Section 10, while there is no such corresponding sub-section under Section 6.
Thus intent of legislature is very clear which reinforces the inference which we have drawn that doctrine of pleasure is implicit under Section 6."
28.
Although this pleasure doctrine has not been expressly stated in the Memorandum of Association and the Rules of the Society the same must be inferred.
29.
Mr. Bhushan sought to distinguish the said decisions on the ground that in those cases there existed a provision for removal in Nagpur Improvement Trust Act but the Apex Court has proceeded on the basis that where removal does not cast any stigma nor penal consequences, doctrine of pleasure can be inferred.
30.
In the instant case also the power of removal is to be taken recourse to only in terms of Section 16 of the General Clauses Act or the principles analogous thereto.
The provisions of the General Clauses Act are not exhaustive.
Even in a case where the said provisions ipso facto are not applicable the principles akin thereto may be applicable.
It is one of such cases (See : Lekh Raj v. Deputy Custodian, Bombay, reported in AIR 1966 SC 334), the Apex Court in no uncertain terms has held that Section 16 of the General Clauses Act are in reality an assimilation of the general principles of law.
It is a "necessary adjunct" to the power of appointment and is exercised as an incident to, or consequence thereof.
Thus, even in absence of any rule or other provision, in terms whereof an embargo has been placed on the Government to exercise such power, it must be held that it has requisite jurisdiction to revoke the nomination.
Such power of the Government is absolute and unbridled.
However there may be a case where a discretion has been exercised in an arbitrary and fanciful manner.
In a case where discretion has been exercised on irrelevant consideration or mala fide, the Court may exercise its jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
But unless it is shown that the impugned order is mala fide or has arbitrarily been misused the Court would not exercise its power of judicial review.
31.
The matter may be considered from another angle.
The appellant herein was not the holder of any civil post.
He did not enjoy any status.
There was no relationship of master and servant between the Central Government/Society and the appellant.
The appellant could not have been removed from the post by taking recourse to the disciplinary rules applicable to a government servant.
The Central Government had exercised its power of nomination not in terms of the provisions of the Constitution of India or a Statute.
It did so in terms of the Memorandum of Association of the Society which is not statutory in character.
32.
It is not in dispute that the control of the Central Government overthe Society is all pervasive.
The maxim relied upon by the learned Additional Solicitor General may be held to be applicable.
In the counter affidavit the respondents contended that complaints regarding irregularities in the functioning of the Society had been received from the sitting members of the Council, which are :  "(i) Accounts and Annual Report for the year 1998-99 have not been brought before the Council for its reasoned consideration, thus the Council had been deprived of the opportunity of overseeing of the functioning of ICSSR that is required by the Rule 27 of the ICSSR MOA & Rules.
(ii) Budget for the year 2000-2001, which should have been considered by the Council before the beginning of the financial year has not yet been brought before the Council.
Thus the money has been spent without budgetary approval of the Council.
(iii) A number of new projects, fellow-ships and institutions have been launched without taking approval of the Council or any of its Committees.
(iv) The pay scales of the staff of Council have been upgraded without taking approval of the Government.
(v) Non-observance of quorum and rules and non-holding of special meeting as requisitioned by the Members of the Council.
(vi) Incurring expenditure on Seminars and Publication without obtaining approval of the Council.
(vii) On 13th February, 2001 during the meeting of the Council, thirteen members out of the fifteen members present signed a resolution stating that the functioning of the Council under the present Chairman had become impossible and requesting the competent authority to intervene and restore the functioning as per the rules and regulations and hand it over to the Chairman.
The Chairman, tore it into pieces without looking at it.
After passing the resolution, 13 members of the Council withdrew from further proceedings of the meeting.
The Chairman continued with the meeting with just 2 members of the Council and summarily passed all items on the agenda and even some additional items placed on the table."
33.
Despite a request to the appellant to send an explanatory note, he did not comply therewith and instead wrote to the Minister of Human Resource Development that certain Members were creating obstacles in his functioning.
34.
In the said letter he threatened that if he was not allowed to function he would have no other alternate but to recommend dissolution of the Governing Body.
He purported to have dismissed the complaints alleging that they are internal affairs of the Council and expressed his distress to the effect that Joint Secretary of the Ministry had asked for a report on issues that exclusively belonged to the purview of the Council and the Chairman of the ICSSR.
35.
In its counter affidavit the respondents categorically stated that how there had been some substance in the allegations made by the Members of the Governing Council.
From the reply of the appellant himself it becomes evident that he had lost the confidence of the Council Members and as a result thereof the functioning of the Society became impossible.
36.
In a situation of this nature if the Central Government has exercised its general power of withdrawal of nomination, can it be said to be a arbitrary act ?
Answer to the said question must be rendered in the negative.
37.
In Union of India v. Tulsiram Patel reported in (1985) 3 SCC 398, the law has been stated in the following terms :  "The pleasure doctrine relates to the tenure of a government servant.
'Tenure' means "manner, conditions or term of holding something" according to Webster's Third New International Dictionary, and "terms of holding; title; authority" according to the Oxford English Dictionary.
It, therefore, means the period for which an incumbent of office holds it.
It is for this reason that the statement of law relating to the pleasure doctrine in England is given in Halsbury's Laws of England, Fourth Edition, Volume 8, under the heading "Tenure of office".
".............
Thus, it the tenure of government servants which Article 310(1) makes subject to the pleasure of the President or the Governor of a State, except as expressly provided by the Constitution.
"............. As pointed out by Lord Hobhouse in Shenton v. Smith, the pleasure doctrine is founded upon the principle that the difficulty which would otherwise be experienced in dismissing, those whose continuance in office is detrimental to the State would be such as seriously to impede the working of the public service.
In Dunn v. Queen the Court of Appeal in England held that it was an implied term of every contract of service that servants of the Crown, civil as well as military, except in special cases where it is otherwise provided by law hold their offices only during the pleasure of the Crown...............
The position that the pleasure doctrine is not based upon any special prerogative of the Crown, but upon public policy has been accepted by this Court in State of UP v. Babu Ram Upadhya and Moti Ram Deka v. General Manager, NEF Rly ............... "..........
Therefore, the only fetter which is placed on the exercise of such pleasure is when it is expressly so provided in the Constitution itself, that is when there is an express provision in that behalf in the Constitution.
Express provisions in that behalf are to be found in the case of certain constitutional functionaries in respect of whose tenure special provision is made in the Constitution as, for instance, in clauses (4) and (5) of Article 124, with respect of Judges of the Supreme Court ................." 38.
In Dr. Bool Chand (supra) the Court held :  "There is no express provision in the Kurukshetra University Act or the Statues thereunder which deals with the termination of the tenure of office of Vice-Chancellor.
But on that account we are unable to accept the plea of the appellant that the tenure of office of a Vice-Chancellor under the Act cannot be determined before the expiry of the period for which he is appointed.
A power to appoint ordinarily implies a power to determine the employment But Clause 4(vii) of the Statue does not purport to confer upon a person appointed Vice-Chancellor an indefeasible right to continue in office for three years : the clause merely places a restriction upon the power of the Chancellor.......
It is true, the office of the Vice-Chancellor of a University is one of great responsibility and carries with it considerable prestige and authority.
But we are unable to hold that a person appointed a Vice-Chancellor is entitled to continue in office for the full period of his appointment even if it turns out that he is physically decrepit, mentally infirm, or grossly immoral.
Absence of 'a' provision setting up procedure for determining the employment of the Vice-Chancellor in the Act or the Statutes or Ordinances does not, in our judgment, lead to the inference that the tenure of office of Vice-Chancellor is not liable to be determined..." 39.
This Court also in BD Wadhwa's case (supra) the Apex Court has held :  "The next point to determine is whether the holder of an office which is not a statutory office even though appointed for a term has a right to continue in office till the expiry of the term.
It is undisputed that the appointment to the Governing Body is by the Delhi Administration even though the appointment is subject to the approval of the Executive Council of the University.
The Delhi Administration does not make the appointment in exercise of any power under any statute.
Therefore, Mr. Chopra is right when he says that the appointment is in exercise of the Executive power of the Government.
The power to appoint includes the power to dismiss and this power extends to a dismissal even during the tenure if the appointment is for a tenure.
It has been so held by the Supreme Court in Dr. Bool Chand v. Chancellor, Kurukshtra University, (1968) 1 SCC 434, where the Supreme Court said that the tenure of office of a Vice Chancellor under the Kurukshtra University Act 1956 could be determined before the expiry of the period for which he was appointed.
Therefore, notwithstanding that the appointment by its terms or according to ordinance XVIII was for a period of three years, it could be terminated before the expiry of the tenure if it was an appointment at pleasure, as in our opinion, the appointment of a member of the Governing Body of a Society is."
40.
It was further held :  "(1) The appointment by the Delhi Administration of a person or persons as a member or members of the Governing Body is at pleasure; (2) Even though the appointment was for the tenure of three years, it could be terminated before the expiry of the tenure; (3) A member or members of the Governing Body of the Society do not hold a statutory office; and (4) The appointment can be terminated without cause."
41.
Reference in this connection may also be made to a decision of the Apex Court in Allahabad Bank Officers' Association and Another v. Allahabad Bank and Others, (1996)4 SCC 504.
42.
In the afore-mentioned backdrop let us now consider the decisions cited by Mr. Prashant Bhushan, learned counsel appearing for the appellant.
43.
In Kanta Devi (supra), the nomination was recalled before the petitioner could take oath of the office.
The High Court held that the provisions contained in Section 16 are subject so a different intention.
It was held that the provisions contained in Section 14 of the Rajasthan Town Municipalities Act covers all the circumstances pertaining to removal of the member.
44.
Similarly in Syed Shaukat Imam's case (supra), the question as regards interpretation of the provisions of Section 8(1) of the Bihar Waqfs Act, 1947 came up for consideration wherein following the decision of the Division Bench of Rajasthan High Court, it was held that once the provision for removal of a Member of the Municipal Board, as envisaged in Section 14 thereto exists, removal cannot be effective in terms of Section 16 thereof.
45.
Almost a similar view has been taken by the Kerala High Court in State of Kerala (supra).
46.
In Hindurao Balwant Patil's case (supra) the question which had arisen was that can in the absence of the provisions of the Act and the bye-laws, the Municipality Committee pass a resolution of no confidence.
The right to be elected under the Act, the Division Bench held, having been created by Statute the same was subject to any condition laid down in the Statute itself.
Construing the provisions of the Act, it was held that Section 16 of the General Clauses Act was not attracted.
Similar was the finding in East India Film Studios (supra), wherein it was held that once an arbitrator was appointed by the Government he cannot be removed by it.
47.
The situation obtaining herein is entirely different.
The terms and conditions of nomination are not governed by any Statute.
There does not exist any procedure as regard appointment or, removal.
The memorandum of Association and the Rules of the Society do not have any statutory flavor.
Power is conferred on the Central Government in terms of the provisions of the Memorandum of Association.
Thus there does not exist any statutory provision indicating a contra intention so as to lead to a conclusion that provisions of Section 16 of the General Clauses Act or the principles analogous thereto would not be applicable.
48.
However we may notice that recently a Division Bench of this Court in Ms. Sarla Kaushik & Ors. v. Jagjit Singh Rathore & Ors., (LPA No. 693/01) disposed of on 22nd March, 2002 held that even in a case of nomination in Municipality the provisions of Section 16 of the General Clauses Act would apply.
It was further held that in a case of this nature even pleasure doctrine would be applicable.
Reliance therein had been placed upon a decision in State of Himachal Pradesh & Anr. v. Kailash Chand Mahajan & Ors., reported in AIR 1992 SC 1277 : 1992(2) SCT 268 (SC), wherein the Apex Court while interpreting the relevant provisions of the Electricity Act, which inter alia provided for the terms of office and conditions of reappointment of the members of the Board, has observed :  "54.
A careful reading of the Section will clearly disclose the section merely talks of term of office and conditions for reappointment.
Those conditions may be as prescribed.
The word 'prescribed' has come to be defined under Section 2(9) of the said Act.
"Prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
Nowhere in this Section, in our considered view, an additional power for appointment is conferred.
At best it could be said that it merely lays down the eligibility for reappointment.
As stated above, that eligibility must be as per conditions prescribed under the rules.
As a matter of fact, when it says "shall hold the office for such period" it means the period as prescribed under the rules.
Beyond this, we are unable to persuade ourselves to come to the conclusion that there is any separate power for reappointment.
It is not even necessary to provide for such a separate power.
The reason why we say so, is Ss.
14 and 16 of Central General Clauses Act provide for such a power.
Section 16 deals with the power of appointment it carrying with it tile power of dismissal, while Section 14 states any power conferred unless a different intention appears could be exercised from lime to time an occasion requires.
Where, therefore, Section 5 provides for a power to appoint, certainly, that power could be exercised from time to time as occasion requires.
Thus one need not search for a separate provision in this regard."
49.
In Krishna v. State of Maharashtra and Others, reported in (2001)2 SCC 441 the Apex Court held :  11.
Once doctrine of pleasure is applicable neither the principle of natural justice would step in nor any question of giving an opportunity before removal would arise.
It is significant when stigma is cast then sub-section (3) of Section 10 specially provides for giving an opportunity to such incumbent before passing an order of removal under Section 10, while there is no such corresponding sub-section under Section 6.
Thus intent of legislature is very clear which reinforces the inference which we have drawn that doctrine of pleasure is implicit under Section 6.
In Om Narain Agarwal v. Nagar Palika, Shahjahanpur, reported in (1993)2 SCC 242 this Court was considering the provisions of Section 9 of the UP Municipalities Act, 1916 as introduced by U P Act 19 of 1990, which made provision for the nomination of two women members by the State Government, and the fourth proviso provides that the nomination of such two members is at the pleasure of the State Government.
This Court held : (SCC p. 254, paras 11-12) "The initial nomination of the two women members itself depended on the pleasure and subjective satisfaction of the State Government.
If such appointments made initially by nomination are based on political considerations, there can be no violation of any provision of the Constitution in case the legislature authorised the State Government to terminate such appointment at its pleasure and to nominate new members in their place.
The nominated members do not have the will or authority of any residents of the Municipal Board behind them as may be present in the case of an elected member .
....
But so far as the nominated members are concerned, the legislature in its wisdom has provided that they shall hold office during the pleasure of the Government.
It has not been argued from the side of the respondents that the legislature had no such power to legislate the fourth proviso.
The attack is based on Articles 14 and 15 of the Constitution.
In our view, such provision neither offends any article of the Constitution nor the same is against any public policy or democratic norms enshrined in the Constitution.
There is also no question of any violation of principles of natural justice in not affording any opportunity to the nominated members before their removal nor the removal under the pleasure doctrine contained in the fourth proviso to Section 9 of the Act puts any stigma on the performance or character of the nominated members.
It is done purely on political considerations."
50.
Submission of Mr. Prashant Bhushan to the effect that nomination of the Members to the Rajya Sabha by the Government of India is similar to the nature of the nomination of Chairman to the Society cannot be accepted.
The nominated member of Rajya Sabha holds a constitutional post.
The Constitution safeguards the fate of Rajya Sabha Member.
A Rajya Sabha Member cannot be equated with the Chairman of the Society, who becomes the head of the institution.
51.
In this case even Rule 8 of the Rules cannot be said to have any application whatsoever.
Rule 8 envisaged contingencies specified therein but the same by itself would not mean that the Chairman cannot be removed in the event any other contingency arises.
The submission of Mr. Bhushan to the effect that the power of the Central Government to withdraw such nomination cannot depend upon the provisions of the Statute or under a Memorandum of Association.
We do not agree.
A writ of or in the nature of Mandamus would issue only if the petitioner establishes existence of a legal right in himself and a corresponding legal duty upon the respondents.
In absence of existence of any such right or a corresponding legal duty on the respondent even a writ of Mandamus cannot issue.
If the post is not created under a Statute, in absence of any other circumstances to show, it would be a repetition to state that no legal right can be inferred.
No screening or short-listing is done.
We may, however, notice that according to the learned Additional Solicitor General in this case although certain recommendations had been made, the petitioner's name had not been found place therein.
52.
Reliance placed by Mr. Prashant Bhushan upon Kumari Shrilekha Vidyarathi (supra) is misplaced.
In that case appointments have been made in terms of Section 24 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
Thus it was not a case where the Apex Court was dealing with an appointment which was not governed by the provisions of the statute.
53.
The only question, which remains to be answered, is what would be the consequences of the non-compliance of the principles of natural justice.
54.
The concept or the applicability of the principles of natural justice must be considered having regard to the purpose it seeks to achieve.
55.
Another question, which would incidentally arise for consideration is as to whether despite findings to the effect that no writ of mandamus can be issued, as has been prayed for by the appellant, having regard to the principles contained in Section 14(1)(b) of the Specific Relief Act, would it be necessary for this Court to consider the effect of non-compliance of the principles of natural justice.
56.
In view of the nature of the post held by the appellant, no writ of or in the nature of mandamus can issue.
The Court while exercising its writ jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India can also refuse to exercise its discretionary jurisdiction.
57.
There cannot, however, be any doubt whatsoever that while allegations had been made by the Central Government as regard functioning of.
the appellant qua the post of Chairman of the Society it was incumbent upon the Central Government to comply with the principles of natural justice.
59.
But it is trite that the Court shalt not set aside an order only because the principles of natural justice have not been complied with unless the petitioner shows prejudice.
By reason of complying with the principles of natural justice the Courts devised a mode of fair administrative procedure.
Procedure as set out in Administrative law is not a matter of secondary importance.
However, in a case where the pleasure doctrine applies no reason is required to be assigned.
Even principles of natural justice are not required be complied with.
The observations made in Krishan Kumar (supra) even would not apply in a case where the post is not created under a Statute.
The power of the Central Government emanates out of the provisions of the Memorandum of Association.
The Central Government did not exercise any judicial, quasi judicial or administrative power.
59.
In Nakkuda Ali v. M.F.D.E.S.
Jayaratne, reported in 1951 Appeal Cases 66 a deviation was made from the application of the principles of natural justice wherein a textile trader was deprived of licence without any kind of hearing.
However, we may hasten to add that these decisions have not been followed in some cases and need not be followed in all' circumstances.
However, these decisions are taken note of for the purpose of considering a situation which is not covered by any direct decision.
The ordinary rule is that when the principles of natural justice are violated the order would be void ab initio.
But such an order must entail civil or penal consequences.
It does not have a civil consequence as thereby the appellant is not to suffer any pecuniary loss.
No penal consequence has ensued as thereby no penalty has been imposed.
What has been done by reason of the impugned press report is a clarification that has been given.
If reputation of the appellant has suffered, he might have suffered damages.
The press release may be found to be based on no material.
In an appropriate adjudication, the same may be held to have been arrived at on a wrong and erroneous premise.
In this view of the matter, the remedy of the appellant may be to file a suit for damages.
60.
However, we may note that the appellant himself has given interview to the press even on various dates making serious allegations against the State and other Members.
We need not dilate on the said question any further.
61.
Appeal is dismissed.
No costs.
Appeal dismissed.