DK Seth, J - The petitioner had been working in the post of Peon.
The post of Peon having fell vacant a decision was taken for filling up the said post according to the Recruitment Rules.
Accordingly, requisition was made from the Employment Exchange on 29th June, 1999.
The petitioner also wanted to participate in the selection but he was not allowed to do so.
The petitioner had moved this writ petition whereupon by an interim order dated 6th October, 1999 the petitioner was permitted to participate in the selection process subject to the result of this writ petition.
The Bank had taken a stand that in the meantime the situation had changed on account of death of the Manager of the Bank on 24th July, 1999.
It is alleged that during pendency of this writ petition the son of the deceased-Manager had applied for appointment under the dying in harness rules.
In the order dated 17th December, 1999 it was mentioned that this question require, examination as to whether in view of the pendency of the application for appointment under the dying in harness rules any appointment could be made.
However, it was made clear that the selected candidate may be given appointment subject to the result of this writ petition.
Admittedly, the selection process was completed.
2.
It is contended on behalf of the Bank that the petitioner has topped the list of selected candidates.
In such circumstance, the petitioner contends that he may be given appointment.
3.
After hearing the learned Counsels for the parties it appears that there are two questions which are to be gone into.
The first question is as to whether this vacancy can be filled up under the dying in harness rules which arose after the selection process has started.
The second question is whether the petitioner could get the appointment without being sponsored from the Employment Exchange only on the ground that he had been working for some time in the Bank.
4.
So far as the first question is concerned, it appears that the selection process had started on 29th June, 1999.
At that point of time the vacancy that was sought to be filled up could not be made available for dying in harness category.
The death having taken place after the selection process have been started the question of appointment under the dying in harness rules does not arise.
It is a settled principle of law that once the selection process starts it has to be governed according to the situation as soon as the selection process starts.
No subsequent development can stand in the way unless there is specific provision.
Even change in law cannot alter the situation.
Therefore, in the present case the selection process having started before the death having taken place the question of giving appointment in the said vacancy under the dying in harness rules cannot arise.
5.
With regard to the second point it may be noted that the petitioner had been working for some time in the post.
He was only given opportunity to participate in the interview along with the candidates sponsored by the Employment Exchange.
He has been given only an opportunity of being considered.
No other advantage or opportunity has been given to him.
It may be a case that on account of the engagement of the petitioner he may not be considered to be an unemployed to be registered in the Employment Exchange or on account of his being employed he may not be considered to be unemployed and his name could not be sponsored by the Employment Exchange.
Since the petitioner has participated in the interview and had competed with all other candidates, he has every right to be considered for being appointed provided he is successful.
6.
In the present case it appears that the petitioner was successful in the selection and had topped the list.
If it is so, his right to appointment cannot be taken away unless there are certain compelling circumstances.
Normally names of candidates are obtained from the Employment Exchange.
Unless there is specific rule candidature of candidates other than sponsored by the Employment Exchange may be excluded.
But in the present case no such provision has since been relied upon by the Bank.
Be that as it may, Article 16 of the Constitution requires equal opportunity of employment to every citizen.
The petitioner being a citizen had also a right unless it is otherwise precluded or prohibited by statutory provisions, to complete with all other candidates.
7.
In the circumstances if the petitioner has succeeded or any one who has succeeded in the interview he may be offered appointment.
If the petitioner has succeeded, he may be given appointment by the Bank within two months from the date of communication of a certified copy of this order.
8.
The writ petition is thus disposed of.
There will be no order as to costs.
9.
If an urgent xerox certified copy of this order is applied for the same may be supplied as early as possible.
Order accordingly.