BK Sangalad, J - The Insurer-appellant has preferred this appeal against the award dated 27021998 in case No. WCA:CR: 151/96 by the Commissioner for Workmen's Compensation, Davanagere.
2.
The first respondent is the claimant.
He was working under 2nd respondent as a Fitter.
On 21041996 his left hand was caught in the machine as such it was crushed and he sustained grievous injuries.
According to him, now he cannot do any work with that hand.
As such there is permanent disability to his left hand.
He was earning Rs. 2,000/- per month and aged 31 years as on the date of accident.
Hence he claimed compensation of Rs. 2,50,000/-.
In addition to examining himself, A1 to A5 are marked and P1 to P3 are marked for the respondents.
Compensation of Rs. 2,47,140/- is awarded.
3.
Mr. HS Lingaraj, the learned Counsel for the appellant has put forth his submissions on two grounds, namely, the percentage of disability and whether the Insurance Company is liable to pay the interest on the compensation.
He had relied upon two decisions, namely, Oriental Insurance Co Ltd v. Raju, ILR 1993(3) Kar 2247 :  "Section 30-1st proviso - Payment of interest - Liability to pay interest or penalty excluded by special condition under policy - "Authorities under Act to apply their mind to see if such liability exists."
And Ved Prakash Garg v. Premi Devi, 1997(4) SCT 541 (SC) : AIR 1997 SC 3854 ;  "Liability of Insurance Company" To make good liability arising under Workmen's Compensation Act "Extends to payment of principal Amount of compensation computed by Commissioner and interest levied under Section 4- A(3)(a)."
But not to penalty levied under Section 4-A(3)(b)."
4.
As against this submission, the learned Counsel for the respondent No. 1 submitted that since three fingers are cut the other two fingers have become unless, as such there is 100% disability.
Therefore the conclusion arrived at by the Commissioner is not liable to be disturbed.
The same view is canvassed by the learned Counsel for the 2nd respondent.
5.
In view of these rival submission the point that arises for consideration is whether the compensation awarded is just and adequate.
6.
It is an admitted fact that the Doctor has not been examined.
The Commissioner cannot import his own ideas and cannot come to a conclusion by his whims and fancies regarding percentage of disability.
When there are schedule injuries, it is his duty to go according to the Schedule prescribed.
Otherwise it amounts to overriding the statutory provisions laid down by the Authorities.
It is an admitted fact that three fingers have been cut.
Therefore we have to look into Schedule-I, part-II, Item No. 8 `Loss of three fingers of one hand,' is causing 30% loss of earning capacity.
There is no evidence that other two fingers are also amputated and further there is no evidence that he is not working any where.
7.
Mr. HS Lingaraj, the learned Counsel for the appellant submitted that notice is served on the first respondent at the address given in the appeal memo.
According to this address it is M/s. Anantha Refinery (P) Ltd., Bangalore Road, Challakere, Chithradurga District and it is clear that the first respondent is working in that establishment.
Against this submission the learned Counsel for the first respondent submitted that it is only for the sake of convenience and for the service of notice that address is shown.
However, this submission is unacceptable.
8.
At the cost of repetition it has to be stated that when there are Schedule injuries unless the Doctor is examined the Workmen's Commissioner cannot import his own ideas in coming to the conclusion that there is 100% disability.
The claimant has also not made any efforts to examine the Doctor.
Under such circumstances, one cannot traverse beyond this statute.
He has sustained, no doubt, sever (sever ?)
injuries, but these injuries cause him permanent partial disability.
There is no second though over this.
Since no proper evidence is recorded the other cannot be held responsible.
There are same cases wherein the Courts have arrived at a conclusion that there is 100% disability.
However, this submission is not applicable.
9.
The first respondent was working as a Fitter.
When he was working his hand was caught and three fingers were cut.
Whatever injuries he has sustained he has to get compensation.
But not beyond the percentage mentioned in Part-II of the 1st Schedule.
Therefore, I am inclined to hold that the compensation now awarded is unwarranted and is only on the higher side.
If calculated according to the Schedule without altering any factor and earning capacity, it comes to Rs. 74,142/-.
This is rounded of to Rs. 75,000/-.
10.
The next point that has to be considered is regarding interest.
Mr. HS Lingaraj, the learned Counsel for the appellant has tried to make distinction between the Policy issued under Motor Vehicles Act and under the Workmen's Compensation Act.
As far as the interest is concerned he relied on the two decisions referred to supra.
In addition to this he has also drawn my attention to Section 4-A(3)(a) and (b) of Workmen's Compensation Act 1923, which read as under :-  "Where any employer is in default in paying compensation due under this Act within one month from the date it fell due, the Commissioner shall - (a) direct that the employer shall, in addition to the amount of the arrears, pay simple interest thereon at the rate of twelve percent per annum or at such higher rate not exceeding the maximum of the lending rates of any scheduled bank as may be specified by the Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, on the amount due; and  (b) if, is his opinion, there is no justification for the delay, direct that the employer shall, in addition to the amount of the arrears and interest thereon pay a further sum not exceedings fifty percent of such amount by way of penalty : Provided that an order for the payment of penalty shall not be passed under clause (b) without giving a reasonable opportunity to the employer to show cause why it should not be passed."
11.
According to Section 4-A(3)(b) it is the employer who is liable to pay the interest and the arrears, and also further is liable to pay the penalty if awarded.
If has been made clear that unless an opportunity is given to the employer penalty should not be levied.
In view of all these facts and circumstances, I am inclined to hold that there is some force in the submissions made by Mr. HS Lingaraj, as far as the interest is concerned.
It is also made clear that simple interest at the rate of 12% per annum has to be made or at such higher rate of interest not exceeding the maximum of the lending rates of any schedule bank as may be specified by the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette.
In the present case rightly only interest at the rate of 12% per annum is awarded.
12.
The case of the claimant may deserve great sympathy, but it is impermissible to traverse beyond statue.
With these observations the following order is passed.
Order In the result of the appeal is allowed in part and the compensation is reduced from Rs. 2,47,140/- to Rs. 75,000/- with interest at the rate of 12% per annum from 21.5.1996 (30 days after the date of accident i.e. 21041996) till the date of realisation.
The interest has to be paid by the Employer, 2nd respondent.
The excess amount deposited shall be refunded to the Appellant Insurance Company.
A sum of Rs. 75,000/- shall stand transferred to the Workmen's Commissioner, Davanagere.
Appeal partly allowed.