M.H.S.
Ansari, J - The undisputed facts are that the petitioner was Assistant Teacher and on 16th November, 1995 applied for being declared as medically unfit to continue in service.
The said application was made to the Sub Inspector of Schools who in turn forwarded the same to the Chairman of the respondent-Council by his Memo.
No. 170 dated 16th November, 1995.
Whereupon, the Chairman by his Memo No. 210 dated 29th December, 1995 returned the matter to the Sub Inspector of Schools for filing the same along with the enquiry report of the Enquiry Committee in accordane with the Government Orders.
The Enquiry Committee in its meeting held on 8th February, 1996 recommended the case of the petitioner and thereafter, the Chairman of the respondent-Council by his Memo No. 438 dated 13th March, 1996 referred the case of the petitioner for declaration as permanently disabled to the Chief Medical Officer Health, Birbhum.
2.
The Deputy Director of Health Service by his Memo No. 1630 dated 3rd September, 1996 forwarded proceedings of the Medical Board in respect of three incumbents specified therein including the writ petitioner.
The Medical Board declared the petitioner permanently incapacitated for further service in their certificate dated 5th August, 1996 and, thereafter, the Chairman by his Memo No. 935 dated 22nd April, 1997 requested the Director of School Education to let him know whether the relevant papers could be forwarded to him for consideration.
The Director of School Education by his Memo dated 21st August, 1997 however, rejected the same.
3.
Aggrieved thereby, the instant writ application has been filed.
The relief inter alia, claimed in the instant writ application is as under :-  "A writ of or in the nature of mandamus commanding the respondents to act in terms of GO No. 768-Edn/P dated 12th November, 1991 by excluding the time of the procedure prescribed in Memo No. 176-Edn/P/14A/9/88 dated 2241988 and 253-Edn/(P)/4A/9/88 dated 2551988."
4.
From the narration of facts as above, it will be seen that the petitioner made the application for being declared medically unfit 50 days before expiry of two years prior to attaining the age of superannuation of 60 years on 511998.
5.
The contention of Mr. Sardar Ajmad Ali, learned Senior Advocate for the petitioner is that the delay or laches on the part of the respondent authorities cannot constitute a ground for denial of the benefits upon the petitioner with regard to the appointment of his ward on compassionate grounds.
The beneficent provisions cannot be allowed to be rendered nugatory on account of in action or delay on the part of the respondent authorities.
6.
It was further contended that the matter on hand being one in relation to appointment of a ward on compassionate grounds, the respondent authorities are expected to act with promptitude.
7.
On the other hand, Mr. Subir Sanyal, learned Counsel for the respondent- Primary School Council contended that the matter is to be considered in accordance with the statutory rules.
For conferring the benefit upon the ward of a disabled employee, it must be established that the disablement was two years prior to the age of superannuation.
That is to say, before the employee attains 58 years of age.
In the instant case, it was submitted, the petitioner was continued in service beyond 58 years and his ward is, therefore, not entitled to the benefits prescribed for such permanently incapacitated employees.
8.
According to Mr. Subir Sanyal and as averred in the affidavit-in- opposition, the application filed by the petitioner was belated.
The petitioner would have attained the age of 58 years on 611996 whereas the application was made on 16111995 that is just 50 days prior thereto.
For the lapse and delay on the part of the petitioner, he cannot rest his fault upon the authority nor can the petitioner expect "supersonic promptitude from the authority to cover of his lapses."
9.
Mr. Sanyal relied upon an unreported Division Bench judgment in F.M.A.T.
No. 2398 of 1996, Ad hoc Committee, Birbhum District Primary School Council v. Ashesh Kr.
Ghosh and others, dated 13th January, 1997 as also upon an unreported judgment of mine (Ansari, J) in WP No. 14532 (W) of 1998, Lalit Rajwar v. Chairman, District Primary School Council, Purulia.
10.
Mr. Amjad Ali, learned Senior Advocate for the petitioner also relied upon a judgment of a learned Single Judge in WP No. 604 of 2000 dated 5th April, 2000, Prabir Kr.
Das v. State of West Bengal and others.
11.
Having heard the learned Counsels for the respective parties and upon perusing the respective judgments relied upon, it is apparent that the only question for consideration in the instant case is whether the period of 50 days constituted a reasonable time for consideration of the application filed by the petitioner.
The judgments referred to supra, have all proceeded on the basis that the Rule provides that the retirement should be at least two years before the date of actual retirement.
In the Division Bench judgment being F.M.A.T.
No. 2398 of 1996, BP Banerjee, J speaking for the Bench held "the expression at least cannot be treated as discrectory but mandatory."
It was held in that case as under :  "In this case the petitioner was born on 14th October, 1996 and he was to retire at the age of 60 years but he made the application when he had already attained the age of 58 years 9 months and 11 days and he was found disqualified and his application was rejected by the authority concerned with the view that he was not eligible in view of the aforesaid Rules.
12.
In Lalit Rajwar's case (supra), it was observed that the Rule provides that only such wards of the employees will be considered for appointment on compassionate grounds if the erstwhile employee retires before two years of his attaining of the age of 60 years.
On the facts of that case, I held as under :  ".....In the instant case, it cannot be said that there has been any inordinate delay in considering the case of the erstwhile employee for being declared unfit on medical grounds.
The application was made only 16 days before the erstwhile employee attained the age of 58 years.
The arguments and contentions raised by Mr. Milan Bhattacharjee as regards inaction or delay on the part of the respondent authorities would have merited consideration, if the application had been made giving sufficient time to the authorities for constituting the Medical Board.
In my view, the application having been made just 16 days prior to the date of attaining 58 years of age, it cannot be said that there has been any inordinate delay whereby the petitioner has been prejudiced by the inaction on the part of the respondent authorities."
13.
In Prabir Kr.
Das's case (supra), Barin Ghosh, J in his order dated 5th April, 2000 on the factual matrix of that case held as under :  "...........That competent authority was approached on 1st November, 1996.
The said authority could, however, examine the petitioner No. 2 only on 14th February, 1997.
Six months before the petitioner attained 58 years he applied to the appropriate authority seeking that he be examined to find out whether his claim of permanent incapacity is genuine or not and if genuine to grant him premature retirement.
Six months time was more than reasonable time to find out whether the claims and contentions of the petitioner No. 2 are genuine or not.
There is no just reason why no step could be taken to find out the same two years before the petitioner was to retire despite having six months time to do so.
There is no just reason why the request made on 1st November, 1996 could be reached only on 14th February, 1997 and not on 14th December, 1996.
There is no just reason why despite knowledge of the fact that the petitioner coved be 58 years on 1st January, 1997, no step was taken to have the petitioner examined any day before 1st January, 1997."
(Emphasis supplied) 14.
The enquiry thus in such cases in view of the accepted rule position is to be confined only to ascertaining whether the application was made within a reasonable time and the action taken thereon by the respondent authorities whether there was any justifiable grounds for the delay in the consideration of the prayer of the employee.
15.
What is reasonable time would undoubtedly depend upon the facts of each case.
The Rule 14(1)(b) itself does not prescribe any period for the making of the application.
It only envisages that the wards of such employees will be considered for appointment on compassionate grounds if the erstwhile employee is declared permanently incapacitated two years prior to his actual retirement on attaining superannuation.
16.
As noticed supra, in Rajwar's case, I held that 16 days was not a reasonable period nor it can be said that there was inordinate delay on the part of the respondent authorities when the application was made 16 days prior to the date of attaining of 58 years of age.
17.
In Prabir Kr.
Das's case (supra), even when the application was made six months prior to the date of attaining of the age of 58 years, action had not taken by the respondent authorities and Barin Ghosh, J accordingly allowed the writ application with certain directions on the ground that there was no just reason why no steps were taken to have the petitioner examined any day before his attaining the age of 58 years.
18.
From the affidavit-in-opposition, it is seen that the application was made to the Sub Inspector of Schools on 16111995 and when the same was forwarded to the Chairman, it was returned to the Sub Inspector of Schools for filing the same along with the enquiry report of the Enquiry Committee.
In other words, from 17.11.1995 when the application was received by the Chairman till 29121995 no action had been taken by the respondent-Council.
It is not known when the application was forwarded to the Enquiry Committee but it appears that the Enquiry Committee held its meeting on 8.2.1996.
It is not known when the report was forwarded to the Chairman.
Thereafter, on 13.3.1996 the Chairman referred the matter to the Director of Health Services who in turn by his Memo No. 1630 dated 391996 that is almost six months thereafter communicated the medical examination report of the Medical Board dated 581996 whereby the petitioner was declared permanently disabled.
It is thus apparent that at very stage there has been inaction or delay on the part of the respondent authorities.
19.
The whole object of the rule is to provide employment on compassionate grounds to mitigate the financial hardship of the family of employee concerned.
The attitude of the respondent authorities appears to be that the petitioner cannot expect supersonic promptitude from the respondent authorities.
The respondent authorities, however, do not state what is the reasonable time they require for processing such applications for declaring medically unfit from employment.
The very object of the Rules is defeated by such delay and laches on the part of the respondent authorities.
I cannot accede to the contention of the respondent authorities that the period of 50 days was not sufficient for them to have processed the application of the petitioner.
The Rules or norms prescribed for processing such application are intended to sub-serve the purpose for which the Rules have been framed.
They cannot be considered to be the vehicles for laxity or delaying the process at every stage by the respondent authorities.
20.
In the circumstances, I am in respectful agreement with the view of Barin Ghosh, J as noticed supra.
In the circumstances, similar directions shall issue in the instant case, as under.
21.
The writ application is accordingly disposed of with the directions to the District Primary School Council, Birbhum, respondent No. 1 herein to consider the matter afresh and to take steps to settle the retiral benefits of the petitioner in terms of his decision at an early date and in so doing the excess payment that has been made to the petitioner for the period beyond 58 years of age during which petitioner was allowed to continue in service until he was declared incapacitated, the said amount shall be quantified and recovered from the petitioner from the retiral benefits provided, however, the ward of the petitioner accorded appointment subject to his eligibility for the post for which he may be suitable in accordance with the law.
In the event, the ward is held not entitled on account of the eligibility criteria applicable to the post, then and in that event, a reasoned order shall be passed and communicated to the petitioner.
The above exercise shall be completed by the respondents expeditiously within a period of 6 (six) months from the date of communication of a copy of this order.
With the directions above, the writ application is accordingly disposed of.
Let urgent Xerox certified copy of this judgment and order be furnished to the appearing parties, if applied for.
Order accordingly.