Amar Dutt, J - The petitioner was recruited as a Sepoy in the army on 141975.
In the year 1988, he was promoted as Hawaldar.
During his service, he was attached with Rajputana Rifles Battalion, Head Quarter at Delhi Cantt.
In the year 1993, he was posted at Labha, Darjeeling, West Bengal, where he started having re-lapses of Psoriasis Vulgaris (a skin disease).
After hospitalisation for two weeks, he was discharged.
In 1995, the disease re- surfaced and the petitioner was referred to the Medical Board.
The Board recorded its finding regarding the nature and origin of the disease and recommended that the petitioner be placed in lower medical category "CEE" for 6/12 years.
The petitioner was advised to get himself medically checked up every month.
In May, 1997, the petitioner claims that he was discharged from the Army service on medical grounds and at that time the Medical Board assessed his disability to be more than 20%.
The case of the petitioner for disability pension was rejected by the Chief Controller of Defence Accounts (Pension), Allahabad (in short "CCDA(P), Allahabad") vide letter No. GR 3/62/53/3/97 dated 2551997 on the ground that the disability suffered by him was neither attributable to nor aggravated by military service.
This information was communicated to the petitioner through Annexure P2.
It is this communication and the order of the CCDA (P), Allahabad rejecting the recommendations of the Medical Board that the petitioner challenges by way of this writ petition.
2.
In the reply filed on behalf of the respondents, the plea that was taken was that the petitioner had been discharged from the army as per Item 13(3)(iii) of Army Rules, 1954 after he had rendered 21 years and sixteen days of service.
In view of this, he was granted service pension and because the disability suffered by the petitioner was neither attributable to nor aggravated by the military service, no disability pension was granted.
The Board was of the opinion that the disability was due to the constitutional disease and, thus, not relatable to army service but the claim of the petitioner for the disability pension was forwarded to the sanctioning authority i.e. CCDA(P), Allahabad along with the proceedings of the Board and other connected documents.
The decision of the CCDA(P), Allahabad, in these circumstances, suffered from no infirmity and, therefore, the writ should be dismissed as the case of the petitioner did not fall within Regulation 173 of the Pension Regulations for Army 1961.
It is further clarified that acceptance or rejection of disability pension claim is submitted to the competent Medical Authority (Pension) (in short "MA(P)") attached to the office of CCDA(P), Allahabad, appointed by the Director General of Armed Forces Medical Services, New Delhi, the Principal Controller for bringing uniformity of Entitlement Rules.
The MA(P) under Rule 17 b of Entitlement Rule 1981 has the power to review and revise the recommendations of the Board, which was done in the present case.
3.
On the point of fact, it was clarified in the written statemen that the decree of disability of the petitioner as assessed by the Invaliding Board was found to be 30% for two years and not 20% as stated by the petitioner.
It was submitted that since the disability was not attributable to or aggravated by the military service, therefore, the CCDA(P), Allahabad-respondent No. 2 had rejected the papers for the grant of disability pension.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the records with their help.
4.
The main point, which arises in this case, is whether the petitioner was discharged from service under Rule 13(3)(iii) of Army Rules, 1954 on completion of the period of service or upon his having been found medically unfit for further service.
In the former case, according to the respondents, the petitioner would not be entitled to any disability pension while in the latter the pension will have to be worked out on the disability suffered by him provided it is attributable to or aggravated by the military service.
Although, it is evident that the petitioner had been discharged from service after the completion of 21 years, which case would fall within Item 13(3)(iii) of Army Rules, 1954, yet the respondents have not placed on the file any material, which would support such a submission and, therefore, on 25.1.2002 this Court had required the learned counsel for the respondents to produce the entire service record regarding the physical disability that the petitioner is suffering.
It is not disputed before me that he was suffering from Psoriasis Vulgaris.
The petitioner had stated in para No. 6 of the petition that on account of this disease, the Board had found him to be suffering from 20% disability, which the respondents have generously indicated in the their reply to this paragraph as 30% disability.
On account of this assessment of the Medical Board, the case of the petitioner was apparently forwarded to the CCDA (P) Allahabad and it seems that the MA (P) attached to the office of CCDA(P) Allahabad has rejected this recommendation.
The respondents have not attached any document with the reply, from which the Court could assess why the M.A (P) differed with the opinion of the Medical Board.
Even the proceedings of the Board have not been made available for independent assessment by the Court to facilitate the determination as to what is the correct percentage of the disability found in the case of the petitioner.
A perusal of the record of the Medical Board, photostat copy whereof has been made available, shows that onset of the disease took place in August, 1993 and the petitioner has been facing relapses thereof during winter.
Psoriasis Vulgaris is a disease which is aggravated by exposure to cold and a perusal of the postings of the petitioner shows that despite the fact that he was found to be suffering from a disease, which is aggravated by the vagaries of cold weather, no attempt was made to post him at a place where weather would have facilitated a speedy recovery.
Instead, the petitioner had always been kept at Darjeeling.
5.
On behalf of the respondents, it is urged on the basis of the Full Bench decision of the Kerala High Court rendered in O.P. No. 6550 of 1990-0, wherein it has been held as under :-  "(a) The burden will be on the claimant to establish that the injury or the disease was on account of the military service or aggravated on account of it.
(b) The onus in this regard is of a rebuttable nature.
(c) The Medical Board is required to elaborately deal with the matter and record reasons as contemplated in Rule 7(b) to Appendix II and also to take note of various aspects highlighted in Appendix II itself.
(d) Unless, the requisite formalities which are to be observed have been so done, the appellate body or for that matter the High Court while exercising powers under Article 226 of the Constitution can examine the matter.
But the scope of judicial review in such matter is rather limited as the High Court does not act as the appellate authority.
Only when the conclusions are perverse, without any material to support it or where irrelevant materials have been taken into consideration for arriving at a conclusion, the High Court can interfere while adjudicating the petition under Article 226 of the Constitution.
(See Mohan Amba Prasad Agnihotri & Ors. v. Bhaskar Balwant Aher (D) through LRs., 2000(1) RCR(Rent) 275 (SC) : 2000(2) SCALE 186)".
that the medical history incorporated in the record prepared by the Invaliding Board makes it clear that the disease was not attributable to or aggravated by the military service and the petitioner has failed to discharge the onus so placed upon him.
I have carefully considered the arguments addressed by the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistance have gone through the records of the case.
6.
The short point, which arises for consideration of this Court, is that whether the disease Psoriasis Vulgaris, on account of which, the petitioner has been boarded out, was attributable to military service or had been aggravated by the military service.
Before proceeding to examine this aspect of the case, it would be but proper to advert to the legal position, which has crystalised on account of the judicial interpretation of the proceedings of the Army Pension Regulation 1961.
It has been consistently held by this Court in Union of India and others v. Ex-Sepoy Chander Singh, 1998(4) RSJ 467 : 1998(2) SCT 632 (Rajasthan)(DB) as under :-  "A conjoint reading of the Regulations and the Rules contained in Appendix II shows that an officer who is retired on account of disability which is attributable to or aggravated by military service and which is assessed at 20 per cent or more is entitled to disability pension in accordance with the regulations.
The question whether a disability is attributable to or aggravated by military service is required to be determined as per rules contained in appendix-II.
A person who is invalided from service on account of disability which is attributable to or aggravated by military service and is assessed at 20 per cent or above is also entitled to disability pension.
Those who are placed in lower medical category (other than E) permanently and who are discharged because no alternative employment suitable to their low medical category could be provided are also entitled to disability pension.
Rule 3 of Appendix II postulates the existence of a casual connection between disablement and military service before attributability or aggravation can be conceded.
In terms of Rule 4, direct as well as circumstantial evidence is required to be taken into account while deciding the issue of entitlement to disability pension and the benefit of reasonable doubt is to be given to the claimant.
The competent authority is required to adopt a more liberal approach in granting benefit to the claimant in field service cases.
First part of Rule 7(b) [re-numbered as 14(b)] contains a deeming provision.
It lays down that the disease which has led to an individual's discharge or death will ordinarily be deemed to have arisen in the course of service if no note of it was made at the time of individual's acceptance for military service.
However, the benefit of this deeming fiction is not available to the claimant if the medical opinion, for the reasons to be stated, holds that the disease could not have been detected on medical examination prior to the claimant's acceptance for service.
Rule 7-C [re-numbered as 14(c)] lays down that if the disease is accepted as having arisen in service it must also be established that the conditions of military service determined or contributed to the onset of the disease and that the conditions were due to the circumstances of duty in military service."
7.
In Letters Patent Appeal No. 1265 of 1991, Union of India v. Karnail Singh, 2002(2) SCT 113 (P&H) decided on 7122001, before proceeding to examine the factual matrix of that case, the Court observed as under :-  "The crucial question in the present case is, thus, as to whether disability, from which the petitioner suffered, was attributable to or aggravated by military service.
If a finding is to be returned in favour of the petitioner that the injury or disability caused to him is attributable to or aggravated by military service, the defence projected by the appellant that the petitioner was boarded out from service on completion of tenure of 15 years would make no difference."
The observations of the Full Bench of the Kerala High Court in O.P. No. 6550 of 1990-0, referred to here-in-before, in my humble opinion, do not take any view to the contrary.
Thus, answer to the question as to whether a particular disease can be stated to be attributable to or aggravated by military service will depend upon the facts and the circumstances of each case as has been brought out on the record by the parties.
8.
In this case, the disease, on account of which the petitioner has been invalided out according to the Medical Board had onset first in the year of 1993.
The opinion of the specialist regarding the nature of the disease and its aggravation is as under :-  "This 40 years old individual a case of PSORIASIS VULGARIS at present in low medical category CEE (Temp) 6/12 years has now reported for recat.
Onset of illness Aug 93 he is always getting relapses in winters.
Complaints of itching over the skin lesions.
General physical and systematic examination reveals no abnormalities.
Dermatological examination, there are multiple enyhematous plaques of variable sizes & shapes with all very while scales over scalp, trunk and extremeties.
Brunt of lesions is on extensors.
Grattage test is positive.
Mucous membranes, Nails, Hair - NAD Lab Investigations :- Routine haemogram and Urine analysis are within normal limits.
Keeping in view poor response to treatment and chronic nature of disease process, individual is recommended to be invalided out of service in Medical Category EEE."
At the time when the disease was first discovered, the petitioner was posted in Labha Darjeeling (WB).
His postings thereafter are given as under :-  From To Place 260778 031081 J&K Uri Sector 201284 181186 Nefa (AP) 230189 170389 CIOPS Battle Axe Mizo Hil 190389 060390 Remote Locality Area Aruna-2 120192 130492 Patt-n (J&K) 261095 to date Jhalas (J&K) 9.
The above said list indicates that despite the fact that the petitioner was suffering from a disease which was aggravated by extreme cold, no steps were taken by the Organisation, in which he was serving, to post him at a place where the same could be controlled, rather than the same being aggravated.
The postings of the petitioner clearly indicate that from 1995 till the date of his discharge, no such attempt was made by the army to facilitate the treatment of the disease and probably it is on account of this fact that ultimately the malady went out of control and he had been boarded out.
In these circumstances, the stand of the respondents that the disease being constitutional in nature cannot by any stretch of imagination be said to have been aggravated on account of military service be sustained because if appropriate measures were taken at the initial stage not only the disease would have been cured and rather in all probability its recurrence could have been prevented.
For the reasons recorded above, this Petition is allowed, the impugned order is set aside and a direction is issued to the respondents for processing the case of the petitioner for the grant of disability pension within a period of three months of the receipt of a certified copy of this order.
However, it is made clear that it shall always be open to the respondent-authorities at any time to have the petitioner's disability re-assessed through a re-survey Medical Board and if such re-survey Medical Board is convened, the petitioner will appear before it as and when required.
Petition allowed.