RL Anand, J - By this judgment, we dispose of bunch of 81 writ petitions mentioned below, as in our opinion all these writ petitions can be disposed of by common judgment.
2.
CWP Nos. 56-2001, SC Sharma v. PNB etc., 1152-2001, Gurnam Singh v. Punjab and Sind Bank, 1243-2001, Amarjit Singh v. Punjab and Sind Bank, 1294-2001, Hardev Singh v. Punjab and Sind Bank, 1302-2001, Bachittar Singh Tiwana etc. v. Punjab and Sind Bank, 1319-2001, Rajinder Singh v. Punjab and Sind Bank, 1350-2001, Ashok Kumar Sood etc. v. Punjab and Sind Bank, 1351-2001, Satnam Singh Sawhney v. Punjab and Sind Bank etc., 1401-2001, Virsa Singh v. Punjab and Sind Bank, 1457-2001, VK Arora v. Punjab and Sind Bank, 19393-2001, CJ Singh v. Pb.
National Bank, 19711-2001, Bhupinder Singh Sachdeva v. Chairman Punjab and Sind Bank and others, 19803-2001, Harminder Singh and others v. The Chairman Punjab and Sind Bank, 1458-2001, Amarjit Singh v. Punjab and Sind Bank, 1472-2001, Har Vijayappal Singh v. Punjab and Sind Bank, 1549-2001, Satgur Singh etc. v. Punjab and Sind Bank etc., 1549-2001, Jasbir Singh Bhullar etc. v. Punjab and Sind Bank etc, 1600-2001, Raj Kumar v. PNB etc., 1639-2001, Bhupinder Pal Singh v. Punjab and Sind Bank, 1646-2001, Surjit Singh v. Punjab and Sind Bank, 1647-2001, Rajinder Singh etc. v. Punjab and Sind Bank, 1735-2001, Inder Pal Singh v. Punjab and Sind Bank, 1742-2001, Kuldeep Singh v. Punjab and Sind Bank, 1770-2001, Ramesh Chand v. Punjab National Bank etc., 1774-2001, Ujjal Singh v. Punjab and Sind Bank, 1782-2001, Manjit Singh v. Punjab and Sind Bank, Karnal, etc., 2285-2001, PK Mahendroo v. Punjab National Bank and others, 2722-2001, Balbir Singh Chadha v. Punjab and Sind Bank 2748-2001, Mohan Lal v. Punjab and Sind Bank 3119-2001, Narinder Singh v. Punjab and Sind Bank etc., 3489-2001, Anil Sanan v. Punjab and Sind Bank etc., 3489-2001, Varinder Kumar Sharma v. State Bank of Patiala and others, 3955-2001, Chander Bhan Khanna v. State Bank of Patiala and others, 4021-2001, Manju Hora v. State Bank of Patiala, 4022-2001, Satish Chander v. State Bank of Patiala, 4023-2001, Praveen Khanna v. State Bank of Patiala, 4024-2001, Tarsem Kumar Salhotra v. State Bank of Patiala, 4025-2001, Raj Kumar v. State Bank of Patiala, 4026-2001, Veena Sharma v. State Bank of Patiala, 4180-2001, Balbir Kaur v. State Bank of Patiala etc., 4184- 2001, Rajeshwar Sahai Mathur v. State Bank of Patiala, 4202-2001, Rajender Parsad Sharma v. State Bank of Patiala, 4232-2001, Krishna Devi v. State Bank of Patiala, 4273-2001, Romesh Chand Kanoji v. State Bank of Patiala and others, 4274-2001, Bakshi Ram v. State Bank of Patiala and others, 4334-2001, Shakuntala Kakkar v. State Bank of Patiala, and others, 4335-2001, Jagir Singh v. State Bank of Patiala and others, 4336-2001, Raj Kumar Singh v. State Bank of Patiala and others, 4337-2001, Meena Kumari Khanna v. State Bank of Patiala and others, 4338-2001, Ram Lal v. State Bank of Patiala and others, 4434-2001, Surinder Nath Sharma v. State Bank of Patiala and others, 4485-2001, Surinder Singh Walia v. State Bank of Patiala, 4486-2001, Gurdev Singh v. State Bank of Patiala, 4526-2001, Tejinder Singh v. State Bank of Patiala, 4543-2001, Kulwinder Singh v. Punjab and Sind Bank, 4647-2001, Mohinder Pal Singh v. Punjab and Sind Bank, Ambala Cantt., 4664-2001, Narinder Paul Singh Kapoor v. Punjab and Sind Bank and others, 4832-2001, Mit Ram v. State Bank of Patiala and others, 4881-2001, Kanwal Nain Singh v. State Bank of Patiala, 4893-2001, Sanjeev Kalra v. State Bank of India, 5043-2001, Subhash Chand Gupta v. Punjab National Bank, 5332-2001, Balbir Singh Chandpuri v. Punjab National Bank, 5339-2001, JV Arora v. The Chiarman of Union Bank of India, 6072-2001, Gurcharan Narang v. State Bank of Patiala etc., 6227-2001, S Chanan Singh Sindhu v. Punjab and Sind Bank and others, 6308-2001, Balbir Singh Mander v. Punjab and Sind Bank etc., 7448-2001, Lakhwinder Singh v. State Bank of Patiala, 7555-2001, Jagteshwar Singh v. Punjab and Sind Bank, 7679-2001, Raminder Singh v. Allahabad Bank etc., 7932-2001, Mohinder Singh v. The Chairman of Allahabad Bank, 9191-2001, Sudesh Kumar Gupta v. State Bank of Patiala, 9237-2001, Dharam Pal Singh v. Punjab National Bank and others, 9684-2001, Kuldip Singh and another v. Punjab and Sind Bank and others, 14325-2001, MP Hallan v. State Bank of India and others, 15686 of 2001, SK Gulati v. State Bank of India, 14865-2001, Ashok Kumar v. Punjab and Sind Bank, 15689-2001, Kewal Krishan Chhabra v. State Bank of India, 19055-2001, Jaswinder Singh v. Punjab National Bank etc., 303-2002, Darshan Singh and another v. Punjab National Bank etc., 1765-2002, Krishan Lal v. State Bank of Patiala etc., and 18044-2001, Darshan Kumar v. State Bank of Patiala etc.  3.
Out of these 81 writ petitions a common prayer made in 71 writ petitions is that a writ in the nature of certiorari be issued and the order vide which the applications of the petitioners for voluntary retirement have been accepted, be quashed and may be treated as having been withdrawn and directions be issued to the respondents to take back the petitioners into service with benefit of continuity of service and to grant them consequential benefits.
4.
In the remaining 10 writ petitions the prayer made by the petitioners is that directions be issued to the respondents to grant them all benefits as per voluntary retirement scheme issued by the respondents.
The fact of these 10 writ petitions will depend upon 71 writ petitions regarding which we have already highlighted the prayer made above.
5.
For the sake of facts we are taking from C.W.P.
No. 4647 of 2001 filed by Shri Mohinder Pal Singh, JMG-I against Punjab and Sind Bank and its officers under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India vide which the petitioner has made a prayer for quashing the order dated 30122000, Annexure P-5, whereby his application for voluntary retirement has been accepted in spite of the fact that the same was withdrawn vide his application dated 27122000 Annexure P-4 which was made before its acceptance.
He has made a prayer that a writ in the nature of mandamus be issued against the respondents to take him into service with continuity of service with all consequential benefits.
6.
The brief facts of the case are that all the petitioners are the employees of different Banks such as Punjab and Sind Bank, State Bank of India, State Bank of Patiala, Punjab National Bank and Allahabad Bank etc.
They applied for voluntary retirement scheme which was floated by the Bank in the year 2000 and the scheme is known as "Voluntary Retirement Scheme-2000".
As per the scheme permanent full time employees of the Bank were eligible to seek voluntary retirement provided they fulfil the eligibility criteria on the date of the filing of their respective applications and the scheme was to remain in operation up to 31122000 and it came into force with effect from 1122000.
It was also the object of the scheme that the employees who opted under that scheme would be granted certain benefits in the shape of ex-gratia amount and certain other payments as per the scheme.
One of the Clauses of the scheme is that it will not be open for the employee to withdraw the request made for voluntary retirement under the scheme after having exercised such option.
The scheme further contains a clause that a mere request of the employee seeking voluntary retirement will not take effect until and unless it is accepted in writing by the competent authority and communicated to respective employee/officer.
The scheme further contains a clause that the competent authority shall have the absolute discretion either to accept or reject the request of the employee seeking voluntary retirement under the scheme depending on the requirement of the Bank.
However, the reasons for rejection of request of an employee shall be recorded in writing by the competent authority.
The acceptance or otherwise of the request of an employee seeking voluntary retirement will be communicated to him in writing as well as to respective Zonal Managers.
By attracting with the clauses of the scheme the petitioner applied for the said scheme.
He submitted his application in the prescribed proforma on 1122000 vide Annexure P-2.
The petitioner alleges that as per condition No. 1020 of the said scheme an employee whose request for voluntary retirement is accepted under the scheme shall be relieved and discharged from Bank's service after three months from the date of the receipt of the application seeking voluntary retirement.
Since he has withdrawn his consent before he was relieved of his duties; therefore, the Bank cannot act upon on his application.
The petitioner further alleges that before this voluntary retirement scheme of 2000, there were statutory regulations called "Pension Regulations 1995".
Clause 29 of the Regulations contains a provision regarding pension, which runs as follows :-  "Clause 29 - Pension on Voluntary Retirement :  (1) On or after the Ist day of November, 1993, at any time after an employee has completed twenty years of qualifying service he may, by giving notice of not less than three months in writing to the appointing authority retire from service.
Provided that this sub-regulation shall not apply to an employee who is on deputation or on study leave abroad unless after having been transferred or having returned to India he has resumed charge of the post in India and has served for a period of not less than one year :  Provided further that this sub-regulation shall not apply to an employee who seeks retirement from service for being absorbed permanent in any autonomous body of a public sector undertaking or company or institution or body, whether incorporated or not to which he is on deputation at the time of seeking voluntary retirement :  Provided that this sub-regulation shall not apply to an employee who is deemed to have retired in accordance with clause (i) of regulation 2.
(2) The notice of voluntary retirement given under sub-regulation (1) shall require acceptance by the appointing authority :  Provided that where the appointing authority does not refuse to grant the permission for retirement before the expiry of the period specified in the said notice, the retirement shall become effective from the date of expiry of the said period.
(3)(a) An employee referred to in sub-regulation (1) may make a request in writing to the appointing authority to accept notice of voluntary retirement of less than three months giving reasons therefor;  (b) On receipt of a request under clause (a), the appointing authority may, subject to the provisions of sub-regulation (2) consider such request for the curtailment of the period of notice of three months on merits and if it is satisfied that the curtailment of the period of notice will not cause any administrative inconvenience, the appointing authority may relax the requirement of notice of three months on the condition that the employee shall not apply for commutation of a part of his pension before the expiry of the notice of three months.
(4) An employee, who has elected to retire under this regulation and has given necessary notice to that effect to the appointing authority shall be precluded from withdrawing his notice except with the specific approval of such authority.
(5) The qualifying service of an employee retiring voluntarily under this regulation shall be increased by a period not exceeding five years, subject to the condition that the total qualifying service rendered by such employee shall not in any case exceed thirty three years and it does not take him beyond the date of superannuation.
(6) The pension of an employee retiring under this regulation shall be based on the average emoluments as defined under clause 10 of regulation 2 of these regulations and the increase, not exceeding five years in his qualifying service, shall not entitle him to any notional fixation of pay for the purpose of calculating his pension".
7.
The petitioner further alleges that as per sub-clause (5) of clause 29 (supra) of the regulations, the qualifying service of the employee retiring voluntarily under this regulation shall be increased for a period of five years subject to the condition that the total qualifying service rendered by such employee shall not in any case exceed 33 years and it does not take him beyond the date of superannuation but in the voluntary retirement scheme of 2000, it has nowhere been stated that for the commutation of pension the bank employees pension regulations will not apply.
Rather, clause No. 7(iv) of the scheme lays down that in addition, an employee seeking voluntary retirement under the scheme will be eligible for all other retirement benefits to which he/she is entitled to under the existing bank rules/regulations/bipartite settlement/award.
8.
The petitioner further makes out the case that after he had opted for the voluntary retirement, the respondent bank issued another staff circular dated 23122000.
According to this circular the benefit of regulation 29 (supra) giving increase in the length of service by five years towards counting of qualifying service shall not be available.
In view of this circular dated 23122002, the petitioner submitted an application dated 27122000 stating therein that if he is not being given the benefit of five years service as stated in clause 29 sub-clause (5) of the Banking Regulations 1995, then his application for voluntary retirement may kindly be treated as withdrawn.
Thus, before the acceptance of his option of the voluntary retirement, the petitioner has already withdrawn the option which he gave earlier but vide order dated 30122000 the application of the petitioner seeking voluntary retirement has been accepted by ignoring the application dated 27122000 whereby he had already withdrawn his option for voluntary retirement.
9.
Now, it is the grouse of the petitioner that since he has already withdrawn his option of voluntary retirement on 27122000 three days earlier to the passing of the impugned order dated 30122000, therefore, the action of the respondent-authorities in passing the order dated 30122000 is contrary to the law.
10.
The above pleas are contained in one set of 71 of writ petitions which are going to be disposed of through this judgment.
11.
In sum of the writ petitions numbering 10 the prayer made by the petitioners is that they should be granted the benefit of five years service as contemplated in Regulation No. 29 of Punjab & Sind Bank Regulations equivalent to Regulation 29 of State Bank of Patiala (Employees) Pension Regulations 1995.
12.
Notice of the writ petitions was given to the respondents.
Joint written statement was filed on behalf of respondents No. 1 to 4.
A preliminary objection was taken that voluntary retirement scheme of 2000 framed by respondent-bank was approved by the Board of Directors.
The Government of India was seized of the problem that in the liberalised economy of the country, the banking system has also to be modernized.
The public sector banks were over-staffed.
The Government of India, Ministry of Finance (Banking Division) advised all the nationalised banks vide their letter dated 2252000 to carry out the man-power planning in order to adopt the measures to have optimum human resources at various levels in keeping with the business strategy as per the requirements of each bank.
It has been further submitted that committees appointed by the Government of India came to the conclusion that most of the banks are over-staffed to the extent of 25%.
Resultantly, the Government called the meeting of the Chief Executives of the Public Sector Banks.
There was a discussion in connection with the problems being faced by the nationalised banks with the Government of India.
The Banks had to be technically more advanced in dealing with the customers.
Modern technology was to be introduced.
Over-staffing was actually one of the matters with which the Government was really concerned.
Resultantly, the committee of Human Resources Management examined the issues being faced by the public sector banks and were asked to suggest certain remedies.
Resultantly, the Government of India observed that the data available with it indicates that 43% of the employees in the public sector banks are in the age group of 46 years and plus and only 12% are in the age of group of 25-35 years and this pattern has serious implication for the banks with reference to mobility, training, development of skills and succession plans for higher level positions.
In order to solve the problems and keeping in view the urgency of the situation the Government placed two schemes including voluntary retirement scheme that would assist the banks in their efforts to optimise their human resources and achieve balanced age and skills.
Indian Banks Association had sought no objection from the Government of circulating the scheme to the Banks for consideration and adoption by their respective boards.
The Government conveyed their decision to the Indian Banking Association that it has no objection to the banks placing the scheme before the respective Boards of Directors for adopting and implementing the scheme.
Thus, the present scheme for voluntary retirement was circulated and it was brought to the notice of all the employees of the Banks.
Finally, the respondent bank i.e. Punjab and Sind Bank circulated the aforesaid scheme to all its offices.
The scheme was circulated after considering the entire matter by the Board of Directors who applied their mind.
The respondents maintain that the present scheme is different from the voluntary retirement as envisaged in the pension regulations of 1995.
The voluntary retirement under the present scheme is not covered under any of the provisions of the pension regulations.
Through the present scheme the desired effect of reducing manpower has been achieved by the present bank as well as by the other Banks.
The respondents denied that through a subsequent circular certain benefits have been withdrawn.
It was also maintained by the respondents that the special voluntary retirement scheme of 2000 is totally different from the voluntary retirement envisaged in the pension regulations.
As per regulation No. 29, an optee desirous of getting voluntary retirement after completing 20 years of service is supposed to give a notice to the Bank and on acceptance he is relieved from service and in such a situation a maximum period of five years can be added to the service for computation of pension.
This provision cannot be made applicable in the case of employee opting for voluntary retirement under the special scheme as in this scheme the employees who have completed 15 years of service are eligible to opt for the same and further they are eligible to get more monetary benefits in the form of ex-gratia compensation over and above their terminal dues.
Thus, the respondents maintained that the present voluntary retirement scheme of 2000 is an independent package containing all terms and conditions.
The Staff Regulations No. 28 and 29 are meant for different purpose and cannot be intermingled with the present voluntary retirement scheme.
It is also the stand of the respondents that as per the special scheme once an employee exercised that option and decides to take the benefit of the special scheme, it is not open to him to withdraw his request after exercising his option.
Since the petitioner has accepted the offer, it is not open to him to withdraw the same.
Moreover, the petitioner would be deemed to have waived his right to withdraw his option once exercised.
The petitioner had carefully read and understood the conditions of the scheme before he applied.
It was a unconditional and irrevocable acceptance.
The averment of the petitioner that as per clause No. 105 of the scheme floated by the Punjab and Sind Bank the request for voluntary retirement will not take effect until and unless accepted by the competent authority in writing, is totally misconceived, misread and is based on erroneous reading of the provisions of the scheme.
The present scheme cannot be rendered infructuous.
The Bank had the discretion to reject and accept the request of the employee seeking voluntary retirement.
Similarly, the employee had absolute discretion either to submit or not to submit the application under the voluntary retirement scheme of 2000 but once he has exercised the option the provision contained in para 104 of the scheme comes into existence and the petitioner had no right to withdraw the same after having carefully read, understood and accepted the same unconditionally and irrevocably waiving his right if any available to him under the law.
13.
On merits, the stand of the respondents is that pension regulation of 1995 has no applicability.
The present scheme is a complete and comprehensive scheme in itself and that the petitioner cannot be permitted to derive any benefit from the pension regulations of 1995 which are altogether different and have no relevance to the present scheme.
It was further pleaded by the respondents that as per clause 104 once the employee opts for voluntary retirement scheme he cannot be permitted to withdraw from the same.
The petitioner gave an undertaking that he will be bound by the terms and conditions of the scheme and would abide by the same.
Denying each and every material averments of the writ petition, the respondents prayed for the dismissal of the writ petition.
14.
The petitioner has supplemented its writ petition by placing only five documents, which are Annexures P-1, P-2, P-3, P-4 and P-5.
15.
Annexure P-1 is a very material document for our purposes and it will be useful for us if we incorporate the contents of Annexure P-1 in verbatim in the present judgment for proper appreciation of the contentions raised by the counsel for the parties.
"PSB Employees Voluntary Retirement Scheme-2000 1.
Object.
A Scheme to adopt measures to have optimum human resources at various levels in keeping with the business strategies, skill profits to achieve balanced age and requirement of the bank.
2.
Name of the scheme.
The Scheme shall be called AND mean as "PSB Employees Voluntary Retirement Scheme-2000."
3.
Definition.
In the Scheme, unless the context otherwise requires :  31 "Bank" shall mean Punjab and Sind Bank.
32 "Competent Authority" shall mean a competent authority as prescribed under para 9 of this Scheme.
33 "Employee" shall mean an officer under PSB (Officers) Service Regulations 1982 and a Workman employee of the bank whose service conditions are governed by the provisions of Awards/Bipartite Settlement.
34 "Salary" shall mean Basic pay + Stagnation increments + Special pay (where applicable) + Dearness Allowance.
35 All other words and expressions used in this scheme shall carry the same meaning as defined in the rules/regulations governing the service conditions of the officers/workman Employees respectively.
4.
Operation of the Scheme :  The Scheme shall remain in operation for the period specified by the Board.
It is one time scheme, which shall remain in operation presently from Ist December, 2000 to 31st December, 2000 in terms of Board approval.
5.
Eligibility  51.
All permanent full time employees to the bank will be eligible to seek voluntary retirement under the scheme provided they meet the following eligibility criteria on the date of application :-  a) they have completed 15 years of service  OR (b) 40 years of age.
52.
However, the employees falling in the following categories are not eligible to seek voluntary retirement under the scheme :-  a) Specialist Officer/Workmen employees who have executed service bonds and have not completed it;  b) Employees serving abroad under special arrangements/bonds;  c) Employees against whom disciplinary proceedings are contemplated/pending or who are under suspension or against whom criminal proceedings are contemplated/pending;  d) Employees appointed on contract basis;  e) Highly skilled and qualified employees who have been given the specialized training in the area of credit, foreign exchange, investment and information technology etc.;  f) Any other category of employees as may be specified by the Board.
6.
Amount of Ex-Gratia.
An employee seeking voluntary retirement under the Scheme will be entitled to the ex-gratia amount mentioned below in para (a) or (b) whichever is less :-  (a) 60 days (salary pay plus stagnation increments plus special pay plus dearness relief) for each completed year of service :  OR (b) Salary for the number of years service left.
7.
Other Benefits.
An employee seeking retirement under the scheme will be eligible for the following benefits in addition to the ex-gratia amount mentioned in para 6 above of this scheme :-  (i) Gratuity as per payment of Gratuity Act, 1972 or Gratuity payable under the Service Rules as the case may be as per existing rules :  (ii) A pension (including commutated values of pension) as per PSB (Employees) Pension Regulation 1995.
OR (B) Bank's contribution towards PF as per existing rules.
(iii) Leave encashment as per existing rules.
(iv) Any other retirement benefit under the existing rules.
8.
Mode of Payment.
The amount of ex-gratia payable to an employee under this scheme shall be as under :-  The 50 per cent of the amount of ex-gratia shall be paid instant cash :  The remaining 50 per cent of the amount of ex-gratia will be paid in the form of Bond issued by the Bank for a period of 5 years.
The said bonds shall bear 10 per cent interest per annum to be paid to an employee on half yearly basis subject to deduction of tax at source in terms of income tax Rules.
9.
Competent Authority :  The competent authority to accept voluntary retirement of an employee under the Scheme would be as under :-  Working Staff General Manager(Personnel) Officers in JMGs-I Committee of three MMGS-II and MMGS-II General Managers.
Officers in Grade Scale IV and V Executive Director Officers in Grade Scale VI and VII Chairman and Managing Director (if post of CMD is not filled by the Government ED will be the Competent Authority).
10.
General Conditions  101.
Only completed years of service will be reckoned for arriving at the minimum eligible service.
102.
Fraction of service of 6 months and above will be reckoned as one year for the purpose of calculating ex-gratia.
Fraction of service less than 6 months will be ignored for the purpose of calculating ex-gratia.
103.
The 60 days salary would be treated as equivalent to 2 months salary and the compensation would be calculated on the basis of last salary drawn by an employee/officer.
104.
It will not be open for an employee to withdraw the request made for voluntary retirement under the scheme after having exercised such option.
105.
A mere request of an employee seeking voluntary retirement under the Scheme will not take effect until and unless it is accepted in writing by the competent authority and communicated to respective employee/officer.
106.
The competent authority shall have absolute discretion either to accept or reject the request of an employee seeking voluntary retirement under the scheme depending upon the requirement of their bank.
The reasons for rejection of request of an employee seeking voluntary retirement shall be recorded in writing by the competent authority.
Acceptance or otherwise of the request of an employee seeking voluntary retirement will be communicated to him in writing as well as to respective Zonal Manager.
a) The employee who is not satisfied with the decision of the competent authority for rejection of his application can make an appeal within 15 days of intimation of rejection from the competent authority to the appellate authority mentioned hereunder :-  Staff  Appellate Authority Workmen Committee of 3 GMs (P) Officers in Gr.
I, II and III and IV and V Executive Director CMD (if the post of CMD is not filled up to the Committee to two Directors and ED).
Grade VI and VII Board of Directors.
b) The appellate authority will decide the appeal and communicate its decision to the appellant within 30 days of the receipt of the appeal.
c) All the appeals shall be addressed to Appellate Authority mentioned hereinabove but sent to Shri R.S.
Sareen, GM (P) Head Office 21 Bank House Rajindra Place New Delhi 110008 by registered post for necessary action.
107.
The Ex-gratia payable under this scheme will be computed as on date of relieving of an employee.
108.
For the purpose of this scheme the age, period of service an employee will be reckoned in terms of the date of birth, date of joining as per the records of the bank which shall be treated as correct and final and no application for any change in this regard will be considered.
109.
All employees under the Scheme and any other benefit payable to an employee will be subject to the prior settlement/repayment in full of loans, advances returning of bank's property and any other outstanding due against him and payable by him to the bank.
1010.
An employee who would seek voluntary retirement under this scheme will not be eligible for re-employment in the bank.
1011.
All payments made under the Scheme shall be subject to the deduction of tax at source as per Income Tax Act 1961 wherever applicable.
1012.
In the event of death of an employee, whose request for voluntary retirement under the Scheme has been accepted, the ex-gratia which would have become due and payable to the deceased employee will be paid to the person nominated by him in the request/application to receive such dues.
1013.
The benefits payable under this scheme shall be in full and final settlement of all claims of whatsoever nature.
Whether arising under the Scheme otherwise to employee (or to his nominee in case of death).
An employee who voluntarily retired under this Scheme will not have any claim against the bank whatsoever nature and no demand or dispute or difference will be raised by him or on his behalf.
Whether for re-employment or compensation or back wages including employment of any of his relative on compassionate grounds in the service of the bank or for any other benefit whatsoever.
1014.
The vacancies caused by voluntary retirement shall not filled up by new recruitment.
1015.
The ex-gratia payable to an employee on opting for voluntary retirement under the scheme would be paid to him within 45 days from the date of his relieving from Bank's service.
1016.
An employee who as in officer cadre and opts for voluntary retirement under this scheme will be eligible for retention of residential accommodation provided to him by the bank or leased accommodation as per the existing rules as applicable to the officers who retire on attaining the age of superannuation for a period of two months but in such case the amount payable to him under the scheme will be released after a period of said two months and on his vacation of residential accommodation.
1017.
An employee who is in officer cadre and opts for voluntary retirement under this scheme will also be eligible for payment of TA/DA and purchase of Bank's furniture in accordance with the existing rules applicable to the officers who retire on attaining the age of superannuation.
1018.
An employee seeking voluntary retirement under this scheme will have an option to convert his outstanding housing loan to the loan available at prime lending rate of the bank.
1019.
Pension optee seeking VRS will have an option to convert his outstanding staff conveyance loan to loan available at prime lending rate.
However, in case of PF optees, the same has to be adjusted out of retirement benefits being received by the employee.
1020.
An employee, whose request for voluntary retirement has been accepted under this Scheme, shall be relieved and discharged from Bank's services after three months from the date of receipt of application seeking voluntary retirement under the Scheme.
1021.
The application for voluntary retirement of the employee against whom disciplinary proceedings are contemplated/pending or who is under suspension or against whom criminal proceedings are contemplated/pending and opts for voluntary retirement under the scheme shall be considered by the competent authority appropriately having regard to the facts and seriousness of the each case and in case the competent authority decides that the request of any such employee for voluntary retirement is accepted/not accepted the same shall be communicated to the employee in writing.
1022.
The bank reserves the right to withdraw this scheme at any time it thinks fit and its decision in this respect will be final.
The Bank has absolute discretion of accepting/rejecting the applications or scrap the scheme altogether in such a case.
11.
Procedure.
111.
An employee/officer, who intends to seek voluntary retirement under the Scheme should submit duly completed application in duplicate on the prescribed format (Annexure A or A.1 to the Scheme as it may be) directly to Shri US Kohli Dy.
General Manager (P) Personnel Department, 21 Rajendra Place New Delhi in the envelope marked offer to seek voluntary retirement by registered post and shall also submit a copy of said application at the office where he is presently posted for onward submission to the Personnel Department.
12.
Interpretation  In case of any doubt or difficulty in the interpretation of the norms and conditions or meaning or with regard to calculation of the quantum of any benefit under this scheme and payment thereof, the decision of Banks shall be final and binding on all concerned."
Annexure P-2 is the letter dated 1122000 through which the petitioner sought voluntary retirement and para No. 2 of this letter can be reproduced for advantage :  "I accept the terms and conditions stipulated in PSB Employees Voluntary Retirement Scheme-2000 unconditionally and irrevocably".
16.
Annexure P-3 is another circular issued by the Bank.
It was issued under the signatures of General Manager (Personal) of the Personnel Department of New Delhi in continuation of circular No. 2585 dated 28.102000.
A reading of the circular would show that a suggestion was given for amendment in Staff Regulation No. 28 of 1995 and a proviso was proposed to the effect that the benefit of the scheme in the matter of pension shall also be granted to an employee who opts to retire before attaining the age of superannuation but after having served for a minimum period of 15 years in terms of any scheme that may be framed for the purpose by Bank's Board with the concurrence of the Government.
17.
Annexure P-4 is the letter dated 27122000 written by the petitioner Shri Mohinderpal Singh through which he wanted to withdraw his request for voluntary retirement earlier made by him and Annexure P-5 is the impugned order of Civil Writ Petition No. 4647 of 2001 through which the request of the petitioner for voluntary retirement was accepted by the competent authority with immediate effect and the petitioner was directed not to report for duty henceforth.
The petitioner was also advised and intimated that his retiral dues and ex-gratia amount would be paid to him subject to the fulfilment of the certain conditions.
18.
The respondents have also filed documents Annexures R-1 to R-4.
19.
Annexure R-1 is letter dated 5101988 vide which the Department of Bureau of Public Enterprises had issued the letter to all Chief Executives of the Public Enterprises and others intimating them that Government had been considering for quite sometime the introduction of a voluntary retirement scheme for the employees of public sector enterprises with a view to reduce surplus man-power and after the consideration it has been decided that public sector enterprises could introduce a voluntary retirement scheme on certain conditions as set forth in the said circular Annexure R-1.
20.
Annexure R-2 is a DO letter dated 512.1995 issued under the signatures of Shri Paramjit Singh Deputy Secretary to the Chairman Indian Banks Association vide which the latter was made aware that a committee was set up by the Reserve Bank of India to look into the recruitment methods and practices in the public sector Banks and Government has taken a decision to accept the recommendations of the committee set forth in the said DO letter.
21.
Annexure R-3 is again a DO letter issued under the signatures of Shekhar Aggarwal Joint Secretary and the same is addressed to the Chairman and Managing Director of Punjab and Sind Bank in which an idea of introducing the voluntary retirement scheme is given which was adopted as back as in the year 1988.
22.
Annexure R-4 is also a DO letter dated 2252000 issued under the signatures of Shri UP Singh Director in the name of Shri SD Narang Executive Director of Punjab & Sind Bank vide which it was requested to carry out the exercise for manpower planning on priority basis and Mr. Narang was also requested to send the plan as approved by the Board of Directors to the Government by a particular date.
23.
We may not refer to the other documents of the various writ petitions in the present judgment as we would like to avoid the duplicacy but we have certainly made a mention of the material documents on which the fate of the writ petitions can be decided one way or the other.
24.
We have heard the various counsel appearing on behalf of the parties in the present writ petitions but the main arguments were advanced by Shri PS Patwalia appearing on behalf of the petitioner of C.W.P.
No. 4647 of 2001 and Shri H.L.
Sibal, Sr. Advocate, who appeared on behalf of the respondents.
Assistance from the side of the petitioners has also been given to us by Shri KS Ahluwalia and Shri HC Arora, Advocate and similarly from the side of the respondents assistance has also been given by S/Shri HN Mehtani, SP Laler, GS Bajwa and Ashok Gupta Advocates and with their assistance we have gone through the record of the case.
25.
The controversy in hand is of national importance.
The petitioners are the employees of the nationalised banks which were acquired and transferred by the Government of India through the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertaking) Act 1970 and State Bank of Patiala Subsidiary Act, 1959.
Earlier to this, the Bank institutions were governed by the Companies Act.
For our purposes there are certain sections which require interpretation in the light of the scheme framed by the different respondent banks.
Section 7 which forms part of Chapter IV of the said Act of 1970 lays down as follows :-  "7.
Head office and management - (1) The head office of each corresponding new bank shall be at such place as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf, and, until any such place is so specified, shall be at such place at which the head office of the existing bank, in relation to which it is the corresponding new bank, is on the commencement of this Act, located.
(2) The general superintendence, direction and management of the affairs and business of a corresponding new bank shall vest in a Board of Directors which shall be entitled to exercise all such powers and do all such acts and things as the corresponding new bank is authorised to exercise and do.
(3) (a) As soon as may be after the appointed day, the Central Government shall, in consultation with the Reserve Bank, constitute the first Board of Directors of a corresponding new bank, consisting of not more than seven persons to be appointed by the Central Government, and every director so appointed shall hold office until the Board of Directors of such corresponding new bank is constituted in accordance with the scheme made under section 9 :  Provided that the Central Government may, if it is of opinion that it is necessary in the interests of the corresponding new bank so to do, remove a person from the membership of the first Board of Directors and appoint any other person in his place.
(b) Every member of the first Board of Directors (not being an officer of the Central Government or of the Reserve Bank) shall receive such remuneration as is equal to the remuneration which a member of the Board of Directors of the existing bank was entitled to receive immediately before the commencement of this Act.
(4) Until the first Board of Directors is appointed by the Central Government under sub-section (3), the general superintendence, direction and management of the affairs and business of a corresponding new bank shall vest in a Custodian who shall be the Chief Executive Officer of that bank and may exercise all powers and do all acts and things as may be exercised or done by that bank.
(5) The Chairmam of an existing bank holding office as such immediately before the commencement of this Act, shall be the Custodian of the corresponding new bank and shall receive the same emoluments as he was receiving immediately before such commencement :  Provided that the Central Government may, if the Chairman of an existing bank declines to become, or to continue to function as, a Custodian of the corresponding new bank, or, if it is of opinion that it is necessary in the interests of the corresponding new bank so to do, appoint any other person as the Custodian of a corresponding new bank and the Custodian so appointed shall receive such emoluments as the Central Government may specify in this behalf.
(6) The custodian shall hold office during the pleasure of the Central Government."
26.
According to Section 8 of the Act every corresponding new Bank shall, in the discharge of its functions be guided by such directions in regard to matters of policy involving public interests as the Central Government may, after consultation with the Governor of Reserve Bank of India give.
27.
Section 9 gives power to Central Government to make scheme after consultation with Reserve Bank of India for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
28.
Section 19 of the Act deals with the power of the Board to make regulations and it lays down as follows:-  "The Board of Directors of a corresponding new bank may after consultation with the Reserve Bank and with the previous sanction of the Central Government by notification in the official gazette make regulations, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act or any scheme made thereunder to provide for all matters for which provision is expedient for the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Act."
Sub-clause (2) of Section 19 lays down as under :-  "In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, the regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters namely :-  (a) ......................  (b)........................  (c)........................  (d)........................  (e)........................  (f) The establishment and maintenance of superannuation, pension, provident or other funds for the benefit of officers or other employees of the corresponding new bank or of the dependants of such officers or other employees and the granting of superannuation allowance, annuities and pensions payable out of such funds.
(g)....................  (h)...................  (i)....................  (j)....................  (k)....................  (l)....................  (m)....................  (3)...................  (4) Every regulation shall, as soon as may be after it is made under this Act by the Board of Directors of a corresponding new bank, be forwarded to the Central Government and that Government shall cause a copy of the same to be laid before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive session aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the regulation or both Houses agree that the regulation should not be made, the regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so, however, that nay such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that regulation."
29.
After quoting the above provision now we have to examine the Voluntary Retirement Scheme of 2000 floated by the different Banks.
The object of the VRS is the same.
By examining the provisions of Section 7 sub-clause (2), we will be abundantly clear that the general superintendence, direction and management of the affairs and business of a corresponding new bank shall vest in a Board of Directors which is entitled to exercise all such powers and to do all such acts and things as the corresponding new bank is authorised to exercise and do.
Thus, there is no difficulty in our mind to hold that the Board of Directors has the power to float a scheme including the voluntary retirement scheme but at the same time we cannot ignore the fact that before introducing of this scheme, the employees of the various banks were governed by the provisions of their staff regulations and Punjab and Sind Bank (Employees) Pension Regulations were also in force.
As per Chapter V of the said regulations of 1995 and vide Clauses 28 and 29, there is a provision for superannuation pension and pension on voluntary retirement.
A reading of clause 28 of Punjab and Sind Bank (Employees) Pension Regulations, 1995, would show that superannuation pension shall be granted to an employee who has retired on his attaining the age of superannuation specified in the Service Regulation or Settlements.
Similarly, there is a scheme of voluntary retirement in the said staff regulations and on seeking voluntary retirement by an employee the guidelines of the pension are given.
As per clause 29 on or after the first date of November, 1993, at any time after an employee has completed twenty years of qualifying service he may give notice of three months in writing expressing his desire to retire from services.
Then there are other clauses such as sub-clause (5) of Regulation 29, which lays down that the qualifying service of an employee retiring voluntarily under this regulation shall be increased by a period not exceeding five years subject to the condition that total qualifying service rendered by such employee shall not in any case exceed 33 years and it does not take him beyond the date of superannuation.
As per sub-clause (6) of regulation 29 the pension of an employee retiring under this regulation shall be based on the average emoluments as defined under clause (d) of Regulation 2 of these regulations and the increase not exceeding five years in his qualifying service shall not entitle him to any notional fixation of pay for the purpose of calculating his pension.
30.
Shri Hira Lal Sibal, Sr. Advocate, appearing on behalf of the respondent banks vehemently submitted that VRS - 2000 is a complete scheme in itself.
It is a special one time offer.
As per clause 104 the moment an employee accepts the offer of the Bank which is in the shape of a golden hand shake, he cannot wriggle out from his unconditional and irrevocable acceptance.
Mr. Sibal even submitted that his scheme was framed with a object to reduce the surplus man power of the Banks and that was the reason that many advantages and privileges were extended attracting the employees who wanted to take the benefit of VRS Certain advantages were such that had they remained in their service in the ordinary course they would not have got it.
By giving one time benefit to the employees, the object of the bank was to reduce the man power.
With open mind the petitioners had accepted the terms of VRS and now they cannot take a somersault on untenable ground.
Moreover, the excuse of the petitioner in the garb of Annexure P-3 has no meaning because this document was only a proposal for adding proviso in regulation 28 of the Punjab and Sind Bank (Employees) Regulations 1995.
It has never attained the finality on account of the procedure supposed to be adopted as per Section 19 sub-clause (1) and sub-clause (4).
Therefore, the order Annexure P-5 cannot be set aside or quashed.
Mr. Sibal also maintained that the present VRS is totally independent from the staff Regulations.
It has been floated by the Board of Directors of the Bank in exercise of their powers vested in them under Section 7 sub-clause (2) and the scheme pertains to the management of the affairs and business of the Bank.
The moment the clauses of the scheme have been accepted by the employees, they cannot be allowed to say that they have the right to withdraw their acceptance in view of alleged changed circumstance Annexure P-3 or on the plea that the acceptance has not been acted upon.
Mr. Sibal in support of his contention relied upon para No. 104, 105 and 106 of the scheme quoted above and submitted that by virtue of clause 104 it is not open for the employee to withdraw the request made by him for voluntary retirement once he has exercised his option.
So far as the employee is concerned, the contract is complete which is in the nature of a special contract.
It is not the case of any of the petitioners that this contract is unconscionable or against the public policy.
As per clause 105 the right is with the management to accept or reject the option exercised by the employee and clause 106 also gives the absolute discretion to the Board of Directors or its delegated authority to accept or reject the request of an employee seeking voluntary retirement under the scheme depending upon the requirement of the Bank.
No duress or coercion was ever exercised by the bankers upon any of the petitioners to exercise their option.
Once they have accepted the offer of the Bank.
It will be most inequitable on their part to withdraw it and it will be equally inequitable on the part of the law Courts to allow the petitioners to back out from their confirm commitment and promise which has taken a shape of the contract.
31.
It was also the frontal argument of Mr. Sibal that the policy of the Bank is a high public policy.
It had a laudable object to achieve.
Law Courts are not expert and they should not interfere with such policy which can be parallel with Regulations No. 28 and 29 of the Pension Regulations.
It should be the approach on the part of the law Courts to go for a validity of the policy/scheme, rather than to upset it until and unless it is unconstitutional and prohibited by law or it violates any provision of law.
The learned counsel for the respondents has also placed reliance on various judgments of the Hon'ble Supreme Court as well as the High Courts which we will discuss in the latter portion of this judgment.
32.
In short, the submission of Mr. Sibal was that the present voluntary scheme of 2000 is a sort of special concession and a special contract totally unrelated with Section 19 of the Act and no compliance of Section 19 sub- clause (1) or sub-clause (4) is required to be made.
33.
On the other hand the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioners vehemently submitted that there is a legal flaw in the frame of the scheme as it has not complied with the statutory provisions of Section 19 sub-clause (1) and sub-clause (4) of the Act of 1970.
The scheme cannot be implemented without fulfilling the conditions of statutory provisions.
The scheme is in the nature of providing special provisions relating to the pension and at any rate it has the effect of modifying or nullifying the effect of Regulations 28 and 29 of the Pension Regulations of 1995 of Punjab and Sind Bank and till those regulations get the statutory approval as required under Section 19 Sub-clause (1) and sub-clause (4), the very scheme is bad and illegal because it is prohibited by law.
It was also the argument of the learned counsel for the petitioners that at any rate the scheme was nothing but an invitation of offer which has been given.
The scheme has the effect of cessation of contract of service and before the cessation is complete the employee has the right to withdraw the same and any clause restricting the right of the employee is bad in the eyes of law and against the public policy and forbidden by law.
The general principles of resignation are equally applicable in the case of a voluntary retirement because the effect in both the eventualities is the same i.e. the cessation of service conditions.
Till the offer is acted upon and till the petitioners are relieved from their services they had the right to withdraw from offer irrespective of the fact that it may be written in the invitation of offer that once the employees exercise their option they will not be permitted to withdraw the same.
In the present case, the mere offer of the petitioners does not become a concluded contract as acceptance was left with the management.
The offer of voluntary retirement was to become effective on a subsequent date and till it is approved and becomes effective and communicated to the petitioners, the latter had the right to withdraw which they did.
It was also the argument of the learned counsel for the petitioners that since the scheme has not undergone the rigour of Section 19 sub-clause (1) and sub-clause (4) of Section 19, therefore, the object of the scheme is forbidden by law.
It restricts the general law of the land when it incorporates the provision that employee is not entitled to withdraw his offer once he opts for the same.
The clause of finality and irrevocability is bad.
Reliance was also placed by the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioners to various judgments regarding which we will also make a mention in the subsequent portion of this judgment.
34.
We have examined the submissions of the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents very carefully in the light of the provisions of the scheme and in the light of the staff regulations of 1995 and we are of the considered opinion that the contentions put forth by the learned counsel for the respondents may look alluring at the first instance but on our deeper scrutiny these are totally devoid of any merit.
35.
The VRS - 2000 is Annexure P-1 and the reading of the same would show that as per Para 51, the scheme has been made applicable to all permanent full time employees of the Bank who had completed 15 years of service or who have attained the age of 40 years.
This Scheme apart from granting ex-gratia as per clause 6, has also granted to the employee seeking voluntary retirement under the scheme, gratuity as per the Gratuity Act or gratuity payable under the service rules and also a pension including commuted values of pension as per PSB (Employees) Pension Regulations 1995.
So much so it has also extended the benefit of bank's contribution towards PF and the benefit of leave encashment.
Not only this, it has also granted all other retiral benefits under the existing rules.
Before the introduction of the scheme the employees of the Banks are governed by the Staff Regulation Rules known by different nomenclature as per the name of the Bank itself.
36.
Reverting to the Punjab & Sind Bank (Employees) Pension Regulations 1995, there are two important rules regarding pension : one is contained in regulation 28 which talks of superannuation pension and it is admissible to those employees who have retired on their attaining age of superannuation.
As per clause 51 the employees are entitled to VRS benefits under the scheme even before attaining the age of superannuation i.e. after completing 15 years of service or at the age of 40.
Thus, rule 51. is totality a modification of Regulation 28.
Similarly Regulation 29 talks of voluntary retirement for which there is a total different procedure.
Even as per this regulation, it is necessary that employees who wants to opt for voluntary retirement under Chapter V of the Regulations of 1995 is supposed to complete 20 years of qualifying service and he has also to give notice of three months.
Further this regulation permits the benefit of five years service.
According to Section 19 sub-clause (1), if the Board of Directors want to make any Regulation not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act relating to the establishment and maintenance of superannuation pension, provident fund or other benefits for the benefit of the officers or other employees, the grant of superannuation, allowances, annuities and pensions payable out of such funds, in such a situation they require consultation of the Reserve Bank of India, previous sanction of the Central Government and notification in this regard.
Not only this, every regulation as per the provision of sub-section (4) has to be sent to the Central Government which shall cause a copy of the same to be laid before the House of Parliament while it is in Session for a total period of 30 days.
Nothing has been done in this case.
We all know that when a thing is required to be done in a particular manner because it gets the validity of an action, it must be done in the same manner and in no other manner.
The administrative decision of the Board which they were competent to take under Section 7(2) of Act of 1970 requires the approval of the Central Government and Reserve Bank of India and that of the Parliament, such actions cannot be approved or enforced or acted upon unilaterally by taking a decision at the level of Board of Directors.
We are not in agreement with the contention raised by the learned counsel for the respondents that the Scheme did not require the approval under Section 19 sub-clause (1) or sub-clause (4).
The reason being is that scheme itself introduces very vital aspects such as grant of ex-gratia, grant of pension as is evident from clause 7 sub- clauses (1) and (2).
We have already reproduced above this very clause in the earlier portion of this judgment.
At the cost of repetition it can be said that apart from the benefits as mentioned in clause 6, as per this scheme, an employee seeking voluntary retirement is also eligible to gratuity under the Gratuity Act or gratuity payable under the service Rules; a pension including commuted value of pension as per the pension regulation 1995 or the bank contribution towards Provident Fund as per the existing rules; leave encashment and all other retiral benefits under the pensionary rules.
These provisions could only be made by the Board of Directors after the compliance of provision of Section 19 sub-clause (1) and sub-clause (4).
Therefore, a scheme which does not fulfil the legal test, in our view, is a bad scheme altogether as it hits the statutory provisions.
Action of the Board of Directors in floating the scheme without adhering or respecting the provisions of Section 19 sub-clause (1) and sub-clause (4), is prohibited by law.
37.
Still further in our opinion the clause of VRS is an exception to clauses 28 and 29 of the Pension Regulations quoted above.
Regulation 28, which deals with superannuation pension, is permissible only to those employees who have retired on their attaining the age of proposed superannuation specified in the service regulations or settlements.
As the scheme has made eligible the employees who had completed 15 years service or more, therefore, the Bank became wiser and issued a circular Annexure P-3 which runs as follows :-  "PUNJAB & SIND BANK Personnel Deptt.
21, Rajendra Place,  New Delhi-110008  Staff Circulatory letter No. 2031 December 23, 2000.
All Branches/Controlling Offices.
Reg.
PSB Employees Voluntary Retirement Scheme, 2000  ......
This is in continuation of staff Circular No. 2585 dated 28.102000.
We have received a letter from IBA under reference PD/CIR/76/42/G4/1529 dated 11122000 wherein they have advised certain amendment to bank (Employees) Pension Regulations, 1995.
Text of the same is appended below for the information of staff members.
As per the scheme, an employee who is eligible and applies for voluntary retirement is entitled for the benefit of CPF, Pension, Gratuity and encashment of accumulated privilege leave, as per rules.
Bank (Employees) Pension Regulations, 1995 do not have provisions enabling payment of pension to an employee who retires before attaining the age of superannuation except under circumstances as in Regulations 29, 30 and 33, we had, therefore, taken up with the Government the need to incorporate necessary provisions in the Pension Regulations by way of amendment to Regulation 28 so that employees who retire as above under special/ad hoc scheme formulated by the banks, after serving for a period minimum period would be eligible for pro-rata pension.
Government of India has after examining the proposal conveyed its approval and desired that IBA advise banks to make necessary amendments to their pension Regulations as given below.
We request banks to take note accordingly.
Please note that with the above amendments, employees who apply for voluntary retirement after having rendered a minimum of 15 years of service under a special/ad hoc scheme formulated with the specific approval of the Government and the Board of Directors will be eligible for pro-rata pension for the period of service rendered as if they are to retire on attaining the age of superannuation on that date.
Existing regulation 28 of the Bank Employees Pension Regulations, 1995 Proposed Regulation 28 of the Bank Employees Pension Regulations, 1995, Superannuation pension Superannuation pension Superannuation pension shall be granted to an employee who has retired on the attaining the age of superannuation specified in the service Regulations or Settlements.
Superannuation pension shall be granted to an employee who has retired on the attaining the age of superannuation specified in the service regulations or Settlements.
Provided that, pension shall also be granted to an employee who opts to retire before attaining the age of superannuation, but after having served for a minimum period of 15 years in terms of any Scheme that may be framed for the purpose of the Bank's Board with the concurrence of the Government".
38.
The reading of the above would show that a vital proviso is being proposed to Regulation 28 so as to bring this regulation in conformity with the Scheme so that the employees with 15 years service may be able to get the benefit of the proposed scheme for the purpose of pension etc.
It is true that the proposal has not been finalised so far but it has to take effect so that the employees with 15 years service may get the benefit of the pension regulations.
Still further the proposed scheme is an exception to Regulation 29 and for this reason the provision of Section 19 sub-clause (1) and sub- clause (4) are required to be complied with.
39.
Clause 7 (ii) talks of other benefits.
It says that employees seeking voluntary retirement will be eligible to a pension including commuted values of pension as per PSB Employees Pension Regulations 1995.
There is only one regulation i.e. Regulation No. 29 which talks of voluntary retirement.
In other words, we will not be wrong if we say that through this scheme the bankers wanted to incorporate the provision of Clause 29 of the regulations in the present scheme for the benefit of the employees.
To elaborate this point further the employees who ask for VRS under the proposed scheme will be entitled of all the benefits which an employee would get if he applies for VRS under the Pension Regulations 1995.
This pension regulation gives an advantage of five years of service.
The persons who opt for VRS under proposed scheme of 2000 would be deprived of this vital advantage of five years and in order to deprive them to this advantage, and to give them the benefit of ex-gratia the statutory stamp as mentioned in section 19 sub-clause (1) and sub-clause (4) is required which has not been done by the bankers before floating the scheme.
During the course of arguments even the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the bankers admitted before us that bankers are not going to give any additional advantage of five years service to a person who opts under the VRS scheme of 2000.
Before it could be framed, it required not only consultation with the Reserve Bank and the previous sanction of the Central Government but it is also incumbent that a copy of the same should be laid before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a period of 30 days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions and only after both the Houses had agreed to make the notification the same be accepted as a valid modification of the previous Regulations and since admittedly this has not been done, therefore, the Scheme could not have made operative.
40.
Now we will deal with the case law which was relied upon by the counsel for the respondents.
The first judgment relied upon is Jit Ram v. HP State Handicrafts and Handloom Corporation, 1996(4) RSJ 78 and our attention was invited to paras No. 10 and 11 of this judgment which are reproduced as under:-  "10.
A perusal of Annexure R-2, vide which the Voluntary Retirement Scheme was made applicable to the employees of the respondent-corporation and options for voluntary retirement under the scheme were invited, there is a specific condition that the option once exercised would be final and the employee having once exercised the option, would have no right to withdraw the same.
In view of such specific condition contained in the Scheme, it was not open to the petitioner to withdraw his option for voluntary retirement at a subsequent stage.
Therefore, the respondent-corporation was justified in rejecting the request made by the petitioners vide his letter dated 17.51993 Annexure P-4 withdrawing his earlier option seeking pre-mature retirement from service.
11.
In view of our decision that the Voluntary Retirement Scheme is applicable to the employees of the respondent-Corporation and that the petitioners having opted for voluntary retirement under the Scheme, is not entitled to withdraw such an option, the other point raised by the learned counsel for the petitioners that the petitioner is governed by Bye-Laws framed by the respondent-Corporation with regard to his conditions of service loses its force and we need not go in to the said question".
41.
It was even stated at the bar by the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents that against the order of Himachal Pradesh High Court, the SLP was filed which was dismissed on 26.4.1994 in Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No. 9438 of 1996.
42.
Yet reliance was placed on AIR 1978 SC 694, Union of India v. Gopal Chander and others, and our attention was invited to relevant portion of para No. 51 of the judgment which lay down as follows :-  "It will bear repetition that the general principle is that in the absence of a legal, contractual or constitutional bar, a "prospective" resignation can be withdraw at any time before it becomes effective and it becomes effective when it operates to terminate the employment or the office tenure of the resignor.
43.
There is no dispute with the preposition of law but in the present case, the option has been withdrawn before the offer became effective.
In order to constitute a valid contract there must be meeting of the minds as unilateral conditions cannot be imposed in an invitation of offer.
44.
The learned counsel for the respondents also relied upon 1997(2) SCT 321 (SC) : 1997 II LLJ 819 SC, Power Finance Corporation Ltd v. Parmod Kumar Bhatia, In our opinion this judgment goes in favour of the petitioners rather than the respondents.
45.
Our attention has also been invited to 2000(2) SCT 807 (SC) : JT 2000(6) SC 358, Shambhu Murari Sinha v. Project and Development India and another and 2001(1) SCT 282 (SC) : JT 2000 (Suppl-2) SC 490, Union of India and another v. Wing Commander Parthasarathy.
We have already taken note of these judgments, and thereafter, we have come to the above conclusion that the scheme is half baked and before it was floated it did not get the nod of the Government of India.
46.
We have considered all these judgments very carefully.
The legality of the scheme, in the light of the provisions, under Section 19 sub-clause (1) and sub-clause (4), has not been considered by the Hon'ble Judges.
Moreover, we are going to allow 71 writ petitions mainly on the ground that an employee has the right to withdraw his offer and that the object of the scheme is hit by the provisions of Section 23 of the Contract Act.
47.
This matter has also to be examined from another angle of vision as to whether the VRS-2000 is an offer or intimation/invitation of offer.
In our considered opinion it is an intimation of circular vide which the applications of the employees were invited.
They gave the offer unilaterally in pursuance of invitation of offer/intimation on a circular with an undertaking that their offer is irrevocable.
Under the Contract Act an offer can always be withdrawn before it is accepted or acted upon.
It is the common case of the parties that the petitioners of 71 writ petitions mentioned above withdrew the option.
The employee who leaves the service under VRS is akin to an employee who leaves the service on submitting resignation because in both eventualities there is cessation of contract of service which had the statutory force on account of the Staff Regulations.
In our opinion, even if the offer makes a mention that it is irrevocable, it has no effect on the statutory powers given to a proposal, which can always be withdrawn before it is accepted or acted upon.
Mere sending of a resignation or mere sending of VRS offer, is not cessation of contract till it is accepted or till the employee is relieved by the employer.
The contract of service remains till the last act is performed and a man is relieved of his duties.
48.
It is the case of the Bank that it is a contract.
Section 23 of the Indian Contract Act lays down that the consideration or object of an agreement is lawful unless it is forbidden by law : or is of such a nature that, if permitted, it would defeat the provisions of any law or is fraudulent or involves or implies injury to the person or property of another; or the Court regards it as immoral, or opposed to public policy.
In each of these cases, the consideration or object of an agreement is said to be unlawful.
Every agreement of which the object or consideration is unlawful is void.
Thus, a contract the object of which is forbidden by law or which is opposed to public policy cannot be acted upon.
Clause 105 restricts the employee to withdraw his request made for voluntary retirement.
This provision is against the general law though included in a special contract in the scheme.
It also gives an arbitrary power to the banks when it makes a provision that request of the employee seeking voluntary retirement shall not take effect until and unless it is accepted in writing by the competent authority and communicated to respective employee/officer.
This clause 105 lacks the element of mutuality.
Not only this, as per clause 106, it further gives absolute discretion to the competent authority to accept or reject the request of the employee seeking voluntary retirement under the scheme depending upon the requirement of their bank.
Thus, the Bank wants to bind the employee but his options are open.
49.
Even if it is assumed for the sake of arguments that scheme was not an invitation of offer in itself but an offer in itself and it is complete with the acceptance on the part of the employee yet the object of such contract has never got the approval of the Board of Directors, Reserve Bank of India or the Government of India as required under Section 19 sub-clause (1) read with sub-clause (4) of the Act.
50.
In AIR 1954 SC 584, Jai Ram v Union of India the Hon'ble Supreme Court made the following observations :-  "It may be conceded that it is open to a servant, who has expressed a desire to retire from service and applied to his superior officer to give him the requisite permission, to change his mind subsequently and ask for cancellation of the permission thus obtained, but he can be allowed to do so as long as he continues in service and not after it has been terminated".
51.
The above principle of law was again reiterated by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in AIR 1969 SC 180, Raj Kumar v. Union of India.
The relevant para of this judgment can be reproduced as follows :-  "Where a public servant has invited by his letter of resignation determination of his employment, his services normally stand terminated from the date on which the letter of resignation is accepted by the appropriate authority and in the absence of any law or rule governing the conditions of his service to the contrary, it will not be open to the public servant to withdraw his resignation after it is accepted by the appropriate authority.
Till the resignation is accepted by the appropriate authority in consonance with the rules governing the acceptance, the public servant concerned has locus poeniteniae but not thereafter."
52.
Further, in AIR 1978 SC 694, Union of India v. Gopal Chandra Misra and others, following observations of the Hon'ble Supreme Court can be quoted with approval :-  "It will bear repetition that the general principle is that in the absence of a legal, contractual or constitutional bar, a "prospective" resignation can be withdrawn at any time before it becomes effective and it becomes effective when it operates to terminate the employment or the office tenure of the resignor.
This general rule is equally applicable to Government servants and constitutional functionaries.
In the case of a Government servant or functionary who cannot, under the conditions of his service/or office, by his own unilateral act of tendering resignation, give up his service/or office, normally the tender of resignation becomes effective and his service/or office tenure terminated, when it is accepted by the competent authority.
In the case of a Judge of a High Court, who is a constitutional functionary and under proviso (a) to Article 217(1) has a unilateral right or privilege to resign his office, his resignation becomes effective and tenure terminated on the date from which he of his own volition, chooses to quit office.
If in terms of the writing under his hand addressed to the President, he resigns in present the resignation terminates his office tenure forthwith, and cannot therefore, be withdrawn or revoked thereafter.
But if he by such writing, chooses to resign from a future date, the act of resigning office is not complete because it does not terminate his tenure before such date and the Judge can at any time before the arrival of that prospective date on which it was intended to be effective withdraw it, because the constitution does not bar such withdrawal".
53.
Yet reliance can be placed on 1987 (Supp) Supreme Court Cases 228, Bal Ram Gupta v. Union of India wherein it was observed by the Supreme Court that there cannot be any valid reason for withdrawing permission by the respondent as the retirement from the Government service was to take effect at a subsequent date prospectively and that withdrawal was wrong before that date and therefore, the appellant had locus poenitentiae.
It was also held that the normal rule which prevails in certain cases that a person can withdraw his resignation before it is effective would not apply in full force to a case of this nature because here the Government servant cannot withdraw under rule 48(a) of the Pension Rules except with the approval of such authority, which has to exercise the said discretion reasonably and rationally.
In the present case, there is no such regulation under the Staff Regulation Rules of 1995.
In Union of India v. Wing Commander T Parthasarathy, reported as JT 2000 (Suppl 2) SC 490, The Hon'ble Supreme Court relied upon the earlier decisions of Gopal Chandra Misra's case (supra) and observed as follows :-  "So far as the case in hand is concerned, nothing in the form of any statutory rule or any provision of any Act has been brought to our notice which could be said to impede or deny this right of the appellants.
On the other hand, not only the acceptance of the request by the Headquarters, the appropriate authority, was said to have been made only on 2021986, a day after the respondent withdrew his request for premature retirement but even such acceptance in this case was to be effective from a future date, namely, 31886.
Consequently, it could not be legitimately contended by the appellants that there was any cessation of the relationship of master and servant between the Department and the respondent at any rate before 3181986.
While that be the position inevitably the respondent had a right and was entitled to withdraw or revoke his request earlier made, before it ever really and effectively became effective.
The reliance placed upon the so called policy decision which obligated the respondent to furnish a certificate to the extent that he was fully aware of the fact that he cannot later seek for cancellation of the application once made for premature retirement cannot, in our view, be destructive of the right of the respondent, in law, to withdraw his request for premature retirement before it ever became operative and effective and effected termination of his status and relation with the Department.
When the legal position is that much clear, it would be futile for the appellants to base their rights on some policy decision of the Department or a mere certificate of the respondent being aware of a particular position which has no sanctity or basis in law to destroy such rights which otherwise inhered in him and available in law.
No such deprivation of a substantive right of a person can be denied except on the basis of any statutory provision or rule or regulation.
There being none brought to our notice in this case, the claim of the appellants cannot be countenanced in our hands.
Even that apart, the reasoning of the High Court that the case of the respondent will not be covered by the type or nature of the mischief sought to be curbed by the so called policy decision also cannot be said to suffer any conformity in law, to warrant our interference".
54.
In Shambu Murari Sinha v Project and Development India, 2000(5) Supreme Court Cases 621, it was observed that it is open to a person having exercised option for voluntary retirement to withdraw the said offer after its acceptance but before it is made effective.
It was held that the resignation, in spite of its acceptance, can be withdrawn before the effective date and in arriving at the aforesaid conclusion the Hon'ble Supreme Court relied upon earlier decision of the Supreme Court given in Bal Ram Gupta's case.
55.
In the present cases, the option exercised by the petitioners were withdrawn before the effective date i.e. before it operated to terminate the employment between the petitioner and the Bank.
We have already stated above that it was permissible to do so irrespective of the clause 105.
In this view of the matter, we sum up this judgment with the following conclusions :-  (i) That the VR Scheme as framed is not a valid piece of subordinate legislation inasmuch as the provision of Section 19 sub-clause (1) and sub- clause (4) of the Act have not been complied with and has, therefore, to be set aside.
(ii) Even if it is assumed for the sake of argument that the scheme is validly framed, it would be open to an employee to withdraw his option before the same has been accepted and effectively enforced.
56.
For the reasons recorded above, we allow 71 writ petitions i.e. CWP Nos. 1458, 1472, 1526, 1549, 1600, 1639, 1646, 1647, 1735, 1742, 1770, 1774, 1782, 2285, 2722, 2748, 3119, 3489, 3954, 4021, 4022, 4023, 4024, 4025, 4026, 4180, 4184, 4202, 4232, 4273, 4274, 4334, 4335, 4336, 4337, 4338, 4434, 4485, 4526, 4486, 4543, 4647, 4664, 4832, 4881, 4883, 5043, 5332, 5399, 6308, 7555, 7679, 7932, 9237, 9684, 14865, 19055, 56, 1152, 1243, 1294, 1301, 1319, 1350, 1351, 1401, 1457 and 18044 of the year 2001 and CWP Nos. 303 and 1765 of 2002, in which the petitioners have made a prayer for the withdrawal of their options and the impugned orders accepting the options of voluntary retirement stand quashed.
All these petitioners shall be reinstated in service with all consequential benefits.
It is however, made clear that those petitioners who have received the benefits under the scheme including the ex-gratia payment whether with or without protest, shall return the entire amount received by them with interest at the rate of 9% per annum from the date of the receipt of the said amount till the date of return.
On return of the aforesaid amount the consequential benefits regarding the payment of arrears of salary and allowances from the date of their release to the date of reinstatement shall be given to them by the respondents.
These petitioners shall also have the benefit of continuity of service and the interregnum period shall be regularised in accordance with law and regulations.
57.
Since we have already declared this scheme as bad, therefore, we are not in a position to give any relief to the writ petitioners of 10 writ petitions i.e. CWP Nos. 6072, 6277, 7448, 9191, 14325, 15686, 15689, 19393, 19711 and 19803 of the year 2001, and in our opinion, these writ petitions are liable to be dismissed.
When all rights flow from a valid scheme and the moment the scheme is declared bad on account of statutory restrictions then the petitioners of these 10 writ petitions cannot ask for any advantage or benefit.
58.
Now we want to make some observations with regard to those employees who had taken the benefit under the VRS Scheme but they have not approached this Court as they appear to be satisfied with the amount/benefits already received by them.
With regard to them we want to make it clear that the Banks are not obliged to recall these employees for employment.
59.
The net result is that 71 writ petitions mentioned above are allowed declaring the Voluntary Retirement Scheme-2000 as illegal and the relief is granted in the light of the observations made above.
There shall be no order as to costs in any of these writ petitions.
60.
The remaining 10 writ petitions as mentioned above are hereby dismissed as redundant.
There shall be no order as to costs in these writ petitions.
Petitions allowed.