Syed Bashir-ud-din, J - Objections/reply not filed.
Heard.
Admit.
Petitioner a Helper in Irrigation Division Budgam, regularised on substantive post, was absent on leave from 191995 to 3091995.
He overstayed this leave spell.
This followed with notice by the Executive Engineer respondent No. 3 on 21.4.1999 (annexure-P3) calling upon petitioner to repot for duty within seven days and to explain the unauthorised absence.
Pursuant to this direction petitioner appeared and presented formal joining report to resume duties in the Irrigation Sub Division Budgam within said seven days (annexure-P4).
Despite complying with the directions of the Executive Engineer, the said Executive Engineer again served a notice on petitioner requiring him to explain reasons for absence and further was notified that the joining report submitted by him, is not acceptable to Executive Engineer (Annexure-P5).
Executive Engineer vide communication dated 1051999 (Annexure-P6) asked and directed Assistant Executive Engineer Sub Division Budgam, respondent No. 4, not to accept joining report of the petitioner.
The Executive Engineer also approached Superintending Engineer for advice in the matter, after the petitioner joined his duties in the Irrigation Sub Division Budgam (Annexure- P7).
Over again Executive Engineer asked Assistant Executive Engineer on 31599, not to accept joining report of the petitioner (Annexure P-8).
2.
Petitioner has challenged the communication (above annexures P6, P7, P8 and P9), in so far as petitioner is informed and Assistant Executive Engineer not to accept joining report of the petitioner.
3.
Mr. Mustaffa concedes that once petitioner has joined and resumed his duties pursuant to the notice of Executive Engineer respondent No. 3 (annexures P3, P4) and that too within the period indicated, the respondents cannot refuse to accept the joining report and stop him from resuming duties as a Helper, leaving apart the question of enquiry and disciplinary action to be taken under rules for misconduct of absence of petitioner.
In fact an impression is given by the then Executive Engineer, respondent No. 3, that he wants in any case petitioner not to resume duty and see him out of service, irrespective of the merits of the case and rule position on the subject.
4.
Petitioner's counsel submits that once the petitioner resumes duties, he is to be allowed to work and the question of his absence or misconduct thereto, if any, is a matter that has to be separately dealt with and orders passed thereto in accordance with rules and the merits of the case.
5.
Obviously, the case can be disposed of at this stage, in so far as meeting ground is there to dispose of the petition consensually on submissions of the parties.
6.
The writ petition is disposed of with direction to respondents to allow the petitioner to work as Helper on resumption of duties from 29.4.1999, pursuant to the directions of Executive Engineer and he shall be paid for the period thereafter he has worked and rendered duties.
The period of absence till 2841999, is a matter that is left open for the Disciplinary Authority to be dealt with separately in accordance with rules and merits of the case.
Whether the petitioner's absence was authorised or unauthorised, if the absence entails loss of service or not, question of entitlement of petitioner to pay and allowance, if any, during the period of absence and how the period of absence, if so required, is to be treated, are all matters that the Disciplinary/competent authority shall have to go into and determine on inquiry.
The competent authority shall be free to take action for the misconduct of absence in accordance with law.
Disposed of.
Petition allowed.