RL Anand, J - Smt. Amina Kundu widow of Shri RS Kundu, of Gurgaon, has filed the present writ petition against the State of Haryana and others under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India and she has made a prayer that a writ against the respondents directing them to reimburse the medical bills of her husband, who, died on 311998, by quashing the order dated 1541997 (Annexure P-7) vide which the medical reimbursement claim submitted by the petitioner was declined.
2.
Some facts can be noticed in the following manner : the husband of the petitioner was serving in the Transport department as Flying Squad Officer.
He remained admitted in the hospital from 15121997 to 311998 when he died.
According to the petitioner, her husband when he was on duty suffered excruciating unbearable pain and profuse perspiration in the body.
Her husband took the treatment from the hospital and on the basis of the test the doctors referred him to Rajiv Gandhi Cancer & Research Institute, Rohini for admission and for further treatment.
The husband of the petitioner was treated as a case of Multiple Myeloma (the disease of cancer).
In the medical treatment of the husband of the petitioner, a sum of Rs. 1,22,627/- was spent till his death.
The petitioner submitted the bills to the respondent-authorities for the medical reimbursement but those were rejected on the plea that the treatment has been taken from an institution which is not recognised by the State of Haryana.
Hence the present writ petition.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents and the stand of the respondents is that the treatment has been taken from an institution which is not recognised by the Government of Haryana, therefore, the petitioner is not entitled to the medical reimbursement.
4.
I have heard Shri Deepak Agnihotri, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner and Shri Sultan Singh, learned AAG, Haryana, appearing on behalf of the respondents and with their assistance have gone through the record of this case and in my opinion this writ should be allowed by quashing the order annexure P-7 and I am further of the opinion that the petitioner should get the medical reimbursement claim at the rates as applicable in All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Delhi or PGI Chandigarh, whichever is less.
5.
It is the common case of the parties that the husband of the petitioner was actually a Government employee and as per the rules, the deceased was entitled to the medical reimbursement.
To get treatment of a particular disease, is always a matter of trust between the patent and the doctor.
The Government has its limitations.
It can prescribe that the treatment must be taken from the recognised institutions but emergency can always arise when the patient was not in a position to go to a particular institution which has been recognised by the Government.
In such a situation, if the person has got the treatment from a different institution other than the recognised one, he can only take the benefit of the medical reimbursement to the extent of the rates which are applicable to the Government institutions.
To supplement my view, I draw support from 1996(4) SLR 177 : 1996(2) SCT 495, Waryam Singh v. State of Punjab and others.
6.
In this view of the matter, I allow this writ petition and give the directions to the respondent-authorities to reimburse the medical claim of the husband of the petitioner, as per the rates as applicable in All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi or PGI Chandigarh, whichever, is less, within a period of three months from the date of the receipt of the copy of this order, failing which the petitioner shall be entitled to get interest at the rate of interest at the rate of 12% from the respondent.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.