RL Anand, J - The petitioners are the Secretaries and they had been working with the District Red Cross Societes of various districts, such as Faridabad, Kaithal, Gurgaon, Rohtak, Rewari and Jind.
Through this writ petition under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India, they have made a prayer for quashment of the order of transfer Annexure P-7 (collectively) vide which they were transferred by respondent No. 2 and according to the petitioners, this action of respondent No. 2 i.e. Indian Red Cross Society, Haryana State Branch, Chandigarh, is without jurisdiction and authority of law and it has also been prayed by the petitioners that respondents be directed to re-post them at their original places of posting.
2.
It is alleged by the petitioners that the Indian Red Cross Society is the creation of Central Act No. XV of 1920, known as the Indian Red Cross Society Act.
Consequent upon the re-organisation of the erstwhile State of Punjab, a separate Branch for the State of Haryana came into existence which was christened as Indian Red Cross Society, Haryana State Branch.
The Management of the Haryana Branch has been entrusted to its Managing Committees, which consists of one or more members including the President, the Vice President, Governor of Haryana (ex-officio President), the Chief Minister Haryana (ex- officio President and Chairman of Haryana Branch) and besides others.
The society is covered in the expression `other authorities' as per the meaning and provision of Article 12 of the Constitution of India.
The petitioners alleged that the Deputy Commissioner-cum-President, District Red Cross Society of the respective districts in the State of Haryana, are the appointing authority of the staff, including Secretary of the District Red Cross Society and there is no provision for transfer of District Red Cross Secretaries from some district branch to another branch under the existing rules.
During the year 1975, Model Constitution for District Red Cross Branches in Haryana was prepared which was approved by the Managing Board of Haryana State Branch in its meeting held on 551975 vide Resolution No. 8 under Clauses 21(i & ii).
It was resolved as follows :  "21(i) All appointments in the District Branch shall be made by the President.
The President shall have the power to determine the terms of employment and pay and allowance of the staff of the District Branch.
The case should be laid before the Executive Committee for confirmation.
21(ii) "Notwithstanding anything contained in Rule No. 21(i), the appointment of the Secretary of the District Branch shall be made by the President with the approval of the State Branch and shall not be annulled except with previous concurrence of the State Branch."
3.
The President of the respective District Red Cross Societies in the State of Haryana had been issuing advertisements for filling various posts in the Societies, including that of Secretaries.
The only requirement as per above reproduced provision is that the appointment of Secretaries is to be made by the President of the District Society with approval of State Branch.
The petitioners were also appointed on the posts of Secretaries in the various District Red Cross Societies after getting approval from the Haryana State Branch, i.e. respondent No. 2.
Different petitioners were given assignments of District Red Cross Secretaries.
4.
It is now the case of the petitioners that there is no provision existed in the rules for inter-district transfer of the District Secretaries of the District Red Cross Society, but respondent No. 2 acting illegally and arbitrarily ordered transfer of the petitioners vide different orders dated 3152001, 162001 and 462001, copies of which are collectively annexed as Annexure P-7.
A similar order was made in case of OP Arora petitioner.
In compliance with the aforesaid order, the petitioners were relieved by respondent Nos. 3 to 8 with direction to join duties immediately at their new places of posting.
5.
According to the petitioners, the impugned transfer order is illegal, arbitrary and without authority or power and is liable to be quashed mainly on the ground that there is no provision exists in the Rules/Constitution of the District Red Cross Society for inter-district transfer of the District Secretaries and no power vests in respondent No. 2 to pass any such order making inter-district transfers of the Secretaries.
The Deputy Commissioner- cum-President of the District Red Cross Society is the appointing authority of the Secretaries and the only requirement is to obtain prior approval of respondent No. 2 in that regard.
However, there is no provision empowering respondent No. 2 to make inter-district transfer.
Hence the order Annexure P-7 (collectively) be quashed.
6.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
A joint written statement was filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 to 8.
A preliminary objection was taken that answering respondent Nos. 1 and 2 are their district agencies.
Respondent Nos. 3 to 8 are not amenable to writ jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India because the answering respondents are neither an authority in terms of Article 12 of the Constitution of India nor any State agency for the purpose of exercising the powers in writ jurisdiction.
A perusal of the constitution of the State Red Cross Society or that of its district units would reveal that the societies are voluntary organisations established for carrying out certain welfare activities.
Governor of Haryana is only an ex-officio President.
There is no provision either in the Constitution or any other set of rules or regulations of the Red Cross Society compelling the State Government to contribute any financial aid or to exercise its administrative control upon these societies.
The petitioners have not made the violation of any provision of the Constitution of the Society or of any other bye-laws/regulations.
In these circumstances, the answering respondents are not amenable to the writ jurisdiction.
7.
On merits, the stand of the respondents is that transfer is a mere incidence of service and not a condition of service and yet, even if such a transfer has been made erroneously, it does not amount to violation of fundamental rights of the petitioners.
It was further submitted that petitioner Nos. 2, 3 and 5 have been continuing at one place of posting for the last 10, 20 and 13 years respectively.
In the administrative and public interest the petitioners cannot be allowed to work at one place of posting for indefinite period as it would result into creation and catering of vested interests.
Moreover, petitioner Nos. 2, 3 and 5 have already joined at their new places of posting without any objection or protest.
Therefore, their writ petition is not maintainable.
With this broad defence, the respondents have prayed for the dismissal of the writ petition.
8.
A rejoinder has also been filed on behalf of the petitioners to the written statement of the respondents in which the petitioners have reiterated their averments in the writ petition and denying those of the written statement.
9.
We have heard Ms. Sangita Dhanda, Advocate on behalf of the petitioners and Shri Tiwari, Advocate on behalf of the respondents and with their assistance, have gone through the record of the case.
10.
The point survives for determination in this writ petition is as to whether this Court has the jurisdiction to entertain the writ petition against the Indian Red Cross Society.
The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents has taken a preliminary objection that the present writ petition is not legally maintainable against the Indian Red Cross Society and it is not a State or Instrumentality of the States as per the provisions of Article 12 of the Constitution.
In support of his contention, the learned counsel for the respondents has relied upon a judgment of this Court in Pant Raj Sachdev v. The Indian Red Cross Society and others, 1986(1) S.L.R.
675 wherein it was observed as follows :  "It is quite evident that the funds of the society are mainly constituted by gifts and donations.
It does not have any share capital which might be said to be held by the Government, nor the financial assistance to it by the State is so much as to meet almost its entire expenditure.
No doubt, the President of India, the Governors of the State, the Chief Ministers and the Deputy Commissioners at the district level head the hierarchy of the Society and its Branches but the State as such does not have deep and pervasive control over the Society.
In fact, most of the Members of the Society are private individuals who volunteer their services to subserve the objects and purposes of the Society.
Its functions are not closely related to governmental functions.
Thus, the tests (1), (2) and (4) to (6) above are not at all satisfied in the case of the Society.
For these reasons, the Society cannot be termed to be an authority; and, therefore, State within the meaning of the expression in Article 12 of the Constitution."
11.
In our opinion, this judgment is not helpful to the learned counsel for the respondents.
In this very judgment, his Lordship was pleased to say in para No. 8 of the judgment as follows :  "He also canvassed support for his contention from Mohan Singh Jaitla v. Commissioner, Union Territory, Chandigarh and others, AIR 1985 SC 364.
I find that there is no escape from the conclusion that although violation of fundamental rights enshrined in the Constitution emanating from the impugned action of the Society cannot be made a ground of attack, the writ petition on the ground of infraction of the Service Rules and the rules of natural justice can be maintained against the Society.
In this view of the matter, I think it is imperative to examine the legality of the impugned order terminating his service."
12.
Now, let us examine what is the case of the petitioners.
Their grouse is that their cadre is not an inter-district cadre.
It is only a localise cadre.
Their appointing authority was the President of the District Red Cross Society.
There are no rules or regulations or the Society vide which it can be held that it is an inter-district cadre.
In this situation, respondent No. 2 could not pass any order of transfer of the petitioners from one district to the order.
13.
On the contrary, the learned counsel appearing of behalf of the respondents submitted that even the rules do not debar respondent No. 2 from effecting the transfer in public interest from one district to the other.
It was also argued by the learned counsel for the respondents that onus is upon the petitioners to show that the action was not justified.
We do not subscribe to the submissions made by the learned counsel for the respondents.
As we have just stated above, that we have to see what is the case of the petitioners in the writ petition in order to see whether the jurisdiction of the High Court has been ousted or not.
It is the case of the petitioners that their cadre is not an inter-district and there is violation of the service rules and, therefore, this Court should interfere.
In the judgment of Pant Raj Sachdev case (supra) it was observed that a writ is maintainable against the Society if it attacks the infraction of service rules or the rules of natural justice.
In Civil Writ Petition No. 13347 of 1995 (Smt. Santosh Rani v. Indian Red Cross Society, District Branch Mansa and another) decided on 14121995 a similar point arose for consideration and reliance was also placed on the judgment of Pant Raj Sachdev.
Their contention was not accepted by the Hon'ble Division Bench and their Lordships were pleased to make the following observations :  "We have given our thoughtful consideration to the submission of the learned counsel for the respondents but are unable to accept the same.
We may have considered the issue whether the Indian Red Cross Society is a State within the meaning of Article 12 at length but in our opinion it is unnecessary to do so because in the very judgment on which the learned counsel for the respondents has placed reliance, this court has held that although writ petition for violation of fundamental rights is not maintainable, but the High Court can issue a writ on the ground of violation of the service rules or the principles of natural justice.
By placing reliance on a Division Bench judgment of the Rajasthan High Court in D.B.
Special Appeal No. 65 of 1976 (Indian Red Cross Society v. RN Kaul and 7 others) decided on 2111980, a learned single Judge of this Court held that although violation of fundamental rights enshrined in the Constitution emanating from the impugned action of the Society cannot be made a ground of attack, the writ petition on the ground of infraction of the service rules and the rules of natural justice can be maintained against the Society.
We may also quota the observations made by the Division Bench of the Rajasthan High Court in the Judgment given in RN Kaul's case (supra) which are as under :-  "Keeping in view the ratio laid down in Ramana v. IA Authority of India (supra), we have no hesitation in holding that the Rajasthan Branch of the Indian Red Cross Society is not an authority within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution of India.
The Society has been created by a statute.
If the statute is not there, the society cannot exist.
The statute gives an exclusive domain and monopoly in the Society to act a particular sphere.
The assets which fall to the share of Pakistan were transferred under Section 13 of the said Act.
The share which fall to the share of Burma was allocated by the Red Cross Society (Allocation of Property) Act, 1936.
As stated earlier the Constitution provides that the Governors shall be the Patron-in-Chief, Chief Minister would be the Chairman and Director of Medical and Health Services would be the Vice-Chairman.
Clause 44 of Annexure R-2/2 clearly states that the services of all the employees shall be governed by the rules which are in force for the employees of the State of Rajasthan.
All these factors lead to the Indian Red Cross Society is not an authority as envisaged under Article 12 of the Constitution of India, yet it is amenable to the jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution".
We respectfully agree with the view taken by the Division Bench of the Rajasthan High Court and the learned single Judge of this Court on the issue of maintainability of writ petition in the cases of violation of the principles of natural justice and the service rules and reject the first objection raised by learned counsel for respondent No.
1."
14.
Furthermore, if a body is created by a statute, it is bound to show under what authority the action is being taken against the employees.
15.
During the course of submissions, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents submitted that there are no regulations with the Society to indicate that the post (post of Secretaries) held by the respective petitioners was transferable to inter-district.
If this is the position then the impugned action cannot be justified.
Since it is not established on the record by the respondents that the cadre of the petitioners was inter-district cadre, therefore, the action of respondent No. 2 to transfer the petitioners to different places vide impugned order Annexure P-7 (collectively) cannot be sustained in the eyes of law, and the same is hereby struck down.
Resultantly, the writ petition is allowed.
The impugned order Annexure P-7 (collectively) is hereby set aside and directions are given to the respondents to restore the position of the petitioners with regard to their posting as it existed prior to the date of their transfer.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.