V Gopala Gowda, J - Pursuant to a notification issued by the respondents- Corporation, the petitioners applied for the post of Conductors.
Petitioners were not selected.
Hence these writ petitions are filed seeking a declaration that their non-selection is bad and a direction to respondents to appoint them and to grant the consequential benefit.
It is the case of the petitioners that they have secured more marks than the persons who have been selected in Group-B The petitioners claim the benefit of rural weightage.
2.
In the statement of objections filed on behalf of the respondents it is stated that petitioners 1 and 2 did not attend the interview and the 3rd petitioner did not produce any proof of rural background and hence they are not entitled to the relief sought for.
Respondents have prayed for dismissal of the writ petitions.
3.
The stand taken by the respondents in the counter statement that petitioners 1 and 2 did not attend the interview and hence they were not selected, cannot be accepted.
In the rejoinder the petitioners have stated that the first petitioner was called for interview on 2781992, on which day he was on duty, which is evident from the Conductors Pass Book at Annexure-Q It is further stated that on the next day, i.e., on 28.8.1992 he reported before the Divisional Controller and all his testimonials had been verified and he had affixed his signature on certain papers.
As regards the 2nd petitioner, it is stated in the rejoinder that on 2781992 he was delayed on line and he was on duty.
It is further stated that he did not receive any intimation regarding the interview.
These statements are not disputed by the respondents.
4.
In paragraph 8 of the counter statement the respondents have admitted that petitioners 1 and 2 were eligible for selection and the marks secured by them in the qualifying examination is also admitted.
The only basis on which they were not selected was, they have not attended the interview.
Since the same has been negatived, they are entitled to be considered and selected for the posts.
5.
So far as the 3rd petitioner is concerned, respondents have stated that he had not furnished proof for having studied in rural arrears and since he had secured only 283 marks in the qualifying examination, on merits he was not selected.
But the 3rd petitioner has produced the certificate at Annexure-K to show that he had studied in rural area.
If the 15 marks earmarked for rural weightage is added to 283 marks secured by him, his total marks would be 298.
He belongs to Group-B and in that group the last candidate selected scored 296 marks.
Since the marks of 3rd petitioner would be 298 after giving rural weightage, he is entitled to be selected.
6.
Since all the petitioners are entitled to be selected, the petitioners are entitled for directions to the respondents to that effect.
7.
Accordingly, these writ petitions are allowed the respondents or the newly established North Eastern Karnatka Road Transport Corporation established in Gulbarga are hereby directed to consider the case of the petitioner in the light of the observations made above and appoint them with prospective effect without taking into consideration their age and place them at the appropriate place in the seniority list within eight weeks from the date of receipt of this order.
Petitions allowed.