M.H.S.
Ansari, J - The petitioner is an employee and was at the relevant time Senior Assistant.
The petitioner is the President of Calcutta University Employees Unity Centre and was elected as Member of the Senate.
The petitioner was served with a show cause notice as to why disciplinary action shall not be taken against him.
The said show cause is based upon a leaflet dated 2.9.96 said to have been issued and distributed by the petitioner among the University community which allegedly contained scurrilous, abusive and derogatory language against the University and showed disrespect towards University authorities causing great harm to the reputation of the institution and for having deliberately maligned the University and lowered the image in the eyes of general public.
The said action, it was stated therein was unbecoming of an University employee.
It was also stated therein that the Syndicate in its meeting dated 12.9.1996 has taken serious note of the aforesaid act.
The petitioner submitted his reply and was therafter informed that the University proposed to hold an enquiry against him.
The substance of the imputation of misconduct including denigration and defamation of the University authorities in respect of which the enquiry was proposed to be held was set out in Annexure `1'.
The statement of imputations of misconduct in annexure `2' and the document by which the articles of charge were proposed to be sustained was enclosed as annexure `3' thereto.
2.
The petitioner on receipt of the said charge-sheet submitted a letter denying each and every charge and expressing desire to be heard in person.
In the said letter, the petitioner stated that his entire defence was on the correctness of the allegations made in the leaflet and if he can substantiate the allegations made in the said leaflet no charge can stand against him.
The petitioner desired inspection of the documents listed thereunder (See Annexure `D').
3.
The University authorities thereafter informed the petitioner that an enquiry officer has been appointed to enquire into the charge and a list of witnesses by whom the articles of charge were proposed to be substantiated was enclosed as Annexure `1' to the said letter being annexure `E'.
4.
The petitioner by his letter being annexure `F' renewed his request for inspection of documents as requested by him in his letter dated 16121996.
5.
The petitioner was thereafter directed by the enquiry authority to appear before him on the date mentioned.
6.
The enquiry authority submitted its report to the University whereupon by letter being annexure `L', the same was forwarded to the petitioner to submit his comments thereon.
The petitioner submitted his statement and thereafter, by a letter dated 1191997 the petitioner was informed that the report of the enquiry officer has been accepted and that the petitioner has been removed from service from the University with immediate effect.
The said order of removal has been assailed in the instant writ application.
7.
Learned counsel Mr. Dey, on behalf of the petitioner reiterated the contentions raised in the writ petition and also the averments contained therein.
However, for the purpose of this enquiry, I shall only refer to certain relevant contentions which need, in my opinion, consideration for the disposal of the instant writ application.
8.
Some of the contentions which in my opinion need to be considered in the instant writ application and as advanced on behalf of the petitioner by Mr. Dey are briefly as under :  (i) The findings arrived at by the enquiry officer declaring the charges as proved is perverse and in violation of principles of natural justice in that the petitioner was denied inspection of the documents.
(ii) The findings are perverse in that the prosecution witnesses could not substantiate that the petitioner distributed the leaflet.
(iii) The representations made by the petitioner based upon the enquiry officer's report have not been considered in accordance with the law by the disciplinary authority.
(iv) The petitioner being a member of Senate, no departmental proceedings are maintainable as all actions in relation to which the charge- sheet has been issued were taken by the petitioner in its capacity as the member of the Senate.
(v) The findings with which the petitioner has been charged cannot be treated as misconduct.
The misconduct has been defined in the Calcutta University First Ordinance, 1979 and the offence with which the petitioner is charged does not figure in the enumerated list of misconduct.
(vi) The punishment of removal awarded by the impugned order is shockingly disproportionate with the gravity of the offence charged besides being beyond the jurisdiction of the disciplinary authority.
9.
Mr. Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharjee, learned Sr. Advocate for the respondent University countered the above submissions by submitting that the petitioner was proceeded against departmentally in accordance with the relevant statutory provisions and was given adequate, reasonable and sufficient opportunity to defend himself in the enquiry.
The disciplinary proceedings have been conducted in accordance with the law and in conformity with the principles of natural justice and there being no infirmity in the decision making process, the petitioner cannot have any cause for grievance.
The petitioner was an employee of the University and was proceeded against not in his capacity as member of Senate.
In the charge-sheet, the fact that he was a member of the Senate was mentioned only to emphasis that being a member of the Senate of the University it added a new degree of responsibility on the petitioner and he should have acted in a much more responsible manner.
Mr. Bhattacharjee, learned Sr. Advocate strenuously urged that the petitioner has been proceeded against departmentally in his capacity as an employee of the University.
10.
Mr. Bhattacharjee further urged that it was an admitted and undisputed fact that the petitioner himself had issued the leaflet in question as can be seen from the petitioner's reply to the show cause notice as also his failure to deny his association there with before the enquiry officer.
A bare perusal of the leaflet in question, it was contended, would rival that the petitioner had acted in a manner unbecoming an employee of the University thereby lowering the prestige and dignity of an esteemed institution like the University.
The misconduct enumerated in the First Ordinance 74 of First Ordinance 1979, it was urged are illustrative and not exhaustive when read with Ordinance 66, it will be apparent that the misconduct with which the petitioner has been charged, the disciplinary enquiry could be initiated validly against the petitioner.
Mr. Bhattacharjee further contended that the scope of a writ Court is limited in such matters.
The Court does not sit as a Court of Appeal.
11.
A perusal of the enquiry report would disclose that 12 witnesses have been examined on behalf of the department.
The delinquent employee himself did not appear as a witness.
He has, however, examined 6 witnesses.
The defence of the petitioner-delinquent before the enquiry officer was that what ever allegations have been made in the pamphlet are substantial and would be substantiated by evidence that he would adduce.
The enquiry officer has noticed that the alleged corrupt activites were not the subject matter of the disciplinary proceedings.
The charges as framed against the petitioner/delinquent was as to the indecent language used in the pamphlet and depiction of the University authority in a contemptuous manner.
It was further noticed by the enquiry officer that all the witnesses whether for the prosecution side or the defence are at unison about the language used in the leaflet which is indecent, abusive, scurrilous and disrespectful and to that extent, it was held that the charge are amply borne out.
12.
As to the scope of judicial review in disciplinary proceedings as far as back in 1963 in State of AP v. Shri S Ramarao, reported in AIR 1963 SC 1723, Supreme Court held as under :  "The High Court is not constituted in a proceeding under Article 226 of the Constitution a Court of appeal over the decision of the authorities holding a departmental inquiry against a public servant; it is concerned to determine whether the enquiry is held by an authority competent in that behalf, and according to the procedure prescribed in that behalf, and whether the rules of natural justice are not violated.
Where there is some evidence, which the authority entrusted with the duty to hold the enquiry has accepted and which evidence may reasonably support the conclusion that the delinquent officer is guilty of the charge, it is not the function of the High Court in a petition for a writ under Article 226 to review the evidence and to arrive at an independent finding on the evidence.
The High Court may undoubtedly interfere where the departmental authorities have held the proceedings against the delinquent in a manner inconsistent with the rules of natural justice or in violation of the statutory rules prescribing the mode of inquiry or where the authorities have disabled themselves from reaching a fair decision by some considerations extraneous to the evidence and the merits of the case or by allowing themselves to be influenced by irrelevant considerations or where the conclusion on the very face of it is so wholly arbitrary and capricious that no reasonable person could ever have arrived at that conclusion, or on similar grounds.
But the departmental authorities are, if the inquiry is otherwise properly held, the sole judge of facts and if there be some legal evidence on which the findings can be based, the adequacy or reliability of that evidence is not a matter which can be permitted to be canvassed before the High Court in a proceeding under Article 226 of the Constitution.
13.
In State Bank of India & Ors. v. Samarendra Kishore, 1994(2) SCT 250 (SC) : 1994(2) SCC 537, the above passage from the judgment of the Supreme Court was quoted.
14.
Yet again in BC Chaturvedi v Union of India, reported in 1996(1) SCT 617 (SC) : 1995(6) SCC 749, the parameters of the judicial review of a writ Court have been clearly defined in the following terms :  "Judicial review is not an appeal from a decision but a review of the manner in which the decision is made.
Power of judicial review is meant to ensure that the individual receives fair treatment and not to ensure that the conclusion which the authority reaches is necessarily correct in the eye of the Court.
When an enquiry is conducted on charges of misconduct by a public servant, the Court/Tribunal is concerned to determine whether the inquiry was held by a competent officer or whether rules of natural justice are complied with.
Whether the findings or conclusions are based on some evidence, the authority entrusted with the power to hold inquiry has jurisdiction, power and authority to reach a finding of fact or conclusion.
But that finding must be based on some evidence.
Neither the technical rules of Evidence Act nor of proof of fact or evidence as defined therein, apply to disciplinary proceeding.
When the authority accepts that evidence and conclusion receives support therefrom, the disciplinary authority is entitled to hold that delinquent officer is guilty of the charge.
The Court/Tribunal in its power of judicial review does not act as appellate authority to reappreciate the evidence and to arrive at its own independent findings on the evidence.
The Court/Tribunal may interfere where the authority held the proceedings against the delinquent officer in a manner inconsistent with the rules of natural justice or in violation of statutory rules prescribing the mode of inquiry or where the conclusion or finding reached by the disciplinary authority is based on no evidence.
If the conclusion or findings be such as no reasonable person would have ever reached, the Court/Tribunal may interfere with the conclusion or the finding, and mould the relief so as to make it appropriate to the facts of each case."
15.
Judged in the light of the well settled principles of judicial review, it cannot be said that the conclusions arrived at by the enquiry officer is either perverse or not supported by evidence.
It is not the function of a writ Court to review or reappraise or reconsider the evidence or the findings arrived at by the enquiry officer/disciplinary authority.
Insofar as the charges are concerned, the conclusions arrived at by the enquiry officer receive support from the evidence and the material on record, the same was accepted by disciplinary authority.
The enquiry was conducted conforming to the principles of natural justice.
16.
As to the contention of Mr. Dey with regard to non-furnishing of the documents or giving inspection thereof vitiating the enquiry, it must be considered in the light of the observations made by the enquiry officer.
17.
In State Bank of Patiala v. SK Sharma, 1996(2) SCT 568 (SC) : reported in 1996(3) SCC 364, the complaint as to non-furnishing of documents requested by the delinquent, it was held, should be examined on the touch-stone of prejudice.
Invalidating an action on the ground of mere technical violation of principles of natural justice would amount to negation of justice instead of doing justice between the parties would not be justified.
In the instant case, the documents called for by the delinquent and the complaint of non-production thereof has to be tested on the touch-stone of prejudice thereby caused to the petitioner.
Neither before the enquiry officer nor before this Court, it has been demonstrated that non-production of the said documents has caused any prejudice to the petitioner.
The documents called for by the petitioner have no relevance to the charges framed against the petitioner.
The said contention of the petitioner on this aspect of the matter is accordingly rejected.
18.
I cannot accede the contention of Mr. Ashok Dey, learned counsel for the petitioner that consequent upon the election of the petitioner as a member of the Senate, the identity of the petitioner as an employee has merged into that of the member of the Senate.
The petitioner did not, in my view ceased to be an employee of the University.
The petitioner has rightly held by the enquiry officer has been proceeded against not in his capacity as a Senate member but only as an employee of the University.
19.
As to the contention of Mr. Dey that the offence with which the petitioner has been charged with does not amount to misconduct, it would be relevant to refer to the relevant provisions of the Ordinance 66 and 74 in the light of the submissions made by Mr. Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharjee, learned Senior Advocate for the respondent University.
"Order 66.
Every employee of the University shall at all time -  (i) maintain absolute integrity, and  (ii) do nothing which is unbecoming of an employee of the University.
Order 74.
The following may for good and sufficient reason, such as, (a) neglect of duty, (b) want of due diligence in the performance of duties, (c) violation of orders regarding attendance and office discipline, (d) in- subordination or disregard or violation of the orders of the superior Officers, (e) violation of any of the provision of this Ordinance, (f) conviction by a criminal Court for moral turpitude, or performance of an offence such as theft, (g) sufficient proof to justify the charge of obtaining bribe, (h) proof of tampering with official records with definite motive, etc. be imposed upon an employee, namely,  (i) Censure;  (ii) Withholding of increment not affecting promotion;  (iii) Recovery of the whole or part of any pecuniary loss caused to the University by negligence or beach of orders;  (iv) Removal or dismissal from service for offences number (f) to (h);"  20.
A bare perusal of Ordinance 74 would show that as contended by Mr. Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharjee, learned senior advocate for the respondent, the misconduct specified in the Clauses thereunder are illustrative and not exhaustive.
The very phraseology used therein supports the contention of Mr. Bhattacharjee.
The words "such as" preceding the clauses `a' to `h' contained therein is suggestive of the misconduct specified therein being illustrative in nature.
21.
I am for the aforesaid reason inclined to accept the submissions made on behalf of the respondent, by Mr. Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharjee that Ordinance 74 when read with Ordinance 66 would confer jurisdiction upon the disciplinary authority of the University to initiate disciplinary proceedings against its employees in respect of the misconduct alleged and in respect whereof the charges had been framed.
I am fortified in the view by a judgment of Satyabrata Sinha, J in Probodh Kr.
Bhowmick v University of Calcutta, reported in 1994(2) CLJ 456.
In the said judgment reference has been made to the Calcutta Universities Act, statutes and the ordinance and in paragraph `44' of the said judgment it was held as under :  "From what has been noticed hereinbefore, there cannot be any doubt that despite absence of any specific definition of misconduct as also the procedure laid down for initiation and/or completion of the disciplinary proceedings, an employer can initiate a departmental proceeding as against the petitioner for well known grounds of misconduct and also place him under suspension."
22.
As in the case of Probodh Kr.
Bhowmick, cited supra, Sinha, J has referred to the various judgments of the Supreme Court, it is not considered necessary to refer to them.
It must also be stated here that in Probodh Kr.
Bhowmick's case (supra), the judgments of the Supreme Court in Glaxo, AL Kalra and Rasiklal amongst others have been considered and distinguished.
Mr. Dey, learned counsel for the petitioner had relied upon the said judgments and for the reasons stated in Probodh Kr.
Bhowmick's case, (supra), it is not necessary to deal with the said judgments in any greater details in this judgment.
23.
In the context of the contentions raised by Mr. Dey as regards jurisdiction and authority of the University to initiate disciplinary proceedings as it did against the petitioner.
Probodh Kr.
Bhowmick's case (supra), concludes the matter and a few relevant paragraphs dealing with that aspect of the matter need to be extracted hereunder.
"In (1) Jagmohan Das Jagjiwan Das Mody v. State of Bombay, reported in 1962(2) LLJ page 507 the remarks made by the delinquent were found to lower the reputation of the Minister and it was held to be misconduct.
The obligation on the part of the Syndicate to take disciplinary measure as against a delinquent teacher in accordance with the Ordinance or State arises provided there exists any.
In absence of any rule the procedure in such a matter, in my considered view, the employer can take recourse to his general/inherent power to proceed against a teacher on the basis of well known and settled grounds of misconduct.
In such an event neither any case of conflict with the prescribed procedure nor `perishing with the sword' would arise as no procedural sword has been taken out by the employer."
24.
Now remains the question as regards the proportionality of the punishment awarded qua the offences with which the petitioner has been charged.
Keeping in view the five (5) charges armed against the petitioner and each of them having been established, the punishment of removal awarded cannot be said to be disproportionate or such as to shock the conscience of the Court.
It has been established in the enquiry that the language used in the leaflet was indecent, abusive, scurrilous and disrespectful and depicted the University authority in a contemptuous manner.
25.
The matter cannot, however, rest here in view of the formidable contention of Mr. Dey that even if the said charges with which the petitioner was charged are held established, the punishment of removal inflicted by the impugned order is beyond the power and jurisdiction of the respondent University authority.
26.
Mr. Dey contended that Ordinance 74 enumerates the misconduct and also prescribes the various punishments in relation thereof.
The punishments range from `minor' to `major' including the drastic punishment of removal or dismissal from service.
Service Law Jurisprudence recognises the punishments that can be awarded on the establishment of misconduct in proportion to the gravity of the charge.
Such punishments range from `minor' to `major' punishments that an employer can award to the employee.
It is Mr. Dey's submission that insofar as removal or dismissal from service is concerned, power has been conferred on the authority by Ordinance 74 to inflict such punishments for offence Nos. `f' to `h'.
The offence with which the petitioner has been charged does not fall within the three offenses specified in clauses `f' to `h' of Ordinance 74 and, therefore, such punishment of removal inflicted on the petitioner is wholly without jurisdiction.
27.
I am inclined to accept the said submission of Mr. Dey.
Various punishments have been enumerated conferring power and discretion upon the University to award any such punishment in respect of the offences or misconduct.
In so far as the punishment of removal or dismissal from service is concerned, it has been specifically laid down that the same can be awarded for offences enumerated in clauses `f' to `h'.
28.
Having accepted the contention of Mr. Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharjee, learned senior advocate for the University that the offences in Ordinance 74 are illustrative and even on the authority of Probodh Kr.
Bhowmick's case, (cited supra) that power is vested in the University as an employer to initiate disciplinary proceedings on well known grounds of misconduct, the same in my view cannot be stretched or extended to confer power where the same has not been conferred to award the punishment of dismissal or removal from service.
The phraseology used in the clause (iv) of Ordinance 74 whereby power is conferred upon the authority to award punishment of removal or dismissal from service is suggestive of a restriction imposed upon the authority and thereby limits the power of the University to award the said punishment of removal or dismissal only in the specific instances in relation to the offences enumerated in clauses `f' to `h'.
The University is conferred the discretion to award any of the three punishments enumerated in the clauses (i), (ii) and (iii) for any of the misconducts established against its employee.
However, as regards the punishment of removal or dismissal in clause (iv), the same can be inflicted on the establishment of the offences in clause `f', `g' or `h' of Ordinance 74.
29.
This Court, however, in its writ jurisdiction cannot substitute its views or award punishment which is in the realm of the jurisdiction of the respondent authority.
This Court, however, is not powerless to set aside the punishment awarded on the grounds and for the reasons already stated hereinbefore.
30.
In State Bank of India v. TL Paul, reported in 1994(4) SCC 759, a similar contention was considered.
In that case as per the Bank of Cochin Service Code, para 22(v) enumerated the punishments for gross misconduct and in particular sub-clause `e' thereof which stated as under :  "(e) have his misconduct condoned and be merely discharged from service."
In that case, the findings of the enquiry officer as regards the charge of misconduct having been established and the said finding having been upheld by the Court, the contention raised before the Supreme Court was that the punishment of removal awarded being not one of the enumerated penalties under para 22(v) of the Rules, the same could not have been awarded.
While dealing with the said contention, Supreme Court observed as under :  "Learned Senior Counsel for the appellants, Shri TR Andhyarujina tried to submit that if the appellate authority decided not to dismiss the respondent, it still had inherent power to award a punishment of "removal", which was lesser in severity.
Learned senior counsel contended that the discretion of the authorities to award such an appropriate punishment could not be interfered with in view of the decision of this Court in Union of India v. G Ganayutham, 1997(4) SCT 214 (SC) : 1997(7) SCC 463 : 1997 SCC (L&S) 1806.
In our view, this decision is not applicable to the facts of the case.
Here the Court is not interfering with the punishment awarded by the employer on the ground that in the opinion of the Court the punishment awarded is disproportionate to the gravity of the misconduct.
Here, the gradation of the punishment has been fixed by the rules themselves, namely, the rules of Bank of Cochin and the Court is merely insisting that the authority is confined to the limits of its discretion as restricted by the rules.
Inasmuch as the rules of Bank of Cochin have enumerated and listed out the punishments for "major misconduct", we are of the view that the punishment of "removal" could not have been imposed by the appellate authority and all that was permissible for the Bank was to confine itself to one or the other punishment for major misconduct enumerated in para 22(v) of the rules, other than dismissal without notice.
This conclusion of ours also requires the setting aside of the punishment of "removal" that was awarded by the appellate authority.
Now the other punishments enumerated under para 22(v) are "warning or censure or adverse remark being entered, or fine, or stoppage of increments/reduction of basic pay or to condone the misconduct and merely discharge from service."
The setting aside of the removal by the High Court and the relief of consequential benefits is thus sustained.
The matter has, therefore, to go back to the appellate authority for considering imposition of one or the other punishment in para 22(v) other than dismissal without notice."
31.
In the light of the above, the punishment of removal awarded by the impugned order cannot be sustained and is hereby quashed and set aside.
Consequently, the matter is remitted to the respondent authority to award such other punishment as may be open to it in law.
32.
For the aforesaid purpose, keeping in view that by the impugned order, petitioner was removed from service and has thus been out of service, it is desirable that the respondent authority take expeditious steps in the matter of awarding punishment within a specified time frame.
33.
In the result, writ application is allowed in part and the matter is remitted to the respondent authority for awarding the punishment as may be open to it in law within a period of three weeks from date of communication of this order.
Also, respondent authorities shall consequently pass appropriate orders with regard to the service of the petitioner as also with respect to the salary and arrears thereof depending upon the nature of punishment that may be inflicted by the respondent authority.
However, there shall be no order as to costs.
Application partly allowed.