RL Anand, J - Shri JP Goyal has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India and it has been prayed by the petitioner that order dated 29.3.1994 Annexure P-10 and the order dated 941994 (Annexure P-13) be quashed and directions be given to the respondents authorities to admit the petitioner into service.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he was the employee of the New Bank of India.
This Bank merged with Punjab National Bank.
The petitioner was inducted into the service of Sangrur Central Cooperative Bank Ltd against the post of Cashier-cum-Clerk in the year 1963.
He was selected as a Manager in New Bank of India.
He joined against the post of Manager on 981977 at Sanghera Branch of New Bank of India.
When he was discharging his duties in that Bank from April, 1988 to May, 1991 the Government of India in consultation with the Reserve Bank of India formulated a scheme known as "Debt Relief Scheme" for the farmers.
This scheme came in to force in the year 1990.
As per this scheme, the farmers who had taken the loans from the banks were given relief up to Rs. 10,000/-.
Those farmers who had already cleared their debts were also given the relief under the said scheme.
When the petitioner was discharging his duties as Branch Manager at Kirmach, District Kurukshetra, Haryana from May, 1991 to December, 1991, two Saving Bank Accounts bearing No. 3071 and 3072 were opened in the names of Tirlok Singh and Arjan Singh respectively on 6121991 at Kirmich Branch by Shri AK Dutta, Agriculture Officer and Shri RK Goswami, Accountant as the duty to open the accounts were assigned to the Accountant.
These saving accounts were initially opened for a consideration of Rs. 10/- each.
The petitioner had no knowledge about the opening of the saving account as these were never put up before him.
These saving accounts were opened in fictitious names without the knowledge of the petitioner.
In fact, the function of opening of accounts was not a part of the duties of the petitioner at all.
3.
Under the "Debt Relief Scheme" Shri Tirlok Singh and Shri Arjan Singh were the beneficiaries of Rs. 10,000/- each as they had already deposited the loan.
Resultantly, the bank authorities of Ratgal Branch issued them the CRIS (Certificate Re-investment Scheme) for Rs. 10,000/- each for 36 months on 6111991.
After opening of Account Nos. 3071 and 3072 a letter was addressed by the New Bank of India, Kirmach Branch to the Ratgal Branch.
However, on 31121991 a sum of Rs. 11030/- was withdrawn from Saving Bank Account No. 3071 and Rs. 11,000/- from Account No. 3072 by the beneficiaries Shri Tirlok Singh and Arjun Singh.
The petitioner came to know about the said episode from Shri AK Dutta who was holding dual charge of Agriculture Officer at Kirmach Branch as well as Ratgal Branch.
Mr. Dutta tried to entangle the petitioner in another episode.
The petitioner asked Shri AK Dutta about the whole episode who informed the petitioner that the saving accounts had been opened in fictitious names.
4.
Agriculture Officer Shri Dutta was simultaneously working at Kirmach and Ratgal Branch.
It was only within his reach to achieve the desired result.
Thus, the whole episode could only have been performed by Shri Dutta with the assistance of Shri RK Goswami who was the Accountant in the Kirmach Branch.
When the whole episode came to the knowledge of the petitioner he immediately brought these facts to the knowledge of the Deputy Regional Manager S Joginder Singh.
He also wrote to the beneficiaries about the withdrawal of the payment but so called Trilok Singh and Arjan Singh never replied.
So much so Mr. Dutta handed over a letter to the Assistant General Manager on 2551992, wherein he owned the responsibility that the amount so withdrawn has been shared by him along with the petitioner and two other parties.
This act has been done by Shri Dutta in order to entangle the petitioner in the embezzlement.
The services of Mr. Dutta had already been terminated by the Bank.
However, the petitioner was charge-sheeted on 23101992.
The petitioner alleges that he was never associated with the fictitiously opening of the accounts or with the withdrawal of the amount.
The whole episode has been done at the level of Mr. RK Goswami and Mr. Dutta Agricultural Officer who was simultaneously working at Kirmach and Ratgal Branchs as the power to open the account vested with the Accountant Shri Goswami.
The keys of the card cabinet also used to remain in the custody of the Accountant.
The petitioner was also charge-sheeted with regard to the absence from duty.
The third charge against the petitioner was that he evaded the training programme from 2551992 to 30.5.1992 though he applied for leave in order to visit Jalgaon (Maharashtra) where the son of the petitioner was studying.
After the return from Jalgaon, the petitioner went to Barnala where he fell ill and proceeded on medical leave.
Hence the charge sheet was untenable.
The petitioner filed the reply to the charge-sheet.
He denied all the allegations and stated that charge-sheet was false and fabricated just to tarnish his image.
The Inquiry Officer was appointed.
The petitioner requested the Inquiry Officer to supply the copies of the relevant documents but these were not supplied to him.
He made another request for the supply of the documents for the just decision of the inquiry proceedings but the authority did not supply the required documents to the petitioner.
Third time also the petitioner asked for the documents but to no effect, the Presiding Officer examined Shri RK Goswami, Accountant, Shri Ashok Singhal, Manager and Shri Joginder Singh, Deputy Regional Manager.
As the petitioner was not in possession of certain documents therefore, he could not effectively cross-examine these witnesses.
The petitioner was supplied with the copy of Inquiry Report.
The perusal of the same would show that the Inquiry Officer came to the conclusion that Presiding Officer could not establish as to how the charge-sheeted Officer was got hold of two re- investment certificates.
There was no independent evidence to show that the re-investment certificates were taken away by the petitioner.
The petitioner gave reply to the Inquiry report.
However, the disciplinary authorities accepted the findings of the Inquiry Officer and imposed penalty of removal which according to the petitioner is illegal.
The order is non-speaking one.
The Inquiry Officer has taken into consideration irrelevant evidence.
So much so according to the petitioner it is a case of "no evidence" and still he had been removed from services.
It is also the ground of the petitioner that no opportunity of personal hearing was given to him.
The petitioner filed an appeal which was also dismissed on 441994.
In short the case set up by the petitioner is that the Inquiry is illegal.
There was no evidence at all before the Inquiry Officer to return the finding against the petitioner and the order of removal which is based on the inquiry report containing no evidence has to be struck down.
5.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents who filed the reply and denied the allegations.
6.
Joint written statement was filed on behalf of the respondents and they took the stand that due procedure prescribed was adopted the after giving adequate opportunity to the petitioner, the finding has gone against the petitioner.
The petitioner failed to point out any illegality or irregularity on the part of the Inquiry Officer.
The Inquiry Officer rightly came to the conclusion that the charges against the petitioner stand proved.
The appeal filed by the petitioner was duly considered by the appellate authority before whom the petitioner failed to point out any irregularity or illegality.
There was no extraneous or malafide consideration for the punishing authority nor any malafide has been alleged.
The High Court cannot sit as a Court of appeal over the administrative decision unless and until the same are vitiated for extraneous or mala fide consideration.
Defending the finding of the Inquiry Officer, the respondents played for the dismissal of the writ petition.
7.
The petitioner filed a rejoinder to the written statement in which he reiterated his allegations by denying those of the written statement.
8.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and with their assistant have gone through the record of the case.
9.
It was vehemently argued by the learned counsel for the petitioner that it was a case of "no evidence" and the Inquiry Officer unnecessarily has given the finding against the petitioner, it was further argued by Shri Mittal that Shri AK Dutta the author of the letter Annexure P-3 had resiled from the same as having written by him in the departmental proceedings against him and in view of his retraction the document Annexure P-3 cannot be relied upon against the petitioner.
This is the only evidence on which the department relied while issuing the charge-sheet to the petitioner.
The moment the document Annexure P-3 is taken out of consideration, the finding of the Inquiry Officer cannot be sustained from any angle of vision.
The learned counsel for the petitioner also referred to the findings of the Inquiry Officer and stated that the Inquiry Officer himself has admitted that Presenting Officer could not establish how the charge-sheeted Officer got hold on two re-investment certificates.
Rather the probability of taking away these two investment certificates of debt relief from Branch of Ratgal rests with Shri AK Dutta who was the Agricultural Officer and was working there on the assigned days.
The Inquiry Officer has also admitted that there is no independent evidence on record to show that two re-investment certificates were taken away by Shri Goel.
10.
I have considered these submissions raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner and in my opinion these are totally devoid of merit.
11.
When a fraud is prayed it can never be proved by a direct evidence.
Fraud and embezzlement are always committed in secrecy.
It is established on the record that the accounts in the names of Shri Arjun Singh and Tirlok Singh were opened fictitiously in the Kirmach Branch.
The Bank people knew that these two people would be the beneficiaries under the scheme and that the money has to be returned to them.
Therefore, two fictitious accounts were opened in the names of Arjun Singh and Shri Tirlok Singh.
Re-investment certificates were issued.
These were got deposited and now it is to be seen how these have been handled and withdrawn.
12.
Before I proceed further with the judgment it will be appropriate for me to make short reference with regard to the various charges levelled against the petitioner.
The first charge was that he failed to discharge his duties with utmost integrity, honesty, devotion and diligence and that he acted in a manner of unbecoming of an officer of the Bank.
Unfortunately, in the statement of allegations, it was alleged that two re-investment certificates were issued by Branch Officer Ratgal in favour of the beneficiaries Arjan Singh and Tarlok Singh and those were sent for collection.
The money was got transferred by the petitioner on 12121991 who misrepresented to the Manager, Ratgal that he had got the account open form and that it was a mere transfer and that the parties were good.
Resultantly, the money was transferred and it was collected by Shri Goel who credited the same in the saying bank account No. 3071 and 3072 which were opened on false pursuation.
It was also alleged against the petitioner that he shared the amount of Rs. 22030/- fraudulently drawn on 31121991 along with Shri AK Dutta and two others.
The second allegations was that the petitioner was advised to attend the training programme but he did not attend the said programme in spite of due information.
Rather the petitioner started proceeding on leave.
13.
We all know that the jurisdiction of the Civil Court/ High Court in interfering the departmental proceedings, is not unlimited.
We can examine if any illegality has been committed by the Inquiry Officer.
The Civil Court or the High Court can also examine whether the order passed by the punishing authority is in violation of the statutory provisions.
It is a settled principle of law that this court cannot sit as a Court of appeal but if the Inquiry Officer or the punishing authority had exceeded his jurisdiction or the order has been passed in a biased, vindictive or for extraneous reasons or that the order is arbitrary certainly this Court will interfere.
If the Court finds that there was evidence produced by the management before the Inquiry Officer then sufficiency of evidence is not to be seen by this Court.
I have gone through the Inquiry report of Shri VM Malhotra.
Reading of the same would show that the management examined three witnesses and those were duly cross-examined except witness No. 3 who was not cross-examined by the petitioner.
The Inquiry Officer took into consideration all the documents which were presented by the Presenting Officer and those documents were admitted.
Rather the petitioner did not lead any evidence nor he examined any witness in spite of opportunities were granted.
He wanted to produce Shri AK Dutta and one Shri P.C.
Dhingra but he could not produce them.
14.
From the statement of PW-3, the Inquiry Officer came to a positive finding that account Nos. 3071 and 3072 were opened by the persons who were duly introduced by Shri JP Goel.
He again clarified that the keys of the card cabinet in which account deposit forms were being kept in the drawer of the table and the keys of the table always remained with the Manager.
Similarly, PW2 reiterated that a sum of Rs. 22030/- was transferred at the instance of charge-sheeted Officer on 12121991.
Similarly, Shri Joginder Singh, management witness stated that the real claimants were illiterate persons.
By making the entire assessment of the evidence produced by the management, the Inquiry Officer gave the following finding :-  Assessment of Evidence :  Whether these two CRISs bearing Nos. 134237/321/90 and 134240/324/90 both dated 6.11.90 were issued in favour of Shri Arjun Singh son of Sh. Jit Ram and Sh. Tirlok Singh son of Shri Karam Singh and collected by BO Kirmich vide their OBC No. 200 and OBC No. 201 through Sh. JP Goel Manager by mis- representing that (i) he had got the account opening forms, (ii) it was a mere transfer, and (iii) the parties are good.
As per documentary evidence on record and duly authenticated by MW 1 and MW 2 during the course of proceeding, the above mentioned two CRISs were issued by BO Ratgal on account of Debt Relief in favour of Sh. Arjun Singh son of Shri Jit Ram and Sh. Tirlok Singh son of Sh. Karam Singh on 6.11.1990 (ME 1, 15 and 16).
Ex. 15 and 16 further reveal that the borrowers were illiterate.
It synchronises with the facts stated in Ex. 18 and 19 and MW3.
Further Ex. ME 6 and ME 7 state that the aforesaid CRISs were sent for collection by BO Kirmich on 6121991.
The payment of these CRISs could not be made on 10.10.1992 in the absence of ADF in record.
However, on 12121992 the same were paid at the assurance of the Manager (CSO).
Ex. ME1, ME6 to ME10 were admitted by CSO.
MW 2 and Ex. M20 does not state that the CRISs were taken away by CSO from BO Ratgal and thereafter BO Kirmich forwarded the said CRISs to BO Ratgal under CBO Nos. 200 and 201 for collection.
MW2 and Ex. M 20, however, state that the proceeds alongwith CRISs were given to CSO and that too at his insistence.
At no stage, CSO has refuted the allegation that he has visited BO Ratgal.
On the other hand he states only that the topic was not the least discussed with him by BM Ratgal.
So it is clear that he went personally to collect the proceeds of CRISs sent under CBC Nos. 200 and 201 for collection.
It is proved that Sh. JP Goel misrepresented the Manager BO Ratgal that he had got the ACSs in respect of the beneficiaries of Debt Relief who were illiterate persons, (ii) it was emerge transfer of funds, and (iii) that the parties are good.
Whether the proceeds amounting to Rs. 22062/- so collected were credited to the accounts bearing Nos. 3071 and 3072 opened in false presentation in the names of beneficiaries of the debt relief i.e. S/Sh.
Tarlok Singh son of Sh. Karam Singh and Arjun Singh son of Shri Jit Ram as under :- Rs. 11031/- in SB A/c No. 3071 Rs. 11031/- in SB A/c No. 3072  Ex. ME 15 and Ex. ME 16 reveal that the beneficiaries of debt relief were illiterate persons.
These exhibits were duly authenticated by MW 2.
These facts were supported by ME 18 and ME 19 and MW3 whereas Ex. ME 8 and Ex. ME 9 obtained by BO Kirmich are contrary to facts.
Here, the beneficiaries of debt relief i.e. Sh. Tarlok Singh son of Shri Karam Singh and Sh. Arjun Singh son of Shri Jit Ram are illiterate and put their LTIs on 1651992 i.e. 4-1/2 months after the money was withdrawn from SB Bank A/c No. 3071 and 3072 at BO Kirmich.
They further informd that they have not opened any account in BO Kirmich.
So it is proved that SB A/c Nos. 3071 and 3072 in the name of Sh. Tirlok son of Karam Singh and Sh. Arjun Singh son of Jit Ram were opened in false personation at BO Kirmich.
Ex. ME 4, Ex. ME 5 and Ex. ME 11 duly authenticated by MW 1 clearly states that the amount so collected (Ex. ME 12) were credited to these impersonated A/c on 14121991 i.e. Rs. 11031 in SB A/c No. 3071 and Rs. 11031 in SB A/c No. 3072.
Ex. ME 21 which was duly proved and corroborated by MW 1 Shri RK Goswami is an evidence of the facts that CSO knew the so called Arjun Singh and Tarlok Singh before introducing the accounts, in whose names these SB A/c bearing Nos. 3071 and 3072 were opened in BO Kirmich.
So the allegation is proved.
Whether Sh. JP Goel shared the amount of Rs. 22030/- fraudulently withdrawn on 31121991 from the said AC A/Cs 3071 (Rs. 11030/-) and 3072 (Rs. 11000/-) with Sh. AK Dutta Agriculture Officer (under suspension) alongwith two other persons.
From the foregoing two paragraphs it is established that two accounts were opened in false personation at BO Kirmich with the intention to deprive the real owners of their legitimate dues of debt relief.
Ex. ME 17 states that the amounts so collected and credited in false personated accounts were withdrawn as per Ex. ME 13 and ME 14 duly authenticated by MW1.
Ex. ME 17 is an admission by Sh. AK Dutta stating therein the sharing of the money with Sh. JP Goel and other two persons.
Presenting Officer could not establish that how CSB has got hold of two CRISs.
On the other hand, the probability of taking away these two CRISs of Debt Relief from BO Ratgal rest with Sh. AK Dutta who was Agricultural Officer and was also working at BO Ratgal on assigned days of the week.
There is no independent evidence on record to show that the aforesaid CRISs were taken away by Sh. JP Goel.
At the same time, the evidence of MW 2 that Shri JP Goel was handed over the CRISs alongwith transfer drafts and those CRISs never found their place in bank record.
Similarly, ACFs relating to these accounts, too were found missing on 1651992 in card cabinet which were accessible to CSO as per Ex. ME.
21.
As per facts and evidence produced before me it is clear that CSO was aware of the misrepresentation and fraudulent withdrawal.
His involvement cannot be ruled out and he has acted with mala fide intention from the very beginning.
Hence, the charge is proved that he shared the amount of Rs. 22030/- fraudulently withdrawn from impersonated accounts (SB A/c Nos. 3071 and 3072 with Sh. AK Dutta along with two other persons."
15.
Stray line cannot be looked into.
The finding has to be examined as a whole and in the light of the evidence produced by the management.
As I stated earlier in this judgment that fraud and conspiracy cannot be proved by direct evidence in such like cases where banking institutions are involved.
The frauds are detected at a later stage when the documents are audited or scanned in proper perspective.
It is not always necessary that a charge should be proved by direct evidence.
The Inquiry Officer has clearly come to the conclusion from the statement of management witness No. 2 that Shri Goel was handed over the re-investment certificate along with the transfer drafts and these re-investment certificates were never found there placed in the bank record.
Similarly, form relating to these accounts were also found missing in the card cabinet on 1651992 regarding which the petitioner had the access.
The Inquiry Officer also gave a direct finding against the petitioner that charge-sheet Officer was aware of the misrepresentation and fraudulent withdrawal.
His involvement could not be ruled out as he had acted with a malafide intention from the very beginning.
Thus, the charge against the petitioner to the tune of Rs. 22030/- stands proved.
The petitioner has not alleged any mala fides either against the Inquiry Officer or against the punishing authority.
With regard to his defence that he was not supplied with certain documents it has no force because all those documents which were relied upon by the management had been admitted and that the copies of those documents were supplied to the charge-sheeted Officer.
16.
Reverting to the frontal argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner that Shri Dutta has resiled from the contents of the letter Annexure P-3, it has no force.
The petitioner got an opportunity to cross- examine Shri Dutta but he did not appear.
Moreover, if Dutta has resiled from document Annexure P-3 how the case of the petitioner is disproved.
Confession of Mr. Dutta was an additional evidence.
The Inquiry Officer has not acted on the sole confession of Shri Dutta.
He has independently formulated an opinion that all pointer goes against the petitioner in the departmental proceedings which was conducted with the help of the record.
Mr. Gupta will always say that he was innocent but nevertheless during the course of submissions, it was brought to my notice that Mr. Dutta was also charge- sheeted and his services were also terminated.
How, the management can produce Mr. Dutta when it is already proceeding against him in the separate departmental proceedings.
It is not the case of the petitioner that letter Annexure P-3 is not signed by Mr. Dutta.
The retracted confession of Shri Dutta cannot make the case of the department weak as the department never got the opportunity to cross-examine Mr. Dutta to explain under what circumstances earlier he confessed that he along with petitioner and two others committed the fraud and became the beneficiaries.
17.
Be that as it may, the fact remains that it is a case with full evidence.
I disapprove the argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner that in view of the so-called retracted confession of Shri Dutta the charge against the petitioner never stood proved.
18.
Resultantly, I do not see any merit in this writ petition and the same is hereby dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.