RL Anand, J - Ex-Sepoy Swaran Singh has filed the present writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India praying that a writ of certiorari be issued by quashing the orders Annexures P-2 and P-7 vide which his case for disability pension has been rejected in an illegal manner and in violation and disregard to the Army Act, Rules and Regulations and the petitioner has further prayed that a declaration be granted in his favour that he is entitled to the benefit of disability pension with effect from 151996.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he was enrolled into the army service as recruit on 1961980 and at that time he was in a very good mental and physical health and he was placed in category AYE.
He was discharged from the army on 151996 before completion of his term of engagement and he was placed in lower medical category BEE permanent without affording any alternative employment.
The petitioner received communication from the Record Officer to the effect that his claim for disability pension has been rejected on 2811997 vide Annexure P-2.
The petitioner on 531997 addressed a letter Annexure P-3 requesting him to supply the copy of the sheet containing decision of Medical Advisor (Pension) and this decision has not been supplied to the petitioner.
The petitioner sent a reminder Annexure P-4 on 2061997.
The petitioner then filed a statutory appeal Annexure P-5 on 1171997 against the rejection of his claim for disability pension.
He also served a legal notice Annexure P-6 on 23.2.1999.
His appeal was also rejected vide Annexure P-7 on 13101999 by a non-speaking and cryptic order and he was not afforded the opportunity of being heard at the time of rejection of his appeal.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents and written statement was filed by respondent No. 4 on behalf of all the respondents.
4.
The stand taken by the respondents is that the Medical Release Board has assessed the disability of the petitioner less than 20% and as such the petitioner is not entitled for any benefit of disability pension under the Rules.
5.
I have heard Shri S.R.
Kanwar, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner and Shri Kamal Sehgal, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents and with their assistance have gone through the record of this case.
6.
Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner submitted that the disability assessed by the Medical Board less than 20% was an arbitrary one.
Petitioner was not supplied with the medical sheet, on the basis of which the opinion was formulated by the Medical Board and he has been deprived of a valuable right.
According to the learned counsel for the petitioner, the petitioner has been permanently incapacitated and in fact his disability is more than 20%.
No effective opportunity was given to the petitioner to put his case before the Medical Board.
Rather the learned counsel for the petitioner has gone to the extent that the signatures of his client were obtained on blank paper and he never participated before the Medical Board.
7.
Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents, on the contrary, has refuted the allegations of the petitioner by stating that the petitioner did participate before the Medical Board as is evident from the proceedings.
The petitioner was noticed with a case of unspecified Psychosis and his disability was assessed as Nil and in these circumstances, the petitioner is not entitled to the benefit of the disability pension.
8.
After considering the rival contentions of the parties, I am of the opinion that it may be difficult for me to agree with the learned counsel for the petitioner in view of the documentary evidence which has been placed on record by the learned counsel for the respondents.
This documentary evidence is the opinion of the Medical Board.
It clearly states that the petitioner was suffering from unspecified Psychosis but the extent of disability was noticed as nil.
9.
In these circumstances, the petitioner has not been able to make out his case for the disability pension for the present.
10.
Faced with this difficulty, learned counsel for the petitioner reiterated that his client is still suffering from the disability and his client will be satisfied if some directions are given to the respondent to constitute a Medical Board and opportunity should be given to the petitioner to appear before the Board so as to substantiate his claim with regard to the disability.
This submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner requires consideration and there is merit in this submission.
11.
In these circumstances, the writ petition is hereby dismissed with the direction to the respondent authority to constitute a Re-survey Medical Board within three months from the receipt of the copy of the order.
The venue of the Re-survey Medical Board will be near to the house of the petitioner i.e. Western Command Hospital Chandi Mandir.
The petitioner shall be informed about the date, time and the place when he has to appear.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.