RL Anand, J. (Oral) - Laxman Das son of Diwan Chand has filed the present writ petition against the State of Haryana and its functionaries under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari for quashing the order passed by respondent No. 4.
The petitioner has also prayed a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to make the payment of the amount of medical reimbursement.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he was appointed as Math Master.
When he was aged 25 years, he suffered ailment of kidney and took treatment in Kartik Kidney Care Hospital, Hisar, Balaji Hospital, Hisar, Bharat Nursing Home, Hisar, and Sir Ganga Ram Hospital, New Delhi, where he was given treatment of dialysis.
He was referred by the Principal Medical Officer, Govt. Hospital, Hisar to Specialist at Medical College, Rohtak, as a result of which he was admitted in Pt. BD Sharma PGI, Rohtak on 18.1.1996.
On 1911996, he was referred to AIIMS, New Delhi for kidney replacement, where he was given Registration Card No. 23713 of 1996 and was referred to the Department of Nephrology.
After some treatment given to him and his mother, who was the donor, they were referred by the AIIMS authorities for admission to ABY Ward.
But there the doctor gave a note on the card that no bed was vacant.
Resultantly, the petitioner was required to wait for 26 weeks for the operation because of the vacancy of bed.
On account of emergency the petitioner was admitted to Sir Ganga Ram Hospital, New Delhi as his condition was very critical.
Thereafter he was operated upon on 321996 in the said hospital and his kidney was replaced.
He was discharged along with his mother on 1821996 and in this manner he incurred a sum of Rs. 83,229/-.
A sum of Rs. 33,563/- was spent on the mother of the petitioner and the total amount comes to Rs. 1,16,792/-.
After operation the petitioner spent a sum of Rs. 33,142/- w.e.f.
8.3.1997 to 8.7.1998.
He made an application for reimbursement on 1331996 before respondent No. 4, who referred the case to respondent No. 2.
Respondent No. 2 raised the objection that the petitioner should bring NAC from the AIIMS.
Finally, the bill of the petitioner was declined on the ground that Sir Ganga Ram Hospital is not a recognised one.
With above broad allegations the petitioner has prayed for the reimbursement of medical bills.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondent, who filed the reply and denied the allegations.
According to the respondents, the petitioner is not entitled to any medical reimbursement because Sir Ganga Ram Hospital is not a recognised hospital and as such any treatment of a government employee in this hospital is not reimbursable by the State of Haryana.
4.
I have heard Mr. RK Jain, Advocate, on behalf of the petitioner, Mr. Heman Aggarwal, Advocate, on behalf of the respondents and with their assistance have gone through the record of the case.
5.
The proved facts are that the petitioner was a case of kidney failure and transplantation of the kidney was required.
It is also not disputed that this operation was performed upon the petitioner in Sir Ganga Ram Hospital and the mother of the petitioner became the donor of the kidney.
The sole point which survives for determination in this petition is whether the petitioner is entitled to the medical reimbursement of the actual expenses incurred by him in Sir Ganga Ram Hospital or not.
I agree with the stand of the State Government that Sir Ganga Ram Hospital, New Delhi is not a recognised one.
In these circumstances, the petitioner will not be entitled to reimburse the actual expenditure.
6.
The learned counsel for the petitioner with the assistance of Annexure P4 tried to convince me that as an emergency case the petitioner was taken to Sir Ganga Ram Hospital, because no bed was lying vacant in the AIIMS as has been certified in Annexure P4.
But a reading of Annexure P4 would show that there is no reference by the AIIMS to this extent.
The certificate is only to the limited extent that no bed was available in ABY Ward and the petitioner was kept at Sr. No. 26 in the waiting list.
In the absence of any reference, the petitioner is only entitled to such rates as are applicable in the AIIMS.
In these circumstances, the petition is partly allowed and a declaration is granted that the petitioner shall get the medical reimbursement at the rate as applicable at the relevant time in AIIMS.
The medical reimbursement bills of the petitioner shall be finalised by the Government and its functionaries within three months from the receipt of certified copy of this order, failing which the petitioner shall also be entitled to the interest @ 12% P.A.
It is also clarified that the petitioner is not entitled to any medical reimbursement with regard to the expenditure incurred on his mother.
Petition partly allowed.