RL Anand, J - Ex-Sep Ranjit Singh has filed the present petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for the issuance of the writ in the nature of certiorari and he has sought quashment of the orders Annexures P-2 vide which his claim for disability pension was rejected.
It may be mentioned that the petitioner also field an appeal against the order Annexure P-2 and during the pendency of this writ petition vide Annexure P-4 his appeal has been dismissed by the authorities mainly on the ground that the disease suffered by the petitioner was not attributable to the army service.
In this manner, the petitioner is now seeking the quashment of the order Annexure P-2 and P-4.
2.
Some facts can be noticed in the following manner.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he was enrolled into the army service on 581987.
This aspect of the case is being disputed by the Union of India and as per the stand of the respondent the date of the enrolment of the petitioner is 481987.
Be that as it may, it is a minor discrepancy.
According to the petitioner he was shunted out from the military service on 1821995 after serving 7 years, 6 months and 14 days.
The petitioner further alleges that while he was serving in the army he suffered two types of disease.
First one was Schizophrenia and disability was Generalised Seizures and disability under this head was also 40%.
Thus, the compost disability of both the diseases was assessed at 60% for a period of two years.
In nutshell, the petitioner submits that the composite disability is attributable to the army service and, therefore, he is entitled to the disability pension and his claim for disability pension has been wrongly rejected by the respondent-authorities.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondent-authorities who filed the written statement and denied the allegations.
According to the respondents, the petitioner joined the army on 481987 and when the petitioner was posted in 11 Sikh Regiment, he had an episode of generalised tonic clonic seizure on 11 October, 1988 just after rendering only 2 years of service in peace station i.e. Ramgarh Cantt.
He was admitted in various hospitals.
All types of medical examinations and tests were carried out and the petitioner was found normal by medical authorities.
He was placed in medical category CEE (Temporary) with effect from 26111988, by the medical board.
Again the petitioner was brought before the medical board for the review of his medical category on June 14, 1989 and after his thorough physical examination he was again placed in the same medical category i.e. CEE (Temporary) for further 6/12 years for the same disease by the Medical Board, approved on 1761989 by the competent authority.
The medical disability of the petitioner was again reviewed and it was upgraded to medical category "BEE" (Temporary) for a period of 6/12 years by a medical board which held its meeting on 14121989.
Thereafter, the petitioner was deployed in Field Area, near the State of Punjab and Jammu and Kashmir but was again admitted in the hospital on 2061990 from where he was transferred to Army Hospital, Delhi Cantt.
on 2461990 and again was transferred to medical hospital at Jalandhar on 30.6.1990 from where he was discharged on 10.7.1990 and the petitioner was diagnosed as a case of Thurotoxicosts.
Again the petitioner was brought before the medical board for review of his earlier medical category on 9.7.1990 at Jalandhar and he was placed in category BEE (Temporary) for a period of six months starting from 1461990.
The case of the respondent further is that he had been getting treatment from time.
In para No. 14 of the written-statement it has been stated as follows by the Government of India :  "That on admission, his complaints were, inadequate penila eraction, feeling of depression, disturbed sleep for 4 months.
The details revealed that he was reported well till November, 1992.
When he got a letter from his home stating that his only brother got separated from his parents, which he did not expect and he was worried.
He kept thinking about it and could not concentrate on his day to day activities.
He went on annual leave and he found difficulty in having sex with his wife this added to his existing problems.
He tried to re- counsel with his parents and brother but could not succeed and hence came back to his unit.
In the unit, he remained dull and depressed.
Psychiatric evaluation done then revealed him to be showing features of anxiety, depression and attention seeking behaviour, lack of self-confidence.
Thereafter he was treated as a case of Neurosis.
He was sent on a spell of leave of four weeks on 1561993.
On returning from sick leave, his mental status was disturbed.
He said that his mind was not working and that he was hearing strange voice saying "Runaway" Mental status examination revealed that he was ill kept, showing psychomotor restlessness, speech was irrational, auditory hallucination present showing ideas of references.
Attention ill sustained, behaviour impulsive and predicted overall picture was of a psychotic illness in the nature of schizophrenia.
After the thorough physical examination, test and treatment, he gradually showed steady improvement of his condition.
He was sent on second spell of sick leave.
On expiry of sick leave, then review done on him and considered fit to be retained in service.
He was also placed in the medical category CEE (Psych) temp for six months by the Medical Board w.e.f.
1 December, 1993 for the disease Schizophrenia."
4.
With this defence, the respondents have tried to make out a case that the disability suffered by the petitioner is not attributable to the army service.
Rather it is due to family circumstances.
Also it is alleged by the respondents that perhaps the petitioner was not satisfied with his sexual life.
Therefore, he became a patient of depression and this disease by no stretch of imagination can be attributed to the army service.
5.
I have heard Shri B.S.
Sehgal, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner and Shri Anil Malhotra, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents and with their assistance have gone through the record and I am of the considered opinion that the diseases suffered by the petitioner are attributable to the army service.
It is a matter of record and there is no denial from the side of the respondents that when the petitioner joined service he was put to medical test and at that time no deformity was ever noticed by the authorities qua the petitioner.
It is not the absolute rule or criteria as propounded by the respondent authorities that since the petitioner never undertook posting at a disturbed area or a sensitive station, therefore, it has to be inferred that the disease suffered by the petitioner is not attributable to the Army service.
As I stated above, the petitioner was found fit when he was taken into Army service.
After joining army service a soldier is put to lot of stress and training and then he becomes a regular soldier.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has relied upon 1998(4) R.S.J.
467, Union of India and others v. Ex-Sepoy Satwinder Singh, 1999(1) RSJ 778, A.S.J.
Chaudhary v. Union of India and others.
In these cited cases, the Hon'ble D.B.
after taking note of the relevant provisions of the regulations 1961, came to the conclusion that if at the time of joining the military service, there is no service note recorded by the authorities with regard to any disease of the candidate, then in such a situation it has to be inferred that the disease suffered by the soldier is attributable to the army service.
6.
In this view of the matter, I hold and declare that the disease suffered by the petitioner is attributable to the Army service, therefore the petitioner is entitled to disability pension which shall be released to him with effect from the date of his discharge from the army service, within three months from the receipt of the copy of this order, failing which, the petitioner shall also be entitled to interest at the rate of 12%.
The petitioner shall appear before the Re-Survey Medical Board as and when called upon by the respondent authority.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.