JS Narang, J - The petitioner was promoted as Deputy Economic and Statistical Advisor on 15.9.1987 vide order dated 3181987 and there after his promotion was regularised vide order dated 7111989 w.e.f.
15.9.1987.
As per the petitioner, his service conditions are governed by the Punjab Economic and Statistical Organisation (State Service Class-I) Rules, 1963 (hereinafter referred to as "the Rules)".
As per the said rules, the contention of the petitioner is that next channel of promotion from the post of Deputy Economic and Statistical Advisor is to the post of Joint Director and the petitioner was accordingly promoted as Joint Director on 2641999 vide order of even date copy Annexure P 2/1.
The next channel of promotion from the post of Joint Director is to the Post of Director or Economic Adviser to the Government of Punjab.
Reliance has been placed upon the qualifications provided for the post of Director/Economic Adviser as given in Appendix `B' to the Rules.
It shall be apposite to reproduce the qualifications for the appointment to the post of Economic Adviser to Government of Punjab, Director, Joint Director and Deputy Economic and Statistical Adviser, which read as under :-  Sr. No.
Designation of Post Academic qualifications Experience 1.
Economic Adviser to Government, Punjab (a) By Direct appointment or by Transfer : Second Class Master's Degree in Economics or in Commerce or Agricultural Economics with Statistics as one of the papers from a recognised University, preference to be given to a person having PhD Degree.
(a) By Direct appointment or by Transfer, Ten years experience in guiding and conducting research in various Economic and Statistical matters either in a University or in some Economic and Statistical organisation in a gazetted capacity.
(b) By promotion Master's Decree in Economics or Mathematics or Agricultural Economics or Commerce or Statistics with Statistics as one of the papers in first four cases from a recognised University.
(b) By Promotion Twelve years experience in guiding and conducting research work on various Economic and Statistical matters as Deputy Economic and Statistical Adviser or Joint Director or Director, out of which two years should be as Director in the Economic and Statistical Organisation Punjab.
2.
Director (a) By Direct appointment or by transfer (a) By Direct Appointment or by Transfer.
Second Class Master's Degree in Economics or Commerce or Agricultural Economics with Statistics as one of the papers from a recognised University.
Preference to be given to a person having PhD Degree.
Eight years experience in guiding and conducting research work on various Economic and Statistical matters either in University or in some Economic and Statistical Organisation in a gazetted capacity.
(b) By Promotion : (b) By Promotion : Master's Degree in Economics or Mathematics or Agricultural Economics or Commerce or Statistics with Statistics as one of the papers in the first four cases from a recognised University.
Ten years experience in guiding and conducting research on various Economic and Statistical matters as Deputy Economic and Statistical Adviser or Joint Director and other gazetted posts in the line, out of which two years should be as Joint Director in the Economic and Statistical Organisation, Punjab.
3.
Joint Director (a) By Direct Appointment or by Transfer : (a) By Direct Appointment or by Transfer : Second Class Master's Degree in Economics or Agricultural Economics with Statistics as one of the papers from a recognised University.
Preference to be given to a person having PhD Degree.
Five years experience in guiding and conducting research in Economic and Statistical matters either in a University or in some Economic and Statistical Organisation in a gazetted capacity.
(b) By Promotion : (b) By Promotion : Master's degree in Economics or Mathematics or Agricultural Economics or Commerce or Statistics with Statistics as one of the papers in first four cases from a recognised University.
Eight years experience in guiding and conducting research in various Economic and Statistical matters as Senior Research Officer or Deputy Economic and Statistical Adviser and other gazetted posts in the line, out of which two years should be as Deputy Economic and Statistical Adviser in Economic and Statistical Organisation Punjab.
4.
Deputy Economic and Statistical Adviser.
(a) By Direct Appointment or by transfer : (a) By Direct Appointment or by transfer : Second Class Master's Degree in Economics or Commerce or Agricultural Economics with Statistics as one of the papers from a recognised University.Preference to be given to a person having PhD Degree.
Five years experience in supervising and conducting research in various Economic and Statistical matters in a University or in some Economic and Statistical Organisation in gazetted capacity.
(b) By Promotion : (b) By Promotion : Master's degree in Economics or Mathematics or Agricultural Economics or Commerce or Statistics with Statistics as one of papers in the first four cases from a recognised University.
Seven years Experience as Research Officer or District Statistical Officer or both in the Economic and Statistical Organisation Punjab."
2.
Argument is that the petitioner having worked for ten years in guiding and conducting research in various Economic and Statistical matters while being on the post of Deputy Economic and Statistical Adviser, is eligible to be promoted as Director/Economic Adviser and the emphasis has been laid upon the words "Ten years experience" which is to be counted only in the post of Deputy Economic and Statistical Adviser.
3.
I am afraid the argument of the learned counsel is devoid of any merit.
A plain reading of the qualifications meant for appointment of Director by promotion are absolutely clear.
It is categorically provided that in all eventualities ten years experience in guiding and conducting research in various Economical and Statistical matters shall be pre-requisite before a person can be considered for promotion to the rank of Director.
This experience of ten years can be acquired in the capacity of Deputy Economic and Statistical Adviser or Joint Director and upon the other gazetted posts in the line.
It has been further provided that out of this period of ten years the person to be considered must have worked for two years as Joint Director in the Economic and Statistical Organisation, Punjab.
Thus, it is condition precedent that before a person can be promoted to the rank of Director he must have functioned as a Joint Director in the Economic and Statistical Organisation, Punjab, in the absence thereof the person shall not be considered eligible for promotion to the rank of Director.
4.
If the argument of the learned counsel is taken to a logical conclusion then the hierarchy of promotion which has been created by virtue of the rules would become meaningless.
Senior Research Officer would become directly eligible for the post of Joint Director, Deputy Economic and Statistical Adviser would become eligible to be appointed as Director/Economic Adviser.
That is not the import of the rule.
In view of the above discussion, I do not find any merit of this petition and the same is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.