NK Sodhi, J - By a notification dated February 1, 1999 the State of Punjab appointed the Punjab Technical University, Jalandhar (for short PTU) as an authority competent to conduct the Common Entrance Test, 1999 (CET).
On the basis of this test, the PTU was required to make admissions to various degree level Engineering and Architecture courses being run in the institutions and Universities located in the State of Punjab.
The institutions for which admissions were to be made included the Thapar Institute of Engineering and Technology, Patiala (respondent No. 3).
Conditions of eligibility for admission to the courses were specified in the notification.
Clause (C) (iv) of this notification provided that reservation policy for making admissions in various Engineering/Professional Institutions approved by the State Government and circulated as per its letter dated June 30, 1998 modified by letter dated September 8, 1998 would be applicable in toto.
It was further provided in clause (ix) of this notification that information about the eligibility for admission to the degree courses in Engineering Colleges and Departments of Universities and also about the institution/discipline/category-wise availability of seats and reservation of seats for various categories would be available in the Admission Brochure to be issued by the PTU.
Thereafter by another notification issued on March 22, 1999 it was notified that admissions to the various courses in respondent No. 3 and the Universities in the State would be made by them at their own level on the basis of the interse merit of the CET.
Clause (ix) of the earlier notification dated February 1, 1999 was amended accordingly.
In view of this amendment, respondent No. 3 issued its own Information Brochure for Under-Graduate and Post-Graduate programmes in Engineering and Sciences.
It is clear from a reading of this Brochure that reservation had been made for different categories of students but no reservation was provided for candidates belonging to a Backward area.
PTU, however, had issued its own Brochure which provided as under :  "The following Universities/Institutions shall make their own admissions on the basis of CET-1999 merit for which they will issue their own advertisement and admission brochure.
The desirous candidates shall have to make separate applications to these Institutions : 1.
Thapar Institute of Engineering and Technology, Patiala.
2.
Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar.
3.
Punjabi University, Patiala.
4.
Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana."
It followed the policy of reservation of the State Government for admission to the institutions for which it had been authorised to make admissions and reserved 5% seats for candidates from Backward areas.
2.
Petitioner appeared in the CET and cleared the same.
She had opted for Computer/Electronics Engineering but according to her merit in the CET she was given admission by respondent No. 3 in the course of Chemical Engineering.
She joined that course and has by now completed the first year.
She claims that she belongs to a Backward area in the State of Punjab and that she possesses a necessary certificate in this regard.
Her grievance is that respondent No. 3 by not providing for any reservation for candidates belonging to Backward areas has deprived her of admission to the discipline of her choice.
25 seats had been allocated to the course of Computer Engineering by respondent No. 3 and according to the petitioner if 5% reservation had been made for candidates belonging to Backward areas, one seat would fall to the share of this category of candidates and she would have thus been admitted.
She has filed this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution for a mandamus directing respondent No. 3 to follow the policy of reservation as followed by PTU and reserve 5% seats for candidates belonging to Backward areas and admit her in the course of Computer Engineering or Electronics Engineering as per her choice.
3.
In response to the notice of motion, respondent No. 3 has filed its written statement.
It is averred that his respondent was required to make admission at its own level on the basis of the Brochure issued by it and that it was not bound to follow the reservation policy as followed by PTU or even as formulated by the State of Punjab.
It is further averred that respondent No. 3 was bound only by the merit of the candidates in the CET and that admissions made by it were governed by its own Brochure and not by the one issued by PTU.
Reliance in this regard has been placed on the notifications dated February 1, 1999 and March 22, 1999 referred to above.
4.
From the rival contentions of the parties, the question that arises for our consideration is whether admission of the petitioner in respondent No. 3 was governed by the provisions of the Brochure issued by it or by the one issued by PTU providing for reservation for candidates belonging to a Backward area.
5.
We have heard counsel for the parties and are of the view that the writ petition deserves to be dismissed.
No doubt, PTU had been authorised to conduct the CET for all the institutions in the State of Punjab including respondent No. 3 and to begin with it was required to make admissions as well for all those institutions but on March 22, 1999 the State of Punjab modified the notification dated February 1, 1999 making it clear that respondent No. 3 and the Universities in the State would make admissions at their own level.
They were only required to make admissions according to the merit of the candidates in the CET.
There is no gainsaying the fact that after issuance of the notification on March 22, 1999 each of the Universities and respondent No. 3 issued their own Admission Brochures in which some of the conditions for admission were different from those published by PTU in its own Brochure.
Since respondent No. 3 had to make admissions at its own level and had published its own Brochure, it goes without saying that admissions made by this institution had to be governed by that Brochure and not by the one issued by PTU.
As a matter of fact, the Brochure issued by PTU itself makes it clear that respondent No. 3 would be making admissions on its own as per its own advertisement and Admission Brochure.
We have, therefore, no hesitation in holding that admissions made by respondent No. 3 are governed by the Brochure issued by it.
It is common case of the parties that respondent No. 3 has made no provision for reservation for candidates belonging to a Backward area.
In this view of the matter, the petitioner cannot claim any reservation in the course of Computer Engineering in respondent No. 3 and claim a seat.
6.
It was strenuously urged by the learned counsel for the petitioner that respondent No. 3 being an institution in the State of Punjab could not flout the policy of reservation followed by the latter and that respondent No. 3 should be directed to make reservation in terms of that policy which has been followed even by PTU.
The argument, in our opinion, cannot be accepted.
Respondent No. 3 is an independent institution and a deemed University.
It published its own Brochure containing the conditions on which students were to be a admitted.
It was not bound to follow the reservation policy of the State Government nor was it necessary for it to follow the PTU.
Moreover, the State of Punjab itself permitted respondent No. 3 to make admissions at its own level on the basis of its own advertisement and Admission Brochure by amending the notification dated February 1, 1999.
It is significant that the State of Punjab has not taken any objection to respondent No. 3 in not following its policy of reservation in regard to Backward areas.
7.
In the result, there is no merit in the writ petition and the same stands dismissed leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.