RL Anand, J - By this order I dispose of two Civil Writ Petitions, No. 19604 of 1998 (Prem Sagar v. State of Punjab & others) and No. 14893 of 1999 (Surinder Singh v. State of Punjab & others) as I am of the opinion that these can be disposed of by a common order as common question of law and fact is involved in both these petitions.
2.
The petitioner is claiming medical reimbursement on the plea that he is a chronic patient.
Though he had not been admitted as indoor patient in the PGI Chandigarh or any other hospital recognised by the government, but being a chronic patient if some medicines have been prescribed, the government is bound to reimburse it and he cannot be directed to claim fixed medical allowance.
3.
The contention of the State Government is that since the petitioner did not remain an indoor patient, therefore, he is only entitled to fixed medical allowance.
4.
The dispute is with regard to the policy of the State Government as contained in Annexure P4.
A reading of the same would show that no specific provision has been made with regard to the patients who at one point of time remained admitted in the medical institutions like PGI, AIIMS or other recognised government hospital and were discharged with the recommendations to continue with the treatment which was last prescribed to them.
A patient cannot remain indoor patient for ever.
He has to be discharged and has to be followed from time to time with some medicines or suggestions or advice of the doctors.
In such a situation, the patient takes the same medicines which are prescribed to him by the doctors even at his home.
From the policy Annexure P4 is not clear whether such type of patients will get the actual reimbursement of the medicines or will only get the fixed medical allowance.
5.
The learned counsel for the petitioner invites my attention to the endorsement of Annexure P4 vide which the Department of Finance made a request to the Principal Secretary to the Government, Department of Health and Family Welfare and he was requested to examine the matter of higher fixed reimbursement on account of chronic diseases on the basis of representations made in this behalf and to send his views.
The grouse of the petitioner is that this note/request was made in the year 1997 and in spite of lapse of three years, no action has been taken by the respondent-authorities to clarify this aspect.
6.
In this view of the matter, the present writ petition stands disposed of with the directions to the respondent-authorities to take a positive decision within six months from the receipt of the copy of the order as to what is the stand of the Government with regard to the chronic patients like the petitioner who was recommended the medicines by the doctor though he did not remain as indoor patient.
It may also be clarified that any order passed by the State Government is open to challenge by the petitioner.
Copy Dasti.
A copy of this order be sent to the Government of Punjab for compliance.
Order accordingly.