Amarbir Singh Gill, J - Petitioner has challenged the order dated 1311998, Annexure P-9 by which respondent Yad Ram Yadav has been appointed as Tehsildar `B' Class on the ground of it being illegal, arbitrary, unconstitutional and against the rules.
The petitioner has further prayed for issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the State of Haryana to appoint him in place of Yad Ram Yadav or, alternatively to appoint him as Tehsildar `B' Class against the two existing vacancies w.e.f.
the date Yad Ram Yadav was appointed as such.
2.
Case of the petitioner is that he initially joined as a Clerk w.e.f.
191971 in the office of the Deputy Commissioner Hissar.
He earned various promotions and on creation of new Revenue Division at Rohtak, he was promoted as Assistant Superintendent (Revenue and Judicial) in the office of the Commissioner Rohtak vide order dated 3111989.
He was thereafter promoted as Superintendent in the same office by order dated 881994, Annexure P-2.
But since for promotion to the post of Superintendent, five years experience as Assistant Superintendent was required, his promotion was made on ad hoc basic in relaxation of the condition of experience.
It was ordered that his first increment in the pay scale of the Superintendent shall be granted on his acquiring the requisite experience and he shall also be treated to have been promoted from the date of fulfilling that condition.
3.
Further case of the petitioner is that in order to fill up some posts of Tehsildars `B' Class by transfer, respondent No. 1 sent a requisition dated 14101997 to various Revenue offices requesting them to send the recommendations of the eligible persons working in their offices by 30101997.
The requisition dated 14101997 was followed by another requisition dated 24101997 whereby the qualification mentioned under the column "minimum qualification required" was omitted.
Pursuant to this requisition, Commissioner, Rohtak Division recommended the name of the petitioner and one Surat Singh Phaugat vide letter dated 3111997, Annexure P-5.
Similarly, from other Divisions and Revenue offices, the names of certain other persons were also recommended including the name of respondent Yad Ram Yadav whose name was forwarded by the Deputy Commissioner, Gurgaon.
According to the petitioner, Yad Ram Yadav was appointed as Assistant Superintendent in the office of the Deputy Commissioner, Gurgaon by order dated 10.2.1994 and for promotion to the post of Superintendent in the office of the Deputy Commissioner also, there is a requirement of possessing the experience of five years on the post of Assistant Superintendent.
Yad Ram Yadav was also promoted as officiating Superintendent by order dated 11101996 in relaxation of the condition of experience.
Likewise, in his promotion order also, it was mentioned that he would start earing first increment only when he acquires the experience of five years required for promotion to the post of Superintendent.
It is also claimed by reference to Appendix appended to the Haryana Revenue (Group-B) Service Rules, 1988 (for short being called as 1988 Rules), that a person having the experience of one year as Superintendent in the office of the Commissioner, as is the case of the petitioner, he was eligible for being considered for promotion to the post of Tehsildar `B' Class, by transfer.
It is further claimed that the petitioner had more than five years experience as Assistant Superintendent and one year as Superintendent in the office of the Commissioner, but still he was not called for interview held for promotion to the post of Tehsildar `B' Class and instead respondent Yad Ram Yadav, who even did not have five years experience as Assistant Superintendent and was only working as officiating Superintendent at the relevant time, was called for interview and was selected.
Faced with this situation, the petitioner made a representation against the proposed selection, but the same did not yield any result and ultimately, respondent No. 2 was selected as Tehsildar by order dated 1311998, Annexure P-9.
4.
In the written statement the stand of the respondent-State is that under rule 9 of the 1988 Rules, a Superintendent working in the office of Commissioner is not eligible for appointment by transfer to the post of Tehsildar `B' Class.
It was categorically stated that mention of "Superintendent of Commissioner's office" in the column of "experience" in Hindi version of Appendix `B' appended to the 1988 Rules is only typographical mistake which is being rectified now.
The correct position is indicated in the English version of the said Appendix under which a Superintendent working in the office of Commissioner is not eligible for promotion as Tehsildar `B' Class, by transfer and thus, there was no question of inviting the names of the Superintendents of Commissioner's Office.
The Commissioner Rohtak Division had wrongly sponsored the name of the petitioner for the said post.
It was also mentioned that as against the petitioner, respondent Yad Ram Yadav had completed one year service on the post of Superintendent in the office of the Deputy Commissioner and thus, he was clearly eligible for appointment by transfer to the post of the Tehsildar `B' Class.
5.
Respondent No. 2 filed his separate written statement.
The primary stand of respondent therein is that he fulfilled all conditions required for appointment by transfer, to the post of Tehsildar `B' Class and he being fully eligible under the Rules was rightly considered and selected for the said post.
6.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the relevant Rules.
Admittedly, the procedure for recruitment to the post of Tehsildar is made under rule 9 of the 1988 Rules.
Therefore, it would be appropriate to notice the provisions of rule 2 of the 1988 Rules, in so far as it relates to the controversy raised in this petition, which reads thus :  "9(1) Recruitment to the Service shall be made : (a) xx xx xx xx (b) in the case of Tehsildar :- (i) xx xx xx xx (ii) xx xx xx xx (iii) 20% by transfer from amongst :- (i) Superintendent of the office of the Deputy Commissioner; (ii) Assistant Superintendent of Commissioner and Deputy Commissioners office; (iii) to (v) xx xx xx (2) Appointment by promotion shall be made on seniority-cum-merit basis and seniority alone shall not give any right to such promotion."
7.
Rule 7 of the 1988 Rules refers to the qualifications and experience to any post in the service, as indicated in the appendix `B' appended to the said Rules.
The requisite experience in so far as it relates to recruitment to the post of Tehsildar `B' Class, by transfer as indicated in the Appendix `B', relevant for our purpose is as under :-  APPENDIX `B' Sr. No.
Designation of posts Academic qualifications and experience, if any, for appointment other than by direct recruitment.
+ 1.
2.
4.
1. xx xx xx 2.
Tahsildar 1.
------------ 2.
By Transfer One year experience as Superintendent in the Deputy Commissioner's Office; or Five years experience as Assistant Superintendent in Commissioner's or Deputy Commissioner's Offices, or 8.
A perusal of the abovesaid rules and the appendix `B' appended to the 1988 Rules clearly makes out that appointment to the post is Tehsildar `B' Class, by transfer can only be made from amongst the Superintendents of the office of the Deputy Commissioners, and the Assistant Superintendents of Commissioners and Deputy Commissioner's Offices who have one year experience as Superintendent in the Deputy Commissioner's Office; or five years experience as Assistant Superintendent in Commissioner's or Deputy Commissioner's Offices.
In other words, the Superintendents or the Assistant Superintendents working in the offices as noticed above were only eligible for being considered for appointment to the post of Tahsildar `B' Class, by transfer and no other.
Undisputedly, the petitioner did not satisfy the first condition of holding the post, either of Superintendent or Assistant Superintendent in the eligible offices, for he, at the relevant time, was neither working as Superintendent in the office of Deputy Commissioner nor as Superintendent in the office of Deputy Commissioner nor as Assistant Superintendent in the Commissioner's or Deputy Commissioner's Offices.
In view of the above provisions of the rule 9, the petitioner, by no stretch of imagination, could be said to be eligible for being recommended/sponsored, what to talk of being considered for appointment to the post in question.
No doubt, the petitioner did possess five years experience as Assistant Superintendent in the Deputy Commissioner's Office, which might satisfy the condition of possessing the condition of experience only, which fact has not been denied by the respondents in the written statement or during the course of hearing.
But at the time when the requisition to send recommendations of the eligible persons was sent, the petitioner was holding the post of Superintendent in the Commissioner's Office, although in terms of his promotion order dated 881994, his promotion was to take effect from the date of issuance of approval letter i.e. on acquiring the requisite experience as Superintendent.
Such approval letter, as per petitioner's own averments, was issued, apparently much before the requisition for recommendation of eligible persons for the post in question was sent.
The petitioner was thus, working as Superintendent without any embargo in his promotion as such, at the relevant time and, therefore, in view of rule 9(i)(iii), he could not have been sponsored or had any right for consideration for appointment to the post of Tahsildar `B' Class, by transfer.
9.
The provisions of rule 9 of the 1988 Rules clearly indicate that the post of Tahsildar is to be filled up from two sources including the one, by transfer, to the extent of 20% only.
It is nowhere indicated by the petitioner that if at any time the case of a Superintendent working in the office of Commissioner was ever considered and included in the 20% quota, meant for appointment as Tahsildar by transfer.
There is thus, no scope for making any in-road to the statutory rules including the consideration of a Superintendent working in the Commissioner's office for appointment to the post of Tahsildar `B' Class, by transfer.
Neither there is any such challenge to the provisions of the rule wherein a Superintendent working in Commissioner's office is not included as being eligible for being considered for appointment to the post in question.
It is also not disputed by the petitioner that respondent Yad Ram Yadav, at the relevant time, was working as Superintendent in the office of Deputy Commissioner and was having more than one year experience on the said post and as such was eligible for being considered for appointment to the post of Tahsildar `B' Class.
10.
In view of the above, there appears to be no reason to hold that the selection of respondent Yad Ram Yadav to the post of Tahsildar `B' Class was in any manner against the Rules, arbitrary or against the law.
The petition thus fails and is hereby dismissed accordingly.
Petition dismissed.