RL Anand, J - Written-statement on behalf of respondent No. 2 is taken on record.
Copy given to the opposite counsel.
2.
Shri Jagbir Singh and Ms. Gurvinder Kaur are the petitioners of this writ petition, filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India and they have prayed for the quashment of the order dated 322000, passed by respondent No. 1, vide which the admission of the petitioners to class BPEd-II year (Bachelor of Physical Education), was declined.
3.
Some facts can be noticed in the following manner.
The petitioners passed their 10+2 examination and they were admitted to Bachelor of Physical Education Course in the Government College of Physical Education, Patiala.
It is three years course.
The petitioners having been admitted to the first year of physical education course as regular students were allowed to appear in the annual examination of the first year held in April, 1999.
Result was declared on 2871999.
Both the petitioners were declared fail.
According to the calendar of the University, both the petitioners applied for re-evaluation of their papers.
Both the petitioners applied for re-evaluation.
Petitioner No. 1 applied for re-evaluation of Social Science while petitioner No. 2 applied for Social Science and Physical Education.
On re-evaluation, the results of both the candidates were changed and re-appear was declared and this order was passed on 22101999.
On the basis of that re-appear both the petitioners were given admission in the second year on 28101999.
4.
The grouse of the petitioner is that the impugned order dated 322000 (Annexure P-3) vide which the University did not give the approval to the petitioners for the second year course, is illegal, arbitrary and against the rules and regulations of the University.
5.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents.
Two sets of written-statement, one by the University-respondent No. 1 and the other by the Government College-respondent No. 2, were filed.
The stand of the University is reflected in para No. 4 of the written-statement which is reproduced as follows :-  "That the contents of para 4 and the grounds taken therein are incorrect.
In this respect, the preliminary submissions may kindly be read as a part of reply.
The petitioner is giving a wrong date of declaration of result and is totally silent on the point as to on which date the petitioners have applied for the admission to the next class.
Therefore, the grounds taken in this para are absolutely uncalled for.
The reproduction of regulation 20 is also sketchy and incorrect as per submissions made in the preliminary paras.
It is incorrect to say that the action of the University is unreasonable and unjust.
It is also incorrect to say that the delay is on the part of the answering respondent in any manner.
It is, further, incorrect to say that the admission forms are accepted and entertained a few days before the examination, such averments are highly vague, unspecific and vehemently denied and the petitioners have no right to join the next class or continue in the same as submitted above.
It has been repeatedly held that the University/Educational Institution have chalked out their rules and regulations for governance and the best to look after their students welfare as also to maintain discipline within the University.
There is no question of arbitrariness, discrimination or violation of Article 14 of the Constitution involved in any manner".
6.
The stand of the University-respondent No. 1 is that respondent No. 2 never intimated the University when the petitioners made an application for seeking admission in the second year course and in the absence of any data, the University was justified in issuing the orders Annexure P-3.
However, the stand of respondent No. 2 is not in consonance with the stand of respondent No. 1.
The stand taken by respondent No. 2 in the preliminary objection is reproduced as under :-  "It is submitted by way of preliminary submission that a student can seek admission within 10 days of the declaration of the result after re- evaluation of papers.
The result of the petitioners was declared on 22101999 by respondent No. 1 and they were granted admission to the B.P.Ed- II year course on 28101999.
As such their admission in the college is valid and legal according to the ordinances of Punjabi University Patiala pertaining to BPEd-II year course".
7.
I have heard Shri Parminder Singh, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioners and Shri Kanwaljit Singh, Advocate, appearing on behalf of respondent No. 1 and Ms. Gurveen H Singh, learned AAG, Punjab, appearing on behalf of respondent No. 2 and with their assistance have gone through the record of the case.
8.
Before I proceed further, I may also state that during the course of submissions, learned counsel for the petitioners has shown to me the admission fee receipt of Jagbir Singh, which prima facie indicates that this person paid the fees on 28101999 in the college for the admission of second year.
9.
The point for adjudication is whether action on the part of the University-respondent No. 1 is correct or not ?
10.
The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioners draws my attention to Regulation 20 of Chapter dealing with "the Important Instructions for the candidates" and this regulation lays down as follows :-  "20.
A provisional intimation regarding result of a candidate whose result is withheld is given to enable him to seek re-evaluation/re-checking as admissible under the rules in subject/paper(s) in which he might choose to do so within the period prescribed in the ordinance of the University and also to enable timely completion of due formalities for admission to subsequent examination, if otherwise eligible under ordinances of the University within the admissible period, in the event of his having not cleared the full examination.
This provisional intimation of result will stand automatically cancelled in case such a candidate fails to clear the lower examination within the specified period.
IMPORTANT NOTE (i) The candidate seeking admission after the date of declaration of re- evaluation result, shall submit his/her admission form for the next examination within 10 days, otherwise late fee will be charged according to original schedule.
2.
While giving admission to a candidate to any class his/her success in the next lower than the preceding examination must be verified by the Principal.
The admission should not be given merely on the basis of this provisional intimation.
Note : For any other information in this regard please contact Examinations Branch."
11.
For our purposes, the Note-(i), is important which entitles a candidate seeking admission after the declaration of the result of re-evaluation.
If such person applies within ten days of the declaration of the result of re- evaluation, such candidate is entitled to the admission to the higher class otherwise such candidate is supposed to pay the late fee also.
It is true that from the petition of the petitioners some facts were not clear to be quoted but with the filing of the written statement of respondent No. 2, the following facts stand proved.
The result was declared on 22101999 and in the re-evaluation both the candidates were directed to re-appear.
For the second year the last date of admission was 1681999 which was extended to 1691999.
The result of the petitioners with regard to re-evaluation was declared on 22101999, therefore, 10 days has to be given to them from 22101999 and not from 1691999.
12.
I have already quoted the relevant para of written statement of respondent No. 2.
As per the Rules, the admission for the higher class could be taken within ten days from the date of the declaration of the result of re-evaluation.
It is proved in this case that the admission sought by the petitioners to the second year on 28101999, was within ten days of the declaration of the result of re-evaluation, and, therefore, the action on the part of respondent No. 1 in issuing the letter Annexure P-3 cannot be sustained in the eyes of law and has to be quashed.
I order accordingly.
13.
Resultantly, this writ petition is allowed by quashing the order dated 322000 (Annexure P-3) and the directions are given to the University- respondent No. 1 to give recognition to the admission of the petitioners to class BPEd-II year.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.