RL Anand, J - The petitioner has filed the present writ claiming disability pension from the respondent-authorties and the case set up by the petitioner is that while, he was on casual leave w.e.f.
2261992 to 371992, he suffered an accident as a result of which, his disability was assessed 60% by the Medical Board of the respondent-authorities.
He requested for the grant of disability pension, which was declined to him vide letter dated 2041998, Annexure P-5.
Thus, the petitioner has given challenge to the order of rejection, Annexure P-5, by stating that it is against the rules and regulation.
2.
The defence of the respondents is that the disability suffered by the petitioner is not attributable to the army service as the petitioner was on casual leave on the relevant date of the accident which took place on 2561992.
3.
I have heard the counsel for the parties and with their assistance have gone through the record of this case.
4.
Counsel for the respondents submitted that the petitioner is entitled to the disability pension only if he can make out a case that the disability is attributable to the army service.
Since, the petitioner was on casual leave, therefore, he is not entitled to any disability to any disability pension.
5.
I am not in a position to subscribe to the argument of the counsel for the respondents.
When an army personal is on leave; whether causal, long, medical or even on furlough, he does not sever his relationship of servant with the master.
He remains under the control of his employer.
Many types of leaves are due under the rules and is for a person to apply for a particular type of leave and it is for the authorities to grant the same or not, as per their rules.
In this view of the matter, the petitioner was in service when he suffered the injury.
He was fully fit when he joined the army.
In these circumstances, I am inclined to hold that the disability suffered by the petitioner is attributable to his army service and he is entitled to the disability pension.
6.
Reliance in this regard can also be placed on 2000(1) SLR 100 where it was held that when a disability is incurred when the army personnel is on casual leave, he will be deemed to be on duty and if he suffers any accident while on casual leave as a result of which he is invalided out of army service, he is entitled to the benefit of disability pension.
7.
Reliance can also be placed on 1999(3) SCT 55.
It was a case where the army personnel was on long leave.
Still, he was allowed the benefit of disability pension.
8.
In this view of the matter, I allow this writ petition, set aside the order, Annexure P-5, and give directions to the respondents to release the disability pension to the petitioner w.e.f.
6.10.1993, within three months from the receipt of copy of this order, failing which the petitioner shall also be entitled to interest @ 12% per annum.
The petitioner is directed to appear before the Re-survey Medical Board as and when called upon by the authorities.
No costs.
Petition allowed.