RS Mongia, J (Oral) - After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and going through the contents of the application, the CM is allowed and the delay of 105 days in filing the LPA is hereby condoned.
2.
The writ petitioners (now respondents in the LPA) were working as Assistant Sports Officers and Sports Coaches in the Maharishi Dayanand University (in short "MDU").
Vide office order issued by the Commissioner and Secretary to Government Haryana, Education Department, dated 1891986, the posts of Sports Officers, Assistant Sports Officers, Sports Coaches and ADPEs.
in Kurukshetra University were declared equivalent to the post of Director, Physical Education in Government/Private/affiliated colleges with effect from 141980.
It was further decided that the present incumbents of the posts of Assistant Sports Officers/Sports Coaches and ADPEs working in different pay scales in Kurukshetra University would be entitled to the UGC grade of Rs. 700-1600 as sanctioned by the Government vide their letter dated 2121985.
This was to be given subject to certain conditions.
Copy of the aforesaid decision was also sent to the Registrar of MDU, Rohtak, as well as Registrar, Haryana Agricultural.
University, Hisar, apart from Kurukshetra University for information and necessary action.
It may be observed here that during the period 2121985 to 9121993, the pay scale of the various posts mentioned above which was Rs. 700-1600, stood revised to Rs. 1640-2900/- for Assistant Sports Officers and Rs. 1600-2660/- for the Sports Coaches in MD University.
This scale in fact stood revised by the UGC to Rs. 2200-4000/- for both the posts.
The Executive Council of the MDU, in its meeting held on 9121993, revised the then existing pay scales of Assistant Sports Officers and Sports Coaches to Rs. 2200-4000/- (Annexure P-2).
This was approved by the Vice Chancellor.
The Registrar, on the basis of the decision of the Executive Council dated 9121993, issued a communication to Director of Sports, MD University etc. that the petitioners be given the scale of Rs. 2200-4000/- on provisional basis subject to confirmation by the State Government.
This led the petitioners (now respondents) to file the writ petition primarily on two grounds, namely, (i) the Executive Council's decision dated 9121993 was based on the State Government's decision itself which is dated 1891986, to which reference has already been made above, and, therefore, there was no requirement of confirmation by the State Government.
Further in the decision of the Executive Council, there was specific reference to the letter dated 18191986 and the decision was not made subject to the confirmation by the State Government.
The Registrar could not add another condition to the decision of the Executive Council.
(ii) The decision of the State Government dated 1891986, though referred to employees of the Kurukshetra University, yet the same was also addressed to the MDU for information and compliance.
Otherwise also, the State Government cannot discriminate between the two Universities situated in its jurisdiction i.e. Kurukshetra University and MD University.
The learned Single Judge allowed the writ petition.
The concluding portion of the Judgment reads as under :  "On a consideration of the controversy, it is noticed that the respondents have not been able to put-forward any plausible or valid explanation for denying the benefit of higher pay scale to the petitioners.
It is not denied that the officers of the equivalent rank in the Kurukshetra University have been granted the pay scale of Rs. 2200-4000.
There appears no reason to deny the same scale to the petitioners who are working in the Maharishi Dayanand University, Rohtak.
It is also not disputed that the State Government had taken a decision with regard to the revision of pay scales of Assistant Sports Officers and the Sports Coaches of the Kurukshetra University.
They were granted the same pay scale as given to the Director, Physical Education.
In such a situation, it appears wholly arbitrary and discriminatory to deny the same pay scale to the petitioners.
The State Government has for no good reason withheld the sanction to the revised pay scale to the petitioners.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to grant the revised pay scale of Rs. 2200-4000 to the petitioners from the date it was granted to the Assistant Sports Officers and Sports Coaches of the Kurukshetra University.
The arrears of salary and allowances shall be paid to the petitioners within three months from the date of this order failing which the petitioners shall be entitled to get interest from the respondents at the rate of 12% per annum on the amount of arrears.
No costs."
The judgment has since been complied with qua the writ petitioners.
3.
Learned counsel for the appellants argued that since finance is involved, ipso-facto the decision of the State Government, qua Kurukshetra University, could not be made applicable to the employees of the MDU.
We do not agree with the learned counsel for the appellants and rather agree with the reasoning of the learned Single Judge, which has already been re-produced above for allowing the writ petition.
Apart from the fact that the Executive Council's decision of the MDU was based on the Government decision itself, the same was not made subject to any confirmation by the State Government as if it was the State Government's decision itself which was being implemented by the MDU.
Otherwise also, as has been held by learned Single Judge, there cannot be any discrimination between the two sets of employees in the Universities under the Jurisdiction of the State.
Whatever the Kurukshetra University's employees are getting, the MDU employees must get the same.
For the foregoing reasons, we find no merit in this Letters Patent Appeal, which is hereby dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.