Syed Bashir-ud-Din, J - Considered.
2.
Admit.
3.
The petition can be disposed of at this stage, so taken up accordingly for disposal.
4.
Heard.
5.
Petitioner, presently working as Senior Assistant in Sub District Hospital Tangdar, prays that his present status as such Sr. Assistant in Health Department of the State should not be disturbed and that his services as such Sr. Assistant, on which post he is working for number of years, may be regularised.
6.
It is found on record that the petitioner employee of Health Department is working as Sr. Assistant for last number of years.
Obviously, the present status of the petitioner and the graded post as Sr. Assistant he is holding cannot be disturbed, except in due course of law.
7.
In State of Haryana v. Piara Singh, (1992)4 S.C.C.
118 : 1992(3) SCT 201 (SC), it is pointed out :  "As regards the temporary/ad hoc employees in Govt. service, the normal rule is regular recruitment through the prescribed agency but exigencies of administration may some times call for an ad hoc or temporary appointment to be made.
In such a situation, effort would always be to replace such an ad hoc/temporary employee by a regularly selected employee as early as possible...if for any reason, an ad hoc or temporary employee is continued for a fairly long spell, the authorities must consider his case for regularisation provided he is eligible and qualified according to the rules and his service record is satisfactory...persons continuing in service over a number of years have a right to claim regularisation and the authorities are under an obligation to consider their cases for regularisation in a fair manner."
Petitioner shall continue as Senior Asstt.
till the post is filed on regular basis if not so filled.
While filling up the post on regular basis, petitioner's experience, period for which he is holding the post of Sr.
Asstt., his performance and conduct shall have to be considered by the respondents/competent authority.
He shall be paid for the period he has actually worked as Sr. Assistant and for the period we will work as such Sr. Assistant in future.
The respondents are directed accordingly.
Further it is made clear that the petitioner shall have to seek his remedy in appropriate forum to pursue his remedy, in case his service rights are infringed or come under shadow by action(s) of respondents adversely affecting him, as such officiating Sr. Asstt.
on the post, he is presently holding.
Order accordingly.