VK Jhanji, J - The claim of the petitioner in this writ petition is for grant of pension under the Swatantrata Sainik Samman Pension Scheme, 1980, on the ground that her husband was a freedom fighter and she being his dependent is entitled to receive the pension.
2.
It is petitioner's case that her husband was granted pension but later on the same was suspended.
She challenged the order suspending the pension in Civil Writ Petition No. 155549 of 1994.
Vide order dated 31101994, the writ petition was disposed of by the Division Bench and the respondents were directed to treat the writ petition of the petitioner as representation and dispose if of by passing a speaking order.
In pursuance of order dated 31101994, Union of India considered the case of the petitioner.
Vide order dated 1311995, the case of the petitioner was rejected on two counts; firstly, her husband, Charan Singh in his application and the civilian proforma had claimed 10 months' imprisonment in Jigar Kacha camp without specifying the specific dates and secondly, he had also not claimed sufferings in any other camp but the co-prisoners' certificates submitted by him indicated that he had suffered dentetion in Jigar Kacha, Chittagong and Neel Ganj camps.
In the present petitions, challenge is to order dated 13/16.1.1995, Annexure P-10 rejecting the claim of the petitioner.
3.
At the time of motion hearing, learned counsel appearing on behalf of petitioner had contended that order rejecting the claim of the petitioner on the face of it was not sustainable because in the civilian proforma submitted by the husband of petitioner, it was clearly mentioned that he had suffered imprisonment in Jigar Kacha, Chittagong and Neel Ganj camps and had also specified the dates and month he suffered imprisonment in these three camps.
In order to ascertain the correctness of the statement of counsel for the petitioner, record was called for and on going through the civilian proforma, it revealed that in the said proforma he had not only mentioned that he had undergone imprisonment in Jigar Kacha, Chittagong and Neel Ganj camps but had also specified the dates and month during which he had undergone imprisonment in these camps.
The total detention in all the three camps was 10 months.
Learned counsel appearing on behalf Union of India has fairly conceded that the rejection of the claim of the petitioner on the ground that her husband, Chanan Singh had not specified in this civilian proforma the detention in camps other than Jigar Kacha Camp, thus, is not sustainable.
In view of the fair concession extended by learned counsel for Union of India, order Annexure P-10 deserves to be quashed.
4.
Resultantly, the writ petition is allowed and order, Annexure P-10 quashed.
Respondents are directed to consider the case of the petitioner under the 1980 Scheme ibid on the basis of the record available with it, within three months from the date of receipt of order or communication of order by the petitioner to the concerned Authority.
Final order passed shall be communicated to the petitioner within one month from the date of passing of the order.
No costs.
Petition allowed.