RL Anand, J - The present petition has been filed under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India for the issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari for quashing the order dated 1121995 (Annexure P-3) and for the issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to grant disability pension to the petitioner, with arrears and interest.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he joined the Army on 531966.
On 15111993 when he was posted at Hisar, he proceeded on casual leave for three days and while the petitioner was in his native village, he was injured by some persons inimical to his family, and FIR No. 269 dated 15.1.1993 was registered at Police Station, Meham (Rohtak).
The petitioner underwent treatment in the Military Hospital and subsequently he was declared disabled by the Board of Doctors at the Military Hospital.
The petitioner was discharged from the military service on 3131994 on medical grounds.
On 1121995, the Commanding Officer of the petitioner sent the case of the petitioner for disability pension but the same was rejected by the respondents vide order dated 1121995.
The petitioner filed an appeal on 221996 before respondent No. 1 and the said appeal was not disposed of, upon which on 2251996, the petitioner sent a reminder.
Another reminder was sent on 281996 and, finally, the appeal of the petitioner was rejected.
Hence the present petition.
3.
Notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents and the stand of the respondents is that the "petitioner was not boarded out/discharged by the Board of Officers for his disability but was discharged from service on completion of his service limits of 28 years prescribed for the rank of Risaldars.
Since the petitioner was in medical CEE (Temporary) for six months at the time of his discharge he was brought before the Release Medical Board in accordance with Army Order 3/89 just to assess the degree of his disability to provide him the entire pensionary benefits if accepted by the Pension Sanctioning Authority."
4.
I have heard the counsel for the parties and with their assistance have gone through the record of this case.
5.
The case set up by the petitioner is that he was boarded out/discharged from the military service on medical grounds.
This fact is not borne out from the record.
It is true that the petitioner was medically examined by the Medical Board when he suffered an injury and his disability was assessed but the petitioner served for full term of 28 years under the Army and he was discharged from the military service because of the completion of his service limit.
In these circumstances, the petitioner is not entitled to disability pension.
Petition dismissed.