Amarbir Singh Gill, J - On July 4, 2000, after hearing the counsel for the parties and going through the facts of the case, this petition was allowed and it was directed that the petitioner shall be interviewed for the post of Lecturer in Economics by the Haryana Staff Selection Commission, respondent No. 3 since the said post which was reserved for Ex-serviceman (General Category) had not been filled, within four months from that day.
Detailed reasons were to follow.
2.
We now give detailed reasons for allowing the writ petition.
3.
The case of the petitioner is that on 22121997, the Haryana Staff Selection Commission, respondent No. 3 (hereinafter to be referred as "the Commission") advertised 693 posts of Lecturers (School Cadre) out of which 21 posts were reserved for Lecturers in Economics (Female), 11 posts for general category, I post for SC (A) category and 1 for Ex-serviceman BC(A) category.
The petitioner being the dependent of Ex-serviceman (General Category) applied for the post of Lecturer in Economics.
She was issued interview card for 8th June, 1999.
It was indicated in the interview letter that she was to appear for the post of Lecturer in Commerce whereas she had applied for the post of Lecturer in Economics.
On 861999, the petitioner appeared before the Commission and apprised the factual position that she had applied for the post of Lecturer in Economics whereas she has been called to appear in the interview for the post of Lecturer in Commerce.
The petitioner came to know that the result of selection of Lecturer in Economics was already declared on 1111999.
4.
The petitioner, thereafter approached the Secretary of the Commission and requested that she be interviewed for the post of Lecturer in Economics, since the result of the selections, as it appeared in the news item, a copy of which is annexed as Annexure P-5, indicated that as against the quota of Ex- serviceman (general category), no candidate was available.
5.
The petitioner has claimed that she has been denied her right to be considered for slection to the post of Lecturer in Economics on account of the wrong interview card issued to her by the Commission.
6.
The case of the respondents in the written statement is that the petitioner was issued interview card by mistake for the post of Lecturer in Commerce whereas she had applied for the post of Lecturer in Economics.
However, the petitioner did appear on 861999 before the Commission and also offered to appear in the interview for the post of Lecturer in Commerce and sought time to produce her requisite documents.
It is admitted that the result of the post of Lecturer in Economics was already declared on 1111999 and the petitioner is not entitled to appear in the interview at this stage and this petition is required to be dismissed.
Besides it has been claimed that the Commission had issued instructions in the newspaper dated 23101998 that the candidates who applied for the post of Lecturer in Economics should contact the Commission on 30101998 and 31101998 with the proof of their qualifications.
However, the petitioner did not contact the Commission on any such date.
7.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties.
8.
It is admitted case that the petitioner applied for the post of Lecturer in Economics against the reserved quota of Ex-serviceman (general category).
The very fact that her candidature was accepted by the Commission and interview card was issued to her and she was duly qualified to be considered for the post of Lecturer in Economics is also in not dispute.
It is also admitted that by mistake, interview card to the petitioner was issued for the interview to the post of Lecturer in Commerce for which the petitioner did not apply.
It is also not disputed that as against the reserved quota of Ex- serviceman (general category), no candidate was selected being not available.
The petitioner has been denied her right to be considered for selection to the post of Lecturer in Economics as against the quota of Ex-serviceman (general category), illegally by the Commission.
9.
This petition is accordingly allowed with the direction that the petitioner shall be duly considered for the post of Lecturer in Economics as against the quota of Ex-serviceman (general category) on the basis of the availability of the post as advertised in the advertisement, Annexure P-1, with four months from today, if the same has not been filled up as yet.
Petition allowed.