RS Mongia, J - The petitioners have a grievance against the Standing Order No. 76/2000 issued by the Director General of Police, Haryana on 2432000 (copy Annexure P-1).
This Standing Order provides for promotion of Constables to the rank of Head Constables after completion of 16 years regular qualifying service.
The promotion of such constables who have completed 16 years of regular service is to be made subject to their fulfilling certain conditions mentioned in the Standing Order itself.
Such constables need not pass the Lower School Course.
The objective of the Standing Order is to remove stagnation in the rank of constables as a welfare measure, who have served the department for more than 16 years with clean reputation but have not been given promotion.
It would be apposite to reproduce the relevant portion of the Standing Order as under :-  "The Haryana Government has taken a decision conveyed to this office vide letter No. 30/1/2000-611 IGI dated 712000 to give promotion to such constables who had completed 16 years of service.
The eligibility criteria of such promotions will be as under :- 1.
The Constables shall become eligible for promotion after completion of 16 years of regular qualifying service on the basis of seniority.
2.
Only those Constables will be considered for promotion to the rank of Exemptee Head Constables who fulfil the following conditions : (a) Whose integrity has not been doubled during last 10 years of service.
(b) The constable has not been awarded any major punishment during the last two years immediately preceding the date of completion of sixteen years of service.
(c) The constable has not been awarded any punishment of censure during the six months immediately proceeding the date of completion of sixteen years of service.
3.
Scrutiny of service records would be carried out twice in a year in the month of December and June every year by Superintendents of Police/Commandants so as to finalise and approve the promotions latest by 10th January and 10th July of every year.
4.
The Head Constables so promoted shall immediately be deputed to undergo a training course for 2 months at PTC, Madhuban the syllabus for which shall be prescribed by Director/PTC.
The objective of training will be to prepare such constables to undertake investigation work required for Head Constables.
Each such exemptee Head Constable would be required to pass this course within the probation period which will be one year.
5.
Exemptee Head Constables so promoted shall exercise all powers of Head Constables as per Police Rules and other Acts/Rules.
6.
The promotion of Head Constables against the regular sanctioned posts of Head Constables will continue to be made as per PPR 13.7 and this promotion will not affect the same in any way.
7.
The post so upgraded under this policy will be treated as personal posts and shall automatically be increased or decreased by upgradation or reduction according to the requirement every year.
8.
The existing scheme of promotion of Constables as UGC shall stand withdrawn henceforth.
However, all those who have already been promoted shall not be reverted.
9.
Such Exemptee Constables who fulfil requisite conditions under Rule 137 of PPR 1934 will also be entitled to appear for B-1 test.
10.
Exemptee Head Constables in order of their seniority will be entitled to selection in lower school course as per their quota fixed."
2.
The grievance of the petitioners is that by virtue of the aforesaid standing order, the constables like the petitioners who are already on list C-1 after having qualified the lower school course and are awaiting regular promotion as Head Constable would stand superseded by those constables who have completed 16 years of service and may not have passed even the lower school course.
Further, the apprehension is that once such promotee Head Constables under the standing order are assigned the duties and work of Head Constable in a particular district, there will be no work left for promotee Head Constables from List C-I and C-II and no promotions would be made from list C-I or list C-II.
3.
After hearing the learned counsel for the petitioner, we find no merit in the submissions of the learned counsel for the petitioners.
Clauses 6 and 7 of the Standing Order (supra) clearly stipulate that the standing order would not affect the promotion to the post of Head Constable against the regular sanctioned post under Punjab Police Rule 137.
The promotions would be continued to be made.
Clause 7 of the standing order (supra) further shows that promotions of the Constables to the rank of Head Constables who are covered under the Standing Orders is personal to them by notionally upgrading the post of Constables to the rank of Head Constables.
Otherwise, the sanctioned strength of the Head Constables is not varied and the Constables who are on list C-I or list C-II would continue to be promoted against the sanctioned strength as per Rule 137 of the Punjab Police Rules and the promotions under the Standing Order would not in any way affect such promotions.
The Head Constable who is promoted under the standing order cannot seek further promotion as ASI even though promoted earlier than a constable who is promoted against the sanctioned strength from List C-I or List C-II.
If the rights of the petitioners are not affected at all, the question of their making any grievance does not arise.
If, in a given case, the sanctioned posts are not filled by way of promotion on the ground that there is no sufficient work for the Head Constables as the same is being discharged by the Head Constables promoted under the Standing Order, in that eventuality, the constables, who may be on the List C-I or List C-II may have some genuine grievance which can be made before an appropriate forum.
Subject to the observations made above, we find no merit in this writ petition, which is hereby dismissed.
Petition dismissed.