Arijit Pasayat, CJ - Order passed by Central Administrative Tribunal, Ernakulam Bench (hereinafter referred to as `Tribunal') quashing transfer of first respondent (hereinafter referred to as `employee') is under challenge in this Original Petition by Director General, All India Radio, New Delhi; Director General (News), All India Radio and Station Engineer, All India Radio, Thrissur, who were respondents in the Original Application filed by employee.
For convenience, All India Radio is described hereinafter as `AIR'.
Petitioners in the present petition, for sake of convenience, are described as `employers' hereinafter.
2.
Factual position leaving out unnecessary details is as follows : First respondent-employee was working as Stenographer Grade II at AIR, Thrissur against a post of Stenographer Grade I, transferred from Cuttack, until further orders.
At that point of time, he was appointed as Private Secretary to Vice-Chairman of Jabalpur Bench of Tribunal on deputation w.e.f.
1011997.
A representation was made by him for repatriation to AIR, Thrissur on the ground that his health condition had deteriorated.
Representation was made to the Vice-Chairman of Jabalpur Bench of Tribunal and copy was sent to Director General, AIR and also to Director General (News), AIR.
By order dated 2081997, Vice-Chairman of Jabalpur Bench of Tribunal repatriated employee to his parent department with a direction to him to report for duty as Stenographer Grade II at Thrissur.
He was served with the order dated 11.9.1997 issued by Director General (News) posting him as Stenographer Grade II at News Service Division, AIR, New Delhi.
He filed OA 1343 of 1997 seeking to have the order set aside on various grounds and when application was taken up for hearing, employers stated that if employee makes a representation to Director General, AIR, New Delhi, same would be considered and a speaking order would be passed within a time limit to be prescribed by Tribunal.
Noting that Director General, AIR alone would be in a position to decide whether employee can be accommodated at Thrissur, application was disposed of with a direction to said officer to consider the representation to be made by employee taking into account his state of health and the fact that he had sought for repatriation only to be with his family.
Said order was made on 22101997.
On 24101997, employee submitted a representation.
Before representation could be disposed of, direction was given to employee to report for duty at New Delhi, while according to employee, he was waiting for order in his representation.
He was served with a notice stating that Director General, AIR has directed Office to inform that his representation has been examined and it has been found not acceptable.
Original order of transfer and the order passed in his representation were the subject-matter of challenge before Tribunal.
3.
Opposing the application, employers took stand the that before deputation, employee accepted that on repatriation he would be willing to serve anywhere in India and, therefore, he has no legitimate claim for a posting at Thrissur.
In any event, it was stated that the post at Thrissur against which employee was working prior to 1011997, had been reverted back to Cuttack and one DC Sahoo, Stenographer Grade II was working w.e.f.
1011997.
4.
Tribunal found that employers had not come with clean hands before it.
Refering to order (Annexure-A2), it was observed that restoration of post was only on 1851998, though it was indicated to be effective from 1011997.
Taking exception to such order being passed, impugned orders were set aside and employers were directed to allow employee to continue in Thrissur on the post which he held prior to his deputation to Jabalpur Bench of Tribunal.
Operative portion of the Order of Tribunal reads as follows :  "In the result, the application is allowed in part.
The impugned orders Annexure A9 and A14 are set aside and the respondents are directed to allow the applicant to join as Stenographer Grade II at Trichur (Thrissur ?)
forthwith, at any rate, within two weeks from today and to treat the period during which he was kept out of duty as duty for all purposes including pay and allowances.
The respondents have to treat that Annexure R2 dated 1851998 transferring the post of Stenographer Grade I from AIR Trichur (Thrissur ?)
to AIR Cuttack with retrospective effect from 1011997 as a nullity and non est as the said order had been made for the purpose of defeating and frustrating the reliefs sought by the applicant in this application, while no necessity existed for such an order.
There is no order as to costs."
5.
In support of the Original Petition, Mr. K Ramakumar, Senior Standing Counsel for Central Government submitted that the approach of Tribunal was erroneous.
In fact, it had no jurisdiction to entertain the application.
Order of transfer was passed at Delhi and merely because employee managed to get a copy of the order in Kerala will not confer any jurisdiction on Tribunal to decide the matter.
Further, a bare look at the order passed by Vice-Chairman, Jabalpur Bench of Tribunal in the matter of repatriation would show that it was passed with reference to request made by respondent.
Vice-Chairman could not have directed that he was relieved of his duties to join at Thrissur.
Such order also refers to another order of the President.
It is not known what is the content of the letter.
Tribunal could not have passed an order of the nature passed because restoration of a post is an administrative decision and by said order one DC Sahoo, who was working against the post, is affected, without being impleaded as a party.
Learned counsel for employee submitted that employer had not come before Tribunal with clean hands and it was, therefore, proper to unearth truth.
As there was no material, as observed by Tribunal, that DC Sahoo was working, there was no necessity to implead him.
6.
Without going into the question whether employer was guilty of suppression of fact and only on 1851998 the post was transferred from Thrissur to Cuttack, Tribunal has no jurisdiction to nullify transfer of the post.
That is a policy decision and there was no prayer, even in the Original Application or during hearing thereof to nullify transfer of the post.
Employers had not been granted opportunity even to justify transfer of the post.
It is at the cost of repetition, we may say, a policy decision and scope of `judicial review' is extremely limited.
There was no challenge to transfer of the post.
Challenge was to transfer of an employee.
It is prima facie doubtful whether Tribunal would have jurisdiction to deal with transfer of post.
Tribunal's jurisdiction, powers and authority are provided in Section 14, Chapter II of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 (in short `the Act').
They are to be exercised in relation to recruitment, matters concerning recruitment and all service matters of the specified categories of employees.
Transfer of a post cannot be encompassed by the prescription.
In any event, that question is of secondary importance as there was no requirement to adjudicate that aspect in the absence of challenge and/or pleadings and/or prayer.
It was an administrative decision and without grant of opportunity, Tribunal should not have held that transfer of the post was bad.
Additionally, definite stand of employers was that one DC Sahoo was working against the post.
Tribunal seems to have lightly brushed aside this question as is evident from its order dated 1331998.
Relevant portion of which reads as follows :  "Shri Menon, the incumbent in the Office of the 3rd respondent has stated that he has been informed by the Directorate that the post vacated by the applicant when he was relieved to join at C.A.T.
Jabalpur Bench has since been reverted to Cuttack and one Mr. DC Sahoo was adjusted against that vacancy.
But no formal order reverting the post and adjusting Shri Sahoo on that post has been brought to our notice.
Respondent may file an additional reply statement with a copy of such order by which the post was reverted to Cuttack.
List on 7.4.98."
In fact, copy of the order by which the post was reverted was filed.
There was a clear mention about functioning of Shri Sahoo.
Therefore, without he being a party to the proceeding, no order which definitely affects him could have been passed by Tribunal.
The inevitable conclusion is that the order of Tribunal is not sustainable.
The same is liable to be quashed and we do so.
Consequentially, Original Application filed by employee before Tribunal is to be treated as dismissed.
The Original Petition is allowed.
Petition allowed.