Syed Bashir-ud-Din, J - Petitioner a Sr. Assistant posted since 23499 in Zonal Education Office Chandanwari Uri, has been transferred to Zonal Education Office Booniyar under order dated 2352000 of Director Education (annexure-B).
This order of transfer is impugned in this petition on th ground that him transfer has been ordered prematurely.
Besides the order is passed on extraneous consideration and with malice.
2.
The impugned order shows that the petitioner is transferred in the interest of administration and that too within one and the same allaqah of District Baramulla.
Merely because the petitioner has been transferred within one year of his posting at Chandanwari allegedly in violation of Govt. instructions, is no ground to interfere.
There is a circular instruction on the record as submitted by the counsel requiring two years stay for an employee of the Education Department at a particular place.
Such instructions have no statutory force.
These are merely executive instructions.
So long the petitioner is transferred on a transferable post, he has no right to remain at a particular place.
Transfer in this case does not violate any legal right of petitioner.
In absence of adequate pleas and particulars regarding alleged mala fide/extraneous consideration (such platives often used in present day petitions in matters of transfers) hardly carries petitioner's case any further.
In AIR 1991 SC 532, it is pointed out :-  "... A Government servant holding a transferable post has no vested right to remain posted at one place or the other, he is liable to be transferred from one place to other.
Transfer orders issued by the competent authority do not violate any of his legal rights.
Even if a transfer order is passed in violation of executive instructions or orders, the Courts ordinarily should not interfere with the order instead affected party should approach the higher authority in the Department.
If the Courts continue to interfere with day-to- day transfer orders issued by the Government and its subordinate authorities, there will be complete chaos in the Administration which would not be conducive to public interest...." In Mohmmad Yakoob v. State and others, 1984 SLJ J&K 167, it is observed :  "...... Mala-fides have not been clearly set out in the petition.
Though Rule 27 of the Rules, and other Government orders require that an officer would not be transferred before the completion of two years service at a post, they are not rigid rules which cannot be relaxed.
Transfer orders are a part of the service of every employee...." In result, the writ petition is dismissed in limine.
Petition dismissed.