RL Anand, J. (Oral) - Dr. OP Angira, HCMS (Retd.
), has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to grant retiral benefits to him i.e. gratuity, provident fund, leave encashment for 104 days, group insurance, pay re-fixation w.e.f.
1.1.1996 and he has further made a prayer that direction be issued to the respondents to employ his son under Ex-Gratia Scheme and to quash the order dated 1131998 vide which the request of the petitioner for employment of his son under the said scheme was declined.
2.
Some facts can be noticed in the following manner :-  The petitioner joined the service of respondents as HCMS Class-II doctor on 811972 and after serving the respondents for about 23 years, he sought retirement on account of medical unfitness as he was suffering from 'acute diabetes', on 781995.
On 2791995, he was asked by respondent No. 3 to produce certificate of medical unfitness from the medical board.
The petitioner appeared before the medical board on 2791995 and the board opined vide report dated 27.10.1995 that he was fit to resume his duties.
On 2461996, respondent No. 3 inspected the hospital where the petitioner was posted as SMO and in the inspection report it was mentioned that respondent No. 3 has medically examined the petitioner, who was found unfit to discharge his duties.
The petitioner was granted one month leave.
On 871996, the petitioner submitted an application seeking retirement on account of his medical unfitness.
The petitioner also issued a reminder to respondent No. 3 for getting him medically examined from the medical board on 1381996.
On 691996, respondent No. 3 directed the petitioner to be present before the medical board at Bhiwani.
The petitioner was examined by the board and the board opined him medically unfit to perform his duties and that there are no chances of improvement.
In pursuance of the report of the board, the petitioner was retired from service under Rule 511 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules Vol. II on 1761997.
Thereafter the petitioner asked the respondents to give employment to his dependent son under Ex-Gratia Scheme.
On 1131998, respondent No. 1 rejected the request of the petitioner on the ground that since the petitioner had sought voluntary retirement, so no employment could be given to his dependent son under the said Scheme.
The petitioner submits that since it was not a voluntary retirement but it was a retirement on medical grounds such as bodily or mental infirmity and, therefore, the stand taken up by the respondents is not correct.
Lastly, the petitioner served a legal notice and claimed the retiral benefits besides compassionate appointment for his son, but to no avail.
Hence the present writ petition.
The notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents, who filed the reply and denied the allegations.
The stand taken up by the respondents is that as the retirement of the petitioner was voluntary, therefore, he is not entitled to the benefit of the Scheme.
It was also maintained by the respondents that the petitioner has not issued any declaration in the shape of affidavit that his income was less than Rs. 2,500/- per month from all resources other than family pension and in these circumstances, the case of the son of the petitioner cannot be considered for compassionate appointment.
3.
In support of his case the petitioner has placed on record certain documents of which I shall make a reference in the later portion of this judgment.
4.
I have heard Mr. Rajesh Chaudhary, Advocate, for the petitioner, Mr. Suveer Sehgal, Deputy Advocate General, on behalf of the respondents and with their assistance have gone through the record of this case.
5.
Annexure P1 is a certificate issued by the Principal Medical Officer, General Hospital, Bhiwani vide which it was opined that the petitioner was fit to resume duties.
This aspect of the case was challenged by the petitioner when he submitted two representations Annexure P2 and Annexure P3.
Finally, on 691996, it was certified by the Medical Board that the disease of the petitioner could not be cured and there was no much hope in the improvement of his illness.
Resultantly, the petitioner was declared medically unfit for doing government job.
On the basis of this recommendation of the Board vide Annexure P5 dated 2651997, the petitioner was allowed to retire from the government service w.e.f.
5.9.1996.
Annexure P6 is yet a representation of the petitioner to the Commissioner and Secretary, Health Department, Haryana vide which he has prayed for compassionate appointment for his dependent son.
This request was declined by the respondent authorities vide Annexure P7 on the ground that since the retirement of the petition was voluntary, therefore, the benefit of the Scheme could not be extended.
Annexure P8 is the legal notice which was served by the petitioner upon the respondents.
6.
The above would show that the case of the petitioner can be divided into two sub-heads.
During the course of submissions, the learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the benefit of gratuity was given to the petitioner on 1952000.
The petitioner retired from service on 761997.
Since there was an inordinate delay on the part of the respondents in the payment of gratuity to the petitioner, therefore, the petitioner is entitled to interest.
This fact has not been refuted by the learned counsel for the respondents that the benefit of gratuity was extended to the petitioner on 1952000, during the pendency of the present writ petition.
Some reasonable time can always be taken up by the State to process the case of a public servant with regard to his retiral benefits, but delay of more than 2-1/2 years cannot be condoned on the test of scrutiny.
In this view of the matter, direction is given to the respondents to grant interest @ 12 per cent per annum on the gratuity amount to the petitioner w.e.f.
111998 till the amount was paid to the petitioner.
The petitioner, however, is not entitled to the interest on other delayed payments which have been made to him after his retirement or during the pendency of this petition because I do not find any negligence on the part of the State with regard to those disbursements.
7.
With regard to the second prayer of the petitioner for compassionate appointment, it was submitted by the learned counsel for the respondents drawing my attention to Annexure P9 that though the petitioner is entitled to the benefit of the Scheme as per para No. 5 of the said Scheme, but he is not entitled to the benefit of ex-gratia appointment for his son because as per para No. 7 it is incumbent upon a public servant to submit a declaration of his income.
He must declare that his income from all resources was less than Rs. 2,500/- excluding the family pension.
Since the petitioner has not given any declaration or affidavit to the respondent authorities, therefore, the case of his son for compassionate appointment cannot be considered.
On the contrary, the learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the stand of the State is untenable.
He draws my attention to Annexure P7 and states that the ground of rejection extended by the State was that the petitioner had retired voluntarily, therefore, his son could not be given employment on the compassionate ground.
8.
There is merit in the contention raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
It was never the stand of the State that the case of the son of the petitioner could not be considered for want of certain declaration in the form of income.
The State took only one objection and that was that the petitioner had retired from service voluntarily, which is not a fact in view of certificate of the Medical Board Annexure P4.
According to para No. 5 of the Scheme, the facility of compassionate appointment to dependant of a Government servant is available if he is declared medically unfit by the Board and retired before attaining the age of 55 years.
Both the conditions are fulfilled in the present case.
In this view of the matter, the second prayed has also to be granted to the petitioner.
Resultantly, the present petition stands disposed of with the directions to the respondents to pay interest @ 12% per annum to the petitioner on the delayed payment of gratuity w.e.f.
111998 till the amount was actually disbursed to him.
Directions are also given to the respondents by declaring and allowing the petition that the son of the petitioner is entitled to the benefit of Scheme for compassionate appointment and his case should be considered according to rules and regulations within six months from the receipt of the copy of this judgment.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.