Bakhshish Kaur, J - Zile Singh-petitioner joined the Police Department on October 10, 1973.
He was promoted to officiate as Clerk on purely ad-hoc basis for a period of six months as per Annexure P.1.
As the promotion was purely on ad-hoc basis, therefore, it was ordered that he shall be liable to reversion any time without notice and his case would be considered for regular appointment after six months.
He shall have to qualify the required typing test within a year of his taking over as clerk at the required speed in typing as mentioned in the Clerical Rules, 1977 and other terms and conditions applicable to a clerk shall apply to him also.
2.
After his promotion of officiate as clerk, Zile Singh-petitioner has been working on the post for three years.
He also qualified the typing test.
He has, however, been reverted to the rank of peon as per order Annexure P2 dated Novembr, 20, 1986 simply on the ground that Haryana Subordinate Services Selection Board (hereinafter referred to as `the Board') has not approved his appointment as Clerk.
It is this order, Annexure P2 which is under challenge in the present writ petition.
3.
I have heard Mr. Maharaj Kumar, learned counsel for the petitioner for Mr. Vijay Dahiya, learned AAG for the State of Haryana.
4.
The case set up by the respondents in the written statement is that promotion of the petitioner was subject to subsequent approval by the Board nd the Board had declined to sanction approval for the same.
Now, adverting to order Annexure P.1 vide which the petitioner was promoted, this condition is totally missing and it is nowhere mentioned that his promotion was subject to the subsequent approval by the Board.
Thus, this objection cannot be accepted at this stage nor it can be made the basis of reverting the petitioner to the rank of peon.
The respondents have also taken a stand that the petitioner had earned only two good annual confidential reports out of 10 ACRs.
He was found suitable by the Board for according approval to his appointment/promotion as Clerk.
Therefore, he was reverted.
The objection so raised appears to be illusive and imaginary because the written statement is totally silent on this point.
The period during which annual confidential reports were reported to be good or adverse have not been indicated.
Assuming that some of the ACRs were recorded adverse, then those were never conveyed to the petitioner.
Thus, the adverse reports cannot be made the basis for passing the impugned order.
5.
It is an admitted fact that the adverse reports were never conveyed to the petitioner.
It is well-settled that where no adverse remarks, if any, recorded in the ACRs have been conveyed to the official, the employer cannot take benefit of the same nor as employee can be kept in the dark in a Government Department.
In a case reported as State of Haryana v. Prem Parkash Gupta, 1997(1) RSJ 742 : 1996(4) SCT 673 (P&H), adverse confidential reports conveyed to the official after delay of 16-17 months were not taken into consideration.
The case in hand is worse than the one referred to above inasmuch as the present petitioner was never conveyed the adverse remarks, if any, recorded by the employer in his ACRs.
The principle of Audi Alteram Partem has to be kept in view while passing an order adverse to an employee.
6.
On a consideration of the matter as above, the impugned order Annexure P2 being unreasonable and illegal, cannot be sustained.
The same is hereby quashed.
This petition is accepted and the petitioner is ordered to be reinstated on the post of Clerk with all consequential benefits.
Petition allowed.