Iqbal Singh, J - The petitioner, who was working as a Peon in the Municipal Committee/Council Kharar, District Ropar (hereinafter referred to as the Committee) retired from service on August 31, 1996, on reaching the age of superannuation.
On July 30, 1996, he had submitted an application to the Executive Officer of the Committee requesting the latter to give him the retirement dues on August 31, 1996 itself.
He completed all the formalities for the release of retiral benefits with the Committee but the same were not paid.
Thereafter, on April 1, 1997 the petitioner served a legal notice (Annexure P-3) upon the respondents requesting them to release the amount of Provident Fund, Gratuity, Pension, Medical and Leave Travel Concession.
Again, a notice for demand of justice (Annexure P-6) was served upon the respondents by the petitioner on July 31, 1997.
Thereafter the Committee vide its letter dated September 22, 1997 (Annexure P-7) informed the counsel for the petitioner to send him to the office of the Committee a number of times for completing the formalities, but the petitioner was not paid the retiral benefits.
Hence the present writ petition in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to pay to the petitioner pensionary benefits and arrears on account of pension along with interest at the rate of 18 per cent per annum was filed.
2.
The Committee, in its reply, stated that the petitioner has not been able to complete the pension papers, that he had been paid a sum of Rs. 2841/- in excess on account of gratuity payment and he was required to deposit the same and that in this connection an objection was raised by the office of the Regional Deputy Director (Local Audit), Ludhiana.
It was further averred that the Audit Department had also raised objections regarding non-furnishing of non-employment certificate and nomination forms by the petitioner.
The Committee further stated that it was only on account of the fault of the petitioner in not completing certain formalities that his case for the release of retiral benefits has been delayed.
3.
The petitioner also filed affidavit dated January 8, 2000 stating therein that he received a cheque of Rs. 20,989/- on March 27, 1999 which included leave encashment, gratuity on account of revised pay scales, revised pay arrears and bonus for the year 1996-97; that he received a cheque of Rs. 20,096/- on June 1, 1998 on account of arrears of pensionary benefits; that there has been a delay of two years and seven months in making this payment to him; that he received an amount of Rs. 1,032/- on account of increased Dearness Allowance on April 30, 1997 ie after eight months of his retirement; that he is entitled to Leave Travel Concession, the amount of which has not been released by the respondents so far and that the respondents have not released the revised pension nor commuted his pension so far.
In the affidavit he further stated that the respondents got wrongly deposited Rs. 2,841/- from him on the ground that he had been paid excess amount of gratuity.
4.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties we find that there has been an undue delay on the part of the respondents in releasing the pensionary benefits to the petitioner.
It is the duty of an employer to get completed all the pension papers of an employee before he retires so that he gets all his dues on the day he retires.
Unfortunately, this is not done in the government offices.
There is no reasonable explanation for not releasing all the pensionary benefits to him even after a period of more than three years and four months has elapsed, the petitioner having retired on August 31, 1996.
The contention of the learned Deputy Advocate General is that the delay occurred because the petitioner did not submit his non-employment certificate besides not completing the other formalities.
It is not shown as to under what provisions of law non-employment certificate is required from an employee who has retired.
Once an employee has retired, there is no justification for asking non-employment certificate from him.
5.
For the aforesaid reason, this writ petition deserves to be allowed.
The same is, accordingly, allowed with costs which are assessed at Rs. 2,000/-.
The respondents are directed to issue final Pension Payment Order to the petitioner within a period of two months from the date of this order.
The amount due to the petitioner shall carry interest at the rate of 12 per cent per annum.
Petition allowed.