Bakhshish Kaur, J - Jaibir-petitioner seeks issuance of writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to consider his case for enrolment as constable in Haryana Police.
2.
In the month of July 1995, recruitment of constables in Haryana Police in District Sonepat took place.
As many as 68 candidates were selected and the name of the petitioner appeared at Sr. No. 32 in the merit list.
Candidates whose name appear at Sr. No. 33 onwards have already been appointed but the petitioner was denied the appointment on the ground that a criminal case under Sections 186/332/353/506 IPC registered vide FIR No. 27 dated January 1, 1995 was pending against him.
Annexure P-2 is the copy of the First Information Report.
3.
Factually, the case is admitted by the respondents.
It is also admitted that appointment to the petitioner was denied on account of pendency of criminal case against him registered vide FIR No. 27 dated January 1, 1995.
4.
Mr. RK Malik, learned counsel for the petitioner contended that since the petitioner has been acquitted of the offences complained of as per judgment, Annexure P-5, therefore, he is entitled to be considered for appointment as Constable as the only reason to deny the appointment to the petitioner has become non est.
5.
Annexure P-3 are the instructions issued by the Government of Haryana pertaining to rehabilitation of ex-convicts released from jails, question of making eligible for appointment under Government.
The case of the petitioner is not covered under the list of offences involving the moral turpitude.
6.
Since the petitioner has been acquitted for the offences punishable under Sections 186/332/353/506 of the Indian Penal Code as per Annexure P-5, therefore, the authorities concerned are directed to re-consider his case because the only hindrance for the appointment of the petitioner was the registration of the criminal case against him which was pending at the time of selection and appointment.
The respondents are directed to re-consider the case of the petitioner, keeping in view the instructions issued by the Government from time to time including the one Annexure P-3.
7.
This petition is, therefore, disposed of with the direction to respondents to re-consider the case of the petitioner for appointment within a period of three months from the date of receipt of copy of the order.
Orders accordingly.