Bakhshish Kaur, J - Smt. Sumitra widow of Vid Parkash has filed his petition for the issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to allow ex gratia grant and employment to her, as her husband died in harness.
2.
Ved Prakash was appointed as a driver on July 16, 1990, as per Annexure P.1.
On September 13, 1993 he died in a motor accident while he was on duty.
Sumitra applied for release of ex gratia grant and employment to her on compassionate grounds by submitting an application/letter on September 20, 1993, Annexure P2 addressed to the District Rehabilitation Officer, District Rehabilitation Centre, General Hospital Bhiwani-respondent No. 3.
Till today, the authorities concerned have not taken any action on the request made by the petitioner, which was followed by several letters and reminders.
Respondent Nos. 1 to 3 and 4 in their separate written statements, have admitted that Ved Prakash was working as a driver and he died in an accident.
It is also admitted that the petitioner moved the authorities concerned for the sanction of ex gratia as well employment on compassionate grounds.
the stand taken by respondent Nos. 1 to 3 is that Government of India respondent is competent to give appointment to the petitioner.
On the contrary, the respondent has pleaded inter alia, that the project in which Ved Prakash was working, though being funded by the Union of India, is under the supervision of State of Haryana, therefore, it is the State of Haryana which has to pave way for the appointment of the petitioner.
3.
I have heard Mr. Mani Ram Verma, Advocate for the petitioner, Ms. Harleen Arora, Advocate appearing for the State of Haryana and Mr. SK Sharma, Advocate representing the Union of India.
4.
Respondent Nos. 1 to 3, on examining the case of the petitioner for payment of ex gratia grant, had referred the matter to Government of India, but the respondent No. 4 had expressed its inability to pay on the premise that there is no provision in the District Rehabilitation Centre for payment of ex gratia in case of death of an employee on Government duty.
However, the widow of Ved Prakash may be appointed against the vacant post as per her qualifications in the District Rehabilitation Centre.
5.
The issue in controversy stands resolved by letter Annexure P4 from Project Director, District Rehabilitation Centre Scheme (Central Administrative and Coordination Unit), Ministry of Welfare, Government of India to the Project Coordinator-cum-Director, Social Defence and Security Department, Government of Haryana.
For facility of reference, the relevant portion of the letter Annexure P4 is reproduced as under :-  "....Since the staff appointed in DRC is governed by the State Government Rules and the overall administrative control of the DRCs rests with State Level Advisory Committee, it is requested that the case of Smt. Sumitra Devi, may please be sympathetically considered at your level and she may be paid ex gratia grant as per State Government Rules out of budget provision of the State Government.
In DRC Scheme, there is no budget provision for payment of ex gratia grant in case of death of an employee while in service.
As regards, providing of employment to the widow of late Shri Ved Prakash, Driver of DRC-Bhiwani, it is requested that she may be given an employment suitable to her either in DRC-Bhiwani or in case if there is no post vacant in DRC-Bhiwani, she may be considered for an employment on compassionate ground under Social Defence and Security Department, Government of Haryana, as a very special case and taken a sympathetic view."
6.
Annexure P4 as reproduced above, clearly indicates that the petitioner's case is required to be considered for employment in DRC-Bhiwani if there is a post vacant in DRC-Bhiwani or in case there is no post vacant she may be considered for an employment on compassionate ground under Social Defence and Security Department, Government of Haryana, as a very special case and taken a sympathetic view.
This letter was issued on April 27, 1994 and it is a matter of regret that the respondent Nos. 1 to 3 have taken no effective steps to consider the case of the petitioner for appointment on compassionate grounds, particularly when the Union of India had already informed the authorities concerned to consider her case, for appointment and for payment of ex gratia grant.
7.
Taking into consideration the aforesaid facts, this petition is allowed with the direction to the respondent Nos. 1 to 3 to consider the case of the petitioner for appointment on compassionate grounds in accordance with the letter Annexure P4 issued by the Union of India as well as the instructions contained in Annexures P.5 and R.4 within a period of four months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
In the event of rejecting the case of the petitioner as set up in her application Annexure P2, the competent authority shall dispose of the same by passing a well reasoned and speaking order and then inform the petitioner by sending her a copy of the order.
Petition allowed.