Swatanter Kumar, J (Oral) - I have heard the learned counsel for the parties at some length.
2.
Learned counsel for the petitioner contends that the finding recorded by the Unfair Means Committee and thereupon order passed by the authorities concerned are vitiated for want of compliance to the provisions of principles of natural justice and audi alteram partem in its true sense.
For this, he makes following submissions :-  3.
Specific complaint was made by the petitioner against the Superintendent of the examination hall to the concerned authorities.
In the complaint it was stated that the said Superintendent did not allow the students to complete their paper and disturbed them unnecessarily and without any reasonable cause.
They further stated that the students who had arrived late and had misbehaved, the Superintendent was showing his anger, annoyance and resultantly shouting and screaming in the hall which was objected to by the petitioner.
4.
It is stated in the written statement that the case of the Unfair Means was registered at the instance of Flying Squad during the course of examination, while according to the petitioner, the Flying Squad had never visited the examination hall on that date.
No document has been produced to show the visit of the Flying Squad in the examination hall on the relevant time.
5.
Two co-examinees, to whom the petitioner had taken with him for being produced before the Unfair Means Committee to substantiate his case, were neither permitted to be examined nor he was permitted to cross-examine the person, who had submitted the report against the petitioner.
Learned counsel appearing for the respondents has not been able to provide any satisfactory answer to these aforestated basic contentions, however, he has tried his level best to refer some kind of explanation that it was a mistaken impression that the Flying Squad was marked in the prescribed form in place of Deputy Superintendent.
But this stand has not been taken in the written statement.
6.
During the course of hearing, learned counsel for the respondents submitted that the competent authority can consider the case of the petitioner for re- hearing before the Unfair Means Committee.
7.
This appears to be a fair stand taken by the learned counsel for the respondents.
Thus, in the aforestated circumstances, it is directed that the impugned order passed against the petitioner will be set aside.
Unfair Means Committee shall give fresh hearing to the petitioner and also permit the petitioner to produce his witnesses as well as permit cross-examination of the person, who prepared the report against him, if it is so prayed.
If the authorities concerned decide to take further action against the petitioner, the Unfair Means Committee shall decide the same within two months.
With the above directions, this petition is partly allowed.
However, there shall be no order as to costs.
Petition partly allowed.