RS Mongia, J - This order will dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 10096 of 1999 and 492 of 2000 involving the identical questions of law.
2.
In CWP No. 10096 of 1999, petitioner Anil Kumar is the son of an armed service personnel who died in action in war with the Pakistan in the year 1971.
Petitioner in the other writ petition viz. CWP 492 of 2000, namely Dilbag, who was working as Airman in the Indian Air Force, was discharged on January 31, 1991 from the Air Force.
The reasons given for the discharge were "medically boarded out".
In the Pension Certificate issued to the said petitioner, it has been mentioned that the petitioner was suffering from Bronchial Asthma, which was accepted as attributable to/aggravated by service and was assessed at 30% for two years as the disability element and was accordingly granted disability pension.
Both the petitioners applied for Haryana Civil Service (Executive Branch) and Allied Services in response to an advertisement, Annexure P.1 issued by the Haryana Public Service Commission.
The last date for submitting the applications was April 15, 1997.
The petitioners appeared in the competitive written test and after qualifying the written test, they were called for interview, but ultimately they did not make the grade for appointment.
The grievance made in the present writ petitions is that as per Haryana Government instructions dated March 6, 1972, issued by the Chief Secretary to all Heads of Departments under the subject "Rehabilitation of disabled ex-servicemen personnel and dependents of those killed/disabled in action", it had been provided that reservation for the ex-servicemen should be in the following order :-  "(a) Reservation : The existing reservation in respect of civil posts for ex-servicemen should be utilised in the order given below :- (i) disabled ex-servicemen with disability between 20% to 50%.
(ii) upto two dependents of service personnel killed/disabled beyond 50%.
(iii) other ex-servicemen."
3.
Petitioner in CWP No. 492 of 2000 (Dilbag) claimed that he fell in category (i) above, whereas petitioner in the other case claimed that he fell in category (ii) above and, therefore, they should have been given appointment to the H.C.S.
(Executive Branch) and Allied Services in preference to candidates from category (iii) above.
In fact, according to the petitioners, the appointments have been made from category (iii) in derogation of the rights of the petitioners.
In CWP No. 10096 of 2000, notice of motion had been issued.
Reply has been filed.
Learned counsel for the respondents drew our attention to the following part of the instructions.
Annexure R.1 with the written statement, which is a complete set of instructions dated March 6, 1972 :-  "(c) Procedure for appointment : (i) Class III and IV Posts : As and when a vacancy reserved for ex-servicemen arises, intimation will be sent to the Employment Exchange (Special Cell for employment of Ex-Servicemen) by the appointment authority.
It will be indicated therein that only names of disabled servicemen (disability between 20% to 50%) and the dependent of those killed/disabled beyond 50% in action should be recommended for that post.
The appointing authority will also intimate to the Employment Exchange the relaxed qualifications, if any, fixed by the appointing authority in that particular case.
If the names of above two categories are not available with the Employment Exchange and the appointing authority has no application of these categories pending with it, then the names of other ex-servicemen will be called for to fill that post.
The appointment of disabled ex-servicemen (disability between 20% to 50%) and of the dependents of those killed/disabled beyond 50% in action will be made on ad hoc basis in the first instance and later their cases will be referred to the Haryana Subordinate Services Selection Board for regular appointment.
(ii) Class I and II Posts : For Class I and Class II posts of which recruitment is not made through competitive examination, the appointing authority while forwarding the requisition to the Haryana Public Service Commission will also forward a copy to the Director, Employment Haryana (Special Cell for Employment of Ex- servicemen).
If the names of disabled ex-servicemen (disability between 20% to 50%) and dependents of those killed/disabled beyond 50% in action are available with the Employment Exchange, then those names will be sent by them to the Haryana Public Service Commission within 10 days of the receipt of the names from the Director of Employment, the Haryana Public Service Commission will first interview those persons and if any among them is found suitable he will be appointed to the post.
In case no name is sent by the Director Employment out of the above two categories, or if out of the names sent by the Director Employment of (no ?)
one is found suitable by the Commission then other ex-servicemen will be considered for the post.
(The procedure for recruitment of other ex-servicemen will continue to remain as at present.)"
On the basis of para (c)(ii) above, learned counsel for the respondents argued that the instructions, dated March 6, 1972, are not applicable to fill in those posts in Class-I and Class-II of which recruitment is made through competitive examination.
For Class I & II these instructions will be applicable only if the appointment is made otherwise than through competitive examination.
Since, according to the counsel, in the present case, the appointments to the HCS (Executive Branch) and Allied Services are made through the competitive examination, which is a major part of selection and then followed by interview, these instructions would not be applicable in the case of the petitioners.
Consequently, all ex-servicemen are to be treated alike and not to be given preference one over the other as contended by the learned counsel for the petitioners.
4.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, we are of the view that there is substance in the argument of the learned counsel for the respondents.
Instructions, dated March 6, 1972 are very clear that for filling posts of Class-I and Class-II, the instructions would be applicable only if the posts are to be filled without reference to any competitive examination.
Since the posts in the HCS (Executive Branch) and Allied Services are filled through competitive examination, which is a major part of selection, and is followed by interview, we are of the view that the petitioners have no case to ask for preference over the other ex-servicemen.
We find no merit in these writ petitions, which are hereby dismissed.
Petitions dismissed.