Swatanter Kumar, J - Miss Nishu Bala has filed this writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India praying for issuance of a writ in the nature of Certiorari and of Mandamus for quashing the admission of respondent No. 3 and for a direction that the respondents 1 and 2 be directed to grant admission to the petitioner in the course of Master of Science in Biotechnology and Master of Science in Microbial and Food Technology being conducted by the Punjabi University, Patiala.
2.
The facts giving rise to the present petition are that the petitioner passed out her B.Sc.
from Punjabi University Patiala in April, 1999.
She appeared in the entrance test for admission in Master of Science in Biotechnology and Master of Science in Microbial and Food Technology.
The entrance test was conducted as per the Handbook of Information published by the University itself.
There were 12 seats in Master of Science in Biotechnology and 10 seats in Master of Science in Microbial and Food Technology for her choice.
She was placed at serial No. 15 and she secured total marks 11837, as per the criteria fixed by the University.
That counselling for the admission of the seat was held on 7th July, 1999 and the petitioner's name appeared at serial No. 3 in the waiting list.
Subsequently, the petitioner learnt that the person of much lower in merit had been given admission in the course while she was not granted admission.
In the telegram dated 17th August, 1999, it was stated that the telegram earlier sent was cancelled.
The respondent No. 3 was at serial No. 5 of the waiting list and had secured 11650 marks in the entrance test, as such, she prays for the aforestated relief.
3.
The Division Bench, vide its order dated 27th September, 1999, granted provisional admission to the petitioner to the course of Master in Science in Food Technology subject to the final decision of the writ petition.
The petitioner since then has been pursuing her course.
On 17th September, 1999, though it was reported that respondent No. 3 has been served but the Hon'ble Division Bench was not satisfied with the report of service and thus, directed fresh notice to respondent No. 3.
Respondent No. 3 was again served, as reported by the Registry, for 6.12.1999 and despite service nobody appeared on her behalf.
Thus, the matter was listed for final hearing on 20th December, 1999.
The parties were required to complete their pleadings by that date.
4.
The respondents No. 1 and 2 filed their reply on record and respondent No. 3 remained unrepresented.
The facts, as narrated in the writ petition, are hardly disputed.
The merit and higher ranking of the petitioner in comparison of respondent No. 3 is also not in dispute.
5.
It is contended by the learned counsel appearing for the University that it was the obligation of the petitioner to get in touch with the department at all subsequent times, as notified by them on the notice board of the College on 2871999, Annexure R1/1 to the reply.
6.
In order to appreciate the merit of the contention advanced by the parties in this behalf, reference to the provisions of the handbook as well as to contents of Annexure R1/1 would be appropriate.
Relevant provision of Handbook of Information reads as under :-  "SELECTION LIST The list of the selected candidates and those on the waiting list shall be displayed on the Notice Board of the Department.
The number of candidates on the waiting list shall be 50% of the seats.
The candidates shall not be informed individually.
The candidates selected for admission will be required to deposit the dues and 3 passport size photographs immediately or as notified by the Head of Department.
The admission of the candidates who fail to deposit their dues by the notified time will automatically stand cancelled and the seats so vacated will be offered to the candidates next on merit."
Contents of Annexure R-1/1 reads as under :- ADMISSION  The waiting list candidates for admission to M.Sc.
Biotechnology/Microbial & Food Technology (academic session 1999-2000) are advised to remain in contact with the notice board of this department for any vacant seat."
7.
It must also be noticed at this stage that the schedule of dates had been printed in the Handbook of Information published by the University for the concerned academic session 1999-2000.
As per the list published, the last date for receiving the application was 16.6.1999; the date of entrance test was 571999; and the dates of Group Discussion/Interview were 16.7.1999 and 17.7.1999.
No other date was indicated in the Handbook.
The reference to Selection List obviously relates to the first list which was to be published and notified by the university for giving admission to the selected candidates.
Certainly, it was indicated in this condition that "the candidates shall not be informed individually."
Thus, a candidate was obliged to see the selection list published on the notice board by the respondent-university.
The petitioner had seen the selection list and that is how she had averred that she was at serial No. 3 in the waiting list, as such, was not entitled to get admission at the first instance.
Nothing has been stated in the Handbook, which would place an obligation upon the candidates to keep on running to the college now and then to find out the progress of the admission of waiting list candidates.
8.
Firstly, the very existence of R-1/1 was challenged, but I would proceed on the basis that it was put up on the Notice Board.
It is conceded before me that entrance test is made for all gradation students and they are entitled to get admission in the respective course on the basis of merit determined amongst all the students, at least from State of Punjab.
It will not be practical for students all over the State to keep on coming to the College off and on.
Admissions as per the settled proposition of law, are required to be given strictly as per merit.
Annexure R-1/1 primarily appears an attempt to frustrate the merit.
In the present days, admission to various academic courses is highly competitive.
It would not only be unfair but unjust also to deprive the candidates of their right to admission by recourse to such indefinite method of admission.
There appears to be no justification whatsoever for issuance of Annexure R-1/1.
9.
Furthermore, in the telegram dated 1681999, which the petitioner submits was not received by her, it was stated, as now it appears on the record, that she should immediately contact the concerned authority for admission to the course.
However, in the telegram dated 17th August, 1999, it was stated that "The seats are full.
First telegram stands cancelled.
Please do not come for admission now."
Issuance of this telegram as well as the previous telegram is not disputed.
This being the admitted position the very basis of the respondent's contention is demolished.
If the stand taken by the respondents is correct, where was the need for issuing the telegram dated 1681999 and if it was issued how could the seat be granted to the candidate lower in merit without affording a reasonable opportunity to the petitioner to seek admission in the course.
10.
The action of the respondent-university in granting admission to respondent No. 3 to say the least is discriminatory.
The stand of the respondent-university suffers from the vice of arbitrariness.
The stand is unreasonable and incapable of standing the judicial scrutiny.
11.
For the reasons stated above, writ petition is allowed.
The Respondents No. 1 and 2 are directed to allow the petitioner to continue her course and let her complete her study in accordance with the Calendar of the University.
If for any reason, it is not possible to permit the petitioner to continue, in that event, they shall cancel the admission of respondent No. 3 and grant admission to the petitioner.
However, in the facts and circumstances of the case, there shall be no order as costs.
Petition allowed.