RL Anand, J - Smt. Mohini Devi widow of Late Shri Ram Niwas Sharma has filed the present writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India for issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents i.e. State Bank of India and its functionaries to pay the commutation of pension, increased gratuity, arrears of revised pension from 24111995 and other benefits for which she is allegedly entitled along with interest at the rate of 18% per annum.
The case set up by the petitioner is that her husband Late Shri Ram Niwas Sharma was appointed to the post of Clerk w.e.f.
21.4.1960 in the State Bank of India, Kaithal Branch (Haryana) and he retired at the age of superannuation on 31101995.
Before retirement, he made a written request to the respondent-Bank on 381995 stating that he was going to retire on 31101995 and gave the option for commutation of 1/3rd of his basic pension.
He died on 23111995 just within a month after his retirement.
The respondent Bank paid only some of the gratuity and unrevised pension but not paid the commutation, full gratuity and arrears of the revised pension.
The petitioner, who is the widow, made a written request as well as oral requests for the payment of the commutation of pension, full gratuity and revised pension, but to no effect.
Hence, she served a demand notice dated 24.9.1998.
The respondent-Bank after gap of three years vide letter dated 1511999 revised the pension of the petitioner but did not pay the arrears along with interest.
Hence, the writ petition.
2.
The notice of the writ petition was given to the respondents, who filed the written statement denying the allegations.
According to the respondents, there was no commutation scheme in operation as suggested by the petitioner at the time when the husband of the petitioner sought voluntary retirement from the respondent-Bank nor on the date when he died.
The husband of the petitioner was paid a sum of Rs. 1,00,000/-, the maximum amount permissible as per the provisions of the Payment of Gratuity Act, 1972, after the retirement.
The Payment of Gratuity (Amendment) Act, 1998 received the assent of the President of India on 22.6.1998 and as per this amendment, the payment of gratuity amount has been raised to Rs. 3,50,000/- and every employee of the Bank, who has left/retired from the Bank service on or after 2491997 and shall be retiring/leaving the service of the Bank would be eligible for payment of gratuity under the Act upto the above revised seiling subject to the employee complying with the other norms of eligibility.
The revised family pension has already been released to the petitioner and she is not entitled to any other claim.
It was further stated by the respondents that a facility for commutation of pension as a one-time exception in accordance with the provisions of sub-rule (1) of Rule 20(B) and rule 23(B) of the I.B.I./S.B.I.
Employees Pension Fund Rules respectively and the pensioners who retired before the notified date could give an option for commutation within 120 days from the date of publication of the notification to commute their pension which would then be done as per commutation factors applicable to their age at their next birthday after 1111994 or the date of retirement whichever is later.
The "notified date" means the date on which these rules have been published in the Gazette of India i.e. 541997.
All the pensioners who seek commutation under these provisions but have completed one year from their dates of retirement would have their commutation applications approved only after they have been declared medically fit by a Medical Officer designated by the Bank.
Since the case of the petitioner does not fall under the abovesaid norms and there was no such scheme in the Bank for commutation of pension at the time of voluntary retirement of the husband of petitioner on 31101995, as such she is not entitled to the additional benefit except the legitimate dues which have already been released to her.
The husband of the petitioner sought voluntary retirement from service w.e.f.
31101995, therefore, the petitioner or her husband were never entitled to the benefit of new scheme.
3.
We have gone through the averments of the writ petition and the supporting documents filed by the parties and are of the considered opinion that the petitioner has not been able to make out any case for payment of commutation of pension or increased gratuity etc. because the case of her husband was governed under the old rules vide which the maximum permissible amount of pension was Rs. 1,00,000/-.
The enhanced gratuity was permissible to those employees who had left or retired from the Bank service on or after 2491997.
Since the husband of the petitioner sought voluntary retirement w.e.f.
31101995, therefore, the petitioner cannot take the benefit of the enhanced amount of gratuity or commutation of pension.
In this view of the matter, we do not find any merit in this writ petition and the same is hereby dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.