Bakhshish Kaur, J - The challenge in this petition is to the impugned order dated June 23, 1999 Annexure P-1 passed by the Director, Technical Industrial Education Haryana-Respondent No. 2 transferring the petitioner from I.T.I.
Women Wing Chhachhrauli to I.T.I.
Women Wing, Naraingarh.
2.
Brief facts of the case are that the petitioner is working as Cutting and Tailoring Instructor.
She has been transferred from I.T.I.
Women Wing, Chhachhrauli to I.T.I.
Women Wing, Naraingarh simply for the reason of accommodating/adjusting Amrit Pal Kaur, Instructor-Respondent No. 3.
She had already remained posted there for five years from July 1993 to September 1998.
She was again transferred from Naraingarh to Chhachhrauli on June 23, 1999.
3.
Mr. AK Rathee, learned AAG representing State of Haryana submitted that respondent No. 3 was posted at Chhachhrauli mainly on medical grounds as she has been suffering from Epilepsy.
He has also produced the file containing the order of transfer, the application moved by respondent No. 3 and the medical certificate produced by her.
4.
1 have heard the learned counsel for the parties and considered the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties.
5.
Mr. MS Guglani, learned oounsel for the petitioner contended that the husband of the petitioner is posted at Indore.
Her son is getting training of Chartered Accountant at Yamuna Nagar.
Mr. Guglani further contended that the petitioner will have no objection even if she is accommodated or transferred to a place of posting which is nearer to Yamuna Nagar.
It is also contended that though she was transferred from Chhachhrauli to Naraingarh yet she was allowed to continue at Chhachhrauli.
6.
Considering the aforesaid circumstances, it is hereby ordered that case of the petitioner be considered for transfer from Naraingarh to any other place near Yamuna Nagar, within a period of three months from the date of the receipt of the copy of the order.
With this direction, the petition stands disposed of.
Orders accordingly.