RS Mongia, J (Oral) - The petitioner was working as a Chowkidar in the Public Works Department (Public Health) of the State of Haryana.
A communication dated December 11, 1998, copy Annexure P-2, was addressed by the Engineer-in-Chief, Haryana Public Works Department, Public Health Branch to all the Superintending Engineers in the Public Health Department in the State of Haryana under on the subject "Departmental Test for promotion of class III and class IV employees to the post of Clerk".
It was mentioned in this communication that the cases of eligible employees of Group D (Mechanical) who had completed five years service and possessed minimum qualification of Matriculation duly recognised by the State Government along with upto date ACR and service book be sent within ten days.
The petitioner offered his name for the aforesaid departmental examination vide communication dated December 30, 1998, copy Annexure P-3.
He was asked to sit in the written test of Hindi and English languages of the Matric Matriculation level, which was to be held on April 17, 1999.
The petitioner's name was mentioned in the list who were to appear in the aforesaid examination on April 17, 1999.
It may be observed here that there were many other Chowkidars working in other places whose names also find mention in the list of candidates who were to appear in the test to be held on April 17, 1999.
The petitioner sat in the test and vide order dated May 10, 1991, copy Annexure P5, he was promoted as a clerk against a vacant post.
Another chowkidar by the name of Mohinder Singh working in Public Health Division No. 2, Sonepat, was also promoted as a Clerk.
The promotion order reads as under:  "The following employees of "Group D" are hereby promoted to the post of clerk in the scale of Rs. 3050-75-3950-EB-80-4590 on ad hoc basis for a period of six months with immediate effect and posted at the place tick marked.
These promotions are without prejudice to the right of others who are otherwise senior to them."
It is the case of the petitioner that he submitted joining report on May 14,1999.
However, on May 21, 1999, the Engineer-in-Chief, Haryana Public Health Branch, passed an order, copy Annexure P-6, which reads as under:  "The promotion orders of Sh. Ranbir Singh Chowkidar Public Health Division No. 2 Bhiwani to the post of Clerk/against the vacant post in Public Health Division Tosham issued vide this office endst.
No. 19802042-PH/ES (4) dt. 11.5.99 are hereby stayed with immediate effect till further orders."
It is this order that has been made the subject matter of challenge in the present writ petition."
3.
Notice of motion was issued and while issuing notice of motion, operation of order Annexure P-6 was stayed.
Reply has been filed.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has referred to the rules framed under Article 309 of the Constitution of India, which are known as Haryana Civil Services (Promotion of Group C and Group D Employees) Rules, 1998, the preface of which provides as under:  "No. G.S.R.
82/Const./Art.
309/98 -.
In exercise of the powers conferred by the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India, the Governor of Haryana hereby makes the following rules regulating the promotion of Group C and Group D employees of all the departments of the State of Haryana to the post of Clerk, namely: These rules were published in Government gazetted dated July 20, 1998.
Rules 2 and 3 of the said rules are in the following terms: "Application  2.
These rules shall apply to all Group C and Group D employees of all the departments of the State of Haryana in respect of promotion to the post of Clerk.
Eligibility for promotion 3.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, contained in any other service rules framed in this behalf, Group C and Group D employees who are matriculate and have put in five years service on Group C or Group D posts or combined experience of five years on both Group C and Group D posts, whose scales of pay are less than or equal to the scale of the post of Clerk reserved for them.
When the turn of such employee comes up for promotion to the post of Clerk, they shall have to pass a written departmental test in Hindi and English languages of the Matriculation level to be conducted by the Head of the Department concerned and only on being qualified they shall be considered for promotion to the post of clerk.
Such promotion shall be made on the basis of seniority-cum-fitness."
These Rules hereinafter would be referred to as Group C and D Rules, 1998.
5.
According to the learned counsel for the petitioner the petitioner's case falls under the aforesaid rules as he belonged to group D post as a Chowkidar and had five years experience as such and was also Matriculate and, therefore, eligible for promotion from class D post to the post of Clerk.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondents submitted that the petitioner belonged to mechanical cadre and it is only a Chowkidar (group D post) of ministerial cadre who can be considered for promotion as a clerk and not a Chowkidar (group D) of mechanical cadre.
It is further the case of the respondents that the petitioner being a Chowkidar in the mechanical cadre could only be considered for promotion as a Water Pump Operator etc.
According to the counsel for the respondents, the petitioner was wrongly considered under group C and D rules of 1998, copy of which has been appended as Annexure P-1 to which reference has already been made above.
6.
Learned counsel for the petitioner also drew our attention to the rules known as the Haryana Public Works Department, Public Health Branch Circle Cadre Ministerial (Group C) Service Rules, 1988, which were published in the Haryana Government gazette dated July 18, 1989.
The preface to the rules reads as under:  "No. G.S.R.
62/Const./Art.
309/89.
- In exercise of the powers conferred by the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India, the Governor of Haryana hereby makes the following rules, Regulating the recruitment, and conditions of service of persons appointed to the Haryana Public Works Department, Public Health Branch, Circle Cadre Ministerial (Group C) Service namely:-" These rules would be referred to as 1988 Rules.
7.
Rule 2(g) of 1988 Rules defines service whereas rule 3 provides that service would comprise of the posts shown in Appendix A Clerk is one of the posts in Appendix A Rule 9(1)(g) of 1988 Rules provides the method of recruitment to the service and so far as the clerks are concerned, it is provided as under:  "(g) in the case of Clerks  (i) 80% by direct appointment, and (ii) not more than 20% by promotion from amongst Group D employees; or  (iii) by transfer or deputation of an official already in the service of the Government of India or any State Government," Appendix 'B' to the 1988 Rules provides the qualifications which are required for purpose of direct recruitment and promotion to various posts.
So far as the Clerks are concerned, the following qualifications are required for promotion:  "(i) Matriculation.
(ii) Five years experience as group D employees.
(iii) The appointment of an incumbent would be subject to the approval of the Subordinate Services Selection Board.
(iv) Qualifies departmental test in typewriting in Hindi/English at a speed of 25/30 words per minute respectively within one year of appointment failing which annual increment will not be granted."
From the reading of the 1988 Rules, it will be clear that 20% of the posts under rule 9(1)(g)(ii) may be filled by promotion from group D employees.
Even while providing for the qualifications for promotion as Clerk, five years experience as group D employee is laid down.
It is nowhere mentioned that such a group D employee has to be either from a ministerial or mechanical cadre.
It is not disputed that the petitioner does belong to a group D cadre though it is being suggested that he belongs to mechanical cadre.
Even as per 1998 Group C & D Rules, Copy Annexure P-1, the eligibility for promotion against various posts for group D employees, there is no distinction made between the employees belonging to the mechanical cadre or ministerial cadre.
8.
Faced with this situation, learned counsel for the respondent referred to another set of Rules known as Haryana Public Works Department, Public Health Branch, Circle Cadre Mechanical (Group C) Service Rules, 1998.
These rules hereinafter would be referred to as the 1998 Rules.
These were published in the Haryana Government gazette dated November 24, 1998.
Learned counsel for the respondents particularly referred to rule 9(1) (XLIII) which provides that the post of Water Pump Operator Grade II is to be filled in by the following methods:  "(XLIII) in case of Water Pump Operator Grade-II.
(i) by promotion from Keyman, Oilman, Petrolman, Chowkidar, Beldar, Mali-cum- Chowkidar, Sewerman, Sewer Helper in the ratio of 10 : 10 : 10 : 5 : 5 : 5 : 3 : 2. respectively and  (ii) 50% by direct recruitment, or (iii) by transfer or deputation of an official already in the service of Government of India or any State Government."
According to learned counsel for the respondents, the petitioner, who was working as a Chowkidar, was only entitled to be promoted as a Water Pump Operator Grade-II under the aforesaid rule.
We do not find any merit in this submission.
A person like the petitioner may have chances of promotion under the 1998 Rules cited by learned counsel for the respondents for promotion as a Water Pump Operator (Grade-II) but nonetheless such an employee to the extent of the posts reserved under the Group C & D Rules 1998 can be promoted even as a Clerk.
Group C & D Rules, 1998 specifically deal with the promotion of Group D employees to the posts of Clerks.
These are special rules for appointment to the post of Clerk and any person who is otherwise eligible under these rules cannot be denied promotion simply because he may also be entitled to become a Water Pump Operator Grade-II.
According to us, under Group C and D Rules, 1998, the eligibility of person who belongs to group D as well as of person who belongs to group C who are in the same or lower scale than the scale of a clerk are eligible for consideration for promotion as Clerk subject to their having five years experience on a group D or group C post or combined subject of course to their fulfilling the other eligibility conditions mentioned earlier.
The petitioner, according to us, was made to sit in the examination as is the requirement under the Group C and D Rules, 1998 and copy of which has been appended as Annexure Pl.
9.
From the aforesaid discussion our conclusion is that the petitioner was rightly asked to sit in the departmental test to make him eligible for consideration for promotion as a clerk and was rightly promoted on passing the examination vide order dated May 10, 1999, copy Annexure P5 and the stay of the said order vide order dated May 21, 1999 copy annexure P-6 is not well founded.
10.
For the foregoing reasons, we allow this writ petition and quash the order dated May 21, 1999, copy annexure P-6.
The petitioner would be allowed to work as a Clerk.
Petition allowed.