Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioners were appointed as Workmates on daily wages.
Their service were regularised in May, 1993.
The petitioners aver that vide order dated June 23, 1997, they were ordered to be promoted to the posts of Assistant Linemen.
However, on November 13, 1997, they were ordered to be reverted to the posts of Workmates.
A copy of this order has been produced as Annexure P3 with the writ petition.
Still further, respondent Nos. 4 to 8 were promoted by another order of the same date.
A copy of this order has been produced as Annexure P4 with the writ petition .
The petitioners claim that they are senior to respondent Nos. 4 to 8.
Thus, their reversion and the promotion of respondent Nos. 4 to 8 are illegal.
The petitioners pray that the orders at Annexure Nos. P.3 and P.4 be quashed.
2.
Even though the petitioners have impleaded various other persons as respondents, Mr. Guglani, learned counsel has categorically stated that he gives up the claim against respondent No. 9 to 23.
3.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 to 3.
It has been inter alia averred that the initial appointment of the petitioners was not in the Yamuna Nagar Circle.
It was on their request that they had been transferred to the Yamuna Nagar Circle after they had served in another Circle for some time.
According to the policy decision of the Respondent- Board, a person who seeks transfer from one Circle to another, loses the benefit of his previous service and is assigned seniority at the bottom of the list of persons who are already working in the Circle.
On noticing the fact that the petitioners had been transferred to Yamuna Nagar at their own request, the seniority was refixed.
As a result, the petitioners had become junior to respondent Nos. 4 to 8.
The seniority having been refixed, even the orders of promotion had to be reviewed.
The factual averment that the petitioners had been transferred at their own request, has not been controverted by filing any replication.
4.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
5.
The fact that the petitioners had been transferred at their own request has not been controverted.
A perusal of the impugned order dated November 13, 1997, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P3, shows that the seniority had been refixed vide order dated November 12, 1997.
The newly assigned seniority has been indicated in the order.
The petitioners have not impugned the order by which their seniority was refixed.
6.
Once the petitioners had been shifted from one circle to another at their own risk and request and they had been assigned seniority on the basis of their date of joining in the new circle, their claim for promotion could be considered only in the order of seniority.
It has not been shown that in the seniority list as determined vide order dated November 12, 1997, respondent Nos. 4 to 8 are junior to the petitioners.
That being so, the challenge of the petitioners to the promotion of respondent Nos. 4 to 8 or to their own reversion is wholly without merit.
7.
Mr. Guglani has contended that there was break in the service of respondent Nos. 4 to 8.
8.
No particulars of the dates on which the respondents had been appointed have been given.
No dates during which there was break, have been indicated.
General and vague averments have been made.
Still further, the seniority as finally determined vide order dated November 12, 1997 has not been challenged.
9.
Mr. Guglani further contends that no notice was given to the petitioners before their seniority was changed.
10.
Even this contention is misconceived.
The petitioners were admittedly transferred at their own request.
To illustrate : Petitioner-Kanwar Singh was transferred vide order dated April 18, 1990.
While transferring him it was specifically observed in the order that "he will be placed at the tail end of the seniority list of Kurukshetra Circle".
Thus, it is clear that at the time of transfer, the petitioner was informed that he would be at the tail end of the list.
This factual position has not been disputed.
11.
In view of this position, the seniority was rightly refixed.
Nothing has been indicated to even prima facie prove that the seniority has not been correctly assigned.
12.
No other point has been raised.
13.
In view of the above, we find no merit in this writ petition.
It is, consequently, dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.