KK Srivastava, J (Oral) - Heard learned counsel for the petitioner and the learned Deputy Advocate General for State of Haryana, appearing for respondents.
2.
The petitioner was working as Driver in the Haryana Roadways and at the relevant time was posted at Charkhi Dadri.
He was charge-sheeted under Rule 7 of the Haryana Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1987, by the General Manager, Haryana Roadways, Charkhi Dadri vide letter No. 3431/ECD dated May 18, 1993.
After the service of the charge-sheet, the petitioner did not submit his reply.
An enquiry was conducted by the Enquiry Officer, who was appointed on February 14, 1994.
The Enquiry Officer found the petitioner guilty of the charges.
The Punishing Authority, after perusing the report of the Enquiry Officer, agreed with the conclusions arrived at in the enquiry report and issued a show cause notice to the petitioner vide endorsement No. 2580/ECD dated May 1, 1995.
In the show cause notice, a penalty of termination of the service of the petitioner was proposed.
The petitioner, after the service of the show cause notice as aforesaid, filed his reply which was examined by the General Manager, Haryana Roadways, Charkhi Dadri.
The aforesaid authority i.e. the General Manager, Haryana Roadways, Charkhi Dadri, allowed personal hearing to the petitioner and thereafter he proceeded to pass the order on February 6, 1996 vide which the services of the petitioner were terminated.
An appeal was filed departmentally before the Transport Commissioner, Haryana which was dismissed vide order dated May 5, 1997 by the competent authority, namely ASTC (A), who exercised the delegated appellate power of the Transport Commissioner.
3.
Feeling aggrieved against the dismissal of the appeal, the petitioner filed a second appeal before the Financial Commissioner and Secretary to Government Haryana, Transport Department, Chandigarh, who afforded personal hearing to the petitioner and after perusing the impugned order of dismissal of the petitioner from service as also the dismissal of the first appeal, he concluded that the petitioner had not remained wilfully absent.
He also took into consideration the medical certificate regarding the petitioner being admitted in hospital which in the instant case was Goyal Nursing Home, Bhiwani and after going through all the relevant record, the Financial Commissioner and Secretary to Government of Haryana, Transport Department, concluded in Para 6 of the order copy Annexure P-1, as under :-  "Keeping in view the facts and circumstances of the case and taking a lenient view I order that Shri Piare Lal petitioner be taken back in service and set aside the order of termination passed by ASTC (A) subject to the condition that the period for which he remained out of job be treated as leave of the kind due/extra ordinary leave."
4.
The petitioner, however, received copy of the order passed by the General Manager, Haryana Roadways which is dated August 24, 1998, copy Annexure P-2, which was passed in compliance with the aforesaid order of the Financial Commissioner and Secretary to Government Haryana, Transport Department, which conveyed to him the fact that, he had been appointed afresh as Driver with effect from July 27, 1998 in the pay scale admissible to the said post and was allotted a fresh driver No. 100.
He was, however, posted at Charkhi Dadri depot.
After the receipt of this order, the petitioner felt aggrieved and filed this petition.
5.
Notice of motion was issued to respondent No. 1 to 3 i.e. State of Haryana through its Secretary, Transport, The Transport Commissioner, Haryana and the General Manager, Haryana Roadways, Charkhi Dadri, District Bhiwani, who put in appearance and filed joint written statement of the General Manager, Haryana Roadways Charkhi Dadri, wherein a categorical stand was taken that the Financial Commissioner-cum-Secretary, Transport had taken a lenient view of the matter and offered fresh appointment to the petitioner.
Since the petitioner was taken back in service under the orders of the Financial Commissioner-cum-Secretary, Transport, the appointment was treated as fresh.
It was categorically denied in para 6 that the word as fresh was not initially written in the order passed by the second appellate Authority i.e. the Financial Commissioner-cum-Secretary, Transport, State of Haryana.
6.
At the time of the hearing of the writ petition, the learned counsel for the petitioner drew our attention to the photostat copy of the order passed by second appellate Authority, Mr. PR Kaushik, Financial Commissioner and Secretary to Government Haryana, Transport Department, wherein in Para 6 the words as fresh after the words "taken back in service" and before the words "and set aside" are missing.
He has also drawn our attention to another copy of the order placed on record which has been marked as Annexure P-3 which shows that the words "as fresh" have been shown to be added between the words "taken back in service" and the words "set aside the order of termination."
Be that as it may, the very perusal of the order passed by the Financial Commissioner and Secretary to Government of Haryana, Transport Department, shows that while allowing the appeal of the petitioner, the authority i.e. the Financial Commissioner and Secretary had intended to order the restoration of the petitioner back to the service after setting aside the order of termination of the service.
It is relevant to point out that from the words used in Para 6, which have been quoted above, it is abundantly clear that the order of termination passed by the competent authority was set aside and the petitioner was ordered to be taken back in service.
In case the intention of the Financial Commissioner-cum-Secretary, Transport was to offer a fresh appointment to the petitioner, there was no occasion or purpose for him i.e. the Financial Commissioner and Secretary, Transport Department, Government of Haryana, to order for setting aside the termination order and directing the petitioner to be taken back in service.
In the context of these expressions i.e. "the setting aside of the order of termination" and "the petitioner to be taken back in service" are clearly indicative of the fact that the petitioner was restored in service and further that he continued in service as the order of termination of the service had been set aside.
Not only this, Para 6 further provides that the period for which the petitioner remained out of job was to be treated as leave of the kind due/extra ordinary leave.
Even this was not required in case the petitioner was to be offered fresh appointment.
7.
In this view of the matter, we find merit in this writ petition and allow the same.
The impugned order, Annexure P-3, is quashed to the extent in so far as it provides appointment to the petitioner afresh.
It is declared that the petitioner shall be treated to be in service in continuity as per the order passed by the second appellate Authority i.e. the Financial Commissioner-cum- Secretary, Transport Department, Government of Haryana, Chandigarh.
It is also made clear that the petitioner will be entitled to all the consequential service benefits.
Petition allowed.