GS Singhvi, J - This appeal is directed against the order of the learned Single Judge by which he accepted the writ petition filed by the respondents for quashing of the order, Annexure P5 dated August 14, 1985 issued by the Block Primary Education Officer, Kharar III, at Mohali stopping the payment of compensatory allowance of the writ petitioners and directing recovery of the amount already paid to them.
2.
We have heard Shri Rupinder Khosla and perused the record.
3.
One of the grounds which found favour with the learned Single Judge was that the order impugned in the writ petition had been passed without complying with the basic rule of natural justice, inasmuch as no notice or opportunity of hearing was given to the writ petitioners before the issuance of direction for stoppage of payment of compensatory allowance to them and for making recovery of the amount already paid to them.
4.
At the hearing of the appeal, the learned Deputy Advocate General, Punjab conceded that no action-oriented notice or opportunity of hearing was given to the writ petitioners before passing of the impugned order.
He, however, tried to convince us that the finding recorded by the learned Single Judge on other issues should be set aside because the schools in which the writ petitioners were teaching did not fall within the Municipal limits of SAS Nagar.
5.
In our opinion, the learned Single Judge has rightly quashed the order under challenge on the ground of infringement of rule of audi alteram partem.
It is a settled principle of law that no order adversely affecting a person can be passed by a public authority without complying with the fundamental rule of justice i.e. no man can be condemned unheard (State of Orissa v. Dr. Binapani Dei, AIR 1967 SC 1269).
6.
Hence, the appeal is dismissed.
It is, however, made clear that the appellants shall be free to initiate fresh action for stopping the payment of compensatory allowance to the respondents-writ petitioners and the competent authority may pass appropriate order after giving reasonable opportunity of hearing to them.
Appeal dismissed.