JS Narang, J - This judgment would dispose of CWP Nos. 1721, 1722 and 1723, all of 1998, as the common questions of law and fact are involved in the said petitions.
Though the facts of all the three are at little variance but for the purpose of this judgment, the facts stated in CWP 1721 of 1998 are being referred to.
2.
The petitioner passed matriculation examination from Punjab School Education Board in March, 1985 and it was in May 1988, he was appointed as Beldar in the pay scale of Rs. 300-430 in the Department of Irrigation, Punjab at Ranjit Sagar Dam, Shahpur Kandi, Tehsil Pathankot, Distt.
Gurdaspur (in short "Ranjit Sagar Dam Project").
The petitioner joined on 2551988.
He was promoted as Junior Welder w.e.f.
1.6.1989 in the pay scale of Rs. 325-495 and thereafter was promoted as Welder in the pay scale of Rs. 950-1800 w.e.f.
131991.
The petitioner was regularised as Beldar w.e.f.
3.3.1996.
In the meanwhile, the petitioner passed BA examination (Three years course) from Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, in April, 1989.
The petitioner also passed B.Ed.
examination from Maharshi Dayanand University, Rohtak in June, 1996 by virtue of one year's correspondence course extended by the University.
3.
The petitioner was posted at Ranjit Sagar Dam Project when he was apprised of a circular letter issued by the Superintending Engineer, Administrative Circle, to all the S.Es.
with copies to the offices of the Executive Engineers etc. vide which a list of qualified personnel having suitable qualifications of Trained Teachers was asked for, who are in fact working in the Divisions under various categories and are also willing to serve in the school established by Ranjit Sagar Dam Project.
The copy of circular letter is at Annexure P6.
The except of the same is reproduced here under :-  "Subject : Qualified personnel i.e.
B.Sc.
; B.Ed.
; BA, B.Ed.
; JBT, MSc.
A list of qualified personnel having suitable qualification of trained teacher who are working in your division or various categories and are willing to serve the project school may please by supplied along with their Bio-data for taking further necessary action.
The information may please be supplied within 15 days positively."
4.
The petitioner who claims himself having acquired the qualifications for the post of SS Master submitted an application in response to the circular letter.
In response to the willingness communicated by the petitioner, the Executive Engineer Ranjit Sagar Dam Project addressed a communication dated 691996 to the Principal, Govt. Higher Secondary School, Ucha Thara (School established at the project).
As per the communication, the names of the officials/workmen including the petitioner were communicated to the Principal to teach children in Govt. Higher Secondary School (referred hereabove) in their existing designation and pay scale without any extra renumeration/benefits.
It had been stated that their services are placed at the disposal of the Principal without any extra renumeration/benefit till the arrival/posting of teachers from the Education Department of Govt. of Punjab.
It had been clarified that the attendance of the said officials/workmen would be marked by the Principal and their pay would be drawn on the basis of the duty certificate issued by the Principal.
The requisite excerpt of the copy of the letter Annexure P7 is reproduced hereunder :-  "Sr. No. Name & Designation Sarvshri/Smt.
Qualification Name of office/Division in which serving  1 to 6 xx xx xx xx 7.
Hakumat Singh Beldar BAB.Ed.
Spillway Const.
Divn.
RSD Shahpurkandi 8. xx xx xx xx 5.
The petitioner claims that he had been working against regular post of a qualified Master because he is a qualified person, as such would be entitled to the pay scale of the SS Master, which is being paid throughout the State of Punjab.
It has also been claimed that the respondents are discriminating in the matter of grant of pay scale between the employees who are similarly situated and are, therefore, not following the settled principle of law "Equal pay for equal work".
Thus, the petitioner is entitled to the salary equal to the salary being paid to the other Masters of the School where he had been teaching for the last so many years.
It has been further alleged that the respondents have appointed on ad hoc/temporary basis a number of teachers in the said school in accordance with the Govt. policies and they have also promoted teachers from the lower post to the higher post as per their qualifications.
Reference has been made in the petition in regard to the appointment of such persons as Teachers in the school.
However, it has also been alleged that out of the cadre of Balders to which the petitioner belongs to, some have been promoted/appointed Junior Engineers possessing the required qualifications and they have also been granted pay scale of Junior Engineers but the petitioner has not been granted they pay scale of SS Master.
The petitioner had made representation to the Chief Engineer and the said representation was not replied to.
It was vide order dated 171998 the Principal of the School recorded relieving report in pursuance to the order passed by the Superintending Engineer of Ranjit Sagar Dam Project by virtue of which the petitioner had been relieved of his school duties w.e.f.
171998 and had been directed to report to his respective Officer Incharge.
The said relieving report, copy Annexure P12, issued by the Principal was duly countersigned by the petitioner in token of having been relieved from school duty.
The petitioner feeling aggrieved filed the present writ petition.
6.
Notice of motion was issued to the respondents and the operation of the impugned order dated 171998 (Annexure P12) had been stayed.
Respondents filed written statement and the petitioner filed rejoinder and thereafter the petitioner filed amended petition and the respondents filed additional affidavit while maintaining the old reply in response to the amended petition.
The petitioner also filed counter to the affidavit filed by the respondents.
7.
The respondents maintained that the petitioner had been appointed as Beldar and subsequently upon revision of pay scale of the Beldar, the petitioner was also paid salary in the revised pay scales and subsequently petitioner was promoted as Welder.
Since then the petitioner is getting the pay of the Welder and the pay is being drawn against the post of Welder from the concerned treasury.
It has been further maintained by the respondents that the petitioner had been employed and continues to be retained against the post of Welder in the pay scale of Rs. 4020-6200 with effect from 111996.
As such, he is not entitled to the pay scale of a teacher because he was never appointed as a teacher by the respondents.
It has been further averred by the respondents that the petitioner may have improved his qualifications but that did not entitle him to claim the salary of a teacher because the petitioner had been given the choice to perform the duty of teaching and his willingness to teach as a stop-gap arrangement had been asked for, which had been given voluntarily by the petitioner.
The petitioner had never been appointed as a teacher i.e. officiating/ad hoc or otherwise, his salary was drawn against the post held by him i.e. Welder.
In this regard reference may be made to para 3 of the preliminary objections of the written statement, as under :-  "3.
The pay of the petitioner is being drawn against the post of Welder from the Jugial Treasury.
He is still a Welder in the record of the respondents.
Copies of extract from Service Book enclosed as Annexure R-1."
In any case, it is absolutely clear from Annexure P-7 that the certificate of attendance of such like persons as the petitioner was to be granted by the Principal but their pay was to be drawn against their substantive post on the basis of the duty certificate issued by the Principal.
It is further maintained that the willingness of the petitioner had been obtained vide circular letter, copy Annexure P-6, which clarifies that the persons working in various divisions of Ranjit Sagar Dam Project in various categories/cadres but otherwise held qualifications of a teacher and are willing to teach in the school at Ranjit Sagar Dam Project, may supply their bio-data for teaching children in the school as a stop-gap arrangement till the arrival/posting of the teachers from the Education Department of Government of Punjab.
As such, no violation of any kind has been committed by the respondents of any rule or regulation as the petitioner had never been appointed as a teacher but continued to retain the post of a Welder and he was being paid his salary in the revised pay scale of a Welder.
It has been further pointed out that vide communication dated 2831986 (copy Annexure R-1/B R/3) the Government of Punjab had specifically communicated that for managing the school upon the project, a Management Board had been constituted consisting of Chief Engineer/ Superintending Engineer (Administration)/Superintending Engineer, Township Circle/Representative of Director, Public Instructions (Schools)/ Representative of Director, Public Instructions (Primary)/Principal, Higher Secondary School and Executive Engineer (Administration).
It had been further clarified that the said Management Board will select teaching and non-teaching staff provided the Director, Public Instructions (Schools) and Director, Public Instructions (Primary) failed to sponsor the same.
As a sequel thereto, teachers required for the school were subsequently selected.
Thus, upon the selection of the required teachers or alternatively the same having been sponsored by the Director, Public Instructions (Schools), the petitioners have been rightfully relieved from the duty in the school and were asked to join the duty in the division/office.
Thus, no case is made out by the petitioner to claim any right as a teacher.
8.
Mr. GK Chatrath, learned Senior Advocate, for the petitioner contended that the petitioner holds qualification of a Teacher and had been asked to perform the job of a teacher which he successfuly performed and is, therefore, entitled to all the benefits as are being given or were being given to the teachers in the said school and as also in the State of Punjab.
He further contended that the petitioner is entitled to be promoted to the next post to which his juniors have been promoted and have been made entitled to the higher grade, with all the consequential reliefs and benefits flowing therefrom.
Lastly he contended that in any case for the period for which the petitioner worked as a teacher, he would be entitled to the salary which was payable to a teacher at that time.
9.
Learned counsel for the petitioner had placed on record an additional fact that the persons junior to the petitioner had been promoted to the next higher rank without considering the petitioner, as such, it is absolutely clear that the petitioner had been accepted as a teacher.
10.
We are afraid, none of the contentions of the learned counsel can be accepted.
It is borne out from the record, especially Annexure P-7, vide which the petitioner had been asked to perform the duty of a teacher, it had been specifically provided that they shall perform the job of a teacher but in fact shall continue in their substantive post of Welder and such persons shall be paid salary against the said post and yet they were to perform the duty as a teacher till the arrival/posting of teacher from the Education Department of Government of Punjab and they were to perform their duty without any extra remuneration/benefit and were allowed to mark their attendance in the school and upon receipt of the attendance certificate were to be paid their salary in their own pay scale which was received by them without any objections in respect thereof.
Thus, the question of giving any benefit to the petitioner as a teacher does not arise because he was never appointed as such.
The petitioner would also not be entitled to any claim in respect of salary of a teacher as he had never been asked to officiate or act as a teacher by any order.
In fact that respondents have brought to our notice that Board of Management of the School on the project had been constituted and the selections of the teachers to be appointed in the said schools were duly made.
The petitioner had neither offered himself nor he had ever been called to be selected as a teacher.
Since the duly selected teachers became available, the petitioner had been duly relieved from his duty to teach in the school in the capacity of a Welder and had been correctly asked to report back in his division to the concerned officer.
The petitioner can neither stake his claim on any count as a teacher nor is entitled to claim salary for having worked as a teacher because it is not the case of the petitioner that he had ever been asked to officiate or had ever been appointed on ad hoc basis as a teacher.
Thus, the petition fails and is hereby dismissed.
11.
Before parting with the judgment, it shall be appropriate to mention here that the petitioner had placed on record an affidavit by virtue of which it had been stated that one junior person to the petitioner as a Welder had been promoted further without the petitioner having been considered for the same.
We refrain ourselves from going into its correctness or otherwise but we observe that if the petitioner files representation in this regard before the competent authority, the said authority shall decide the said representation within a period of three months from the date of filing of such representation and if the petitioner is found entitled to the relief claimed from the date when his junior was promoted, the petitioner shall be granted consequential relief flowing therefrom.
No order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.