Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner is working as a Hockey Coach at the Kurukshetra University.
He prays for the issue of a writ of Mandamus directing the University to grant him the selection grade of Rs. 3700-5700.
He prays that the order dated July 2, 1998 by which the request has been rejected be quashed.
2.
The respondents contest the petitioner's claim.
It has been pointed out that the petitioner possesses the qualification of matriculation only.
He has passed a diploma in Hockey coaching from the National Institute of Sports.
He does not possess the qualifications prescribed by the UGC for the post of Director of Physical Education or Coach viz. "a Post Graduate Diploma or a Certificate of degree in Physical Edcuation."
Thus, he is not entitled to the selection grade as claimed by him.
3.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties.
4.
The short question is - Does the petitioner fulfil the qualifications for the grant of the scale of Rs. 3700-5700 prescribed for the post of Director of Physical Education ?
5.
Mr. Sehgal, learned counsel for the petitioner, has claimed that the instructions issued by the State Government vide letter dated February 21, 1985 entitle the petitioner to the scale claimed by him.
Is it so ?
6.
A perusal of the letter issued by the State Government shows that a uniform scale of Rs. 700-1600 had been prescribed for persons working on the posts of Directors of Physical Education in Government/Private Affiliated Colleges.
In para 4 it was specifically prescribed as under :  "These scales will be admissible to only those existing incumbents, who are in the UGC approved/prescribed grades and possess the qualifications mentioned in Annexure-I" 7.
In Annexure-I the minimum qualifications prescribed for the posts of Director of Physical Education in the pay scale of Rs. 700-1600 were as under :-  "Must possess the minimum qualifications of a Post Graduate Diploma or a certificate of degree in Physical Education."
8.
It is the admitted position that the petitioner does not have a Post Graduate Diploma or a Certificate of degree in Physical Education.
Thus, he was not entitled to the scale of pay as sanctioned by the UGC  9.
Mr. Sehgal contends that the Screening Committee had considered the petitioner's case for the grant of the senior/selection grade.
It had recommended the grant of the higher scale vide its proceedings held on December 14, 1995, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-16 with the writ petition.
Thus, the scale should be granted.
10.
We have perused these proceedings.
In para 4 the Committee had observed as under :-  "Three Sports Coaches (R.B.
Chauhan, Sh. IS Banta, and Sh. MM Bhardwaj) possess certificate in coaching now treated as Diploma and on the basis of same qualification, they were given the grade of Rs. 700-1600 w.e.f.
1.4.1980 and further Rs. 2200-4000 w.e.f.
111986 and hence the Committee considers them eligible for senior scale/selection grade."
11.
The Committee had made its recommendation on the basis of the fact, that the petitioner had been granted the scale of Rs. 700-1600 w.e.f.
April 1, 1980 and thereafter the scale of Rs. 2200-4000 w.e.f.
January 1, 1986.
However, it has already been noticed that the petitioner did not fulfil the minimum requirement as laid down by the Government for the grant of scale of Rs. 700- 1600.
He did not have a Post Graduate Diploma or a Certificate of degree in Physical Education.
In fact, he is not even a graduate.
He is a mere matriculate with training as a Hockey Coach.
Resultantly, it is clear that the scale of Rs. 700-1600 granted to the petitioner was not in strict conformity with the circular issued by the State Government vide its letter dated February 21, 1985.
It also deserves notice that vide letter dated March 8, 1989 the State Government had provided for the revision of pay scales in the educational institutions.
The grant of these scales was again subject to the conditions laid down therein.
So far as the posts of Director of Physical Education in the scale of Rs. 700-1600 were concerned, a revised pay scale of Rs. 2200-4000 had been sanctioned.
It appears that even this scale was given to the petitioner in routine.
However, despite that it cannot be said that the petitioner would be automatically entitled to a even a higher scale or the selection grade despite the fact that he does not possess the qualifications for the post.
12.
Mr. Sehgal contends that various persons junior to the petitioner have been granted the senior scale and the selection grade.
It may be so.
But it has not been shown that any of them was similarly placed as the petitioner.
It has not been indicated that any of the juniors was a mere matriculate with training as a Coach and was still granted the higher scale.
Since the petitioner has not been able to establish the parity in qualifications with his juniors, he cannot complain of discrimination in the grant of higher scales.
13.
No other point has been raised.
14.
We find no infirmity in the view taken by the authority.
Consequently, we find no ground to interfere.
15.
Resultantly, the petition is dismissed.
However, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.