GC Garg, J - Petitioners applied against advertisement issued by the respondent department for selecting 1800 constables (Male) through direct recruitment.
Names of the petitioners were entered in the recruitment registration register.
Petitioners 1 and 2 were allotted registration Nos. 3817 and 6095 respectively.
The petitioners filled up their application forms and were physically measured.
Petitioner No. 1 was declared successful whereas petitioner No. 2 was not declared successful.
The physical measurement was noted by the officials on different paper slips of different candidates.
According to petitioner No. 2, his physical measurement was upto the standard required under the rules, but in spite of that he was declared unsuccessful.
Grouse of petitioner No. 1, however, is that he was found physically fit as far as physical measurement was concerned.
He appeared for physical test and secured 20 marks out of a total of 20 marks but in spite of that he was not selected even though he faired well in the interview.
On these premises the petitioners have challenged the entire selection by filing the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
2.
In response to notice of motion, respondents put in appearance.
Written statement was filed on behalf of respondents 1 to 5 only.
Stand of the official respondents in the written statement is that petitioner No. 1 was found to be physically fit and petitioner No. 2 was declared ineligible.
As per physical measurement register maintained under rule 1216(ii), the height of petitioner No. 2 is shown as 5 fee 1025 inches and not 5 feet 95 inches as mentioned by him.
His chest measurement was, however, found to be 32 inches and 34 inches (on expansion) He was thus declared ineligible because his chest was below the required standard of 33 inches with an expansion of 15 inches.
Petitioner No. 2 moved application before the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Hissar Range who measured his chest personally on 771998 and found it to be 325 and 34 inches and informed petitioner No. 2 on the spot regarding rejection of his candidature.
It was also stated that there was no tampering with the physical measurement record and a list of all the candidates who were found eligible for physical efficiency test was displayed on the notice board.
It was admitted that petitioner No. 1 secured full marks in the physical efficiency test i.e. 20 marks out of a total of 20 marks, but he secured only 6 marks out of 15 marks in the interview.
Petitioner No. 1 could not secure position in the merit list he having secured 26 marks in all as against 29 marks secured by the last candidate recommended for selection in the general category.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that measurement of petitioner No. 2 was not taken by the Deputy Inspector General of Police himself but was taken by an Inspector.
Learned counsel by reference to photo copies of slips produced on record submitted that after physical measurement, petitioner No. 2 was given a slip which goes to show that the measurement of his chest was 33 and 345 inches and height was 59-1/2 feet.
But later on the record was tampered with and he was declared unsuccessful in the measurement test.
4.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and perusing the record, we are of the opinion that the petition deserves to be dismissed.
As regards petitioner No. 1 it is admitted by the respondents that he secured full marks i.e. 20 marks out of a total of 20 marks in the physical efficiency test.
It is clearly mentioned in the written statement that he secured only 6 marks out of a total of 15 marks prescribed for the interview.
The last man recommended for selection secured 29 marks whereas after adding the marks of physical efficiency test, petitioner No. 1 secured a total of 26 marks.
His name thus could not figure in the merit list prepared for recommending the names of candidates for selection.
It has been categorically denied by the respondents that there was any tampering with the record of selection.
As regards petitioner No. 2, he was found ineligible as his chest measured below the required standard.
He made a request in that behalf to the Deputy Inspector General of Police who himself measured him chest again on 771998 and found the same to be 325 and 34 inches whereas the required standard under the rules is 33 inches and 345 inches (on expansion).
Petitioner No. 2 was thus not eligible for being called in the interview and thus has been rightly ignored.
Learned counsel for the petitioner could not show by reference to any material that the measurement slip which he is referring to show that measurement of chest of petitioner No. 2 was 33 and 345 inches, was in fact issued by the officials of the selection committee.
In this view of the matter, we see no reason to interfere in exercise of jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
The petition is consequently dismissed.
Petition dismissed.