Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioners claim that they were appointed as Craft/Balwari Teachers in various Centres in the district of Patiala.
These appointments were made in December, 1994.
They continued to function till September 30, 1998 when their services were terminated.
The petitioners complain that the action of the respondents in terminating their services is arbitrary.
They also point out that no salary had been paid from October 1, 1997.
The petitioners pray that the respondents be directed to pay the emoluments from October 1, 1997.
They also pray that the orders of termination passed on September 30, 1998, copies of which have been produced as Annexures P-9 to P-15, be set aside.
2.
The respondents contest the petitioners' claim.
It is urged that the appointments had been made on a purely temporary basis and could be "terminated without any notice at any time".
Thus, the termination is in strict conformity with the terms of appointment.
As for the payment of salary, the respondents blame each other.
On behalf of respondent Nos. 1 to 3 it is urged that respondent Nos. 4 and 5 had been directed to desist from making any appointment or allowing any one to continue beyond the age of 58 years.
On behalf of respondent No. 4 it is mentioned that the appointments were legally made.
It is further pointed out that respondent Nos. 1 to 3 were regularly disbursing the aid and now they cannot turn around to say that the appointments were illegal.
3.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
4.
Mr. Brar, learned counsel for the petitioners, has not urged anything to challenge the action of the respondents in terminating their services.
It is conceded that the termination was in conformity with the terms of appointment.
However, it is urged that the petitioners have a right to the payment of salary for the period they have actually served.
This claim is undisputed.
Factually, the petitioners have performed their duties from October 1, 1997 to September 30, 1998.
They are entitled to the wages for the period they have actually worked.
The action of the respondents in not paying them their salaries is illegal and arbitrary.
It cannot be sustained.
5.
The respondents are directed to make payment of the salary to the petitioners within two months from today.
In case of failure to do so the petitioners shall be entitled to the payment of the arrears along with interest at the rate of 12% per annum from the date of accrual till the date of actual payment.
The accounts shall be mutually settled by the respondents.
6.
The writ petition is, accordingly, disposed of.
In the circumstances, we leave the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.