Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was working as a Clerk-cum- Cashier with the Oriental Bank of Commerce.
On January 29, 1997 he was charge-sheeted.
It was, inter alia, alleged that he had embezzled an amount of Rs. 31,130/- from the four accounts of different persons by "issuing four loose cheques and signing fraudulently for the account-holders, who used to put thumb impressions."
This was alleged to have been done on December 12, 1995.
It was further alleged that on March 16, 1996 he had deceitfully signed two cheques for a total amount of Rs. 16,200/-, which was misappropriated by him on March 22, 1996.
Again he had committed fraud of Rs. 24,450/- by forging signatures.
He issued three cheques books and out of these four withdrawals were made through cheques and another through a withdrawal slip for a total amount of Rs. 24,450/-.
After the issue of this charge-sheet, the petitioner had filed a reply.
An Inquiry Officer was appointed.
While the inquiry proceedings were in progress, the petitioner admitted his guilt and made a clean breast of his having committed the misconduct, as alleged against him.
thereafter, the Inquiry Officer recorded his findings, which were based not only on the confession but also on the evidence, which had been produced in the inquiry proceedings till the date the petitioner had made the confession.
Thereafter, on May 1/5, 1997, the petitioner was furnished with a copy of the inquiry report and asked to submit his reply.
After consideration of the matter, the Authority ordered the petitioner's dismissal from service.
It was also decided that the amount, which had been misappropriated/embezzled by him, shall be recovered.
The petitioner filed an appeal.
It was dismissed.
Hence this writ petition.
The petitioner prays that the order of his dismissal from service be set aside and that he be reinstated in service.
This claim is being made on the premises that "the petitioner had been lured into making the confession by being promised that he would be treated leniently."
2.
We have heard Mr. Roshan Lal Batta, learned counsel for the petitioner.
Two-fold submission made by the learned counsel is that the Inquiry Officer has not recorded the findings on the basis of any evidence on the record and that he has merely gone by the petitioner's confession.
Thus, the finding that the charges have been proved, cannot be sustained.
Secondly, it has been contended that the petitioner has had a good record for a period of 12 years and that this aspect was not considered by the Punishing Authority while awarding the extreme penally of dismissal from service.
3.
We have perused the inquiry report, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P8 with the writ petition.
A perusal of this document shows that the Inquiry Officer has noticed the factual aspect relating to the charge-sheet.
Thereafter, he has noticed documents like Exhibits A-I/1 to A-I/5, B-I/1 to B-I/7 and C-I/1 to C-I/2, which had been produced on behalf of the bank.
He has also noticed the statement made by Mr. KK Khanna, Manager, Branch Office, Sharifpura, in support of the charges levelled against the petitioner.
He has noticed the fact that the delinquent employee was "provided opportunity to cross-examine the management witness", but he declined to do so.
On the contrary, on April 9, 1997 he filed a written confession, which was taken on record as Exhibit D-1.
The Inquiry Officer further noticed the fact that "the defence also requested to close the enquiry on the grounds that he did not wish to say anything further in his defence and also requested for lenient view in the matter.....
He further undertook to deposit Rs. 35,890/- (being half share of the total fraud of Rs. 71,780/-) along with up-to-date interest at the rate of 20 per cent...." After noticing these facts the Inquiry Officer recorded his defence.
4.
On a perusal of the report, we are satisfied that there was evidence which clearly proved the charges against the petitioner.
This evidence was taken into account.
The petitioner had not offered any defence.
He did not even avail of the chance to cross-examine the witness, who had appeared on behalf of the Management.
In fact, he had confessed the guilt and made a clean breast of the whole matter.
Having done that, the petitioner cannot make a grievance that the Inquiry Officer had not acted properly.
5.
Equally lacking in merit is the contention that in view of the past record, the extreme penalty of dismissal was not warranted.
People deposit their money in the banks in the hope that they will be able to utilise the money in the hour of need.
The depositors in the present case appear to be illiterate ladies, who used to humb mark the withdrawal slips/cheques.
The petitioner is alleged to have committed forgery.
He issued cheques fraudulently and withdrew the money.
During the course of inquiry, the petitioner admitted his guilt.
By way of instance, one of his admissions may be noticed :-  "I admit that I posted two loose cheques in the accounts of Smt. Kailash Rani and Smt. Vidya Wati on 2231996.
I also put my signatures on back of both the cheques in token of having received the payment of Rs. 7700/- and Rs. 8500/-, respectively."
Similar is the position even with regard to the other transactions.
6.
Should such a person be allowed to deal with the funds of innocent depositors ?
Can such a person be allowed to continue in the service of the Bank ?
We have no doubt that the view taken by the Bank that he ought to be dismissed, was just and fair.
It was clearly warranted by the petitioner's conduct.
We find no infirmity in the view, so as to call for any interference.
Our only regret is that the Bank did not report the matter to the Police, so that the petitioner could have been dealt with properly.
So far this petition is concerned, it is dismissed in limine.
Petition dismissed.