KK Srivastava, J - Heard learned counsel for the petitioner and the leanred counsel for the State of Punjab-respondents.
2.
By means of this writ petition filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner-Kuldeep Singh seeks quashing of Annexure P-13 dated 11.9.1998 issued by respondent No. 2-Director General of Police, Punjab, and for issuance of a direction to consider and appoint the petitioner on the post of Assistant Sub Inspector.
3.
The petitioner sought appointment to the post of Assistant Sub Inspector as ex gratia appointment due to the death of his father late Shri Harbans Singh, who was working as Sub Inspector/Additional Section House Officer posted at Police Station Dasuya on 6.11.1994.
At the time of the death of Harbans Singh, the petitioner was not having the requisite qualification for appointment on the post of Assistant Sub Inspector.
The mother of the petitioner moved an application before the respondents for appointment of the petitioner on the post of Assistant Sub Inspector.
This application was forwarded by Deputy Inspector General of Police, Jalandhar Range, Jalandhar.
However, respondent No. 2-Director General of Police, Punjab referred the case back with the condition that as and when the petitioner fulfills the eligibility condition for appointment as an Assistant Sub Inspector, the case would be processed at that time.
Thereafter, the petitioner acquired the requisite qualification which at that time was 10+2 and applied for consideration of his appointment on compassionate grounds on the post of Assistant Sub Inspector.
Certain queries were made by respondent No. 2 which were replied by the petitioner and the requisite information regarding the mother and the sisters of the petitioner was furnished together with the affidavit of the sisters of the petitioner.
In the meantime, the eligibility condition regarding the qualification for the post of Assistant Sub Inspector was raised from 10+2 to graduation.
The petitioner passed his BA examination on 671998 and furnished the requisite information to respondent No. 2.
The petitioner had scored 1479 marks out of 2400.
Respondent No. 2, however, declined the appointment on compassionate ground to the petitioner vide order dated 451998 on the ground that he did not fulfill the eligibility condition for the post of Assistnt Sub Inspector.
The copy of this order has been place don record as Annexure P10.
Thereafter, the petitioner made a detailed representation annexing therewith the document showing his eligibility condition and acquiring the qualification of BA in August, 1988.
Respondent No. 4-Senior Supreintendent of Police, Hoshiarpur, Punjab forwarded the said representation of the petitioner with his recommendation to the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Jalandhar Range, Jalandhar, on 2481998, vide Annexure P12.
The respodents, however, again rejected the representation of the petitioner vide letter dated 2291998, copy Annexure P13, showing that the case had been reconsidered and filed.
Feeling aggrieved against the impugned orders and the rejection of the claim of the petitioner for appointment to the post of Assistant Sub Inspector on compassionate grounds, the petitioner has filed this writ petition.
4.
The respondents filed written statement through the Senior Superintendent of Police, Hoshiarpur, wherein a stand has been taken that Harbans Singh, Sub Inspector, father of the petitioner, died in an accident on 6.11.1994 leaving behind him his widow Smt. Nirmala Devi, aged about 46 years, daughters Miss Manju Saini, born on 1191974, Miss Anju Saini, born on 1971975, the petitioner Kuldeep Singh, born on 231977 and Miss Hema Saini born on 28.3.1979.
It was contended that the widow of Harbans Singh and the daughters Miss Manju Saini and Miss Anju Saini were eligible for the post of Class-III post immediately after the death of their father but they did not apply for the same.
The claim of the petitioner was considered but was rejected as the petitioner did not fulfill the eligibility condition.
It was further mentioned that the purpose of providing employment on compassionate ground is to provide financial help to the family which has fallen in distress and harness on account of death of the bread-earner in the family.
The harness was at the time of the death of the employee and at that time there were other eligible persons in the family of the deceased Harbans Singh but they did not apply for appointment and as such the petitioner could not be offered appointment on compassionate ground.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has drawn our attention to the order passed by respondent No. 2-Director General of Police, Punjab copy Annexure P10, dated 481998 whereby the case of the petitioner was filed as he did not fulfill the eligibility conditions for the post of Assistant Sub Inspector and argued that the rejection of the claim of the petitioner was not on the grounds which are now being taken by the respondents in their written statement.
He has also contended that the petitioner applied as per the communication received from the respondents and complied with the query made from them.
He has referred to the affidavits of the sisters Miss Manju Saini, copy Annexure P4 and Miss Hema Saini, copy Annexure P5.
These affidavits were filed with reference to the memo dated 13.5.1997 received from Director General of Police, Punjab, vide copy Annexure P3 dated 2351997.
Miss Manju Saini in her affidavit, copy Annexure P4, deposed, inter alia, that she was married with Shri Surinder Mohan and she had no objection to the appointment of her brother Kuldeep Singh as Assistant Sub Inspector as none in her family had availed the benefit under the priority list instructions.
Miss Hema Saini deposed about herself being a student of BA Part I in SD College Hoshiarpur and further that her brother was a student of BA Part II class in Government College Hoshiarpur and that he be considered for appointment on the post of Assistant Sub Inspector on priority basis.
Despite the fact that the requisite informations had been furnished by the petitiner and the sisters of petitioners had filed their affidavits, the respondents rejected the claim of the petitioner only on the ground that he had not acquired the requisite qualification for being eligible for appointment to the post of Assistant Sub Inspector.
It is note-worthy that the petitioner graduated from Panjab University on 671998 vide Annexures P8 and P9 and again sought his appointment vide application, copy Annexure P.11.
In this representation, copy Annexure 11, the petitioner had furnished the detailed facts regarding his eligibility and the difficulty faced by the family after the death of his father.
This application was forwarded by respondent No. 4-Senior Supreintendent of Police, Hoshiarpur, vide his letter dated Annexure P12.
The order dismissing the representation/application of the petitioner, copy Annexure P13, reads as under :-  "Copy of memo.
No. 23746/E-3, dated 11.9.98 from the Director General of Police, Punjab Chandigarh to the Dy.
Inspector General of Police, Jal.
Range, Jall.
Cantt.
Subject : Enlistment of candidate Kuldeep Singh Saini S/o Late S.I.
Harbans Singh No. 243/J as A.S.I.
Reference your Endst.
No. 16566/JR-A-4, dated 28898 on the subject noted above.
The case has been re-considered and filed.
Copy of endst.
No. 17844/JR-A-4, dated 15998 from the office of DIG/JT to SSP/HPR w.r.t.
his office memo No. 45613 dated 24898 for information and necessary action.
No. 53047 Dated : 22998.
Copy to Sh. Kuldip Saini s/o Late S.I.
Harbans Singh Saini H.No.
11/136/3 near Govt. College Road, Hoshiaripur for information.
Sr. Supdt.
of Police,  Hoshiarpur."
6.
We are, therefore, of the considered view that the stand which has been taken by the respondents in the written statement is altogether a different one from the ground on which the appointment on compassionate ground was declined to the petitioner.
The stand of the respondents, thus, cannot be said to be reasonable and justified.
The petitioner possessed the requisite qualification and the eligibility condition for appointment to the post of Assistant Sub Inspector on compassionate ground.
The other members of the family of the petitioner i.e. the heirs and legal representatives of the deceased Harbans Singh have not claimed appointment on compassionate grounds on his death.
7.
In this view of the matter, this writ petition has considerable merit and is, accordingly, allowed.
The impugned order declining the appointment to the petitioner vide Annexure P13 is quashed.
The respondents are directed to consider the case of the petitioner for appointment to the post of Assistant Sub Inspector on compassionate ground in accordance with the relevant policy of the State Government and according to law within a period of two months from the date a certified copy of this order is produced before them.
Petition allowed.