Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - the petitioner was working as an Overseer with the Batala Co-operative Sugar Mills Limited, Batala.
Vide order dated March 3, 1997, the petitioner was informed by the Managing Director of the Batala Co- operative Sugar Mills Ltd that his services have been terminated.
The petitioner filed an appeal.
On August 5, 1997, the Board of Directors rejected it.
Hence this petition.
2.
The primary contention raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner is that neither the punishing nor the appellate authority has considered the objections raised by the petitioner against the proposed penalty of termination.
He points out that even the findings recorded by the Enquiry Officer have been left un-noticed.
The counsel maintains that no speaking order has been passed.
Mr. Vinod Sharma appearing for the respondents submits that the technical officers have no idea about the niceties of law.
He, however, does not dispute that the impugned orders do not assign any reason.
3.
We have perused both the orders.
The punishing authority did not even notice the exact charges levelled agasint the petitioner of the findings recorded by the Enquiry Officer.
It proceeded to observe as under :-  "You have submitted your reply to the show cause notice on 1821997 which has been deeply scrutinised on the basis of charges proved against you in the Enquiry Report.
Accordingly, you are held responsible for omissions and commissions committed by you as per enquiry report.
Hence your services are terminated as per Punjab State Co-operative Sugar Mills Services Rules, 1991 and certified standing orders of the Mills with immediate effect.
Sd/- The Batala Co-operative Sugar Mills Ltd  Batala Distt.
Gurdaspur."
4.
On a perusal of the above, we are satisfied that the reply submitted by the petitioner has not even been considered.
The order does not show that the reply has even been cursorily examined, much less than "deeply scrutinised", as observed by the authority.
Similarly, even the appellate authority has not even noticed the contention raised by the petitioner in his petition of appeal which was apparently a detailed one.
In this situation, we are unable to sustain the impugned action.
Both the orders are consequently quashed.
It is, however, clarified that the respondent authority shall be competent to pass a fresh order in accordance with law.
5.
The writ petition is allowed in the above terms.
Orders at Annexure P-15 and P-17 are set aside.
The petitioner shall be entitled to consequential benefits.
However, there shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.