Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner is working with the Oriental Insurance Company.
He is aggrieved by the order dated May 14, 1999 by which he was transferred from the Branch Office, Nabha and posted as Assistant Divisional Manager, Divisional Office, Karnal.
The petitioner alleges that he had been selected and posted as a Branch Manager.
The transfer results in deprivation of certain benefits and amounts to reduction in rank.
He prays that the order pased on May 14, 1999, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-4 with the petition, be set aside.
2.
The respondents contest the petitioner's claim.
Firstly, it has been pointed out that there is a common cadre of Administrative Officers, Branch Managers and Assistant Divisional Managers.
The designation depends upon the office in which an individual is posted.
Since the posts are borne on a common cadre, the plea that there is reduction in rank is not tenable.
Secondly, it has been pointed out that on the petitioner's selection as Administrative Officer in the year 1992 he was posted as Branch Manager at Bhiwani.
A copy of the order passed on May 8, 1992 has been produced as Annexure R-1 with the written statement.
Still further, it has also been pointed out that the petitioner's performance as Branch Manager had been monitored.
On February 20, 1999 the petitioner's office was checked.
He had not reached the office till 1045 A.M.
Thereafter, on April 8, 1999 the Regional Manager had reported that the petitioner belongs to Hissar.
He leaves his station of posting quite often.
As a result the work suffers.
Vide letter dated April 9, 1999 a copy of which has been produced as Annexure R-4, it was pointed out that the petitioner had availed of 8 Casual Leaves during the months of January and February.
He had also taken 5 days leave by way of Sick Leave from February 15, 1999 to February 19, 1999.
It was also mentioned in this communication that the petitioner was not staying at his Headquarter viz. Nabha and was going to Ambala daily.
A few other communications have also been produced.
On these premises it has been contended that the action of the company in transferring the petitioner from the post of Branch Manager to that of Assistant Divisional Manager is legal and valid.
3.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
4.
Admittedly, the petitioner was selected and promoted as Administrative Officer.
He was posted as a Branch Manager.
He had joined as such and was even subsequently transferred in October, 1994 as an Assistant Divisional Manager.
The posts of Administrative Officer, Assistant Divisional Manager and Branch Manger form part of one cadre.
Consequently, on transfer from one post to another it cannot be said that there is reduction in rank or promotion.
5.
Mr. Malik submits that the persons are selected through a process of interview etc. for posting as Branch Managers.
It may be so.
The employer is entitled to determine the suitability of his officers for being posted as Branch Managers.
Yet, the employer has the right to monitor the performance and if it is found that a person who was selected and posted as Branch Manager has not been able to perform his duties properly, the company has the right to post him at another equivalent post.
This is what precisely appears to have been done in the present case.
It is the admitted position that the performance of an individual as Branch Manager is constantly watched.
Even the petitioner was informed vide letter date October 13, 1997 that his "performance as Branch Incharge will be under constant review and .... continuance as Branch Incharge would be subject to ..... satisfactory performance".
A copy of this letter has been produced by the petitioner as Annexure P-2 with the writ petition.
It was in conformity with this condition that the petitioner's performance was monitored.
In view of the facts as brought on record, we are not surprised that the respondents found it necessary to shift the petitioner to the post at Karnal.
6.
No illegality requiring intervention has been pointed out.
Resultantly, no ground for interference is made out.
7.
We, consequently, dismiss the writ petition.
However, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.