CS Rajan, J - The petitioners in these Original Petitions were Constables in Border Security Force.
They resigned from the service.
In Ext.
P-1 the Commandant accepted the resignations under R 19 of the BSF Rules, 1969 with pensionary benefits at his own request on extreme compassionate grounds.
Now the respondents have denied the pensionary benefits to the petitioners.
In Ext.
P-2 (OP No. 2920/99) the claim for pensionary benefits were found to be inadmissible for persons who resigned.
2.
In the counter affidavit filed by the respondents the stand taken is as follows : The petitioners are governed by CCS (Pension) Rules and as per R 48(A) of the above rules pension is admissible only to persons who completed 20 years of qualifying service.
Moreover, under R 26 of the CCS (Pension) Rules on resignation the person forfeits his past service.
Therefore, it was submitted that the petitioners are not entitled to any pension.
In view of these conflicting position taken in the Original Petitions it is necessary to examine the relevant rules in this matter.
R 19 of the BSF Rules, 1969 reads as follows :  "19.
Resignation :- (1) The Central Government may, having regard to the special circumstances of any case, permit any officer of the Force to resign from the Force before the attainment of the age of retirement or before putting in such number of years of service as may be necessary under the rules to be eligible for retirement : Provided that while granting such permission the Government may, - (i) require the officer to refund to the Government such amount as would constitute the cost of training given to that officer; or (ii) make such reduction in the pension or other retirement benefits of the officer if so eligible as that Government may consider to be just and proper in the circumstances.
(2) The Central Government may accept the resignation under sub-R (1) with effect from such date as it may consider expedient : Provided that it shall not be later than three months from the date of receipt of such resignation."
This rule is quite different from R 26 of the CCS (Pension) Rules.
R 26 stipulates that resignation forfeits the past service unless allowed to be withdrawn in public interest.
R 40(2)(b) of the C.C.S (Pension) Rules reads as follows :  "(b) In the case of a Government servant retiring in accordance with the provisions of these rules before completing qualifying service of thirty-three years, but after completing qualifying service of ten years, the amount of pension shall be proportionate to the amount of pension admissible under clause (a) and in no case the amount of pension shall be less than rupees sixty per mensem."
3.
On the basis of the above Rule it was argued by the learned Central Government Standing Counsel that only persons who retire under these Rules are entitled to the benefit of the above sub-rule.
It was further submitted that the petitioners did not retire from service in accordance with the CCS (Pension) Rules.
They were allowed to resign from service.
Therefore, R 49(2)(b) has no application in the case of the petitioners.
4.
On the other hand learned counsel for the petitioners points out that under R 182 of the BSF Rules, CCS (Pension) Rules will continue to be applicable to the BSF personnel unless modified or abrogated by the Government or any other competent authority.
5.
So when the BSF Rules make CCS (Pension) Rules applicable to persons like the petitioners, it must be understood in the light of the provisions contained in the BSF Rules.
If the petitioners are allowed to resign with pensionary benefits under R 19 of the BSF Rules, then the petitioners' claim for pension must be worked out under R 49(2)(b) of the CCS (Pension) Rules.
Therefore, R 49(2)(b) of the CCS (Pension) Rules cannot be narrowly interpreted so as to deny the pensionary benefits to the petitioners who were allowed to resign with pensionary benefits as per Ext.
P-1 Order.
If the argument of the learned Additional Central Government Standing Counsel is accepted, persons who are allowed to retire under the CCS (Pension) Rules alone will be entitled to pension.
That cannot be the case.
If CCS (Pension) Rules are made applicable to the BSF personnel under R 182 of the BSF Rules, it may not be said that persons who retire under the CCS (Pension) Rules alone are entitled to get the benefit of R 49(2)(b) of the Rules.
Such interpretation will work out injustice to a large number of persons who were governed by other Rules or enactments, but to whom the CCS (Pension) Rules are specifically made applicable.
6.
Therefore, the petitioners are entitled to succeed in these Original Petitions.
The respondents are directed to grant pension to the petitioners in accordance with R 49(2)(b) of the CCS (Pension) Rules.
Orders in this respect must be passed within three months from the date of receipt of a copy of this judgment.
The petitioner in OP No. 3295/1999 has got a grievance that his PF amount has not been disbursed.
It is for the petitioner to take up the matter before the appropriate authority.
Original Petitions are disposed of as above.
Petitions allowed.