RL Anand, J - Shri Sheonath petitioner has filed the present writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for the issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari or any other writ, order or direction for quashment of the order Annexure P-5 vide which the petitioner was informed that his disability pension had been discontinued.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as Seepahi in the Grenadier Branch of the Artillery in the year 1949.
He remained in active service.
He was discharged from the service on medical grounds on 31.5.1954.
At that point of time, his disability was 100 per cent.
This disability continued upto the year 1985 when it was reduced to 11-14 per cent.
Since the disability of the petitioner was reduced to less than 25 per cent, therefore, vide Annexure P-5, the petitioner was informed as follows :-  "Your disability permanently is below 20% i.e. (15-19 per cent).
In confirmation the Controller Defence Pension accepted it as 20% on 27488 RSB had been again done.
One investigation of your medical paper it was found that disability was improved and it remain at its lowest.
The appellate Medical authority has (sic) less than 20% (i.e. 11-14%) from 25995 upto 21488 and after this through the life.
According to rules, you are not entitled for disability pension."
3.
As per rules, the findings of the Re-survey Medical Board are final and cannot be questioned.
4.
Now, it is common case of the parties, that disability of the petitioner has been reduced to less than 25% therefore, he is not entitled to disability pension which has been rightly stopped by the Government of India.
5.
Faced with this difficulty, learned counsel for the petitioner submits that though the petitioner is not entitled to the permanent disability pension he is entitled to other service benefits by virtue of the reduction of the disability.
On the contrary, it has been submitted by the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents that there is no such prayer made in the present petition.
I find merit in the contention raised by the learned counsel for the respondents.
Prayer of the petitioner was for quashment of order Annexure P-5 which cannot be granted for the reasons stated above.
6.
Resultantly, the present petition stands dismissed with the observations that it will always be open to the petitioner to make a separate representation to the department claiming service benefits if any by virtue of his reduction in the disability and if such representation is made by the petitioner, the same shall be disposed of by the respondent authorities according to rules within six months from its receipt.
It will also be open to the petitioner to seek his remedy for which he is entitled to under the service rules.
Petition dismissed.