NK Jain, Actg.
CJ.
- This writ appeal is filed by the appellant against the order of the learned single Judge dated 25.2.1999 in WP No. 2829 of 1999, whereby the learned single Judge dismissed the writ petition.
2.
The grievance of the appellant is that the officers of the 7th respondent, on the introduction of computers to eliminate the entire award staff, introduced a voluntary retirement scheme, coerced the members of the award staff to sign resignation letters.
Whereas the members of the petitioner Federation have every right to continue in service till their superannuation at the age of 60, it sought for a writ of mandamus to respondents 1 to 4 to cancel/revoke the permission granted to the 7th respondent/Bank for its voluntary retirement scheme.
3.
The learned single Judge dismissed the writ petition holding that it is only an optional scheme, to which no one can be compelled and no material had been placed to substantiate its averments, which were only vague.
Hence, this writ appeal.
4.
The learned counsel for the appellant reiterated the argument.
It is submitted hat the Income-tax authorities have given permission for implementation of the voluntary retirement scheme and on retrenchment, the Bank has to pay compensation up to Rs. 5 lakhs to those retrenched and it is exempted under the provisions of the Income-tax Act.
That scheme is valid up to 31.3.1999.
5.
We have heard the learned counsel and perused the material on record.
The learned single Judge has dismissed the writ petition holding that the counsel has not been able to disclose any material to show that the said scheme was forced or thrust upon the employees under threat or coercion as alleged.
Once the scheme has been framed and had come into existence and on giving option one is entitled to get compensation and that compensation is exempted under the provisions of the Income-tax Act, in the absence of any material of coercion, it cannot be said that the scheme is bad.
On consideration we are of the view that no relief as prayed for can be granted to the petitioner/association.
We find no error or illegality in the order of the learned single Judge and we find no reasons to interfere with the order.
Hence, this writ appeal is dismissed.
Consequently, CMP Nos. 4697 and 4698 of 1999 are dismissed.
No costs.
Appeal dismissed.