Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner, a former Director of the Post-Graduate Institute of Medical Education & Research, has filed this petition with a prayer that the respondents be restrained from holding the meeting of the "Special Selection Committee on 110 1999."
The petitioner alleges that the meeting of the "Institute Body of the PGI-MER took place on 22.6.1999.
In that meeting of the Institute the then President of the Institute was authorised to constitute a Special Selection Committee for making recommendation for appointment to the post of Director and bring back the matter to the Institute Body.
Shri Dalit Ezhilmalai did not take any action in constituting the Special Selection committee.......In the 3rd week of August, 1999 Shri Dalit Ezhilmalai resigned from the Ministry and Shri AK Patel, Minister of Petroleum & Chemical, was asked to look after the charge of Ministry of Health & Family Welfare."
Mr. Patel was nominated as President of the Institute on September 9, 1999.
After his nomination as President of the Institute, he constituted the Special Selection Committee on September 20, 1999.
This Committee is meeting on October 1, 1999 to consider claims to various eligible persons for appointment to the post of Director of the Institute.
The petitioner alleges that the action of the President "in constituting the Special Selection Committee on 20.9.1999 and in calling the urgent meeting.......is wholly illegal and a writ of mandamus deserves to be issued to the respondents not to hold the meeting of Special Selection Committee on 1101999 for making recommendation........."  2.
We have heard Mr. Hemant Kumar, learned counsel for the petitioner.
He contends that the Institute had no power to authorise the President to constitute the Special Selection Committee.
Is it so ?
3.
The Parliament had enacted the Post-Graduate Institute of Medical Education & Research, Chandigarh Act, 1966.
By this statute the Institution was declared to be one of "national importance."
Under Section 5, the composition of the Institute has been laid down.
Section 10, inter alia, provides that the Institute "may constitute as many standing committees......as it thinks fit for exercising any power or discharging any function of the Institute or for inquiring into, or reporting or advising upon any matter which the Institute may refer to them."
Section 11 provides that "there shall be a chief executive officer of the Institute who shall be designated as Director......" The Director under the provisions of the aforesaid Act and Rule 7(3) of the Post-Graduate Institute of Medical Education & Research, Chandigarh Rules, 1967, had to be appointed "by the Institute with prior approval of the Central Government."
4.
Admittedly, the present incumbent has to continue in office till November 30, 1999.
Keeping in view the fact that the vacancy was likely to occur and to maintain continuity, the Institute took a decision in the meeting held on June 22, 1999 that a Special Selection Committee be constituted to make recommendation for appointment to the post of Director.
Still further, it is the petitioner's own case that the Institute had authorised its President, who happens to be the Minister of Health and Family Welfare, to constitute the Committee.
It was in pursuance to the directions given by the Institute that the President appears to have constituted the Committee consisting of 8 persons, including the Secretary, Ministry of Health; the Director General Health Services and "four Vice-Chancellors of various Universities of the Country - Dr. LS Chawla, Vice-Chancellor of Baba Farid Medical University, Faridkot; the Vice-Chancellor of MGR University, Madras; Dr. Deshmukh, Vice-Chancellor of Bombay University, Mumbai; and Dr. K Rao, Vice-Chancellor of Nizam Institute, Hyderabad."
No infirmity in the constitution of the Committee has been pointed out.
Apparently, the Committee is broad based.
Its only function is to make a recommendation.
Its proceedings have to be considered by the Institute itself.
They have also to be examined by the Central Government.
It is only when the recommendation of the Institute is approved by the Central Government that the appointment to the post of Director can be made.
We are not surprised that the President considered it proper to expedite the action and to constitute the committee.
5.
We find no violation of any mandate of the statute or the rules.
We find no evidence of any imminent danger of injury to the public interest.
We find no ground to intervene at this stage.
Since the proceedings of the Selection Committee and the Institute will have to be examined by the Central Government, we shall not like to say anything more at this stage.
However, in view of the fact that we have found no infirmity in the proposed action, we find no ground to interfere.
6.
In view of the above, the writ petition is dismissed in limine.
Petition dismissed.