NK Agrawal, J - This is a petition under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution seeking Family pension and suitable employment on compassionate ground.
2.
Maha Singh, husband of petitioner No. 1 and father of petitioner No. 2, was working as work-charge T-Mate on regular basis with the Executive Engineer, Haryana State Electricity Board, Jhajjar, District Rohtak.
He died in a fatal road accident on 251988 while going to do certain work assigned to him.
He had at that time completed six years of service as a daily wager and 18 months as a regular work charged employee.
Petitioner Nos. 2, being the son of the deceased employee, claimed that he was entitled to an ex-gratia employment.
3.
An application for appointment on compassionate ground was filed by petitioner No. 1, the widow of the deceased employee.
Since her children were minor, no decision was taken.
She again made a request when her son, petitioner No. 2, became major.
He was a matriculate in the 2nd division.
family pension was said to be not admissible as the deceased was only a work- charged employee.
An employment on compassionate ground was also wrongly denied.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioners has submitted that the petitioners would not press their demand for the Family pension but the case for employment to petitioner No. 2 on compassionate ground was on a sound footing.
Petitioner No. 2 would accept an appointment on a class IV post.
5.
Learned counsel has argued that earlier a circular memo dated 1481985 (Annexure P-2) required that a work-charged employee should have rendered minimum five years' continuous service in the Board.
The Board, however, took another decision and the condition regarding the minimum service as a work- charged employee was waived vide memo dated 461991 (Annexure P-3), which reads as under :-  "In continuation to this office Memo No33/NGE- P/3217, dated 9.7.1990 read with Memo No33/NGE/P/3217, dated 2371990.
The wholetime members in their meetings held on 6.11.1990 and 151991 decided that : The stipulation of length of service that is 10 years in the case of daily wage employee and 5 years in the case of work-charge employee who was disabled while on duty as a result of fatal accident is waived off provided : 1.
Daily wage workers must have completed 240 days' service.
2.
Work-charge/daily wages employee is on duty duly authorised by the authority concerned.
Sd/- Secretary, HSEB, Panchkula.
6.
A plain reading of the above instructions dated 461991 would show that the earlier condition regarding the period of service of the deceased has been done away with.
The second condition regarding the deceased employee having died while on duty is found to have been fulfilled in the present case.
In paragraph No. 2 of the writ petition, it is clearly mentioned that Maha Singh died in fatal road accident on 251988 when he was going to perform the duty assigned to him by his immediate officers incharge.
7.
In reply to the aforesaid paragraph, respondent No. 4, in paragraph No. 2 of his written statement, has not specifically denied that Maha Singh was going on duty at the time of accident.
Para No. 2 of the written statement reads as under :-  2.
That the contents of para No. 2 are denied.
Late Shri Maha Singh was only a daily wager.
On 2371987, he was working as work-charge T-Mate.
He worked as such till 251988 when he unfortunately met with fatal road accident with a private truck."
8.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has stated that the petitioners would not press the demand for family pension but would definitely require the Board to offer an appointment to petitioner No. 2 on compassionate ground.
It is also stated by the learned counsel that the order (Annexure P-5) whereby the petitioners' request has been rejected is a non-speaking order.
9.
Learned counsel for respondent No. 4 has argued that the benefit of appointment on compassionate ground was available where the work-charged employee had rendered continuous service for five years or where a daily wage worker had rendered service for ten years.
It is also contended that it was necessary that the employee died in an accident while discharging duty.
The petitioners' case is said to be not covered under the instructions of the Haryana State Electricity Board.
It is further stated in paragraph No. 5 of the written statement that Maha Singh had rendered less than one year service as work-charged employee.
10.
On a consideration of the controversy, it is found that respondent No. 4 has not specifically denied the petitioners' claim that Maha Singh had died while going on duty.
Therefore, the first condition is found to have been fulfilled.
The second condition regarding the period of service by the deceased has also become irrelevant in the light if the instructions dated 4th June, 1991.
It is, therefore, found that petitioner No. 2 is entitled to the benefit of employment on compassionate ground.
His father died in an accident while going on duty.
The respondents have not denied it in specific terms.
His father was work-charged employee.
The condition that a work-charged employee should have completed five years' minimum service has been waived by memo dated 4th June, 1991.
The writ petition is, therefore, allowed.
The respondents are directed to give appointment to petitioner No. 2 Surender Kumar s/o late Sh. Maha Singh on a suitable post on compassionate ground within three months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
Petition allowed.