DV Sehgal and SS Goindi, JJ.
- This order shall dispose of CWP No. 1158 of 1999 and CWP No. 8996 of 1997, the first by the workman and the second by the Municipal Council, Ambala.
2.
On February 1999, an offer was made by the workman petitioner through his counsel Sh. MS Cheema, Advocate that the workman is prepared to give up his claim for backwages in case his services are regularised by the Municipal Council, management respondents No. 2 and 3.
The counsel for the management- respondent sough time to get instructions and the matter was adjourned to March 24, 1999.
On March 24, 1999, yet another adjournment was sought by the learned counsel for the management stating that the case had been prepared and submitted to Haryana Government for regularisation of the services of the workman-petitioner.
The matter then came up on 12.7.1999 when Sh. Suresh Negi, a Clerk of the Municipal Council, Ambala respondent No. 3 put in appearance and stated that the case for regularisation of the services of the workman- petitioner referred to the State Government by the Municipal Council vide letter dated 30th June, 1999 an was yet awaiting sanction.
Accordingly, th matter was adjourned, which again came up on August 13, 1999.
No one appeared on behalf of the Municipal council, ambala respondent No. 3 on that date and a fresh notice was issued.
The matter then came up on 31.8.1999, when a request was once again made on behalf of Municipal council for adjournment as the decision of the government was still awaited.
This is how the matter has come today.
No one appears on behalf of the Municipal Council, Ambala today.
3.
It is not in dispute that the workman-petitioner was reinstated in Service and he is working as a Baildar with the Municipal Council, Ambala.
All that he seeks is regularisation of his services in view of the instructions issued by the Government on 731996 as stated above despite a number of adjournments no decision has been taken for grant of this relief to the workman.
4.
We are of the considered view that since the workman petitioner was reinstated in service with its continuity from the date of his initial appointment, his entire period of service is to be taken into account.
We, therefore, direct that his eligibility for regularisation of his services should be considered on the basis of the instructions of the State Government dated 731996 and if he is considered eligible and suitable, his service should be regularised within a period of three months from today.
This directional shall be meticulously complied with and shall constitute a decree under Section 21 of the Legal Services Authority Act.
5.
The writ petition is disposed of accordingly.
A copy of this order be given to both the counsel within seven days free of costs.