NK Agarwal, J - This is a petition by four persons, namely, Mewa Lal, Smt. Radhamma Nair, Smt. Kanta Dutta and Smt. Balbir Kaur under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution seeking a direction to the respondents to regularise the services of the petitioners and to pay their salaries from July 1994 onwards with interest.
2.
Petitioners are the employees of the Indian Red Cross Society serving in the District Society at Kurukshetra.
They are working as Family Planning Field workers at different places.
Petitioner No. 1, Mewa Lal, was appointed in the year 1971.
Petitioner Nos. 2 and 4 were appointed in the year 1982.
Petitioner No. 3 jointed service in the year 1984.
All of them are serving since then.
They were appointed on temporary basis on a monthly salary.
Appointment letters were issued to petitioners No. 1 and 2 (Annexures P-1 and P-2).
No such letter was, however, issued to petitioners No. 3 and 4.
Appointment of petitioner No. 1, Mewa Lal, was made subject to the approval from Director, Health Services, Haryana.
He was also transferred from Fatehabad to Ladwa under instructions from the Director.
He has put in more than 24 years in service.
Petitioner No. 2 has served for more than 13 years.
3.
The petitioners' case is that they are performing duty regularly but they have not been paid salary since July 1994.
They were, however, informed that they had to bring three cases each for sterilisation every month.
Since the target fixed in this regard for the centre has not been achieved, the Red Cross Society was not receiving grant-in-aid from the Director, Health Services, Haryana.
The petitioners have claimed that they are not only entitled to salary every month but are also entitled to be regularised in service inasmuch as they have completed more than 13 years in service.
Neither their services have been regularised nor they are being paid salary regularly.
They have been instead threatened with termination from service.
4.
Respondent No. 1, State of Haryana, has, in its reply, stated that the petitioners are not the employees of the State Government and, therefore the State Government is not under any obligation to pay salary to them.
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government of India, New Delhi, had conveyed, vide letter dated September 16, 1991, to the Secretary, Health, Government of Haryana, that financial assistance to the units, which did not reach 85% target, shall be stopped forthwith.
Grand-in-aid is given to the units of the Red Cross Society to the extent of 100% under the centrally-sponsored scheme.
Grant-in-aid was sanctioned to the performing centres only.
Performance of the Red Cross Society, Kurukshetra Unit of the Red Cross Society, Kurukshetra Unit, was 4474%, 4722% and 3887% in the years 1992-93, 1993-94 and 1994-95 respectively.
Thus, the Kurukshetra Unit of the Red Cross Society did not fulfil the prescribed target of 85% under the norms fixed by the Central Government vide letter dated September 16, 1991.
The Kurukshetra unit was, therefore, not entitled to receive the grant-in-aid.
It was decided to bring Ladwa and Shahbad centres within the control of the Red Cross Society, Karnal.
Grant-in-aid amounting to Rs. 50,000/- for the year 1993-94 was released to the District unit of Karnal.
The said District unit, however, objected to the taking over of the control of two units of Ladwa and Shahbad as those two centres were situated in Kurukshetra.
It is further pointed out that the instructions issued by the State Government of Haryana regarding regularisation of the services are not applicable to the petitioners as they are not the employees of the State Government.
5.
Respondent No. 2, Indian Red Cross Society, Haryana, has, in its separate reply, admitted that the family Welfare Centres were being run on 100% grant- in-aid provided by the Director General, Health Services, Haryana, who in turn received it from the Ministry of Health, Government of India.
It is further stated that the employees of the family welfare centres are required to fulfil the target with regard to sterilisation.
Each Field Worker and ANM had to bring three cases of sterilisation every month.
Petitioners failed to reach the target.
Petitioner Nos. 2 and 4 were, therefore, warned in the year 1991 in this regard.
Government of India did not release the grant-in-aid.
90% grant-in-aid had been released for the year 1993-94 but no grant was released for the year 1994-95.
The petitioners cannot, therefore, claim salary as they failed to perform their duty.
6.
It is, however, admitted in paragraph 2 of the reply filed by respondent No. 2 that the petitioners are the employees of Family Planning Centres which are run by the Indian Red Cross Society, Haryana, on 100% grant-in-aid made available by the Government of India through Director General, Health Services, Haryana.
Respondent No. 2 has also not denied the appointments of the petitioners, vide paragraphs 3 and 4 of the written statement.
It is, however, explained that the guidelines were sought by the Haryana Government from Government of India in respect of the employees who did not reach the target.
It was so done to know whether such employees should be retained in service or not.
Since it was a target-oriented project, the services of the petitioners cannot be regularised.
Salary has been denied due to their failure to reach the target.
7.
The appointment letter dated June 15, 1971, appointing petitioner No. 1, Mewa Lal, does not contain any condition with regard to the fulfilment of the target.
He was appointed in the pay scale of Rs. 120-200 plus allowances.
Paragraph 2 of the appointment letter (Annexure P-1) reads as under :-  "This will be a purely temporary appointment.
As such your services will be liable for termination without any notice or assigning any reason whatsoever.
However, if you wish to resign you will have to give one month's notice or pay to the Society one month salary in lieu thereof.
Please report duty to the Senior Medical Officer i/c Civil Hospital, Fatehabad."
It would, thus, appear that the appointment of petitioner No. 1, Mewa Lal, was not subject to any pre-condition that he would not be entitled to continue or would not get salary if he failed to achieve the prescribed target.
8.
Petitioner No. 1, Mewa Lal, was asked on July 16, 1982 to report to the Medical Officer, Incharge, Civil Hospital, Ladwa, for duty (Annexure P-2).
It would, thus, show that his services were being utilised and he was transferred to Ladwa.
9.
Petitioner No. 2, Mrs. Radhamma Nair, was offered the post of ANM (Family Planning) on temporary basis in the pay scale of Rs. 420-600 plus allowances.
It would also be relevant to read the letter of her appointment so as to understand if any pre-condition was imposed with regard to the non- payment of salary for failure to reach the prescribed target.
It reads as under :-  "You are hereby offered the post of ANM (FP) on temporary basis in the scale of 420-600 plus usual allowances as sanctioned from time to time by the Society.
This offer is valid upto 7th Jan 1992.
If you accept the offer please report to this office for duty upto 7th Jan 1992 with original certificates.
Formal appointment orders will be issued at the time of your report for duty."
10.
On a consideration of the controversy, it is noticed that no condition was imposed at the time of appointment of the petitioners in service with regard to the payment of salary on the fulfilment of targets only.
There is also nothing on record to show that any such pre-condition was imposed thereafter.
The petitioners are still working.
Their services have not been terminated on failure to reach the prescribed target.
The respondents have not stated that the petitioners are not in service.
It is not known as to what steps were taken to improve the working of the units and the centres where the petitioners were working so that targets could be achieved.
In these circumstances, it is difficult to deny salary to the petitioners.
Nothing has been placed on record to show that the petitioners were absent from duty after July 1994.
Since they are in service and no action has been taken against any of the petitioners, payment of salary cannot be denied to any of them.
Since they continue to be in service, they are entitled to get the salary.
11.
The question of regularisation cannot, however, be decided inasmuch as the petitioners are working in a project.
Further, they are not the employees of the State Government.
12.
In the result, the writ petition is partly allowed.
Respondents are directed to pay the arrears of salary and allowances to the petitioners from July, 1994 till date within three months from the date of this order failing which they shall be liable to pay interest at the rate of 12% per annum to the petitioners on the amount of arrears of salary and allowances from the date of the expiry of the aforesaid three months till the date of payment.
Petition partly allowed.