BSA Swamy, J - The petitioners, 14 in number, who are studying Degree in Physiotherapy-III Semester in respondent-University filed this writ petition questioning the action of the respondent-University in detaining them in the III Semester on the ground that they did not secure 50% of the aggregate marks in the examination whereas under the Regulation No. 15, a candidate has to be declared as passed in the examination if he gets 40% marks in theory and if orals are also there, the candidate should get aggregate of 50% marks in both theory and oral put together.
2.
The counsel for the respondent-University strenuously opposed the relief sought for in this writ petition by contending that unless a student gets 50% marks, he cannot be declared as passed in the examination whether oral examination is there or not.
3.
To appreciate the rival contentions of the parties it is useful to extract regulations framed by the University for this course :  "Regulation XV : A candidate shall be declared to have passed the examination if he/she obtains the following qualifying marks; (a) 40% marks of theory in the subject in University examinations conducted and aggregate of 50% marks in theory and orals taken together (there is no minimum marks prescribed for orals) (b) 40% of marks in the University theory examination; 50% marks in University practical/clinical examination and 50% aggregate in theory, practical/clinical and oral marks taken together (there is no minimum marks prescribed for orals) Regulation XVI :  (1) Second Class - 50% and above but less than 65% of total marks.
(2) First Class - 65% and above but less than 75% of total marks and having passed the examination in first attempt.
(3) Distinction - 75% and above of total marks and having passed the examination in first attempt.
Regulation XXV  SCHEME OF EXAMINATION FOR BACHELOR OF PHYSIOTHERAPY :  Scheme of examination is as follows :  (i) Duration of written examination - 3 hours (ii) Practical marks include marks for record book - 10 marks (iii) T - Theory; P - Practicals ; O - Orals BACHELOR OF PHYSIOTHERAPY :  SCHEME OF EXAMINATION - SEMESTER SYSTEM  Sl.
No.
Semester Subject Marks + + Theory Oral Practical 3.
III Microbiology/Pathology + 100 - - Gen. Med.
including elements of + 100 - - Pharm./Ge.
Surgery/Paediatrics + Nursing and First Aid + 100 - - 4.
Form the above regulations, it is seen that in the subject of Microbiology/Pathology, no oral examination is there and the student has to write only theory examination.
5.
The Counsel for the respondent-University contends that as per the Regulations of the University, one should get 50% marks to get through the examination and he placed reliance on clause XV of the Regulations as extracted supra.
But I am afraid that I cannot accede to the contention of the counsel for the respondent for the simple reason that Regulation XV deals with qualifying marks for pass which was already extracted supra.
The language used in Regulation XV is that a candidate shall be declared to have passed in the examination if he or she obtains the qualifying marks 40% marks in theory and aggregate of 50% marks in theory and orals taken together.
If once oral examination is not there, the question of getting any marks in oral examination does not arise.
When once the University made it clear that a person who gets 40% marks in theory will be declared to have passed the examination, the question of adding marks in the oral examination does not arise, if there are no orals.
The counsel for respondent-University placed reliance on Regulation XVI which deals with classification of the results.
It is common knowledge that in every examination a candidate who secures qualifying marks will be treated as passed in the examination and on the basis of the marks obtained by the student, division will be awarded to him i.e., III, II and I and Distinction.
In this case, by interpreting both Regulations XV and XVI it has to be held that a student who gets 40% marks in theory where there is no oral examination a particular subject can be declared as passed in the examination and the question of getting 50% marks will arise only when orals are there.
Likewise, a student who gets above 50% but less than 65% will be given II class and a student who gets 65% to 75% will be given I class and a student who secures more than 75% will be declared to have passed the examination in distinction.
6.
Hence, I find sufficient force in the contention of the petitioners and accordingly the Writ Petition is allowed.
Consequently, a direction is given to the respondents to treat the petitioners who secured 40% marks in theory where there is no oral examination as passed in the examination and declare their results accordingly.
7.
The writ petition is allowed accordingly.
No costs.
Petition allowed.