VS Aggarwal, J - By this common judgment, two Civil Writ Petition Nos. 18485 of 1998 and 5242 of 1999 can conveniently be disposed of together.
2.
The facts are stated to be identical and, therefore, the same are being reproduced from CWP No. 18485 of 1998 titled Prem Parkash and another v. Panjab University and another.
3.
The relevant facts are that the petitioners appeared in the All India Senior School Certificate Examination, 1998.
It was conducted by the Central Board of Secondary Education in March, 1998.
The result of the examination was declared and the marks statement was issued on 961998.
The petitioners had cleared all the papers except in the subject English Core in which they had scored 19 and 16 marks respectively.
Their result was declared in compartment and they had been shown as having failed in English Core paper.
In the next examination, the petitioners cleared the English Core paper.
The process of admissions in Government College, Chandigarh, commenced in July, 1998.
The last date fixed for admission was 2181998.
Panjab University by a general order extended the admission date to 2991998.
Since the petitioners had cleared the compartment examination, they were granted admission in BA Part I of the Three Years Degree course.
They deposited their fees and started attending the classes w.e.f.
24.9.1998.
The Vice Chancellor had allowed the admission of 10 candidates including the petitioners.
4.
It is alleged that vide order dated 21101998 the petitioners were found ineligible for admission to BA Part I since they had cleared their compartment in 10+2 examination in the month of September, 1998.
It has been claimed that this was contrary to the Panjab University Calendar Volume II.
The petitioners were asked to approach the office of the college for refund of their fees.
They represented to the Vice Chancellor against the cancellation of their admission but without avail.
The petitioners assailed the action of the respondents asserting that no opportunity of being heard had been given to the petitioners.
They had not suppressed any fact.
It is the mistake, if any, of the college.
They were entitled to be admitted in any case as per Panjab University Calendar Volume II.
5.
The petitioners claimed quashing of the impugned order dated 21101998 and for a declaration that they are eligible for admission to BA Part I in the college as per Regulations of the respondent-University.
6.
In the reply filed by respondent No. 2, it is not disputed that the date of admission had been extended uptil 2991998 but it was subject to the permission of the Vice Chancellor and payment of late fee.
However, it was pointed out that admission is regulated under Rule 7(a) of the Panjab University Calender.
Since the petitioners had not scored 20% marks in the paper in which they were declared to have failed, they could not get the admission.
7.
The contest was also offered by respondent No. 1-Panjab University.
It has been pointed out that the petitioners were ineligible for admission to BA Part I as they have scored less than 20% marks in the subject of compartment in the +2 examination held in March, 1998.
The Regulations of the University do not permit admission of such students.
It is not disputed that last admission had been approved by the respondent-University, but it has been pointed out that as a matter of practice the University grants approval for late admission formally on the recommendation of the Principal of the College without verifying the eligibility of the candidate.
Once the petitioners were not eligible, the approval of the Vice Chancellor could not be availed of.
8.
The position in the case of Kulwinder Kaur (CWP No. 5242 of 1999) is identical.
She was also admitted in the Govt. College, Sector 46, Chandigarh.
Other details do not require any mention because the facts are identical.
9.
Learned counsel for the petitioners urged vehemently that the petitioners had stated the correct facts and mistake, if any, was of respondent No. 2.
In any case, according to the him, the approval of the Vice Chancellor had been obtained and lastly since the petitioners had also cleared the compartment examination in September itself, they were entitled to be admitted.
10.
On careful consideration, all these contentions must be held to be without merit.
In the case of Prem Parkash, the result of the Central Board of Secondary Education reveals the following facts :-  Code Subject Marks Obtained + + + + TH PR TOTAL TOTAL IN WORDS POSITIONAL GRADE 301 ENGLISH CORE XX XX 19F Nineteen E 002 HINDI ELECTIVE XX XX 50 Fifty B2 028 POLITICAL SCIENCE XX XX 62 Sixty A2 030 ECONOMICS XX XX 56 Fifty six B2 048 PHYSICAL EDUCATION 16 56 72 Seventy two C2 500 WORK EXPERIENCE B1 502 PHY & HEALTH EDUCA B1 503 GENERAL STUDIES B2 In other words, he scored only 19 marks out of 100 marks in English Core subject.
However, in the subsequent examination, he scored 39 marks and passed.
The result was declared sometime in September, 1998.
11.
So far as the permission of the Vice Chancellor is concerned, the order so issued in this regard by the Panjab University (Annexure P-5) reads as under :-  "I am to inform you that the Vice-Chancellor has allowed the late admission of the following candidates of your College/Department at this stage for the class as noted against each, if they are otherwise eligible :- 1 to 9 xx xx xx  10.
Prem Parkash BA Part-I"  The permission so granted, indeed, cannot be availed of because it indicates that it had been granted if he candidates were otherwise eligible.
If the candidate if not otherwise eligible, obviously the petitioners cannot avail of the said permission granted by the Vice-Chancellor for late admission.
12.
The controversy in this regard obviously was as to if the petitioners were eligible to take the examination or not.
Regulation 42 of the Panjab University Calender Volume II (1995), which has been published on 28.10.1995 reads as under :-  "42.
A candidate who has been placed under compartment in the +2 examination conducted by a Board/Body/Council/University in India shall be eligible to seek admission to the First Year of BA/B.Sc.
course, provided he fulfils the following conditions :- (i) He should have been placed in compartment in one subject only; (ii) He should have obtained at least 20% marks in the subject in which he had been placed in compartment; and  (iii) He should have obtained the requisite percentage of marks in the aggregate of the examination as laid down in the relevant regulations.
Provident that (i) A candidate joining the BA First Year class should have obtained at least 33% marks in the aggregate of all the subjects (including the marks obtained by him in the subject of compartment, Theory and Practical/as taken together) taken up by him at the +2 examination.
(ii) A candidate joining the B.Sc.
First Year class should have obtained at least 40% marks in the agreegate of all the subjects (including the marks obtained by him in the subject of compartment, Theory and Practical/s taken together) taken up by him at the +2 examination."
Similarly, Regulation 7(a) of the Panjab University Calendar Volume-II (1995) reads as under :-  "7.
The examination in First/Second/Third Year shall be open to a student who :- (a) has passed not less than one academic year previously the qualifying examination laid down in Regulation 41.
In the case of a compartment candidate who is eligible to join BA/B.Sc.
course, the period of one academic year shall be counted from the examination in which the candidate is placed under compartment.
A candidate who is placed in compartment/fail in the subject in +2 examination may be allowed to join BA/B.Sc.
Ist Year class subject to the following conditions :- The admission of a candidate under Regulation 42 shall be provisional and shall be confirmed only after he has cleared the subject of compartment from the parent Board/Body/Council/University in the two consecutive chances subsequent to his admission.
In case he does not clear the compartment at two consecutive chances afforded to him his provisional admission to the Ist Year of the BA/B.Sc.
shall stand cancelled."
These Regulations have statutory force.
They bind the University and persons can only be admitted in accordance with these Regulations.
According to Regulations 42, a candidate seeking admission to BA Part-I must have obtained at least 20% marks in the subject in which he had been placed under compartment.
Similarly, as per Regulation 7(a), it has been clarified that in case of a compartment candidate who is eligible to join BA course, the period of one academic year shall be counted from the examination in which the candidate is placed under compartment.
Admittedly, the petitioners had scored less than 20% marks in one subject in which they were placed under compartment.
Since they had not scored more than 20% marks in the subject in which they had been placed under compartment, they were not entitled to be admitted nor were they eligible to be admitted in BA Part-I.
Once the mistake is detected, the same had to be set right.
To urge that the petitioners have already studied for more than a year and it would be an appropriate case that would be contrary to the Regulations of the respondent- University.
The law must bind all.
The result is obvious that the petitioners were not eligible to be admitted to BA Part-I class.
13.
For these reasons, the writ petitions being without merit must fail and are accordingly dismissed.
Petitions dismissed.