VS Aggarwal, J - Petitioner Vinay Kumar Monga seeks a direction to the respondents to consider the candidature of the petitioner for admission to M.B.A. (Part Time) in the University Business School, Panjab University, Chandigarh.
2.
The relevant facts are that Panjab University respondent issued a prospectus for admission to Master of Business Administration (Part Time) (MBA PT) course.
One of the terms was that candidate should have 2 years whole time executive experience in a Commercial or industrial establishment.
The petitioner had passed B.Com.
from Himachal Pradesh University in April, 1995.
He had done Post Graduate Diploma in Marketing and Sales Management from Bhartiya Vidya Bhawan, Chandigarh in the year 1996.
The petitioner has experience of working as Sales Supervisor with M/s Whirlpool India Limited from January, 1997 to September, 1997 and was holding an executive post.
After that he joined with M/s North India Computers as Marketing Executive on 111998 and is still working there on regular basis.
In this process he has two years experience as an executive on 3171999.
3.
The petitioner was called for Group discussion on 19.5.1999.
His eligibility was duly checked and he was allowed to sit in the examination on 28.3.1999.
The Interviewing Board was only to assess the petitioner for granting him marks in the Group discussion but he was told that he did not have the necessary experience and, therefore, was not eligible.
4.
The petitioner assails the said order of the respondents.
His contention is that he has the necessary experience because he worked in M/s Whirlpool India Limited and also presently with M/s North India Computers as Marketing Executive.
5.
The petition as such has been contested.
According to the respondents, the petitioner did not hold an executive post in M/s Whirlpool India Limited.
He was only a Sales Supervisor.
The definition of "Executive" adopted and followed uniformly by the Board of Control, University Business School does not indicate that petitioner holds an Executive Post in M/s Whirlpool India Limited.
6.
The short question that comes up for consideration is as to if the petitioner had the necessary two years experience in the executive or in the managerial cadre or not ?
The prospectus regarding the qualification reads :-  "MASTER OF BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION PART-TIME (MBA-PT) : (i) A Bachelor's or Master Degree in any discipline with not less than 50% marks in the aggregate or any other examination with 50% marks, recognised by the University as equivalent thereto : OR Pass in final examination of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India or Institute of Cost and Works Accountants of India or the Institute of Company Secretaries of India.
OR Diploma in Personnel Management and Labour Welfare or Diploma in Marketing Management with not less than 60% marks in the aggregate, provided the candidate holds as Bachelor's degree.
(ii) Two years whole time executive experience in a Commercial or Industrial establishment after passing the qualifying examination as given above.
Members of all India or State Administrative/Technical Services and Defence Personnel holding administrative posts with not less than 2 years' executive experience will also be eligible.
Organizational sponsorship is essential.
Note : The cut off date for considering executive experience is July 31, 1999."
It is obvious from aforesaid that the candidate must have two years whole time executive experience in commercial and industrial establishment.
The petitioner has placed on record two certificates.
Annexure P-1 is the certificate from M/s Whirlpool India Limited.
It reads :-  "THIS IS TO CERTIFY THAT MR. VINAY KUMAR MONGA HAS WORKED A SALES SUPERVISOR IN THE SALES AND MARKETING DIVISION OF THIS ORGANISATION FROM JAN. 97 TO SEPT. 97.
HE USED TO HELP THE MANAGEMENT IN GETTING THE SALES DONE THROUGH DEMONSTRATOR NETWORK.
HIS WORK AND CONDUCT HAS BEEN FOUND GOOD DURING HIS STAY IN THIS ORGANISATION.
HE HAS LEFT THE JOB AT HIS OWN WILL."
The second certificate is from M/s North India Computer and the same reads :-  "This is to certify that Mr. Vinay Kumar Monga has been working as Marketing Executive, in our organisation since 1st January 1998.
He is drawing Rs. 4500/- P.M. on regular basis."
Regarding the second certificate there was no controversy that petitioner has been working as Marketing Executive since 111998.
But as regards Annexure P-1 with respect to service in M/s Whirlpool India Limited, the respondent's contention was that he was only helping the management in getting the sales done through the demonstrators.
The petitioner had produced a fresh certificate from M/s Whirlpool India Limited which reads :-  "This is to certify that Mr. Vinay Monga has worked as a Sales Supervisor in the Sales and Marketing Division of this Organisation from Jan 1997 to Sept 1997.
We hereby confirm that the post of Sales Supervisor in our company is administrative job, where 10-15 Nos. of Demonstrators reporting to him and were under his administrative control.
His work and conduct has been found good during his stay in this organisation.
We wish him success in life."
It is true that certificate now being filed with the Civil Miscellaneous has been filed subsequently.
But there is precious little on the record to doubt the genuineness of the same.
It shows that from January, 1997 to September, 1997 the petitioner was working as Sales Supervisor.
10-15 Demonstrators were reporting to him and were under his control.
Consequently, it must follow that he was holding an executive post in M/s Whirlpool India Limited and in this process had the necessary experience to two years.
7.
As an offshoot of these reasons, it must follow that contention of the petitioner is not without substance.
The respondents were not justified in rejecting his just claim.
Accordingly, the writ petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to consider the case of the petitioner for admission to M.B.A. (Part Time) on basis of his performance in the written test as well as in the interview.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.