VS Aggarwal, J - Petitioner Sachin Kumar Kansal seeks a direction to the respondents to permit him to appear in Hindi Compulsory subject as deficient subject in BA Part-I.
2.
The relevant facts are that petitioner passed his 10+2 examination and took admission in BA Part-I (Honours).
He appeared in BA Part-I (Honours) examination in April, 1996 and passed the said examination.
After passing BA Part-I examination from Maharishi Dayanand University (for short the University), the petitioner took admission in BA-II (pass course).
At the time of admission the petitioner was not informed that he has to pass Hindi Compulsory subject in BA Part-II examination in April, 1997.
The petitioner passed the examination of BA-II but the result was shown as RL-Lower in the Mark Sheet.
The petitioner contacted the college authorities (Nirankari Babu Gurbachan Singh Memorial College, Sohna) that why his result has been shown as RL-Lower.
He was informed by respondent No. 2 that petitioner has to pass Hindi Compulsory subject of BA-I as deficient subject.
Respondent No. 2 informed the petitioner that he can appear in BA-I Hindi Compulsory subject alongwith BA Part-III.
The petitioner submitted examination form for BA Part-III alongwith BA Part-I Hindi Compulsory as deficient subject for April, 1998.
He deposited the necessary fee.
Roll number was issued to the petitioner for BA Part-III but not for BA Part-I Hindi Compulsory deficient subject.
The petitioner was informed by respondent No. 2 that examination form of BA Part-I Hindi Compulsory was not forwarded to respondent No. 1 due to clerical mistake.
The result was that petitioner appeared in B.A Part-III.
Petitioner again applied for BA Part-I Hindi Compulsory as deficient subject in April, 1999.
Respondent No. 1 informed him that he is not eligible for the examination as he has to appear in BA Part-I Hindi Compulsory alongwith BA Part-III.
Even the college authorities- respondent No. 2 informed that it was their mistake.
The request of the petitioner had been rejected.
The petitioner's claim is that respondents should be directed to permit him to appear in Hindi Compulsory as deficient subject of BA Part-I in April, 1999.
3.
Notice had been issued and so for as respondent No. 2 college is concerned, they admit the mistake on their part.
It is admitted that petitioner had to pass Hindi Compulsory subject as a deficient subject and that because of their mistake his application for BA Part-I Hindi Compulsory subject was not sent to the University.
4.
Respondent No. 1 contested the claim of the petitioner.
As per respondent No. 1 after passing the BA Part-I examination in the Honours stream, the petitioner took admission in BA Part-II pass course.
The result of the examination was declared as RL-Lower because he had not passed BA Part-I (deficient subject of Hindi Compulsory).
There is a separate ordinance for each stream i.e. pass course and Honours.
As per Clause 13.2 of the ordinance a candidate of BA examination is required to take up English and Hindi/Punjabi/Sanskrit/Urdu as compulsory subjects.
The petitioner has taken English and Hindi as compulsory subjects and History and Political Science as elective subjects.
He did not pass Hindi compulsory in BA Part-I in Honours stream.
Therefore, he had to pass the same alongwith BA-II or BA Part- III examination.
He did not do so.
Since he failed to pass the compulsory paper of Hindi with BA II in April, 1977 or BA III in April, 1998, he is estopped to claim that he should be allowed to take the examination of Hindi compulsory of BA Part-I as deficient subject.
He was not allowed to appear in Hindi compulsory deficient subject in April, 1999.
5.
The facts are not much in controversy.
It is not disputed that petitioner had passed BA Part-I (Honours) but had not cleared the Hindi compulsory subject.
It is also not in controversy that he applied for taking the examination of Hindi compulsory subject alongwith BA III.
He submitted the necessary application form to his college.
The College did not send the same to the University.
This fact is admitted by the College.
In fact the Principal of respondent No. 2/College had written to the Vice Chancellor of the University and the said letter reads :-  "Mr. Sachin Kumar passed his BA III Examination in 1998 under Roll No. 235760 from this very University.
There was a slight official bungling in the sense that our college Clerk could not submit the Examination Form in the subject of Hindi in BA I as deficient subject in 1998 itself alongwith his passing the BA III, though the student had duly deposited his fee and Form with us.
Now, under the prevailing circumstances and in view of the disastrous consequences entailing and ensuing thereof, I beseech the pleasure of your Most Magnanimous Self to allow the student, Mr. Sachin Kumar as a special case to take the deficient subject Examination i.e. BA I Hindi so that he gets entitled to earning his bona fide graduation degree, which otherwise would jeoparadise the entire career of the student.
I hope that your goodself would rise to the occasion by acceding to the merecy petition of Mr. Sachin Kumar."
These facts show that fault if any lies with the College.
When the student submits the application form to the College, the same is forwarded to the University with which the college is affiliated.
In this regard the colleges act as agent for collecting the forms on behalf of the University.
Once the mistake is of the college, the petitioner cannot be allowed to suffer.
All that he could do was that he has to take the examination of Hindi compulsory subject of BA Part-I.
If the college fumbles and faulters, in that event, the interest of justice requires that petitioner should not suffer.
There is no ground thus to justify the action of respondent No. 1 in not allowing the petitioner to take Hindi compulsory examination of BA Part-I as deficient subject.
6.
For these reasons, the writ petition is allowed and it is directed that petitioner should be permitted to appear in Hindi Compulsory as deficient subject of BA Part-I examination.
During the pendency of the writ petition, the petitioner on 1541999 was admitted to Hindi Compulsory in BA Part-I examination.
If he had taken the examination his result be declared within a week.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.