GC Garg, J - Petitioner was enrolled as a Constable in the Punjab Police in the year 1992.
Petitioner while posted at Police Station Valtoha absented from duty and was accordingly served with a charge sheet dated 1141998, Annexure P-1.
A departmental enquiry was held.
The Enquiry Officer submitted his report.
The petitioner was thereafter served with a show cause notice to show cause as to why he should not be dismissed from service.
Petitioner submitted reply to the show cause notice.
The punishing authority on a consideration of the matter, dismissed the petitioner from service by order dated 16.1.1999, Annexure P-5.
Hence this petition challenging the order of dismissal.
2.
In response to notice of motion, respondents have put in appearance and have filed written statement.
Stand of the respondents is that the petitioner was a disobedient employee and when he was posted at Police Station Valtoha he absented from duty without leave.
The petitioner was given full opportunity to defened his case.
It was further stated that the absence of the petitioner from service was a gravest act of misconduct and, therefore, after conducting a regular enquiry, he was dismissed from service under the Punjab Police Rules.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the petitioner was not made available the enquiry report and this has seriously prejudiced his case and he was deprived of an opportunity of submitting his reply to the charges levelled against him.
Counsel also submitted that there is no finding that the petitioner was guilty of gravest misconduct which may lead to a conclusion that he was unfit for being retained in service.
Counsel further submitted that in any case, the punishment of dismissal was very harsh punishment and the punishing authority ought to have awarded a lesser punishment.
4.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and perusing the record, we are of the opinion that this petition deserves to be allowed.
It is the specific case of the petitioner that he was not made available the report of the Enquiry before passing the impugned order of dismissal and thus he was deprived of an opportunity of defending his case effectively.
Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents could not controvert the contention of the counsel for the petitioner and as a matter of fact, it had to be conceded that it was indeed so.
On a consideration of the matter we are of the view that it was enjoined upon the punishing authority to supply to the petitioner the report of the Enquiry Officer and afford him reasonable opportunity of being heard so as to provide him an occasion to defend himself effectively and explain the charges levelled against him, before passing the impugned order.
This having not been done, the impugned order is vitiated.
In this view of the matter, we allow this petition and quash the order Annexure P-5 with liberty to the punishing authority to pass a fresh order after following due procedure under the Punjab Police Rules and affording an opportunity of being heard to the petitioner.
Petition allowed.