Harjit Singh Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner joined the Indian Army on 10th December 1976, and was discharged therefrom on 7th June, 1982, after having been down graded to medical category EEE, certifying that he had been found totally unfit for further military service.
A copy of the discharge certificate has been appended as Annexure P-1 to the petition.
It is the petitioner's case that he had been enrolled in the Indian Army after a thorough medical examination and had been found physically and mentally fit in all respects as provided by paragraph 391 of the Regulations for the Medical Services of the Armed Forces, 1983.
The petitioner thereafter made a representation for the grant of disability pension and his case was duly forwarded by his Unit to the CCDS (Pensions) Allahabad.
The petitioner was, however, informed by Annexure P-2 dated 18th March, 1994 by the Officer Incharge Records that the Medical Board proceedings had already been submitted to the CCDA (P) Allahabad along with the papers relating to the grant of disability pension but the said authority had declined the petitioner's claim on the ground that the disease "Juvenile Diabetes Mellitus" was not attributable to military service.
The petitioner thereafter served a notice under Section 80 of the Code of Civil Procedure on the respondent-Union of India and pointed out that at the time of his enrolment, he had been found to be physically fit and not suffering from any disease and, as he fulfilled the conditions laid down in Regulation 173 of the Pension Regulations for the Army, he was entitled to disability pension.
The Records Office of the Sikh Light Infantry, Fatehgarh, sent a reply to the notice, inter alia, stating that the petitioner's claim to disability pension had again been examined by the Army Headquarters and they had concluded that since the CCDA (P) Allahabad had found the petitioner's disease to be a constitutional one and not related to military service, the claim had been rightly declined.
Frustrated thereby, the petitioner has filed the present writ petition.
2.
On notice of motion, the respondents have filed their written statement and it has been pointed out that CCDA (P) Allahabad, which was the final sanctioning authority for the payment of pensions had declined the petitioner's claim to disability pension on the ground that the petitioner's disease was a constitutional one and could not be attributable to military service.
It has nevertheless been admitted that the petitioner had been examined and found fit at the time of his enrolment in the Indian Army.
3.
It will be seen that the impugned orders Annexures P-2 and P-5 are based on the assessment made by the CCDA (P) Allahabad and there is no reference whatsoever with regard to the report that had been rendered by the invaliding medical board.
As the CCDA (P) Allahabad or the Medical Authority attached thereto, did not have the occasion to examine the petitioner and had based their assessment only on the record no sanctity can be accorded to such a decision.
It is true, that the respondents have also averred that the petitioner's disease was a constitutional one and could not be attributed to military service and that this decision had come from the invaliding Medical Board at the initial stage, but nothing has been put on record with regard to the decision of the said Board.
Moreover, a constitutional disease does not ipso facto debar a person from claiming disability pension.
This has been so held in Union of India and others v. Sepoy Satwinder Singh and another, 1998(4) R.S.J.
467.
4.
This petition is accordingly allowed, the order Annexures P-2 and P-5 are quashed and a direction is issued to the Release Medical Board to re-examine the petitioner within a period of three months from the date that a certified copy of this order is supplied to the respondents and to re-determine the issue with regard to the petitioner's claim to disability pension in the light of the case law cited above.
In case, it is found that the petitioner is entitled to payment of disability pension, the same shall be given to him within two months thereafter.
No costs.
Dasti order.
Petition allowed