NK Agrawal, J - This is a petition by Rajinder Singh Patpatia under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution for quashing orders dated June 25, 1993, August 13, 1993 and February 3, 1994, whereby his request for next higher scale of pay has been rejected.
2.
Petitioner joined service with the Punjab Government in the Irrigation Branch as a Draftsman on June 7, 1951.
He was promoted as Divisional Head Draftsman on February 28, 1957 and was transferred to the Bhakra Beas Management Board (in short, 'BBMB') and posted at Nagal.
The petitioner was again promoted as Circle Head Draftsman on January 28, 1963 and was posted in the Beas Project, Talwara.
The petitioner passed two examinations, namely, the Departmental Professional Examination and the Departmental Revenue Accounts Examination on October 21, 1963.
He belonged to the Drawing Establishment and was a member of Draftsmen and Tracers Service.
He was further promoted as Assistant Design Engineer/Sub Divisional Officer vide Punjab Government's order dated August 25, 1971.
Thus, the petitioner joined Class II post and then retired from service on superannuation after attaining the age of 58 years on November 30, 1990.
The petitioner's case is that the pay scales were revised by the BBMB in respect of the employees drawn from the State Government and also for the regular employees of the BBMB.
The pattern of the pay scales followed by the Punjab State Electricity Board was adopted by the BBMB also.
The time bound promotional pay scales after 9/16 of years service were regulated by the instructions contained in the orders and the circular letters issued by the Punjab State Electricity Board on April 30, 1990 and May 24, 1990.
Technical subordinates in the Drawing Establishment, when promoted to the post of Assistant Engineer, were deemed to have been appointed as Assistant Engineers selected through direct recruitment.
The petitioner was working on the post of Sub-Divisional Officer and was holding a Class-II post.
He was given higher pay scale of Rs. 3000-4500 w.e.f.
September 1, 1986, after completion of 9 years service as Sub Divisional Officer.
The next higher pay scale of Rs. 4500-6300 was however not granted to the petitioner though it was granted after completion of 16 years of service to one Jaspal Singh, a person similarly situated as the petitioner.
It was discriminatory.
3.
Sri KL Arora, learned counsel for the petitioner, has argued that the petitioner had completed 16 years of service and was, therefore, entitled to the next higher pay scale from September 1, 1987.
Since the petitioner retired from service on November 30, 1990 he was entitled to receive the scale and the arrears from September 1, 1987 to November 30, 1990.
4.
The petitioner made a representation seeking next higher pay scale.
He was informed by letter dated June 25, 1993 (Annexure P-5) and letter dated August 13, 1993 (Annexure P-6) that the next higher pay scale was admissible only to those Sub Divisional Officers who were directly recruited or to those Sub Divisional Officers who possessed the qualification of AMIE and were promoted within the quota fixed for the AMIE category.
The petitioner again sent a representation drawing the attention to the Regulations, but that was also rejected by order dated February 3, 1994 (Annexure P-8).
5.
It is undisputed that the petitioner was appointed to the post of Sub Divisional Officer in the promotion quota.
The promotional pay scale was regulated by the provisions of the Punjab State Electricity Board's Office Order dated May 24, 1990 (Annexure P-2).
It provided that the promoted employees shall be deemed to have been appointed as directly recruited officers.
The petitioner was earlier given the higher pay scale of Rs. 3000- 4500 w.e.f.
September 1, 1986 after 9 years of service.
He was, however, denied the next higher pay scale of Rs. 4500-3000 after he completed 16 years of service.
6.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that the petitioner was entitled to the time bound higher pay scale inasmuch as he was eligible like the directly recruited Assistant Engineers and like those officers who were working as Sub Divisional Officers after acquiring AMIE qualification.
7.
Respondent No. 1 (BBMB) has, in its reply, referred to Regulation 7-A of the Punjab State Electricity Board Service of Engineers (Civil) Regulations, 1965.
It is pleaded that the aforesaid regulation provided for recruitment to the Service from three sources, namely, (1) from amongst the Trainee Engineers, (ii) from the category of promotees, and (iii) from amongst the officers already in Government service or in the Electricity Board by transfer.
8.
Regulation 9 laid down the qualifications for a Trainee Engineer.
9 per cent of the cadre posts of Assistant Engineers (Civil) was reserved for the departmental employees who had passed AMIE examination and had completed three years service.
9.
The next higher pay scales after 9/16 years of service as Assistant Engineer was granted only to the graduate engineers who were recruited directly or were promoted from the AMIE category (which was equivalent to the Degree in Engineering).
10.
Sri N.S.
Bawa, learned counsel for respondent No. 1 has argued that benefit of the next higher pay scale was not extended to the promotees who were Diploma-holders.
The petitioner, admittedly, was a Diploma-holder in Civil Engineering and was promoted as Sub Divisional Officer.
Jaspal Singh, on the other hand, was a Graduate Engineer and was promoted from the AMIE category.
Sri Bawa has further contended that there was no joint seniority.
The petitioner could not be treated to be a direct recruit as he was not a Graduate Engineer as required in Regulation 9.
11.
It would be useful to read the relevant paragraph 2 and the 'Note' in the Finance Circular dated May 24, 1999 issued by the Punjab State Electricity Board :-  "2.
The above higher scales will only be available to the directly recruited Assistant Engineers as per Regulation 7-A(i) read with Regulation 9 of PSEB, Service of Engineers (Electrical) with regulation 9 of PSEB, Service of Engineers (Civil).
NOTE :- The Departmental Employees (Technical Subordinates and Drawing Staff) who while in service of the Board have been promoted to the post of AE (Electrical/Civil) against quota reserved for promotion from amongst them under Regulation 7-A(ii) read with Regulation 10(7) of the PSEB Service of Engineers (Electrical) Regulations, 1965/Regulation 7-A(ii) read with Regulation 10(4) of the PSEB Service of Engineers (Civil) Regulations, 1965, shall be deemed to have been appointed as Assistant Engineers like the Assistant Engineers appointed through direct appointment under Regulation 7- A(i) read with Regulation 9 of the Service of Engineers (Electrical) ibid/Regulation 7-A(i) read with Regulation 9 of the Service of Engineers (Civil) for the purpose of grant of above higher scales after 9/16 years of regular service as Assistant Engineer.................." A plain reading of the aforesaid explanation contained in the 'Note' leaves no room for any doubt that the departmental employees who were promoted to the post of the Assistant Engineer against the promotion quota, shall be deemed to have been appointed as Assistant Engineer like the direct recruits for the purposes of the next higher pay scale.
This deeming provision is sufficient to raise a presumption in favour of the petitioner.
There was no occasion to incorporate a deeming provision in the 'Note' after it was laid down that the next higher pay scale will be available to the direct recruits only.
There is no dispute to the fact that there are three categories of Assistant Engineers, viz, (i) directly recruited graduate engineers, (ii) promotees, and (iii) AMIE qualified engineers.
While the next higher pay scale has been granted to the direct recruits and also to those who had acquired AMIE qualification, it has been denied to the category (ii) employees.
There appears no valid reason nor a justification.
The benefit of higher pay scale of Rs. 3000-4500 has already been given to the petitioner on completion of 9 years of regular service.
That would mean that the BBMB found the petitioner eligible for the higher pay scale after completion of 9 years of service.
A different yardstick could not be adopted after the petitioner completed 16 years of service so as to deny him the benefit of the next higher pay scale.
The order declining the next higher pay scale to the petitioner after completion of 16 years of service is found to be wholly unjust.
12.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed, the impugned orders are set aside and respondent No. 1 is directed to grant within three months from the date of this order the next higher pay scale to the petitioner after completion of 16 years of service, i.e. from September 1, 1987 to November 30, 1990.
No costs.
Petition allowed.