Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner complains that his claim for the grant of ex-gratia appointment has been arbitrarily rejected by the Chief Secretary to Government, Haryana.
He prays that the order dated October 21, 1998 passed by the Chief Secretary be quashed and the respondents be directed to grant him appointment.
2.
We have heard learned Counsel for the parties.
3.
It is the admitted position that Devki Parshad, the petitioner's father, had joined service as a Secretary with the Municipal Committee, Sirsa.
He had worked as such from January 4, 1968 to September 10, 1992 when he was promoted as Executive Officer.
On July 18, 1994, Devki Parshad submitted a representation in which it was stated that the vision of one of his eyes had deteriorated.
He requested that his son, the present petitioner, he granted an ex-gratia appointment.
The Department of Local Government asked the Director General of Health Services, Haryana to get Devki Parshad medically examined.
The medical report was issued on March 24, 1995, in which it was observed that the eyesight had deteroriated.
However, Devki Parshad continued in service as an Executive Officer till August 31, 1995 when he retired on attaining the age of superannuation.
Thus, his service tenure was not cut short.
4.
In view of the above factual position, the short question that arises for consideration is - can the petitioner claim a right to be granted ex-gratia appointment despite the fact that his father had enjoyed full tenure of service ?
The instructions issued by the State Government, to which reference has been made, only contemplate the grant of appointment to a member of a family, whose bread-winner has become handicapped, to continue in service and thus provide sustenance to the family.
In a case where the employee has enjoyed his full tenure of service, such a claim cannot be raised.
Nor is there any provision for the grant of an appointment on ex-gratia basis in a case where the employee has completed the full tenure.
The entire scheme of employment of a dependent on ex-gratia basis is calculated to help the needy.
The object is not to confer undue benefit on anyone who is greedy.
The petitioner's father, Devki Parshad, having enjoyed full tenure of service, he can have no claim for the grant of any ex-gratia appointment.
If he is qualified, he can compete along with the others.
There is no reason or basis for him to claim any preferential treatment.
5.
The order passed by the respondent is perfectly just and fair.
It is in complete conformity with law.
It suffers from no error.
It promotes justice.
It calls for no interference.
6.
Resultantly, the writ petition is dismissed as being without any merit.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.