VK Gupta, J - This batch of appeals raises a question of law regarding the interpretation to be put upon clause 20(5) of Calcutta Dock Workers (Regulation and Employment) Scheme 1970 (hereinafter referred to as the Scheme) and the related provisions contained in the Schedules to the Scheme, as also the legality and validity of Resolution No. 74 dated 30th September, 1992 issued by the Calcutta Dock Labour Board (C.D.L.B) amending substantially Resolution No. 50 dt. 29th September, 1983.
The learned Single Judge vide his Judgment dated 3rd May, 1996 has, while allowing the Writ Petitions filed by the Respondents set aside and quashed Resolution No. 74 dated 30th September, 1992.
Vide this Judgment the learned Single Judge also quashed and set aside the bills raised by the CDLB against the Respondents for payment of the amounts to the appellant-Board on the basis of the aforesaid Circular dated 23rd November, 1992 and Resolution No. 74 dated 30th September, 1992.
The operative part of the Judgment of the learned Single Judge reads as under :-  "The resolution passed by the Board dated 30th September, 1992 and Circular passed by the Board dated 23rd November, 1992 stand quashed and set aside and all bills raised by the Board on the basis of the said Resolution which are subject matter of this Proceeding stand quashed and set aside."
There will be no order as to costs."
2.
It is against the aforesaid Judgment in a batch of Writ Applications filed by the Stevedores and Stevedoring Associations that the present appeals under Clause 15 of the Letters Patent have been filed by the CDLB and others.
3.
CDLB is a creation of the Dock Workers (Regulation of Employment) Act, 1984 (Act for short).
It is under Section 5A of the Act that the Government has the powers to establish a Dock Labour Board for a Port or a group of Ports.
It is under these provisions that CDLB was constituted by the Central Government.
The functions of the Board as defined under Section 5B of the Act inter alia include its responsibility for administering the Scheme, as made under the Act for the Port or the group of Ports.
Section 3 of the Act read with Section 4 gives the power to the Central Government to frame Scheme for a Port or a group of Ports and to amend, vary or revoke such Scheme.
Such power includes the power to make provision in the Scheme for the registration of Dock Workers and Employers with a view to ensuring greater regularity of employment and for regulating the employment of Dock Workers, whether registered or not in a Port.
It is in the exercise of the aforesaid powers that the Scheme was formulated by the Central Government.
4.
Sub-clause (5) of Clause 20 of the Scheme provides for the engagement of the Articled crew of a Ship by the Master of the Ship for rigging and fitting of Derricks and for carrying out all the functions and duties as laid down in Schedule III.
Sub-clause (5) of Clause 20 of the Scheme reads thus :  "5.
The Masters of the ships may engage the Articled crew of the ship, excluding harbour crew, for rigging and fitting of derricks and for carrying out all the functions and duties as laid down in Schedule III.
The Shipping Companies who have workshop establishments and who have been employing before the 1st August 1955 their workshop staff for rigging and fitting of derrick may also be permitted to continue to do so.
In all other cases, registered workers of the board of appropriate category shall be employed for such work on requisition made by registered employers.
Explanations : for the purposes of this sub-clause -  1.
"articled crew" means the crew enrolled and supplied to the Shipping Companies by the Principal Officer, Mercantile Marine Department on specific requestion submitted by the Shipping Companies.
Such crew are engaged on board the ships after they sign as `articled crew' of the ship for a particular voyage or voyages and are engaged to look after running or maintenance of the ships as per the directions of the Masters while during the voyage and during the stay at any Indian or foreign port.
2.
"horbour crew" means the crew engaged by the Shipping Companies to meet the demands of ships crews purely on day-to-day basis.
Such crews are engaged as helpers to the repairing staff and maintenance staff in engine room and work as per directions given by the Master of the Ship."
5.
It appears that on 29th September 1983 the CDLB by its Resolution No. 50 prescribed minimum manning scale for the Derrick Fitters in Calcutta Port.
Insofar as the works under item (d) occurring in Schedule VII of the Scheme, that is opening and closing of Mc.Gregor hatches and deep tanks as required, a manning scale of 1 plus 6 was provided, but in the Remarks column of this Resolution it was clearly mentioned that if the Mc.Gregor hatch cover are to be put upon or closed through push button or any other automatic devices system, no Derrick Fitters would be required.
Similarly in respect of the same item number during rainy season it was provided that if these Mc.Gregor hatches were neither to be opened nor closed at the commencement or closing of each shift, there should not be any necessity of booking Derrick Fitters but the Captain or the Chief Officer of the Vessel will have to issue a written certificate to that effect to both Calcutta Port Trust and CDLB on arrival of the ship in the port.
These two remarks occurring in the 3rd column of Resolution No. 50 being reproduced hereinbelow for ready reference.
"(i) In case of opening and closing of Mc.Gregor hatch cover through push botton or any automatic device system, no Derrick Fitter will be required.
(ii) In case when Mc.Gregor hatches are not required to be opened/closed at the commencement/closing of each shift, there should not be any necessity of booking Mc.Derrick Fitters but the Captain or the Chief Officer of the Vessel will have to issue a written certificate to that effect to both CPT and CDLB on arrival of the ship in the Port."
6.
Resolution No. 50 however was substantially modified and varied by Resolution No. 74 dt. 30th September 1992 by providing that the manning scale for Derrick Fitters as adopted by the CDLB in Resolution No. 50 dt. 29th September 1983 be modified to the extent indicated herein below :-  "(a) Certificate issued by the Master/Chief Officer of the Vessel for exemption from booking of Derrick Fitters for opening/closing of Mc.Gregor hatch covers at the commencement/closing of each shift, will not be entertained except in case of vessels carrying logs, sulpher and iron and steel exclusively.
(b) Booking of Derrick Fitters at the rate of 1 plus 6 in case of opening/closing of Mc.Gregor Hatches at the time of commencement/fishing of the vessels work in the Port exclusively for vessels carrying cargoes viz. log, sulpher, iron and steel be maintained.
(c) Booking of Derrick Fitters at the rate of 1 plus 6 for lashing/unlashing job for cargoes requiring/unlashing, be maintained.
(d) All other provisions of the existing manning scale of Derrick Fitters, be maintained."
2.
It is hereby announced for information of all derrick fitters and concerned Regd.
Employers that the above Resolution of the Board will come into force with effect from 1st of November, 1992.
All concerned are hereby requested to comply with the same without fail and cooperate in the matter.
Sd/- Illegible 30.10.92 for ADMINISTRATIVE BODY."
7.
It would thus appear that the certificates issued by the Master or the Chief Officer of the Ship for exemption of booking Derrick Fitters for opening or closing of Mc.Gregor hatches/hatch covers at the commencement or closing of each Ship would not entertained except in case of vessels carrying logs, sulpher and iron steel or other such items.
All the aforesaid Clauses of Resolution No. 74 dated 30th September 1992 accordingly modified Resolution No. 50 dated 29th September 1983 by insisting in effect and substance that Derrick Fitters would be employed even in respect of the duties occurring and mentioned in Clause (d) of Schedule VII of the Scheme, even if the Master or the Captain of the Ship would either decide to engage the Articled Crew of the Ship or issue a Certificate, as was provided in Resolution No. 50 dated 29th September, 1983.
It was also the effect and substance of this modification that the writ petitioners were brought under an obligation to provide for and engage Derrick Fitters for this purpose, even if not required by the Ship, and in any case to pay for such engagement in accordance with the prescribed manning scale, even if the Derrick Fitters were not actually put on job or factually engaged in the Ship, the basis of the payment thus being totally notional and fictional as emanating from Resolution No. 74 dt. 30 September, 1992.
It was on the basis of such provision therefore that the impugned bills were raised and the writ petitioners were put to make such payments with a threat that if this was not done, the supply of Derrick Fitters and other Workers in the Dock Labour Board would be stopped by order of CDLB.
It was in this background that the Writ Applications under Article 226 of the Constitution were filed by the Respondent-Writ Petitioners.
8.
The expression "Derrick Fitter" had been imported into the Scheme, in place of the expression "Riggar" and this was brought about by an amendment dated 28th February 1979 incorporated in the Scheme through Calcutta Dock Workers (Regulation of Employment) Amendment Scheme, 1979.
By this amendment Schedule VII was also introduced in the Scheme and it was because of such introduction that clause B relating to opening and closing of Mc.Gregor Hatches and deep tanks as required was introduced.
It will be worthwhile to mention here that even though the amendment aforesaid was brought about with effect from 28th February 1979, actually that draft of the proposed amendment was published on 26th August, 1978.
This is relevant because on 24th February 1979, the Govt. of India in response of the communication dated 5th February 1979 from CDLB had clearly ruled that in the matter of engagement of Riggers (or Derrick Fitters), wherever there was a dispute regarding the capability of the Riggers and where the Master of the Ship had a genuine doubt about such capability, the Master's direction should prevail, since this was in the interest of the safety of vessel and its equipment.
The Govt. of India was further of the view that if it was insisted that the Riggers were allowed to perform rigging of derricks at present being done by the ship's crew at the discretion of the Master of the Vessel, there was the risk of workers pressurising the Master to entrust work to them, imperilling the safety of sophisticated equipment.
This communication being very important and pertinent for our case needs to be carefully considered.
It reads thus :  "Kindly refer to your DO Letter No. S-C/2(f) dated 5279 regarding amendment to Clause 20(5) of the General Scheme.
The matter has again been examined in consultation with the Deputy Development Advisor of the Ministry.
The Deputy Development Advisor has pointed out that where there is dispute regarding capability of the Riggers and where the Master of the vessel has a genuine doubt about the capacity of the DLB Riggers, the Master's discretion should prevail.
This is found to be necessary in the interest of the safety of vessel of its equipment.
In case the registered riggers are allowed to perform the actual rigging of derricks at present being done by the ship's crew at the discretion of the Master of the vessel, there is the risk of workers pressurising the master to entrust work to them, imperililing the safety of sophisticated equipment.
On balance therefore it seems available not to require ships to compulsorily engage DLB's Riggers for fitting and rigging of derricks in Calcutta.
9.
It is also advantageous to quote letter dated 5279 written by the CDLB to the Govt. of India, reply whereof has been quoted above.
The letter dated 5279 reads thus.
Please refer to your DO letter No. LDC/33/78 dated 221279 regarding amendment of clause 20(5) of the General Scheme.
10.
It is quite true that the equipment and the fittings of the ship are under the control of the Master and that it is his responsibility to ensure its proper operation and maintenance.
It is also true that if the Master has valid reasons to feel that the Board's Riggers cannot undertake such a job, he should have the authority to get the job done by the ship's crew under his control.
As we pointed out earlier, the Board's Riggers are quite competent to handle the appliances provided on modern ships and all these years, they have actually handled them quite efficiently.
There has also been no complaint against them in this matter.
In the circumstances there is no reason why the Master should feel that the appliances on their ships would not be safe in the hands of the Board's Riggers.
Nobody can obviously challenge the authority of a Master on board the ship but it is only expected that they/he would not exercise his authority in such a manner as to deprive the Board's Riggers of their legitimate employment opportunities.
It might be necessary to employ the ship's crew in certain special circumstances but such cases should normally be very few.
The whole object of the proposed amendment is to increase the level of employment of the Board's Riggers, which is extremely low for quite sometime.
In 1977, the average level of employment of the Riggers was 1349 days per month.
This came down to only 1052 days per month in 1978.
As you are aware MG wages are payable to the Rigger for 21 days in a month and hence you can well imagine to what extent the Board is required to pay idle time wages to them.
The riggers are quite relative (restive ?)
over this fall in their level of employment and often I have to fact (face ?)
demonstration by them.
All that I want to emphasise is that the Board's Riggers should be assured of a fair share of the work available and that legitimate employment opportunities should not be denied to them only on technical grounds.
It was pointed out in my earlier letter that in Cochin also, only BLD riggers are engaged by the Stevedors.
Even in or cases where the ship's crew are permitted to do any special type of job, the Stevedors do engage riggers from the Dock Labour Board so that the letter do not lose their normal employment opportunities.
I shall be granted (grateful ?)
if the matter is reconsidered by the Ministry in the light of what has been stated above and the relevant clause amended as proposed by us in terms of the Board's Resolution No. 77 dated 23278.
As will be appreciated, keeping the riggers idle for so many days in a month would not only be against the intentions of the scheme but would also be against the overall interests of the Trade itself."
11.
The question which thus arises for consideration in effect and substance is whether in respect of any item covered in Schedule VII or elsewhere in the Scheme, it is not required of derrick fitters to do any particular work, namely the work of opening and closing of Mc.Greger Hatch covers, since such work can be done or should be done by the Articled Crew of the ship at the discretion of the Master of the Vessel, can the Stevedors be compelled to pay the bill of such Dock Workers in respect of such item of work in accordance with the manning scale as fixed in Schedule VII of the Scheme.
12.
The learned single Judge in the Judgments under Appeal found against the appellants by holding that there was no compulsion at all to insist for the engagement of such Derrick Fitters in such an eventuality and to that extent the amendment in notification No. 74 was irrelevant.
We find ourselves in complete agreement with the views expressed by the learned Single Judge.
13.
It is undoubtedly true that Schedule VII of the Scheme does provide for duties and functions of Derrick Fitters, but in Clause (b) the expression used is "as required."
It is to be understood that Schedule VII was introduced in the Scheme by the amendment brought about on 28th February 1979 and that such amendment was after the exchange of communication between CDLB and the Govt. of India.
The Govt. of India had clearly indicated the contention of the CDLB about the compulsory engagement of Derrick Fitters.
The purposeful insertion in Clause (b) of Rule VII clearly, "as required" is indicative of the intention that the Derrick Fitters would be engaged only if and when they would be required.
If there was no requirement for the engagement of Derrick Fitters, there was no compulsion for such engagement and correspondingly there was no question of any obligation upon the Stevedors to either engage them or to pay for their actual or notional engagement.
If the master of the Ship did not require the services of the Derrick Fitters since he thought that his Articled Crew could do the job, or he thought that Derrick fitters were not competent or capable of doing such job it could not be thrust upon the Master of the Ship.
Not only this, the job of Derrick Fitters is to put into proper position the Derricks, including adjusting and fixing thereof, but such job could be done only if required and could not be thrust upon the Master of the Ship if he did not want Derrick Fitters to do it.
Undoubtedly operation of the Mc.Gregor Hatches and Hatch Covers involved inter alia "Rigging and Fitting" of Derricks, but such performance of job and such a requirement was always subject to Clause 20(5) of the Scheme read with other relevant provisions in the Scheme, like clause (b) of Schedule VII and it was in this background that Resolution No. 50 was notified.
14.
The contention of the CDLB that even if the Derrick Fitters were not actually engaged, the Board was entitled to charge notionally for such engagement of Derrick Fitters for meeting the cost, charges and expenses of the Board is untenable since it is totally fallacious.
Their contention was that the Board has to make payment of guaranteed wages to Derrick Fitters for 21 days in a month and that unless the registered Employers or Stevedors were compelled to book and engage Derrick Fitters the Board would suffers loss, is also totally devoid of any merit.
Both these contentions ignored and overlooked the fact that under Clause 56 of the Scheme the Board is entitled to prescribe a levy for defraying the cost of operating the Scheme.
The effect of levying such fee under Clause 56 of the Scheme is that the burden of paying guaranteed wages to Derrick Fitters who were given employment is distributed and spread over by the registered Employers.
Such levy is revised from time to time in such a manner as prescribed in Clause 56 of the Scheme.
The Board has been actually revising the percentage of such levy and the same now admittedly stands at more than 500% of the wages payable to the registered Dock Workers by the registered Employers.
The total fund which is thus created is used to meet the entire cost of operating the Scheme which includes the provision for payment of minimum guaranteed wages and attendance allowance to the registered workers in the reserved pool, including the Derrick Fitters.
The entire cost of operating the scheme in any case therefore is realised from the registered employers.
15.
CDLB, its functionaries and other Appellants undoubtedly are such Authorities which come within the purview of Article 12 of the Constitution, being instrumentalities of the State and having been created under an Act of Parliament.
It is now a settled principle of law that Art. 14 of the Constitution enjoins upon such Authorities to objectively and fairly discharge their statutory obligations and not to act arbitrarily, capriciously or whimsically.
Fairplay in the discharge of statutory functions is the hall- mark of Art. 14 of the Constitution and arbitrary action is an antithesis to such principle of equality before law.
Undoubtedly the action of the Appellants in passing Resolution No. 74 and in insisting upon the Respondents for paying the Bill amounts for notional and fictional engagement of Derrick Fitters is opposed to Art. 14 of the Constitution and cannot be sustained in the eyes of law.
16.
The appellants thus are not entitled to insist that the registered employers must requisition the services of Derrick Fitters even if they do not wish to do so and that if they fail to do so they would be deprived of their entitlement to the supply of other Dock Labours.
17.
For what we have said, we find no merit in this batch of Appeals.
We agree with the learned Single Judge.
18.
These Appeals accordingly are dismissed, but without any order as to costs.
Appeals dismissed.