RS Mongia, J - Learned counsel for the petitioner states that respondent No. 4, namely, Lady Head Constable Ms. Hem Lata, though junior to the petitioner as Head Constable, has been confirmed ignoring the right of the petitioner to be confirmed earlier.
So far as respondent No. 5, namely, Lady Head Constable Kamlesh Kumari is concerned, the case of the petitioner is that she is junior to the petitioner inasmuch as the petitioner was promoted as a Head Constable on 9111989 and respondent No. 5 was so promoted later than the petitioner (no date or year of promotion has been given).
Both petitioner and respondent No. 5 have not been confirmed, yet respondent No. 5 has been deputed for the Intermediate School Course.
It is further the case that despite the petitioner having been promoted as Head Constable in November, 1989, yet she has not been confirmed even in her own district despite the period or probation having been completed.
2.
So far as the first contention of the petitioner vis-a-vis respondent No. 4 is concerned, suffice it to mention that so far as seniority for purpose of confirmation is concerned, it is districtwise and not rangewise.
Respondent No. 4 is working in the different district, i.e. Mohindergarh whereas the petitioner is working in district Faridabad.
She cannot compare her case for purpose of confirmation vis-a-vis-respondent No. 4.
3.
So far as the case of the petitioner vis-a-vis respondent No. 5 for purpose of deputing for Intermediate School Course is concerned, it may be observed here that for purpose of deputing Head Constables to the Intermediate School Course, a working joint seniority list rangewise is maintained as the seats which are allotted for the Intermediate School Course are rangewise.
Firstly, the confirmed Head Constables as per their working joint seniority on the basis of length of service are to be deputed, thereafter, the probationers and still thereafter the officiating Head Constables.
4.
So far as the case of confirmation of the petitioner within her own district is concerned, if the petitioner was put on probation and she has successfully completed period of probation and a post is or was lying vacant, the petitioner would be entitled to be confirmed.
5.
So far as petitioner's case for confirmation from a date prior to the date of confirmation of respondent No. 4 is concerned, that has no merit as she cannot compare her case with a Head Constable of a different district.
So far as the other two prayers regarding deputing the petitioner for the Intermediate School Course and for confirmation within her own district are concerned, the petitioner may make necessary representation to the concerned authorities and if any such representation is made within a fortnight from today, the same shall be decided in accordance with law within a period of two months of the receipt of the same.
It would be appreciated if the said representation is disposed of by passing speaking order.
Writ Petition stands disposed of accordingly.
Copy of this order be given dasti on payment to the counsel for the petitioner.
Petition disposed of.