Harjit Singh Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner Rishi Dua, who claims to be a permanent resident of the State of Haryana, has filed the present petition impugning the grant of free seats in two of the private Engineering Colleges in the State of Haryana to respondent Nos. 6 and 7 Jagmohan and Amit Kumar respectively, whereas he has been granted admission against a payment seat in the Al-Falah School of Engineering & Technology, Faridabad.
2.
The facts of the case taken from the petition are as under :-  The petitioner's father, Col. JS Dua was killed in action in operation `Rakshak' as would be evident from Annexure P-2 issued by the Secretary, Zila Sainik board, Ambala, The petitioner was, by force of circumstances, compelled to complete his schooling at Patna while staying with some colleague of his late father.
He also appeared in the Combined Entrance Test held by the Regional Engineering College, Kurukshetra, Haryana and on the declaration of the result, was shown at Rank No. 9134.
The petitioner, however, failed to submit his application form for admission to any Engineering College.
Subsequently, however, three New Engineering Colleges i.e. Shri Krishna Institute of Engineering & Technology Camp at Kurukshetra; Shri Baba Mast Nath Engineering College, Asthal Bohar, Rohtak and the Al- Falah School of Engineering and Technology, Faridabad, invited applications for admission.
The petitioner applied for admission to these colleges as a dependent of an Armed Forces personnel whose father had died in action.
It is the conceded position that one seat had been reserved in each of the three Engineering Colleges for the reserved category against which the petitioner had applied.
The admissions were made on 27101997 and while respondent Nos. 6 and 7 were granted admission in the Baba Mast Nath Engineering College, Asthal Bohar, Rohtak and Shri Krishna Institute of Engineering and Technology Camp at Kurukshetra respondents No. 4 and 5 respectively against free seats the petitioner was granted admission in the Al-Falah School of Engineering and Technology, Faridabad as per his merit against a payment seat.
It is the admitted position that the petitioner has deposited the requisite fee and is now undergoing the Course.
It is the petitioner's case that as he had been granted admission being dependent of an Armed Forces Personnel and as his father had died in Action, he was to be given priority over respondent Nos. 6 and 7 in terms of clause (c) of the Admission Brochure 1997-98 and was entitled to admission against a free seat.
3.
On notice of motion, various replies have been filed on behalf of the respondents.
In the reply filed by respondent No. 3 i.e. the Regional Engineering College, Kurukshetra-the Admitting Body, it has been pleaded that 50% seats in the private Engineering Colleges were deemed to be free seats and the remaining to the treated as payment seas and that the free seats had been further divided with 80% being exclusively reserved for candidates passing their qualifying examination from Schools or Colleges located in thee State of Haryana, whereas the balance 20% seats were to be filled in by these candidates as also from amongst others who had not passed their qualifying examination from the State of Haryana, though they were residents of Haryana.
It has further been pleaded that respondent Nos. 6 and 7 were candidates who had passed to qualifying examination from Patna, he was not entitled to be considered against the 80% seats.
It has further been elaborated that as per Tables E(1) and E(2) appended with the admission brochure giving the break up and apportionment of seats in the two colleges (respondent Nos. 4 and 5), the two seats available therein had been left as free seats whereas the petitioner had been considered against a payment seat/as per table E(3) for which he was eligible and had, accordingly, been granted admission in the Al-Falah School of Engineering & Technology at Faridabad.
4.
The decision of this petition would rest on the various clauses incorporated in the Admission Brochure.
Clause (c) dealing with the Reservation of Seats on page 10 of the Admission Brochure provides that candidates seeking admission against reserved seats as being children or wards of Armed Forces Personnel/Ex-servicemen whose father had died while in action service would be accorded the first priority, the second priority would be given to Ex-servicemen themselves, whereas the remaining seats were to be given to the third category viz children/wards of Armed Forces Personnel/Ex- servicemen who may be either serving or may have served the Armed Forces.
It is the admitted position that the petitioner belongs to category No. 1, whereas respondent Nos. 6 and 7 belong to category No. 3.
Free and Payment seats have also been defined in the Admission Brochure and these clauses are reproduced below :-  "ALLOCATION OF SEATS 5.
50% of the seats in these private Engg.
Colleges are `Free Seats' and the remaining 50% are `Payment Seat'.
The seats (free as well as payment) are meant for the candidates passing their qualifying examination from Schools/Colleges located in Haryana and/or having Haryana Residence certificate.
However, the payment seats will be filled on CEET merit list from the candidates from Haryana including Haryana Resident and any such payment seat remaining vacant would be filled from the candidates from outside Haryana.
The distribution of seats in these Colleges is given in tables E1 to E3.
(i) FREE SEATS Eighty per cent (80%) of the Free Seats in each branch of Engineering and category of allocation will be exclusively for (a) the candidates passing the qualifying examination from the schools/colleges located in haryana, and (b) the children/wards (if parents not alive) of (i) Haryana Government Employees, (iii) Employees of autonomous bodies/boards/corporation of Haryana State whether posted in or outside Haryana including on deputation to Government of India irrespective of the location of schools/colleges from where they passed the qualifying examination.
The remaining twenty per cent (20%) seats are allocated for the candidates who are residents of Haryana irrespective of the location of the Institute from where the qualifying examination is passed.
(ii) PAYMENT SEATS For admission to `Payment Seats' preference would be given to candidates from Haryana.
There will be no 80% and 20% distribution as in case of `Free seats'.
Upto to the extent of 5% seats of the total intake can be filled, out of the payment seats, from Non-resident Indian students by the concerned Colleges on the basis of merit to be judged by the respective Colleges and not on the basis of CEET Result".
6.
Relying on the aforesaid provisions, Mr. AK Chopra, the learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that clause (c) (had created a reservation for the children of Armed Forces Personnel/Ex-servicemen) and a right had been given to the petitioner who was in priority No. 1 to seek admission on that basis against the reserved seats of that category but by further providing that 80% seats were to be offered to only such candidates who had passed their qualifying examination from the State of Haryana, the very purpose of reservation in favour of the petitioner's category had been obliterated.
He has also urged that distinction made with regard to the candidates who had passed the qualifying examination from within the State of Haryana and those from outside was bad and, therefore, to be struck down.
7.
Mr. Virk, the learned counsel for the respondents has, however, argued that the petitioner had sought admission on the basis of the provisions contained in the Admission Brochure which had the force of law and as no challenge had been made to its vires prior to the grant of admission, the criteria could not be challenged at this stage.
He has also pointed out that no reasons had been given by the petitioner's counsel as to why the clauses were bad in law.
8.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the opinion that there is no merit in this petition.
9.
Admittedly, clause (c) dealing with the reservation for children of Armed Forces Personnel, does accord prirotiy to a candidate whose father had been killed in Action.
It is also evident that 80% of the free seats had been notified as being reserved for those candidates who had passed their qualifying examination from the State of Haryana whereas the balance 20% seats had been retained for the candidates who were residents of Haryana, irrespective of the fact from where the qualifying examination had been taken.
It is also the admitted position that there was only one free seat each in the Colleges (respondent Nos. 4 and 5) for Ex-Servicemen as per tables E(1) and E(2) and there was only one payment seat available in Al-Falah School of Engineering & Technology at Faridabad [table E(3)] against which the petitioner was entitled to stake a claim as he had not passed the qualifying examination from Haryana State.
To my mind, no fault can be found with the manner and method of admission or with the various clauses of the Admission Brochure.
Moreover, the admission brochure had the force of law and bound the parties to its terms.
The question of eligibility, the mode of selection and the apportionment and break-up seats in various institutions and whether they were payment or free seats was given in the Information Brochure and no deviation from those provisions was permissible.
10.
For the reasons recorded above, there is no merit in this petition.
Dismissed with order as to costs.
Dasti.
Petition dismissed.