Y Venkatchalam, J - Invoking Article 226 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner herein has filed the present writ petition, seeking for a Writ of certiorarified Mandamus to call for the records relating to the award dated 231992 in ID 118/80 passed by the Presiding Officer, II Additional Labour Court the 1st respondent herein and to quash the same and to direct the management of WS Insulators the 2nd respondent herein to reinstate the petitioner in service with back wages, continuity of services and other attendant benefits.
2.
In support of the writ petition, the petitioner herein has filed an affidavit wherein he has narrated all the facts and circumstances that forced him to file the present writ petition and requested this Court to allow the writ petition as prayed for.
Per contra, on behalf of the 2nd respondent, a counter-affidavit has been filed rebutting all the material allegations levelled against them one after the other and ultimately they have requested this Court to dismiss the writ petition for want of merits.
3.
Heard the arguments advanced by the learned Counsel appearing for the respective parties.
I have perused the contents of the affidavit and the counter-affidavit together with all other relevant material documents available on record in the form of typed set of papers.
I have also taken into consideration the various points raised by the learned Counsel appearing for the respective parties during the course of their arguments.
Besides I have also gone through the various decisions relied on by the respective parties in support of their case.
4.
In the above facts and circumstances of the case, the only point that arises for consideration in this case is, as to whether there are any valid grounds to allow the present writ petition or not.
5.
The brief facts of the case of the petitioner as seen from the affidavit are as follows :-  The petitioner herein was working under the 2nd respondent as Trimmer in the year 1970 and was carrying on his work faithfully, efficiently and to the satisfaction of this superiors.
On 28.9.1975 he was retrenched from service in an unjust, improper and illegal manner.
The reason given by the respondent management is that on and from 28.9.1975, the petitioner herein was unauthorisedly absent for more than 10 consecutive working days and hence as per the standing orders applicable to the respondent management he had abandoned his job.
According to him he was undergoing ESI treatment during the said period and to prove the same he had marked exhibits M-3 series being the ESI Certificate copies for the said period of absence.
According to Section 72 of the ESI Act no workmen can be retrenched while he is undergoing ESI treatment.
It is well settled law that non-employment of a workman for any reason whatsoever except for the exemptions found in Section 2(oo) of the ID Act will amount to retrenchment under Section 2(oo) of the ID Act 1947 and non-employment of workman in pursuance of the standing order applicable to the Industry also amount to retrenchment and since he is a permanent workman having worked for 240 working days in a period of 1 year preceding the date of non-employment he is entitled to the protection of Section 25 of the ID Act and hence even without taking shelter under the ESI Act or Exhibit M3 series, he is entitled to the protection of Section 25F of the ID Act.
He challenged his illegal retrenchment from service by raising an Industrial Dispute being ID No. 118/80 and the Labour Court by an award dated 1361983 has held that he is not entitled to reinstatment in service with back wages, continuity of service and other attendant benefits.
As against this, he preferred WP No. 1103/84 challenging the said award and this Court by an order dated 12121990 has remanded the matter back to the Labour Court for adjudication with certain observations.
According to the petitioner this Court has clearly stated that it is open to the parties to argue the legal point as to whether even if the ESI Certificate produced by him is not proved to be genuine and whether the facts of the case would tantamount to retrenchment of the petitioner.
It is clear from the order of remand passed by this Court in WP No. 1102/84 that there are 2 issues to be decided by the Labour Court.
The first issue as to whether exhibit W-3 series are genuine.
The second issue is that even if exhibit W-3 series are not proved to be genuine whether the act of the management in refusing employment to the petitioner would amount to retrenchment.
Before the Labour Court it was argued by the management that the petitioner had abandoned service and hence his name was struck off from the rolls as per the provisions contained in the standing orders applicable to the respondent.
According to him the Supreme Court has dealt with cases of retrenchment by deemed abandonment, cases of retrenchment in pursuance of the standing orders and cases of striking of names from the rolls and has held that all the cases where the management alleges abandonment and all cases of non-employment pursuant to the standing orders will amount to complying with Section 25-F of the ID Act is illegal, and that the Supreme Court has clearly held that such act would amount to retrenchment and it cannot be contended that the workmen had abandoned service and it will not amount to retrenchment.
The grievance of the petitioner is that the Labour Court has failed to take notice of the said decision placed before it and has passed an award dated 231992 holding that his non-employment will not fall under Section 2(oo) of the ID Act and there is no retrenchment by the respondent and hence his non-employment is justified, that the Labour Court has completely failed to take note of the decision rendered by the Supreme Court reported in 1990(2) Lab.
LJ 70 wherein the Supreme Court has held that act striking off the name of the workmen in pursuance of the standing orders is nothing but retrenchment.
His grievance is that without considering the said decision and without considering the various other arguments made by his counsel, the Labour Court has given a finding that his retrenchment is justified.
It is his case that the Labour Court has not understood the order of remand by the High Court in its proper perspective and that the Labour Court has completely disregarded the first part of the remand order and has dealt with only as regards the 2nd part of the remand order which was not at all seriously contested by him.
It is also his grievance that he remains unemployed from 28.9.1975 and he is already leading a precarious life and he has been reduced to live a life of beggary, and that he has been unemployed for more than 17 years and thus the award dated 231992 passed by the Labour Court in ID No. 118/90 is unjust, improper and illegal and is liable to be set aside.
6.
The impugned award is challenged by the petitioner on the grounds that the Labour Court failed to understand the order of remand passed by the High Court in its proper perspective, that the Labour Court disregarded the first part of the order of remand passed by this Court and also that he failed to take note of the decision of the Supreme Court reported in 1990(2) Lab LJ 70 in the case of Punjab Land Development and Reclamation Corporation v. The Presiding Officer, Labour Court, Chandigarh which was placed before him at the time of arguments, that the Labour Court failed to take note of the fact that the retrenchment of the workman whether in pursuance of clause in the stranding orders or in pursuance of the service conditions or for any reasons, whatsoever, without complying with Section 25F of the ID Act, 1947 would vitiate the order of retrenchment, that the Labour Court ought to have held that the petitioner has worked for more than 240 days during the 12 months proceeding the date of retrenchment and hence he is entitled to the protection of Section 25F of the ID Act, 1947, that the Labour Court ought to have held that the retrenchment of the petitioner in pursuance of the standing orders amounts to retrenchment as defined by Section 2(oo) of the ID Act.
It is also his grievance that the Labour Court has failed to take note of the direction of the High Court to the effect that it is open to the parties to argue the legal issue as to whether the termination of the petitioner on the basis of the standing orders will amount to retrenchment or not and also that the Labour Court ought to have held that the petitioner was entitled to argue the legal issue as to whether the retrenchment of the petitioner in pursuance of the standing orders would amount to retrenchment or not.
It is also their case that striking off the name of the petitioner from the rolls of the company for failure to attend work on 8 consecutive working days will amount to nothing but retrenchment falling within the definition of Section 25(oo) [2(oo) ?]
of the Act.
It is further contended by the petitioner that the Labour Court ought to have held that since the petitioner did not make any attempt to prove the ESI Certificate W-3 series the only issue left open for adjudication by the Labour Court is to whether the of the respondent of the petitioner in pursuance of the standing orders will amount to retrenchment or not.
They also contend that in pursuance of the decision of the Supreme Court reported in 1990(2) Lab LJ 70 the act of the respondent in retrenching the petitioner, from service would amount to retrenchment.
It is also the case of the petitioner that the Labour Court ought to have held that in the case of abandonment an enquiry ought to have been held to prove abandonment before terminating the petitioner from service and also that the Labour Court ought to have held that in pursuance of the decision of the Supreme Court reported in 1990(2) Lab LJ 70, the act of the respondent in retrenching the petitioner from service would amount to retrenchment.
Therefore it is also contended by the petitioner that the Labour Court ought to have held that in the case of abandonment an enquiry ought to have been held to prove abandonment before terminating the petitioner from service.
It is also their grievance that the Labour Court ought to have held that abandonment is an intention on the part of the workman and it is for the management to prove abandonment and since the plea of abandonment has not been proved by the management, the Labour Court ought to have held that since abandonment has not been proved by the management the allegation of striking off the name of the petitioner from the rolls will amount to retrenchment, that the Labour Court ought to have held that striking of the name of the petitioner will amount to retrenchment and since 25F was not complied with the petitioner's retirement is illegal and void and is to be set aside.
Thus it is contended by the petitioner that the Labour Court ought to have ordered the reinstatement of the petitioner in service with back wages, continuity of service and other attendant benefits.
He has also stated that he has no other remedy except to file this writ petition and hence this writ petition.
7.
Per contra, in the counter-affidavit, inter alia it is contended by the respondent-management that the claim of the petitioner herein that he was undergoing ESI treatment during the relevant period was not established by proper evidence before the trial Court and the Labour Court dismissed the claims in ID No. 118/90 by order dated 1361983 and against which the petitioner preferred WP No. 1102/84.
By an order dated 12121990 Kanakaraj, J, set aside the award and consequently this Court directed that :-  "The Labour Court restrict its enquiry only to the question of proof of Ex.W3 series after giving opportunity to both sides on this aspect along.
If the Labour Court comes to the conclusion that Ex.W3 series are genuine, the Labour Court may consider the question whether the explanation offered for the petitioner's absence till 2041979 is justified or not.
On such finding the Labour Court may render its final verdict."
Therefore according to the respondent management there is no substance in the present writ petition since the petitioner has failed to establish by evidence the genuineness of Ex.W3 series before the Labour Court as per directions in the order of remand as observed by the Labour Court and that the Labour Court has rightly come to the conclusion that the petitioner has not provided his case as indicated in the order of remand.
It is the categoric case of the respondent management that the petitioner has also committed misconduct enumerated under the standing Order No. 8 or 27 or 30 of the certified standing orders of the company and the trial Court has considered the conduct of the petitioner in giving a false explanation that he was undergoing ESI treatment which stands disproved even after a second opportunity was given to the petitioner.
It is also their case that whatever the merits of the case of the petitioner may be, the petitioner is not entitled to any relief on account of the inconsistent stand taken by him in the claim statement and his evidence and the purpose of the remand by this Court was to find the truth of the specific claim made by the petitioner about his treatment in para 3 of the claim statement.
It is also the categoric case of the respondent-management that the Labour Court as directed by this court having found that the explanation given by the petitioner was false, has rightly refused the relief.
It is also contended by them that as held by the Supreme Court and this court, technicalities should not come in the way in the matter of discipline and that the Labour Court has found that the petitioner to be at fault and taking into consideration the lapse of time of about 20 years from the date of institution of proceedings before the Labour Court and considering the fact that the petitioner was already aged more than 57 years and barely six months left for his retirement in any of this Court inclined to set aside the award, ends of justice will be met by awarding reasonable compensation to the petitioner, since the management was not at fault.
Hence it is their case that there is no merit in this case of the petitioner and that therefore the writ petition has to be dismissed.
8.
Having seen the entire material available on record and from the facts and circumstances of the case and also from the claims and counter claims made by the rival parties, the following are the admitted facts in this case.
The workman herein i.e., the petitioner herein did not attend the work from 8.3.1979 to 2041979.
According to the management, the petitioner did not attend duty from 8.3.1979 and only on 12.3.1979 he had sent ESI certificate requesting one week leave from 8.3.1979 to 14.3.1979 and on the basis of the certificate he would have joined duty on 1531979, but he did not join duty and he did not send leave application and also he did not convey that he is in ill-health, that after 1531979 since no information from the petitioner and no application regarding leave and till 1241979 he did not come to duty without prior permission and without leave application.
The management sent a letter to the petitioner on 1241979 stating that his name has been deleted from workers particular register since for 10 days continuously it was considered as per standing order Section 23, he himself stopped away from duty.
It is also their case that the petitioner has received the termination order dated 1241979 on 2941979 and even after the receipt of the order dated 1241979 the petitioner did not give any explanation for his absence to duty immediately.
Therefore it is contented by them that there is no chance to allege that the petitioner was either terminated from service or retrenched from service, and that therefore the action taken by the respondent was legal and just in such circumstances.
That being so, the petitioner's case is that during the period in question he was undergoing ESI treatment and to prove the same he had marked Exhibit M-3 series being the ESI certificate copies for the said period of absence and that according to Section 72 of the ESI Act no workman can be retrenched while he is undergoing ESI treatment.
On these grounds he challenged his illegal retrenchment from service by raising an Industrial Dispute being ID No. 118/80 but the Labour Court also held that he is not entitled to reinstatement in service with back wages, by virtue of award dated 1361983.
Aggrieved by the same he approached this Court in WP No. 1102/84.
However this Court by order dated 12121990 has remanded the matter back to the Labour Court for adjudication with certain observations.
Consequently the impugned award dated 231992 came to be passed holding that the petitioner is not eligible for reinstatement and his Industrial Dispute was dismissed.
Thus it is clear that already in two rounds he failed before the Labour Court and he also has approached this Court earlier and has got an order remanding the matter back to the Labour Court.
In this writ petition he has raised a number of grounds challenging the impugned ward passed by the Labour Court.
But a perusal of the said award goes to show that the said award is a speaking award and the same has been passed after thoroughly taking into consideration all the aspects of the case.
Apart from that it has also taken into consideration the directions given by this Court while remanding the matter.
It is the categoric case of the Labour Court that the petitioner herein did not at all take any step to prove the Ex. No. 3 and he did not try to examine the medical officer who issued the said Ex. No. 3.
Further the Labour Court considering all these aspects was of the opinion that a worker who was absent from duty for 10 days continuously without either prior permission or leave application as per the Standing Order, will only mean that he himself stopped from service and will not be considered as retrenched.
The Labour Court was also of the view that as per the standing order when the petitioner himself stopped from service it cannot be considered as retrenchment and it will not be fit to follow the procedures under ID Act under Section 25(F).
Therefore, in the above facts and circumstances of the case, I do not see any reason whatsoever to interfere with the award impugned in this writ petition.
Therefore I am of the clear view that the Labour Court has rightly held that the petitioner herein is not entitled for any relief and rightly dismissed his industrial dispute.
9.
In support of his case, the learned Counsel appearing for the petitioner relied on the following decision :  DK Yadav v. JM.A.
Industries Ltd., 1993(3) SCT 537 (SC) : 1993(2) Lab LJ 696 wherein it has been held thus :- "It is well settled that the right to life enshrined in Article 21 of the Constitution would include the right to livelihood.
The order of termination visits with civil consequence of jeopardising not only the worker's livelihood (but also) of the dependants.
Therefore before taking any action of putting an end to the tenure of an employee, fairplay requires that a reasonable opportunity to put forth his case is given and domestic enquiry conducted complying with the principles of natural justice."
Whereas in support of their case the management relies on the following decisions :- 1.
Lakshmi Pandit v. The Presiding Officer, Ind Tribunal Faridabad, 1997(2) Lab LJ 1012 : 1992(2) S.C.T.
34 : 1992(1) S.C.T.
219(Madras) wherein it has been held thus :- "That when once the Labour Court came to the conclusion and found the punishment was not disproportionate, High Court cannot interfere with the award if it is satisfied that the discretion exercised is judicial."
2.
Municipal Committee, Tauru v. Harpal Singh, 1999(1) SCT 543 (SC) : 1998 AIR SCW 3926 wherein it has been held thus : "The Labour Court and the High Court cold not have turned a blind eye to inconsistent stand taken by him the claim statement and his evidence.
The workman deserved no relief whatsoever."
It is significant to note that in this case it has been clearly made out that in this matter the Labour Court twice considered the case and came to a same conclusion, but the petitioner has not availed the opportunity given by this Court in its earlier order to prove his case.
Thus while the decisions relied on by the respondent-management support the case of the management, the decision relied on by the petitioner does not render any support or help to them  10.
Therefore, for all the aforesaid reasons and in the facts and circumstances of the case and also in view of my above discussions with regard to the various aspects of this case, and also in the light of the above decisions, I am of the clear view that the petitioner herein has failed to make out any case in his favour and that therefore there is no need for any interference with the award impugned in this writ petition.
Thus, the writ petition fails and the same is liable to be dismissed.
11.
In the result, the writ petition is dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.