Syed Bashir-ud-Din, J - Petitioner a graduate with technical qualification of having been certified as Electrician ITI was engaged as Installation Inspector on PDL basis in Sept 1973.
On 171980, after putting him on continuous service on PDL basis, he was brought on regular establishment.
On 171981 was appointed as designated line Inspector in the grade of 180-250.
The petitioner joined the post and discharges his duties as Line Inspector even at the time when SRO 381 of 1981 (embodying rules of J&K Power Dev.
Deptt.
subordinate service recruitment) was enforced on 26th of August 1981.
Under these Power Development Deptt.
Subordinate Service Recruitment Rules of 1981 hereinafter for short 'Rules'.
Post of Line Inspector carried the grade of 220-430 (unrevised) and figured at S.No.
10 of Schedule II Part B Executive annexed to these rules (annexure P1).
The petitioner by virtue of Rule 12 read with Rule 3 of the Rules was deemed under these rules appointed and holding the post of Line Inspector and consequently carried all the benefits of pay as revised from time to time and promotion in terms of the applicable rules.
The petitioner voiced the grievance that instead of being treated as Line Inspector (Executive), he has been on the cadre of PDD Services in the un- revised grade of 220-430, earlier to which he was holding the post of Line Inspector in the grade of 180-250.
Instead of being given promotion from the post of Line Inspector (Executive) as Meter Inspector in the grade of 280-520 as provided by rules, he was given the promotion against the post of Line Inspector in the unrevised grade of 220-430.
Despite representations he made from time to time, his case has not been finalized.
His case is even processed and recommended on his representation by Executive Engineer Srinagar vide (Annexure 4), but still despite lapse of over 10 years, no decision has been taken on his representation hereto.
2.
It makes an interesting reading that despite being provided ample opportunities, the respondents have not filed the reply.
The right to file reply has been closed way back on 22391.
Even thereafter at no stage, the reply has been filed.
This liberty to produce record to respondents was again afforded on 881996, that the respondents for un-known reasons have failed to avail the opportunity of producing the record.
Not only so the disinterestedness of the respondents can be guaged by the fact that even the Govt. Advocate Mr. RA Khan, who represents did not come forward to argue the case.
It was in these circumstances that the respondents were set ex-parte and matter was heard, on the cardinal principles of law of pleadings and documents placed on record.
3.
In absence of reply/counter, the writ allegations and averments shall have to be deemed as legally admitted.
The allegations supported by an affidavit as also the annexure remained uncontroverted and intact on record.
4.
From record, it clearly evinces that the petitioner after his initial engagement as installation Inspector on PDL basis from Sept 1973 to ending July, 1980 was appointed and designated as Line Inspector on 1780.
On this regular establishment as Line Inspector, he was working and discharging his duties as such even on 26881 when the rules came to be enforced.
The grade of Line Inspector in terms of the Schedule II Part B (Executive) to the rules is 220-430.
(Vide entry 6 against Col. 10 of the rule schedule).
Rule 4 of the Rules provides that the strength and composition of service under the Rules shall comprise of permanent and temporary cadre posts.
The authorised strength of the cadre shall be such as may be determined by the Govt. from time to time and shall at the initial constitution of the service under these rules be as specified in schedule 1 annexed to these rules....."  5.
It is obvious that the schedule post are included in the strength and composition of the service of sub-ordinate employees of Power Dev.
Department as in 1981.
Rule 12 while repealing the other rules saves the appointment and action(s) taken under the provisions of earlier rules and have been given deemed effect, as if such appointments and actions are made and taken under these rules.
A combined reading of these two Rules leads undoubtedly to the conclusion that the post of line man as on the date of applicability of the rules, is included and constitutes a cadre post in the sub-ordinate service of J & K PDD.
If so, then obviously the petitioner shall have to be deemed to be Line Inspector in the grade of 220-430 as on 26th of August, 1981 when the rules came into force.
The next promotional post for Line Inspector and other posts specified in clause 6 against entry 10 of the rules, is 'Meter Inspector' in the grade of 280-520 (unrevised) subject to the conditions that such line Inspector has put in at least five years experience and is ITI Certificate holder.
The prescribed qualification is matriculate.
In this case, the petitioner fulfils eligibility criteria for promotion to the post of Meter Inspector insofar as he is graduate, ITI certificate holder and is having over five years experience as Lince Inspector at his back.
The condition of fulfilling five years experience as Line Inspector is not hedged by any condition whatsoever.
A plain interpretation would lead to the conclusion that if a person is de facto Line Inspector, whether on PDL basis or on regular basis, he is still entitled to be considered to the promotional post of 'Meter Inspector'.
Admittedly, as per uncontroverted petition averments read with the representation of the petitioner, as also the inter- departmental correspondence (incorporating full bio-data of petitioner) between the then Executive Engineer and Supdt.
Engineer Electric Maint.
and RE Circle Sopore No. EDH/30-31 dated 541988 (Annexure 4), petitioner has strong case of promotion to the post of Meter Inspector.
6.
Admittedly, the petitioner earned and should have been included as Lince Inspector under the schedule and given the benefit and effect of 220-430 grade on 26th of August, 1981 and thereafter on his own turn and on his merit, suitability and seniority should have been given the next promotion in the cadre of Meter Inspector in the grade of 280-430 (unrevised).
Placing of the petitioner in a lower grade not provided by the rules is illegal and not covered by any provisions of law.
7.
For the aforesaid reasons, the writ of mandamus is issued to respondents to place the petitioner in the higher grade of 220-430 (unrevised) as Line Inspector as on 26881 when the rules came into force, and further to provide him the benefit which would accrue to him on grade revision(s) ordered from time to time.
In addition, respondents shall accord consideration to the petitioner for promotional post of Meter Inspector or equivalent post if any added to the services, subsequently on his merit, suitability and seniority, subject to criteria laid thereto and further subject to norms laid by such rules.
The benefit which would accrue to the petitioner on the next promotional post still be as well released to him under applicable rules and orders.
8.
The petitioner is awarded Rs. three thousand (Rs. 3,000/-) as quantified costs, to be deposited in Lawyers Welfare Fund.
9.
The writ petition is disposed of accordingly.