GS Singhvi, J - The petitioner has prayed for quashing the order dated 24.5.1998 issued by the District Education Officer, Ambala (respondent No. 3) cancelling her appointment on the post of Punjabi Teacher (Female).
2.
There is no contest between the parties that on the basis of recommendations made by the Haryana Staff Selection Commission, the District Education Officer, Ambala issued order dated 2741998 appointing the petitioner as Punjabi Teacher.
However, just after one month the respondent No. 3 issued the impugned order in compliance of the direction given by the respondent No. 2 vide order No. 22/19-98-Estt-III(3) dated 551998.
3.
The petitioner has challenged the impugned order, which has the effect of terminating her service from the post of Punjabi Teacher, on the following grounds :  (i) The impugned order has been passed in violation of the principles of natural justice, inasmuch as, no action-oriented notice or opportunity of hearing was given to her.
(ii) The impugned order is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution, because unselected persons have been retained on the posts of Punjabi Teachers.
(iii) The decision of the respondents to separately earmark the posts for male candidates and non-consideration of the candidature of female candidates against these posts is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
4.
The learned Deputy Advocate General conceded that no notice or opportunity of hearing was given to the petitioner before the respondent No. 2 gave direction for cancellation of her appointment, but he tried to justify the impugned action by stating that no prejudice has been caused to the petitioner due to the non-compliance of the rule of audi alteram partem.
Shri Goyal submitted that Smt. Krishna Devi, whose over-all merit number is 129 as against 188 of the petitioner and who had applied for selection as Punjabi Teacher (female) against the posts reserved for Backward Class `B' category, was erroneously placed in the merit list of Backward Class `A' category and as soon as this mistake was detected, the respondents took corrective measures resulting in the issuance of the impugned order.
Shri Goyal agreed that 8 persons appointed as ad hoc Punjabi Teachers (female) are being continued in service but tried to convince us that this action of the respondent No. 3 cannot be characterized as arbitrary by contending that the petitioner, who belongs to Backward Class `B', category cannot claim consideration for appointment as ad hoc Punjabi Teacher (female) against the general category posts.
5.
We have thoughtfully considered the submissions of Shri Goyal, but are unable to agree with him that the impugned order should be upheld notwithstanding the fact that it has been issued in clear violation of the principles of natural justice.
Admittedly, the petitioner was appointed as Punjabi Teacher (female) against the posts reserved for Backward Class `B' category on the recommendations of the Haryana Staff Selection Commission.
She has not been accused of making any mis-representation or of deceiving the respondents in the issuance of order dated 2741998.
Therefore, she could not be deprived of the right acquired by her on the basis of order of appointment without being heard and the respondents No. 2 and 3 were under an obligation to comply with the basic principle of natural justice, namely, that no person can be condemned unheard, before the impugned order was passed.
Since no notice and opportunity of hearing were given to the petitioner, the impugned order is liable to be declared as void.
6.
We also find considerable merit in the petitioner's plea that she cannot be deprived of her right to hold the post of Punjabi Teacher because those, who were appointed on ad hoc basis and who have not been selected, are being allowed to continue in service.
The right of an ad hoc appointee to continue in service till the availability of regularly selected persons is well recognised but it is equally well recognised principle of law that an ad hoc appointee cannot continue in service after the availability of regularly selected candidate.
In the case in hand, the respondents have not offered any explanation as to why the impugned order cancelling the petitioner's appointment has been issued resulting in the termination of her service, although 8 Punjabi Teachers (female) appointed on ad hoc basis are being allowed to continue in service.
We, therefore, hold that the impugned order is also violative of the petitioner's right to equality in the matter of employment guaranteed to her by Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
7.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is allowed.
The impugned order is quashed.
The petitioner shall be allowed to continue in service.
However, this shall not preclude the competent authority from passing a fresh order after giving notice and opportunity of hearing to her.
Petition allowed.