GS Singhvi, J - Whether the petitioner is entitled to be appointed as Anganwadi Worker on the basis of interview held on 2481995 by the respondent No. 3 and whether the selection and appointment of the respondent No. 4 is liable to be quashed on the grounds enumerated in the writ petition are the two inter-related issues which arise for adjudication in this case.
2.
The case set up by the petitioner is that she was selected for appointment as Anganwadi Worker for village Ghillaur on the basis of interview held on 2481995 but order appointing her has not been issued so far and this has been done by the official respondents with a view to manipulate the appointment of respondent No. 4.
She has pleaded that there is no rhyme or reason to cancel the selection made on 2481995 and there is also no justification to deny consideration to her in the selection made on the basis of interviews held on 23111995.
3.
In the additional affidavit dated 2981996 filed by Shri Harbhajan Singh, father of the petitioner, it has been averred that the interview was held on 2481995 after issuance of proclamation in villages Gillaur and Majri, which are having a common Panchayat.
Shri Harbhajan Singh has averred that the Munadi was got conducted by the village Sarpanch Samme Singh through village Chowkidar.
He also averred that one of the candidates named Babita has been appointed as Anganwadi Worker for village Majri on the basis of the interview held on 2481995.
In paragraph 4 of the affidavit, he has also stated that no proclamation was ever made in the village in respect of the interviews held on 23111995 and Smt. Nirmal Kaur, Anganwadi Worker, got the date of interview noted only from the five candidates, namely, Neeta, Sheetal Dutta, Vineeta Kumari, Ajit Kaur (respondent No. 4) and Prem Wati.
4.
In their reply, respondent Nos. 1 to 3 have averred that the respondent No. 4 has been appointed after due selection made in pursuance of the proclamation issued on 19111995.
According to them, 3 candidates appeared for interview on 23111995 and the petitioner's candidature was not considered because she did not appear in the interview.
5.
In a separate written statement, the respondent No. 4 has pleaded that the interview of the petitioner allegedly held on 2481995 was not preceded by proclamation of the impending selection and in fact, the so-called exercise of interviewing the petitioner was nothing but an act of sheer favouritism.
6.
Along with Civil Miscellaneous Application No. 23905 of 1998 filed by her, the respondent No. 4 has produced three documents marked as Annexure R-4/1 to R-4/3.
Annexure R-4/1 is the copy of the complaint allegedly made by 5 candidates and members of Panchayat as well as Lambardar of village Ghillaur on 1391995 against the so-called interview held on 2481995.
Annexure R-4/2 is the order appointing the respondent No. 4 and three other candidates as Anganwadi Workers and Annexure R-4/3 is the certificate issued by the Kasturba Gandhi National Memorial Trust, Yamuna Nagar showing that the respondent No. 4 has satisfactorily completed training at the Integrated Child Development Training Centre, Radaur.
7.
We have heard learned Counsel for the parties and have perused the record produced by the learned Deputy Advocate General in support of the case set up by the official respondents that proper Munadi was done in respect of the interviews held on 23111995 and we are of the considered opinion that neither the petitioner can claim appointment on the basis of interview held on 2481995 nor the selection and appointment of respondent No. 4 can be sustained.
Learned counsel for the petitioner relied on annexures P-1 and P-2 in support of his contention that the post of Anganwadi Worker was given due publicity before the interview was held on 2481995 and, therefore, the petitioner whose name was recommended, is entitled to be appointed as of right.
However, after perusing the record produced by the parties, we are unable to accept his submission because no proof has been placed on record of the writ petition to show that Munadi was actually got done in the village on 981995.
Perusal of Annexure P-1 shows that respondent No. 3 had instructed the Sarpanch, Gram Panchayat, Ghillaru-Majri to get Munadi done in the Village about the recruitment of Anganwadi workers so as to enable eligible applicants to appear for interview on 2481995.
Annexure P-2 is the certificate of the alleged Munadi got done by the Sarpanch on 1981995.
However, the affidavit of the person who did the Munadi has not been filed and no other contemporaneous evidence has been produced to support the contents of Annexure P-2.
It is, therefore, not possible to rely upon the certificate given by the Sarpanch.
Our conclusion about the lack of proper publicity is buttressed by the fact that the petitioner was the only candidate who appeared for interview on 2481995 and it is not possible to believe that no other eligible person of the village was aspirant for recruitment as Anganwadi Worker.
The fact that immediately after the interview, 5 such persons, the local public representatives and Lambardar of the village jointly complained against the interview held on 2481995 is also indicative of the absence of publicity about the impending recruitment.
We, therefore, hold that the petitioner is not entitled to be appointed as Anganwadi Worker of village Ghillaur on the basis of interview held on 2481995.
8.
The issue which now remains to be decided is whether the selection and appointment of respondent No. 4 is vitiated due to lack of proper advertisement/publicity about interviews held on 23111995 and the resultant denial of consideration to the petitioner ?
The official respondents have relied on the averments made in the written statement and the affidavit dated 27.9.1996 of Shavinder Kaur, Child Development Project Officer, Radaur to show that Munadi about the proposed interview for selection of Anganwadi Worker was got done in the village.
The learned Deputy Advocate General placed before us the file maintained by the office of the Child Development and Project Officer, Radaur and drew our attention to the two documents, one of which is said to be a report dated nil made by Nirmal Kaur, Anganwadi Worker of Ghillaur and the other is the certificate allegedly given by Dharam Pal, Chowkidar of the village.
The translation of these documents reads as under :-  Letter of Nirmal Kaur  "To  The Child Development Project Officer  Radaur (Yamuna Nagar).
Madam  It is respectively submitted that as per your order I have informed all the candidates of AW post that interview has been fixed at 930 am on 23111995 and you should reach the office of CDPO Radaur.
AWW Nirmal Kaur Ghillaur.
Neeta  Sheetal Dutta Vanita Kumari Ajit Kaur Premwati" ............................ "Certified that I am Chowkidar of village Ghillaur.
Here I have informed those who wanted to be posted as AW.
Chowkidar  Dharam Pal."
9.
To us, it appears that these documents have been fabricated with a view to create evidence is support of the assertion made by the official respondents that Munadi was got done in respect of the interviews held on 23111995.
Neither of them bears any date nor any evidence has been produced to prove their receipt by respondent No. 3.
Extract of the entry of Chowkidar's register which would have corroborated the assertion of the official respondents regarding the Munadi has also not been placed on record.
That apart, a bare reading of the undated report of Smt. Nirmal Kaur shows that she has written the same at the instance of respondent No. 3.
In the undated certificate given by the Chowkidar, it has been recorded that he has intimated all those who wanted to become Anganwadi Workers.
This certificate is not in the hand-writing of the Chowkidar but of some one else.
Moreover, there is nothing in these documents to show that Nirmal Kaur and the Chowkidar Dharam Pal had done Munadi.
The learned Deputy Advocate General could not explain as to how Nirmal Kaur (Anganwadi Worker) and Chowkidar Dharam Pal knew as to who are the candidates for the impending selection for appointment as Anganwadi Worker.
He also could not explain as to how Nirmal Kaur got the signatures of the 5 candidates and why she left out the petitioner even though she had been interviewed on 2481995.
In view of these facts, we are inclined to agree with Shri Rathore that the interviews were held on 23111995 without giving due publicity to the proposed selection and the petitioner has been deprived of the opportunity to compete for selection for appointment as Anganwadi Worker and in this manner, her fundamental right to equality in the matter of employment guaranteed under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution has been violated.
10.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is allowed.
The selection and appointment of respondent No. 4 is quashed.
The official respondents are directed to advertise the post of Anganwadi Workers afresh by Munadi within a period of one month and make a fresh selection within next one month.
The Director, Women and Child Development, Haryana should entrust the task of making afresh selection to an officer or a Committee of officers but in view of the adverse finding recorded by us about the manner in which the Child Development Project Officer, Radaur has tried to create evidence regarding the so-called Munadi, we direct that the officer concerned shall not be associated with the selection to be made in pursuance of this order.
In case, the respondent No. 4 is again selected then she may be allowed to continue as Anganwadi Worker, else her services be terminated and the newly selected candidate be given appointment.
Petition allowed.