Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was recruited in the Indian Air Force as a Painter on January 3, 1994.
In July, 1996, it was declared that the petitioner had satisfactorily completed the period of two years' probation.
On March 26, 1998, his services were terminated.
The petitioner claims that on satisfactory completion of the period of probation, he should be deemed to have been confirmed and that the action of the respondents in terminating his services was illegal and, thus, liable to be set aside.
2.
The respondents have filed a written statement.
It has been pointed out that the petitioner's appointment was "contrary to the rules... at the time of entering into service, he was underage by eight months and six days and was also unqualified for the post.... having not passed 8th standard.
The case of illegal appointment... came to the notice of the authority, and immediately the case was referred to the HQ WAC (Western Air Command)."
In turn the "MOD (Ministry of Defence) through Air Headquarters, the Heaqdquarter Western Air Command had conveyed the COI vide their letter dated 24121996 that the appointment of the petitioner is contrary to the rules and the services of the petitioner be dispensed with."
Still further, it was been pointed out in paragraph 7 of the written statement that the petitioner during his service of 1592 days had availed of "129 days earned leave, 90 days half pay leave, 56 days casual leave, remained absent for 125 days which was converted as extraordinary leave without pay and allowances."
The petitioner "remained either on leave or absent from duty for 401 days i.e. approximately 1/4th of his total period of service."
The respondents have also categorically stated that the petitioner was never "given a permanent status.
Even after expiry of the probation period, he continued as a temporary Govt.
employee."
3.
The petitioner has not filed any replication to controvert these facts.
4.
Learned counsel for the parties have been heard.
5.
Keeping in view the averments made in the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it is apparent that the petitioner was not eligible at the time of his entry into service.
He did not possess the prescribed qualifications.
Despite the fact that the initial period of two years' probation was declared to have been satisfactorily completed, the petitioner was never confirmed in the service.
He had not become a permanent employee.
Thus, he was on the temporary establishment.
Still further, it is clear that he had remained absent for a long period of time on different occasions.
He was a member of the disciplined force.
However, he had not abided by discipline of the service.
6.
Taking the facts cumulatively, we find that the action of the respondent- authorities was not unfair or arbitrary.
Helping a person like the petioner would amount to interfering with the discipline of the service.
We do not consider it appropriate to do so especially in exercise of the jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution  7.
Resultantly, the writ petition is dismissed.
However, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.