GS Singhvi, J - This petition has been filed for enforcing the principle of last come first go (described as first come last go in the prayer clause of the writ petition) in the matter of termination of services of those who are appointed on ad hoc basis.
2.
The averments made in the writ petition, which lack clarity, show that the petitioners have made prayer for directing the official respondents to allow them to continue in service on the premise that they are senior to the respondents No. 4 and 5 on the basis of date of joining the service as ad hoc Punjabi Teachers.
They have pleaded that the official respondents should have dispensed with the services of the respondents instead of showing door to them.
3.
Shri SP Laler submitted that in view of the averments made in paragraph 3 of the writ petition showing that the petitioners had joined service on 4101996, and the respondents did so on 5101996, the official respondents should be directed to allow the petitioners to remain in service in preference to the respondents.
4.
In our opinion, there is no merit in the contention urged by the learned Counsel.
The normal rule of seniority is the length of continuous service.
However, this rule has no application where appointments are made on the basis of selection.
In such cases, the seniority is dependent on the merit determined at the time of selection.
In the case in hand, the petitioners have, for the reasons best known to them, refrained from placing on record the orders by which they were appointed.
They have also not produced the copies of the orders by which the respondents No. 4 and 5 were appointed as Punjabi Teachers.
The select list/merit list prepared at the time of their selection has also not been placed on record.
It appears that the petitioners have not done so because these documents may not be supporting their claim of seniority over the respondent Nos. 4 and 5.
Therefore, it is not possible to record a finding that the petitioners are senior to respondents No. 4 and 5 and the official respondents have gravely erred in not following the principle of `first come last go.'
5.
It also appears that the petitioners have either not faced regular selection or their names do not figure in the list of selected candidates.
Thus, they cannot make any grievance against the termination of their services occasioned due to the joining of the regularly selected candidates.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.