RS Mongia, J (Oral) - The petitioners, who were Class-IV employees were promoted as Clerks on the following dates :  Sr. No. Names of petitioners Date of promotion 1.
Hardev Singh 27.3.1978 2.
Ram Kumar 2581986 3.
Dev Sharma 29.10.1979 4.
Raja Ram 6121989 5.
Des Raj 111988 2.
The recruitment to the post of Clerk is governed by the Haryana Education Directorate (State Services Class III) Rules, 1974 (hereinafter called the Rules).
Rule 7 of the Rules provides that no person shall be appointed to the service unless he is in possession of qualification and experience specified in column 3 of Appendix `B' to the Rules in case of direct recruitment and those specified in column 4 in case of appointment by promotion or by transfer.
Appendix `B' was amended on November 3, 1981 and the amendment was made retrospective w.e.f.
1721978.
Prior to the amendment of Appendix B, the qualifications for the post of Clerk by direct recruitment as well as by promotion were as under :  Sr. No.
Designation of the post Academic qualification and experience, if any, for direct recruitment Academic qualifications and experience if any, for appointment other than by direct recruitment 13.
Clerk Matric first division or its equivalent or possesses any higher qualification (i) Atleast two years as Restorer or Gestetner Operator or Class IV employee working in the Directorate and having passed Matriculation or its equivalent examination (ii) Atleast two years regular service as Clerk in another Government office or Institution."
The aforesaid Appendix was amended on November 10, 1981, by the Rules known as Haryana Education Directorate (State Service Class III) (Ist Amendment) Rules, 1981.
So far as the post of Clerk is concerned, the amendment to Appendix `B' was made by Rule 6(e), which is in the following terms :  "(e) against serial No. 13, under column 4 for entry (i), the following entry shall be substituted and shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect from the 17th day of February, 1978, namely:- "(i) At least five years' service as Restorer or Gestetner Operator or Group D employee of Directorate and has - (a) passed Matriculation or its equivalent examination; and (b) knowledge of typing in Hindi or English at the speed of 25 and 30 words per minute, respectively, and passess the prescribed test in typing, within a period of one year from the date of appointment to the post of Clerk."
3.
The promotion orders which were issued to the petitioners were almost identical in terms and one of the orders issued to petitioner No. 1 is dated 3111979.
It will be seen that the only condition imposed in the promotion order was that the incumbents would have to pass a departmental test in typewriting failing which they would not be allowed the next increments accruing to them.
The next promotion from the post of a Clerk is to the rank of an Assistant.
All the petitioners stand promoted to the rank of Assistant between the period 27.8.1988 to 2341993.
One of the orders of promotion issued to petitioner Hardev Singh dated 2551988 may be reproduced (relevant portion) :  "The following Clerks/officials, office of the Director of Higher Education, Haryana, Chandigarh are hereby promoted as Assistants on purely temporary basis in the grade of Rs. 1400-40-1600-50-2300-EB-60-2600 against newly created post with immediate effect and posted as such in the branches mentioned against their names subject to the following conditions: Sr. No. Name of official Branches Remarks 7.
Sh. Hardev Singh (SC) C-III Br.
Creation of works Branch for improvement in Physical facilities.
1.
These promotions are without prejudice to the right of their seniors and they can be reverted at any time in the event of non-existence of vacancy of Assistants.
2.
The decision regarding the Branch Officer for the newly created branches of Works, Library, Sports Cell in N.C.C.
and Special Cell for N.P.E.
will be taken later on."
4.
It may be observed here that on 22101997, Haryana Government had issued instructions, which, inter alia provided that in future no Clerk, who had not passed the type test, would be promoted to the higher post and such officials who had already been promoted without passing the type test, could be given an opportunity of passing the type test within a period of three months from the date of issue of the instructions failing which they would be reverted to the post of Clerk.
On the basis of the aforesaid instructions, all the petitioners were asked to pass the type test vide order dated 27111997 Annexure P-12, which is subject matter of challenge in the writ petition.
The validity of instructions dated 22101997 have also been made subject matter of challenge.
5.
Before dealing with the argument of learned counsel for the petitioners, we may also observe that for purpose of promotion to the rank of an Assistant, the relevant rule is Rule 9 sub-clause (d) of the 1974 Rules.
The same is reproduced below :  "9(d) in the case of Assistants - (i) eighty per cent by promotion from amongst Clerks, Junior Scale Stenographers or Steno-typists, or by transfer of an official already in the service of the State Government of Haryana; and (ii) Twenty per cent by direct recruitment."
6.
The submissions of the learned counsel for the petitioners are that petitioners No. 1 to 3 had been promoted prior to the amendment of the Rules, which was brought about on November 3, 1981 though with retrospective effect from 1721978.
Other petitioners were promoted as Clerk after November 3, 1981.
So far as petitioners No. 1 to 3 are concerned, the argument is that the Rules which were amended, could not be changed to their detriment and no condition could be imposed regarding appointment to the post of a Clerk retrospectively and no condition of type test could be put to the appointees to the post of a Clerk, who were appointed prior to November 3, 1981.
So far as the other petitioners are concerned, the argument is that the only condition that was put in the order of promotion was that in case of non- passing of the type test, further increments would not be given.
The order of promotion of petitioner No. 2 to the rank of Clerk dated 261988, regularlsing his services as such w.e.f.
25.8.1986, has been appended as Annexure P-3.
The condition regarding passing of type test, mentioned in Annexure P-3, is as under :-  "He will be required to pass a departmental test in Typewriting failing which he will not be allowed the next increment securing (accruing ?)
to him.
He will be allowed increment from the date of passing the said test without payment of arrears of increments.
The date of next increment, will, however, not be postponed on account of failing to pass the test."
Learned counsel for the petitioners contended that the only rider in the promotion order was that in case of non-passing of the type test, no further increments would be given and not that the petitioners would be reverted.
Further, the petitioners did not lack any qualifications for being promoted as Assistants as per Rule 9(d) of the Rules and all the petitioners now stand promoted to the rank of Assistant.
Further, the instructions dated 22101997, issued by the Government of Haryana, cannot be applied retrospectively and in any case these cannot be applied to the persons who are already holding the rank of Assistant as the condition of passing the type test could be imposed, if at all it could be imposed, on the Clerks only.
7.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondents argued that as per the amendment of the Rules brought about on November 3, 1981 and made effective from 1721978, petitioners could not have been promoted as Clerks without passing the type test and, therefore, there is no illegality or infirmity in imposing the condition of passing the type test though the petitioners have been promoted as Assistants.
8.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, we find force in the submission of the learned counsel for the petitioners.
The 1974 Rules, which were amended on November 3, 1981, could not be made applicable to petitioners No. 1 and 3, who were promoted as Clerks prior to the amendment of the Rules, i.e. November 3, 1981.
Such condition of passing the type test could not be imposed on the Clerks who already stood appointed.
So far as the other petitioners are concerned, the only condition that was put in their promotion orders was that they would not be given increments till they pass the type test after one year of their promotion.
The petitioners got promotion subject to that condition.
It will be too late in the day now to say that their promotions were not in conformity with the Rules.
The condition of type test will be deemed to have been relaxed in the case of the petitioners under Rule 18 of the Rules.
Apart from that, under Rule 9(d) of the Rules, there is no condition that an Assistant must pass the type test.
The only condition envisaged is that a person should have three years service as laid down in Rule 9(d) of the Rules.
9.
For the foregoing reasons, we are of the view that now imposing the condition on the petitioners that they will have to pass a type test, would not be in consonance with the Rules and the petitioners cannot be reverted on the ground that they have not passed the type test.
10.
For the reasons recorded above, we allow this writ petition and quash the orders dated 27111997, Annexure P-12 (filed collectively on behalf of the petitioners).
Petition allowed.