KA Abdul Gafoor, J - First, I deal with OP No. 10922 of 1994.
The challenge in this original petition is against Ext.
P6.
That is a final order issued in a disciplinary proceedings initiated as per Ext.
P2 dated 12101990.
Ext.
P6 was passed on 21.6.1994.
By that time, the petitioner had retired from service on 3061993.
By Ext.
P6, it is ordered to recover an amount of Rs. 26,149/- being the cost of gunny bags from the petitioner's pensionary claims.
In Ext.
P2, there was a charge that the petitioner while holding the post of Block Development Office failed to remit the sale proceeds of the said gunny bags to the District Rural Development Authority.
Thus, there was allegation of loss to Government.
The petitioner had replied to Ext.
P2 charge sheet while he was in service.
A show cause notice was later issued on 27.11.1993 after the retirement of the petitioner.
The petitioner replied to that show cause notice as well.
It is after that Ext.P6 has been issued directing recovery as mentioned above.
No enquiry had been conducted before passing Ext.P6.
2.
The disciplinary proceedings initiated while the employee was in service can be continued after his retirement as if it is a proceedings under Rule 3 Part III KSR for the purpose of withholding or withdrawing of pension or apart of it or for ordering recovery from pension of the whole or part of any pecuniary loss caused to Government by the delinquent.
Of course, in this case, there was allegation of pecuniary loss caused by the petitioner as is discernible from Ext.P2 memo of charges which was issued prior to the petitioner's retirement.
No final orders have been passed until his retirement on 3061993.
So, the proceedings initiated as per Ext.
P2 shall be deemed to be a proceedings instituted in terms of Rule 3 Part III KSR by reason of Clause (a) to the proviso to the said rule.
But, that shall not be in respect of any event which took place more than four years before the institution of the proceedings.
In other words, a proceedings commenced before the retirement of the delinquent alleging pecuniary loss cannot be continued after retirement of the delinquent for the purpose of recovering from the pension such pecuniary loss when the incident alleged had taken place more than four years of institution of such proceedings.
In this case, the incident alleged is in respect of the year 1985-86, far beyond the four years' limit made mention of in the proviso to Rule 3 Part III KSR So, on that ground itself, Ext.P6 is incompetent.
3.
There is another ground as well to quash Ext.
P6.
Any proceedings continued under Rule 3 or instituted under Rule 3 shall be conducted "in accordance with the procedure applicable to departmental proceedings in which an order of dismissal from service could be made in relation to the employee during his service".
That means, even for the purpose of withholding or withdrawing pension or recovery from pension any pecuniary loss caused by the delinquent, procedure as contained in rule 15 of the Kerala Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules has to be followed.
4.
Admittedly, as is discernible from Ext.
P6 there was no enquiry nor any enquiry report is referred to in Ext.P.6.
Therefore, the procedure as contemplated in the proviso to Rule 3 has not been followed, to issue Ext.P6 directing recovery of amount from the petitioner.
Ext.
P.6 is therefore quashed.
5.
The petitioner had earlier filed an original petition No. 5113 of 1994, challenging Ext.P11 marked therein.
That also is the final order issued in another disciplinary proceedings initiated against the petitioner.
Ext.P11 was passed 2121994, again after retirement of the petitioner.
Ext.P11 also directs recovery of excess cost of food grains amounting to Rs. 3,32,552/-.
No enquiry has been conducted before passing Ext.P.11 nor any enquiry report is referred to in Ext.P.11.
Ext.P.11 is bad on the same reason as the impugned order in OP No. 10922 of 1994.
Consequently, Ext.P11 is also quashed.
Both the original petitions are allowed.
Petition allowed.