GS Singhvi, J - This is a petition for directing respondent No. 2 to consider the petitioner for selection for appointment as Lecturer in Physical Education (College Cadre) against one of the posts reserved for Scheduled Castes.
2.
When the case was heard on 15.3.1999, learned counsel for the petitioner invited our attention to the contents of letter No. RG 20/94/40237 dated 3121997 written by the Secretary of the Commission to the Financial Commissioner and Secretary to Government, Education Department, Haryana to show that the names of three Schedules Caste candidates were forwarded to the government for appointment against the advertised posts.
After perusing the contents of that letter, we asked Shri Mehtani to produce the record of the Commission.
3.
Today, Shri Mehtani has produced the application form submitted by the petitioner along with the annexed documents.
He also produced two sealed envelopes containing the award of marks to the candidates at the interview and the final compilation of marks made by the Commission.
4.
A bare perusal of the application form submitted by the petitioner and the documents annexed with it shows that the petitioner applied for selection as a general category candidate and not as a Scheduled Caste.
The column in which the candidates were required to indicate whether he or she is seeking recruitment on a reserved category post was left blank.
She also did not claim benefit of relaxation as a member of Scheduled Caste.
In column No. 8 of the questionnaire in which she was required to indicate whether she belongs to Scheduled Caste or Backward Class, the petitioner wrote the word 'No'.
The record contained in the sealed envelope shows that she was interviewed on 1281997 as a general category candidate.
Seven days thereafter, she submitted an application for being treated as a candidate of the Scheduled Caste.
Along with that application, Scheduled Caste certificate issued in her favour on 1981997 was also enclosed.
5.
After perusing these documents we are convinced that the petitioner did not apply for recruitment as a reserved category candidate belonging to Scheduled Caste and, therefore, the Commission's decision not to consider her candidature against one of the posts reserved for Scheduled Castes cannot be termed as arbitrary or illegal.
6.
The documents produced by Shri Mehtani were shown to Shri S.P.
Singh, who very candidly and fairly stated that he may be allowed to withdraw the writ petition.
The request of Shri Singh is accepted.
The writ petition is dismissed as withdrawn.
Petition dismissed.