Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The two petitioners were working as Special Police Officers.
They are aggrieved by the two orders passed on July 9, 1998 by which their services were terminated.
The petitioners allege that they have been punished without having been found guilty in a regular enquiry.
Consequently, the petitioners pray that the impugned orders be set aside and that they be reinstated in service with all consequential benefits.
2.
The respondents contest the petitioners' claim and point out that the impugned orders were passed after holding a fact finding enquiry.
In paragraph 10 of the written statement, it has been specifically averred that "the petitioners were found guilty for the allegations levelled in the complaint."
3.
The petitioners have filed a replication.
4.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
5.
Ms. Anu Chatrath, learned counsel for the petitioners, contends that the orders are per se stigmatic.
The petitioners have been punished.
The procedure as prescribed under the Rules has not been followed.
On the other hand, Mr. Berry submits that according to the standing order issued by the Inspector General of Police, it was not necessary to hold a regular enquiry.
Specific reliance has been placed by the learned counsel on Clause 9 of the standing order, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure R-1 with the written statement.
Clause 9 reads as follows :-  (9) DISCHARGE OF INEFFICIENT SPECIAL POLICE OFFICERS :  Special Police Officer whose work and conduct is not found satisfactory can be discharged any time by the District Senior Superintendent of Police without the issue of any notice.
6.
A perusal of the above provision shows that an Officer whose work and conduct are not found to be satisfactory can be discharged by the Superintendent of Police without the issue of any notice.
This power is, undoubtedly, available to the respondents.
However, in the present case a perusal of the impugned orders show that the petitioners were accused of having teased a lady.
It was observed that they had used vulgar and condemnable language.
It has been further observed that the petitioners are not "fit for working as responsible Police Officers".
On this basis, the impugned orders have been passed.
Even though it has been said that the paetitioners were discharged, yet the fact remains that allegations were levelled and a finding was recorded against them.
In this situation, the orders can't be sustained under Clause 9 of the standing order.
The petitioners were entitled to the grant of a due and reasonable opportunity in accordance with the principles of natural justice.
No enquiry was admittedly held.
The petitioners were not associated with the fact finding proceedings.
There was violation of the principles of natural justice.
As a result, the impugned orders are vitiated.
7.
In view of the above, the orders dated July 9, 1998 by which the petitioners were discharged from service are set aside.
The petitioners shall be entitled to all consequential benefits.
This will, however, not preclude the respondents from proceeding against the petitioners in accordance with the law.
No costs.
Petition allowed.