GC Garg, J - Present is a case where the petitioner, who was on deputation with the State of Punjab for a period of two years, has not joined his parent State even after the expiry of the extended period of deputation.
There is a deliberate effort on the part of the petitioner to remain in the State of Punjab even after his request for inter-cadre transfer and permanent absorption in the State of Punjab has been declined by the Government of India.
The facts :  2.
The petitioner was selected as a direct candidate to the Indian Police Service.
He was assigned 1985 batch and was allotted to the Andhra Pradesh cadre.
Government of India in exercise of its powers conferred by sub-rule (1) of Rule 6 of the Indian Police Service (Cadre) Rules, 1954 deputed the petitioner for service in the State of Punjab for a period of two years from the date of his joining the duty under that Government, by order dated 651990, Annexure P-1.
Petitioner held various assignments in the State of Punjab, such as, Superintendent of Police VIP Security, Superintendent of Police Counter Intelligence and Superintendent of Police Special Branch in the Intelligence Wing of the Punjab Police.
The petitioner also looked after Railways at the time of the election to the Punjab Vidhan Sabha held in 1992.
The work of the petitioner was appreciated by the higher police authorities.
The Government of Punjab had been seeking extension of the period of deputation of the petitioner from time to time.
The Government of Punjab also wrote various letters to the Government of India for the inter-cadre transfer of the petitioner and his permanent absorption in the cadre of Punjab, in public interest.
The deputation period of the petitioner was not extended beyond 31121996.
The Government of India, by its letter dated 2541997, Annexure P-16 addressed to Mr. RS Mann, Chief Secretary, Government of Punjab, Chandigarh, conveyed that it was not possible to agree to any further extension in the case of Dr. Rajwant Singh, petitioner.
It was further conveyed that it may be ensured that he is relieved of his duties in the Government of Punjab and directed to report to the Government of Andhra Pradesh forthwith.
The Government of Punjab, consequently, by its order dated 1271997, Annexure P-17 repatriated the petitioner with immediate effect to his parent State of Andhra Pradesh.
3.
Petitioner thereafter moved the Central Administrative Tribunal, Chandigarh Bench, Chandigarh by filing a petition whereby he challenged the orders dated 2541997 and 1271997.
Petition filed by the petitioner was dismissed by the Tribunal by order dated 28.9.1998, Annexure P-19.
This is how the petitioner filed this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for the issuance of a writ of certiorari for quashing the order dated 2541997 i.e. the order of the Government of India rejecting his further extension of deputation period in the State of Punjab, order dated 1271997 i.e. the order of the Government of Punjab repatriating him to his parent State of Andhra Pradesh and order dated 28.9.1998 of the Tribunal whereby his petition was dismissed.
4.
Petitioner has primarily challenged the above orders on the grounds that the same are illegal, arbitrary and wholly discriminatory.
The petitioner mainly harped upon two facts, namely, (i) that various requests made by the Government of Punjab to the Government of India for his inter-cadre transfer and for permanent absorption in the State of Punjab has not been considered in its true perspective and keeping in view the public interest, and (ii) that he has been discriminated in the matter, as in the case of many other officers similarly situated, inter-cadre transfers were allowed from one State to another and they were permanently absorbed in the State of their choice in public interest and keeping in view their personal problems.
The petitioner also quoted several personal reasons for his permanent absorption in the State of Punjab namely, that during the period of his posting in the State of Punjab, his father died due to heart attack and his mother suffered paralytic attack and she also died.
Wife of the petitioner is working as Senior Medical Officer, PCMS-I in the State of Punjab and in case his request is not accepted, they will live like two poles fixed apart.
Further case of the petitioner is that the Tribunal was not justified in dismissing his petition.
It was stated that the Tribunal only considered the guidelines in the case of marriage when both the spouses belong to All India Service and these guidelines do not speak of public interest.
According to the petitioner these guidelines only talk about the case of inter-cadre transfer on account of personal reasons and extreme hardship.
In the end, it was argued that the impugned orders deserve to be quashed, the same being arbitrary, discriminatory and against the principles of natural justice.
5.
Separate replies were filed by respondent No. 1, respondent No. 3 and respondents 5 to 9.
The petitioner also filed rejoinders to these replies.
6.
It was stated in the reply filed on behalf of the respondent No. 1 that the Government of India, Department of Personnel and Training has prescribed certain guidelines for inter-cadre transfer and these guidelines have been approved by the Prime Minister.
A copy of these guidelines dated 1991995 had been attached with the reply as Annexure R-1/1.
It was specifically stated that as per the guidelines, inter-cadre transfer will continue to be permitted only for members of the All India Service on marriage to another member of the All India Service and that cadre transfers shall not be permitted to All India Service Officers on marriage to an officer serving in a Central Service/State Services/Public Sector Undertaking and any other organisation.
It was further stated that the case of the petitioner had been considered by the Appointments Committee of the Cabinet and was rejected as it was not covered by the above policy.
7.
Stand of the State of Punjab in its written statement is that the Government of Punjab wrote letters to the Government of India for extension of the period of deputation of the petitioner and not for his permanent absorption in the State of Punjab and that was also done keeping in view the serious illness of the parents of the petitioner.
It was specifically stated that no security cover has been provided to the wife and the children of the petitioner by the security wing of the State of Punjab as stated by the petitioner in the petition.
It was further stated that no reason was required to be given for issuing impugned orders Annexures P-16 and P-17 as the petitioner being a deputationist had no right to remain permanently on deputation.
8.
In the reply filed on behalf of respondents 5 to 9, it was stated by reference to instructions dated 1771995, Annexure R-5/1 that inter-cadre deputation at a time normally cannot exceed three years and the total permissible span for availing inter-cadre deputation is five years in an officer's career and that on grounds of extreme hardship, an officer once in his career can be permitted the maximum permissible deputation of five years in one stretch.
9.
After hearing the petitioner in person and learned counsel for the respondents, we are of the opinion that this petition has no merit and deserves to be dismissed.
On selection of a person to All India Service, it is the prerogative of the Union Government to allocate cadre and such allocation is an incidence of service.
The petitioner was allocated to the Cadre of Andhra Pradesh.
As per the case of the petitioner, the State of Punjab suo moto requisitioned his services, but this has been controverted by the Union of India.
It has been stated that the petitioner was selected to the service in 1985.
He married a serving Medical Officer in the State of Punjab in the year 1987.
Petitioner's wife made a representation for change of cadre of the petitioner from Andhra Pradesh to the State of Punjab.
The request was declined by the Government of India as the same was not permissible under the then existing inter-cadre transfer policy.
This aspect has been elaborately considered by the Tribunal.
As per the policy of the Government of India, inter-cadre transfer could be permitted only for a member of All India Service on marriage to another member of the said service.
It is further provided in clear terms in the said policy that inter-cadre transfer shall not be permitted to All India Service Officers on marriage to on officer serving in Central Service or State Service or Public Sector Undertaking or any other organisation.
No relief thus can be given to the petitioner on the ground that his wife is serving in the State of Punjab and therefore, he is entitled to the change of his cadre from Andhra Pradesh to the State of Punjab.
10.
As regards the contention of the petitioner that his case for permanent absorption in the State of Punjab, in public interest deserves to be considered, suffice to say that as per the policy dated 1991995 Annexure R- 1/1 prescribing guidelines for inter-cadre transfer of a member of All India Service, "public interest" is not a ground for seeking change of cadre.
Instructions prior to September, 1995 stand superseded and the petitioner cannot seek any relief on the basis of instructions which were in vogue prior to the present policy.
Moreover, the Government of India has after considering various aspects and the policy, decided not to change the cadre of the petitioner from Andhra Pradesh to the State of Punjab.
This action of the Union of India, in our opinion, is not justiciable.
11.
It may be noticed at this stage that inter-cadre transfers were allowed by the Government of India in public interest prior to the policy which came into force in September, 1995.
Under the existing policy, inter-cadre transfers cannot be made in public interest.
The petitioner thus cannot complain that he has been discriminated.
It also deserves to be noticed that the petitioner throughout his entire period of deputation of about eight and a half years remained posted at Chandigarh though in various capacities.
The ground of discrimination, therefore, is not available to the petitioner.
12.
The other contention of the petitioner that the action of the Government of India is discriminatory and against the principles of natural justice again has no merit.
The petitioner could not bring to our notice any decision taken by the Union of India in the case of an Indian Police Service Officer under the policy decision dated 1991995 whereby the cadre of one officer was changed from one State to another in public interest, or on account of his extra efficiency or on account of his personal problems.
The only judgment on this point relied upon by the petitioner, in Union of India and others v. Shri Rajiv Yadav, IAS and others, 1994(4) SLR 547, does not help him in any way.
That was not a case where relief had been given having regard to public interest or on account of personal problems of the officer.
The order in the reported case appears to have been passed in the peculiar facts and circumstances of that case and is not a precedent for ordering the change of inter-State cadre.
13.
Above apart, the stand of the petitioner that the State of Punjab requisitioned his services suo moto to combat militancy in Punjab has been controverted by the respondents.
It has been clearly stated that it was on petitioner's own request that he was taken on deputation in the State of Punjab.
It is, therefore, apparent that he opted for deputation to the State of Punjab with the sole object of living with his own family and his effort to stay in the State of Punjab in his personal interest is writ large.
In the circumstances it cannot be said that he offered his services in public interest.
It is significant to notice here that it is the prerogative of the Union of India alone, the cadre controlling authority, to consider cases for inter-cadre transfer under the existing policy.
No change of cadre can now be allowed under the existing policy in public interest.
As noticed already, the case of the petitioner for permanent absorption in the State of Punjab was considered by the Appointments Committee of the Cabinet and was rejected being not covered under the policy of the Government of India.
We in exercise of our jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India see no ground to undo the action of the respondent-Union of India in that behalf or to quash the orders of the Central Administrative Tribunal.
14.
The Government of India in refusing to grant the request of the petitioner for inter-cadre transfer has not in any way acted arbitrarily or against the principles of natural justice.
As already noticed, there is an all-out effort on the part of the petitioner to stay in the State of Punjab on one pretext or the other and by getting orders from one source or the other.
The petitioner in the end submitted that a direction be given to the Government of India to re-consider his case for inter-cadre transfer to the State of Punjab and till the decision is taken in that behalf, he be permitted to continue to stay in Punjab on deputation.
This request of the petitioner also goes to show his only effort is to prolong the period of deputation.
The petitioner has already over-stayed the maximum period of his deputation as per the policy, by over three and a half years.
Even if it be taken that his case is still required to be re-considered, it is open to him to make a representation to the Government of India in that behalf but he cannot prolong his stay in the State of Punjab, especially when the Government of India finally declined to extend his period of deputation beyond December, 1996 and in any case, by order dated 2541997.
He should immediately join his parent cadre on repatriation in the State of Andhra Pradesh and make a representation or request, if any, thereafter.
Request of the petitioner was declined by the Government of India for change of cadre by order dated 2051998, Annexure R- 1/13.
Request made by the Chief Minister of Punjab by his semi-official letter dated 1261998 for change of cadre of the petitioner was also considered by the Government of India and this letter was replied by Shri LK Advani, the Home Minister of India.
It was informed that the request of Dr. Rajwant Singh cannot be acceded to.
The Government of Punjab was requested by letter dated 1471998, Annexure R-1/16 to relieve the petitioner immediately so as to enable him to join his parent cadre.
15.
Civil Misc. 3192 of 1999 moved by the petitioner for re-hearing of the petition after about two days of the conclusion of the arguments and reserving the order is again nothing but an effort on the part of the petitioner to prolong his stay in the State of Punjab.
16.
For the reasons recorded above, the writ petition as also the Civil Misc. 3182 of 1999 are dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.