GS Singhvi, J - Whether the petitioner is entitled to have her contractual service counted for the purpose of relaxation in the upper age limit specified in the advertisement issued by the Haryana Staff Selection Commission (for short, the Commission) for regular recruitment of Lecturers in Home Science is the only question which arises for adjudication in this petition.
2.
The petitioner's date of birth is 6121957.
She joined government service on the basis of offer of contractual appointment made to her vide memo No. 6/11-97 E-IV(4) dated 10101997.
She applied for regular selection in pursuance of advertisement No. 6 of 1997 issued by the Commission.
Her application has been rejected on the ground of over age.
3.
Shri Ashish Grover argued that in view of the relaxation clause incorporated in the advertisement, the petitioner is entitled to be considered for regular appointment on the post of Lecturer in Home Science and the decision of the Commission declaring her ineligible should be invalidated on the ground of arbitrariness.
Learned Counsel submitted that the service rendered by the petitioner on contract basis is as good as ad hoc service and, therefore, the period during which she served in pursuance of Annexure P-4 should be taken into consideration for giving benefit of relaxation clause.
Learned Counsel further submitted that an ad hoc teacher has the right to be treated eligible for regular recruitment even though he/she may have crossed upper age limit at the time of ad hoc appointment.
4.
We have thoughtfully considered the submissions of the learned Counsel but are unable to agree with him.
A look at the advertisement Annexure P-7 shows that the upper age limit prescribed for recruitment of Lecturers is 35 years and relaxation has been given to some categories of applicants.
The relevant portion of the advertisement which relates to age reads as under :-  "AGE : Age for all categories is 17 to 35 years unless specified otherwise.
RELAXATION IN AGE : Relaxation in upper age is admissible for SCs and BCs of Haryana, ESM, widows and women who have been divorced, deserted, legally separated from their husbands and dependents of those servicemen killed in action/disabled ESM, as per Haryana Govt. instructions.
Benefit of relaxation in age will also be given only to those Haryana Government employees who are working on ad hoc basis, provided that they produce a certificate from their department as per Govt.
instructions."
5.
In our opinion, the petitioner cannot be treated eligible for recruitment as Lecturer in Home Science on regular basis because :-  (i) she was not eligible for appointment as Lecturer even on contract basis because as on 10101997 she was more than 39 years and 10 months of age.
In view of this, her appointment on contract basis will have to be treated as illegal and fortuitous; (ii) the relaxation clause refers to service rendered on ad hoc basis and not on contract basis and as the petitioner was never appointed on ad hoc basis, she cannot claim benefit of relaxation clause; and (iii) the relaxation clause can, at the best, entitle an ad hoc appointee to count the period of ad hoc service for the purpose of grant of benefit of relaxation.
However, if the ad hoc appointee has crossed the upper age limit at the time of initial appointment, then he/she cannot be treated eligible by invoking relaxation clause.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.