SS Sudhalkar, J - Petitioner is serving in the Industrial Training and Vocational Education Department of the Government of Haryana.
She joined service in the year 1968 as a Clerk.
In the year 1978, she was promoted as an Assistant in the clerical grade and was confirmed as such on 111986.
She was further promoted as Research Assistant on 5111997.
In the respondent- Department, there is another cadre viz. Steno-typist/Stenographer.
Respondents No. 4 to 6 belong to that cadre.
2.
The petitioner contends that respondents No. 4 to 6 were assigned their seniority amongst Clerks from time to time.
According to the petitioner, the latest seniority as stood on 3061997, calculated vide Memo dated 22nd July, 1997, showed the respondents No. 4 to 6 having been placed at serial Nos. 6, 13 and 23 respectively.
They were treated as Clerks for the purpose of further promotion in the clerical cadre.
As such, these respondents were promoted to the post of Assistant vide order dated 921989.
According to the petitioner, they refused to accept the promotion.
The petitioner has mentioned about the order qua respondent No. 5 and has referred to Annexure P-3 dated 951989.
It reads as under :  "The promotion orders of Shri Megh Raj Narang, Senior Scale Stenographer to that of Assistant issued under Endst.
No. TA/4/10/2805-6 dated 921989 are hereby cancelled as he himself refused to accept the promotion vide his application dated 2841989.
It is made clear to him that in future he will not be considered for promotion for the post of Clerical side."
3.
It is further contended that the petitioner was shown in the seniority list of Assistants circulated vide order dated 2121994 at serial No. 23.
According to the petitioner, the names of respondents No. 4 to 6 did not occur in the line of clerical cadre to which the petitioner belongs.
The seniority list is produced along with the order at Annexure P-4.
4.
The respondents vide Memo dated 24121997 invited objections regarding fixation of seniority of respondents No. 4 to 6 and others among the Assistants.
The petitioner filed a detailed representation dated 111998.
The petitioner at that time came to know that a Memo dated 911996 was issued by respondent No. 1 regarding assigning of seniority of Senior Scale Stenographers among the Assistants.
The representation made by the petitioner was rejected by respondent No. 2 vide order dated 2911998.
It is alleged that respondent No. 3 in order to favour respondents No. 4 to 6 got the case processed in haste and orders of promotion of respondents No. 4 to 5 to the post of Research Assistant after assigning them retrospective dates were issued.
By the same order, the petitioner was ordered to be reverted with immediate effect from the post of Research Assistant to Assistant as respondent No. 5 had been ordered to be placed in her place.
5.
The petitioner has, therefore, filed this writ petition with the prayer that Annexure P-5, P-6, P-8 and the order dated 2911998 promoting respondents No. 4 and 5 (Annexure P-9) be quashed.
6.
Annexure P-5 is a memo dated 911996.
By the said memo, it was decided that the Senior Scale Stenographers be given seniority at par with the Assistants and amendment in Class-III Service Rules be made.
Annexure P-6 is a Memo dated 24121997 regarding the seniority of Senior Scale Stenographers making them equivalent to Assistants.
Annexure P-8 is a letter by which the objections/representations with regard to the tentative seniority list were rejected, making the seniority list final.
7.
Annexure P-9 is an order by which respondents No. 4 and 5 were promoted and the petitioner and one other person are reverted on the fixation of inter se seniority of the Senior Scale Stenographers amongst the Assistants.
8.
Notice of motion was issued.
The respondents except respondent No. 4 were served.
The learned counsel for the petitioner requested that respondent No. 4 need not be served for the purpose of motion hearing.
Written statement was filed by the official respondents as also by respondents No. 5 and 6.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties.
9.
So far as the first argument regarding respondents No. 4 to 6 refusing to accept the promotion is concerned, it has been stated in the reply that respondents No. 5 and 6 made representation against the promotion orders of 921989 which were made keeping in view the seniority of Clerks, whereas they claimed seniority amongst Assistants and the Government had decided that Senior Scale Stenographers be given seniority at par with Assistants vide letter dated 911996.
Therefore, the question of refusal to accept the promotion and the consequent order passed at that time that they will not be considered for promotion in future does not come to the rescue of the petitioner.
10.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that the respondents even according to the Rules as they exist, were not qualified for promotion.
We are at present dealing with the promotion of respondent No. 5 only because the learned counsel for the petitioner has challenged the order of reversion of the petitioner because of promotion of respondent No. 5.
The promotions are governed by the Rules which are called as "Punjab Civil Services (Promotion of Stenographers and Steno-typists) Rules, 1961 (hereinafter referred to as the Rules).
By the amendment in the Rules made by the Punjab Civil Services (Promotion of Stenographers and Steno-typists) Haryana First Amendment Rules, 1978 (hereinafter referred to as the amended Rules), sub-rule (1) of Rule 3 was substituted as under:  "(1) In offices where the scale of pay of Stenographers is identical to that of Assistants, the Stenographers shall, before becoming eligible for promotion to a higher post on the clerical side, have to work as Assistant for a period of two years on some existing vacancy or by sharing the work of an Assistant.
Explanation I :- The period during which a Stenographer has before the date of issue of these rules, performed the duties of an Assistant whether in addition to his own duties or otherwise will be taken into consideration in computing the period of his training as Assistant.
Explanation II :- Where there is no available vacancy of the post of Assistant for imparting training to the Stenographer, he shall be given at least one- third of the work of some Assistant in addition to his own duties.
The Assistants who is thus relieved of some of his work will in turn help the Stenographer in his routine duties."
Therefore, the Stenographer, before becoming eligible for promotion to the higher post on clerical side, has to work as an Assistant for two years on some existing vacancy or by sharing the work of an Assistant.
Where there is no available vacancy of the post of Assistant for imparting training to the Stenographer, he has to be given at least one-third of the work of some Assistant in addition to his own duties.
Learned counsel for the petitioner vehemently contended that respondents No. 5 to 6 have not undergone this training.
This contention is taken up in para 9(viii) of the petition.
In reply to this, it has been averred by the official respondents that due to the reason that the juniors had already been promoted, a condition was imposed in the promotion orders dated 2911998 that respondents No. 4 and 5 will be given annual increments on this post after attaining the experience of two years.
Obviously the explanation given by the official respondents cannot be swallowed.
Similar explanation is also given by respondents No. 5 and 6.
When the Rule requires prior training of two years to be imparted for making the person eligible for promotion, it will be a mockery of the Rules if promotion is given without the requisite training by just making a provision in the order that the annual increment will start after the training period is over.
Therefore, we are not in a position to accept the explanation given by the respondents in this case.
11.
As stated earlier, we are confining our judgment qua respondent No. 5 only.
The promotion of respondent No. 5 cannot be sustained in view of the above reasons.
Consequently, we allow this petition and quash the order Annexure P-9 so far as it promotes respondent No. 5 and reverts the petitioner.
In view of the above reasons, no order regarding Annexure P-5, P-6 and P-8 needs to be passed.
Petition allowed.