RS Mongia, J - The primary grievance of the petitioner is that when some of his juniors were promoted on September 25, 1990, vide Annexure P-4, his case was not considered as some enquiry was pending against him.
In para 4 of the reply filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been averred as under :-  "4.
That para 4 of the writ petition is admitted to the extent that he joined the service as per his assertion in para 4 and this fact is also correct that Sh. Matadin was junior to the petitioner when the case of Shri.
Matadin for promotion was taken up.
As stated by the petitioner himself in para 3 above he was charge-sheeted under rule `7' of the Punishment and Appeal Rules, 1987 on 19.6.1990 and was not eligible for consideration for promotion to the post of Superintendent."
2.
It may be observed here that vide order dated September 3, 1996, copy Annexure R-1, punishment of stoppage of two increments without cumulative effect has been awarded to the petitioner, for which he was charge-sheeted on June 9, 1990.
The petitioner has since retired from service w.e.f.
July 31, 1998.
The respondents have produced an order dated June 4, 1998, on the file of this case whereby petitioner has been promoted with immediate effect as Superintendent (Class II Gazetted) on ad hoc basis for a period of four months.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner argued that since the petitioner was ignored for promotion on the basis of enquiry which took the respondents six years to decide, his case has to be considered w.e.f.
the date his juniors were promoted, of course, taking into consideration the entire record including the punishment.
3.
From para 4 of the written-statement, it is evident that a junior person was promoted and the petitioner's case was ignored on the basis of pendency of enquiry against him.
When the enquiry culminates into punishment of exoneration, the case of such an individual who is earlier ignored from consideration on the basis of enquiry has to be reconsidered on the basis of the record including the punishment, if any awarded.
Admittedly, in the present case, after the enquiry, petitioner's case has not been reconsidered for promotion w.e.f.
the date his junior was promoted.
4.
For the foregoing reasons, we allow this writ petition and direct the respondents to reconsider the case of the petitioner for promotion w.e.f.
September 25, 1990, when his junior was promoted, of course taking into consideration his entire record including the punishment that has been awarded to him.
If he is found fit for promotion, needless to mention that all necessary consequences shall flow therefrom.
Let these directions be carried out within a period of six months.
Petition allowed.