Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The Union of India and the officers of the Indian Railway are aggrieved by the order passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The first respondent was appointed as a Gateman in the Indian Railway on September 22, 1979.
He was ultimately placed in the scale of Rs. 775-1025/-.
While working as a Gateman, the respondent was promoted as a Coach Attendant on December 20, 1989.
This appointment was on ad hoc basis.
However, he had appeared in the selection test.
Having qualified, he was appointed on regular basis on January 29, 1990.
While he was working as such, he was served with a notice on August 21, 1990.
It was observed that he had been wrongly promoted on the higher post and persons senior to him had been ignored.
He approached the Central Administrative Tribunal to challenge this notice.
The Tribunal having accepted his claim, the Union of India has filed the present petition.
3.
Mr. Marwaha, learned counsel for the petitioners contends that the respondent was junior to various persons and had been wrongly promoted vide order of January 29, 1990.
Thus, the Railway had the right to review the order and cancel the promotion which had been wrongfully granted to the respondent.
Learned counsel has further submitted that according to the Indian Railway Establishment Manual, Volume-2, the inter se seniority is determined by the date of continuous appointment.
Mr. Marwaha has produced before us the extract from the Indian Railway Establishment, Volume-2.
He relies on rule 320  4.
Firstly, the provision is in the following terms :-  "320.
Relative seniority of employees in an intermediate grade belonging to different seniority units appearing for a selection/non-selection post in higher grade.
When a post (selection as well as non-selection) is filled by considering staff of different seniority units, the total length of continuous service in the same or equivalent grade held by the employees shall be the determining factor for assigning inter se seniority irrespective of the date of confirmation of an employee with lesser length of continuous service as compared to another unconfirmed employee with longer length of continuous service.
This is subject to the proviso that only non-fortuitous service should be taken into account for this purpose.
Note :- Non-fortuitous service means the service rendered after the date of regular promotion after due process."
A perusal of the above provision would show that it is only when two persons are in an identical grade that the seniority is determined by the total length of continuous service.
In the present case, the admitted position is that the respondent was in the pay scale of Rs. 775-1025/- while persons who were declared or considered to be senior to him were in the lower scale of Rs. 750-940/-.
In terms of Rule 320 as reproduced above, a person in a lower scale cannot be treated as senior to a person in higher scale.
5.
Secondly, it also deserves notice that the respondent had appeared in a suitability test.
He was successful.
He had been selected in preference to persons who were senior to him.
Having been selected, he was promoted on regular basis in January, 1990.
Thereafter, he could not have been reverted to make room for those who had either not competed or were not considered to be senior to the respondent.
It also deserves mention that the petitioners are treating the persons in a lower scale as senior to those in a higher scale.
This does not appear to be legally permissible in view of the provisions of Rule 320.
A person with a higher scale cannot be junior to a person working on a lower post.
6.
Mr. Marwaha has referred to the decision of a learned Single Judge in the case of Dewakar Sharma, Instructor v. The State of Punjab and others, 1996(1) SCT 754 : 1996(1) RSJ 569.
The factual position in this case was totally different.
Thus, it is of no assistance for the decision of the present case.
In view of the above, we find no illegality in the order passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal so as to call for any interference under Article 226 of the Constitution.
The petition is dismissed in limine.
Petition dismissed.