VK Bali, J - Petitioner, a candidate for the post of Art and Craft teacher, through present petition filed by her under Article 226 of the Constitution of India seeks her selection and appointment on the post aforesaid in a vacancy meant for sports category as per reservation policy of the State Government.
2.
It is the case of the petitioner that she passed the matriculation examination with 850 marks out of 1700.
She also passed the additional subject of drawing in the Matriculation Examination.
She also completed two years Art and Craft Teachers Training Course in second division.
She also acquired the qualification of Giani from the Punjabi University, Patiala.
She is a sports person and was placed third in the event of Kho-Kho (Girls) in the All India Rural Sports Event in 1976-77.
It is further the case of the petitioner that Punjab Government notified the rules called the Punjab Recruitment of Sportsman Rules 1988 wherein it has been provided that 3% of the vacancies to be filed in by direct appointment in all the State Civil Services and posts connected with the affairs of the Punjab State shall be reserved for being filled in by way of recruitment of sportsmen.
In this way 3% vacancies to be filled in by way of direct recruitment in all the State Civil Services have been reserved for sportsmen/women.
The Departmental Selection Committee issued advertisement dated 28121994 for selection of various categories of posts in the Punjab Education Department including the Art and Craft teachers.
The said committee issued interview letter dated 681996.
She appeared for interview before the Departmental Selection Committee on 2681996.
The Chairman of Departmental Selection Committee declared the result of the selected candidates which appeared in the Punjabi Tribune dated 13111996.
950 candidates were selected for their appointments as Art & Craft teachers.
However, the petitioner was not selected.
It is further the case of the petitioner that as per advertisement dated 28121994, 950 posts of Art & Craft teachers were advertised and as per reservation policy 29 vacancies were required to be reserved for sportswomen.
The result would clearly reveal that only 3 males and 9 females have been selected from the category of sportsmen/women.
3.
Learned Counsel representing the petitioner vehemently contends that if 3 per cent seats were reserved for sportsmen/women as per policy of the government, 29 vacancies were required to be reserved and filled in the reserved sports category and inasmuch as only 12 such candidates have been selected, the petitioner has lost her chance for selection and appointment by ignoring the reservation meant for sportsmen/women category.
4.
We have heard the learned Counsel representing the petitioner and with his assistance, we have perused the records.
Advertisement Annexure P-4 pursuant to which the petitioner made an application for the post under contention concedely talks of reservation according to 100 point roster system.
To a specific question, the Counsel representing the petitioner admits that if reservation is given as per 100 point roster system and so far reservation in sports category is concerned, 3 per cent of total seats are reserved for sports category, the reservation as provided in 100 point roster system would exceed 50 per cent.
If that be so, surely the contention of the learned Counsel representing the petitioner cannot be accepted.
It is too well settled by now that reservation on all counts cannot exceed 50 per cent.
In other words 50 per cent of the total posts have necessarily to be given to the candidates belonging to the general category.
Hundred point roster system and reservation to the extent of 3 per cent of total posts in the category of sports persons cannot go side by side.
We have not been shown any policy of the government making 3 per cent reservation for the sports category but assuming the same to be there, it can only be interpreted to mean that the reservation in this category i.e. sports category cannot exceed 3 per cent.
Supposing the Government had issued various policies with regard to reservation in various categories to an extent of 3 per cent, 4 per cent and likewise, in a given case all the advertised posts may go to reserve category.
With a view to protect the government policy with regard to percentage of reservation in various categories as also with a view to make such reservation legal, it shall have to be held that the reservation in the reserve category as enshrined in some of the policies of the Government is to the extent of maximum.
It is, therefore, not necessary that three per cent posts must be reserved in the category of sportsmen/women.
If by such reservation, more than 50 per cent posts get reserved, the same shall be illegal and unconstitutional.
However, reservation according to 100 point roster as mentioned in Annexure P-4 has not been opposed.
If the contention of the learned Counsel with regard to giving minimum 3 per cent reservation to sports category is accepted, the roster which, as mentioned above, makes provision of 50 per cent reservation of various categories shall have to be upset.
Thus, looked from any angle, we are of the view that there is no merit in the contention of the learned counsel.
Finding no merit in this petition, we dismiss the same.
Petition dismissed.