GS Singhvi, J - This petition has been filed for quashing the select list prepared by the respondents in pursuance of the advertisement Annexure P2 issued by respondent No. 2 for admission of the eligible candidates to Multi Purpose Health Worker (Female) Training Course.
2.
It appears that the petitioner claimed selection for admission on the basis of her achievement in sports.
She was interviewed along with other eligible candidates but her name does not figure in the list of selected candidates notified by respondent No. 3.
3.
Shri SK Rattan submitted that in view of 3% reservation made by the Government of Punjab for recruitment to Class III and Class IV posts, the respondents were duty bound to consider the petitioner's candidature for selection against one of the posts reserved for sports persons.
He further submitted that non-consideration of the petitioner's candidature has the effect of vitiating the entire selection.
4.
We have considered the submission of the learned counsel but are unable to agree with him that the entire selection made by the respondents should be quashed on the ground of alleged non-consideration of the petitioner's candidature against the posts reserved for sportsmen because none of the selected candidates has been impleaded as a party respondent and without hearing them, no order to their prejudice can be passed.
5.
The petitioner's claim for consideration against the posts allegedly reserved for sports persons cannot be entertained because of lack of complete information regarding the actual reservation of posts for sportsmen.
However, keeping in view the averments made in the writ petition and the representation Annexure P6 submitted by the petitioner to respondent No. 3, a copy of which has been endorsed to respondent No. 2, we deem it appropriate to direct respondent No. 2 to consider the issues raised in the writ petition including the one regarding the petitioner's entitlement to be considered for admission against the posts reserved for sports persons and then decide whether she is entitled to be selected against the reserved vacancies.
Respondent No. 2 is expected to examine the question whether one of 40 posts advertised for the purpose of admission was liable to be earmarked for sports persons and if so, whether the petitioner can be considered suitable for admission against such vacancy.
Appropriate decision shall be taken by respondent No. 2 within 15 days of the submission of certified copy of this order together with a copy of the writ petition.
6.
With the above observations, the writ petition is disposed of.
Copy of this order be given dasti on payment of fee prescribed for urgent applications.
Order accordingly.