HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner superannuated from service under the State Government on 3131997.
He applied for the release of his retiral benefits prior to his retirement and when they were not received he filed various representations as well.
He was however informed vide letter dated 24997 that as his service book had been misplaced, his pension case could not be finalised.
The petitioner thereafter filed two more representations dated 6.3.1997 and 231998 copies of which are annexed Annexure P.6 and P7 to the writ petition but no action being taken thereon, has filed the present petition.
2.
The petition was admitted on 24.3.1998 and listed for today for directions.
In the interregnum the respondent-State has filed its reply.
It has been averred that the duplicate service book of the petitioner had been received in the concerned departments on 961998 and that a provisional pension and the leave encashment had been sanctioned to him on 22.6.1998 whereas the petitioner had already been paid the full amount of General Provident Fund amounting to Rs. 1,73,665/- on 171997.
It has also been averred that a sum of Rs. 4,33,03400 representing his arrears of pay etc. had been received by him vide voucher dated 1771998.
It has also been highlighted that as of now all the payments due to the petitioner except the gratuity had been released to him.
3.
Mr. Malik, the learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that the delay in the release of retiral benefits to the petitioner was occasioned due to the loss of his service book which was in the custody of the department and as such he was entitled to the interest on the amount of the delayed payments.
In this connection he has pointed out that the only payment made to the petitioner within a reasonable time of his superannuation was the General Provident Fund whereas all the other payments had been made after an inordinate delay.
Mr. Sharma representing the respondent has only reiterated the stand taken in the written statement.
4.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, I am of the opinion that the preparation and custody of the service book was the responsibility of the department and if the same was misplaced leading to a delay in the payment of retiral benefits, the petitioner must have his compensation.
This petition is accordingly allowed and it is directed that the petitioner will be entitled to interest at the rate of 12% per annum from 161997 to the date of actual payment with respect to the retiral benefits other than General Provident Fund which he had received on 171997.
It is further directed that the payments still due as also interest as determined by this order, shall be paid to the petitioner within a period of three months from the date that a certified copy of this order is supplied to the department.
The petitioner shall also have his costs which are assessed to Rs. 2,000/- to be recovered personally from the person responsible for the loss of the service book.
The responsibility will be fixed by the head of the concerned department.
Petition allowed.