HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioners who belong to the Clerical Cadre of Public Health (Government Works), Division No. 1, Ropar, are presently posted at that place.
On 8101997, respondent No. 1 i.e. the Secretary to the Department of Public Health issued an order Annexure P-1 to the petitioner directing that the office of the Executive Engineer, Public Health, Division No. 1 Ropar, be temporarily shifted to Anandpur Sahib up till July 31, 1999, and that this action was being taken to run the public health services in an efficient manner leading upto the celebrations of the 300th Anniversary of the foundation of the Khalsa Panth at Anandpur Sahib in the year 1699.
The petitioners have impugned the order Annexure P-1 on the ground that they have been put to unnecessary expense and hardship as their families continued to reside at Ropar whereas they had been shifted to Anandpur Sahib and that the running of two establishments was beyond their financial capacities, and the order was, therefore, arbitrary.
The petitioners have also appended Annexure P-2 dated 1411998 from the Superintending Engineer, Public Health (GW) Circle Chandigarh to the Chief Engineer, Punjab (P.W.D) Public Heath (GW) Branch, Patiala whereby he had intimated that there was no accommodation available for the stay of the petitioners and the other officials who had been shifted to Anandpur Sahib.
2.
On notice of motion, respondents No. 1 to 3 have filed a detailed reply and it has been pointed out that the order Annexure P-1 had been made as the Department of Public Heath had taken up the work of providing good water supply and sewerage facilities costing about Rs. 8 crores and to complete the same before the commencement of the celebrations in April, 1999.
It has also been pleaded that it was within the competence of the government to order the shifting of the headquarter to Anandpur Sahib by virtue of Rule 151 of Chapter V of Punjab Civil Services Rules Vol-I Part-I (hereinafter called `the Rules").
3.
A replication has also been filed by the petitioners in response to the written statement and it has been pleaded for the first time that the petitioners were nevertheless, entitled to the payment of a compensatory allowance in terms of Rule 53 of the Rules as their headquarters had been temporarily shifted to Anandpur Sahib from Ropar.
It has also been pleaded with reference to Annexures P-3, P-4 and P-5 that employees similarly situated belonging to the Bhakra Beas Management Board were entitled to some extra payments on account of the shifting of their headquarters and reference has also been made to Annexure P-7 to highlight that there was paucity of accommodation to accommodate the petitioners and other similarly situated employees at Anandpur Sahib.
4.
During the course of motion hearing on 331998, the learned Additional AG Punjab, took time to find out if the petitioners could be paid a compensatory allowance in terms of Rule 53 (b) and the case was adjourned for hearing on that date to 17.3.1998 and as no satisfactory reply had been forth- coming, it was admitted to a regular hearing.
The case had been taken up yesterday when Mr. Anil Sharma, the learned Deputy Advocate General, Punjab sought time till today to find out as to whether the State Government was willing to accommodate the petitioners but he too has intimated that the State Government was not in a position to take a decision on the matter.
5.
The only point raised by Mrs. Sangita Dhanda, the learned counsel representing the petitioners is that the headquarter of the petitioners had been temporarily shifted to Anandpur Sahib from Ropar at a distance of 55 KM, and as such, the petitioners were entitled to the payment of a compensatory allowance in accordance with Rule 53.
6.
Mr. Anil Sharma, the learned Deputy Advocate General has, however, argued that the petitioners had been shifted to Anandpur Sahib in exigency of service and as the work that they were called upon to perform was of a pious nature and of national importance, the petitioners were not entitled to any compensatory payment.
In this connection, he has also referred to Rule 151 of the Rules.
7.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the record as also the rules.
Rule 52.
(b) defines `Temporary Transfer', to mean, a transfer to duty in another station which is expressed to be for a period not exceeding 120 days, but if the temporary duty is subsequently extended beyond 120 days in all the title to compensatory allowance will remain intact up to the date of the orders of extension.
Rule 53(b) is reproduced below :-  "53.
An allowance granted owing to the expensiveness of living, other than a house-rent allowance may be drawn- (a)-- -- -- (b) during temporary transfer, if- (i) the authority sanctioning the transfer certifies that the Government employee is likely on the expiry of the temporary duty to return to the station from which he is transferred; (ii) the government employee draws no allowance of the same kind in the post to which he is transferred; and (iii) the government employee certifies that he kept his family, for the period for which the allowance is claimed, at the station from which he proceeded on transfer."
It will be seen from Rule 53 that three conditions have to be satisfied before compensatory allowance can be granted to an employee.
It is also apparent from Annexure P-1 dated 8101997 that the petitioners were temporarily shifted to Anandpur Sahib upto 3171999 and it is the conceded position that the order was made enforceable with effect from 111998.
In this connection Mr. Sharma has placed reliance on rule 52 to contend that as the temporary transfer was limited to a period not exceeding 120 days and as such, compensatory allowance as envisaged under the Rules could not be paid to the petitioners.
To my mind this argument of the learned counsel lacks merit for the reason that rule 52(b) itself visualises that temporary duty can be extended beyond 120 days and if it is so extended, the Government employee would be entitled to claim compensatory allowance as if he had been transferred for a period of 120 days or less.
Mr. Sharma's further reliance on rule 151 is to no avail as the said Rule deals with the authorities which are competent to make transfers etc. and does not even remotely touch the question of the payment of compensatory allowance.
I am, therefore, of the opinion that the respondents, reluctance to give compensatory allowance to the petitioner is wholly unjustified.
8.
Mr. Sharma has finally argued that the matter be left in the hands of the State Government, yet again.
The argument is untenable.
It is evident from the stand taken by the respondents in the written statement as also from the enquiries made by the Law Officers on two different occasions that as the State Government was not willing to consider the employees' demand for the payment of compensatory allowance, no useful purpose would therefore be served in leaving the matter with the authorities as the outcome is self-evident.
This petition is accordingly, allowed and a direction is issued that if the petitioners or any other employee similarly situated satisfy the two conditions laid down in Sub Clauses (ii) and (iii) of Rule 53(a), they would be paid compensatory allowance as per their entitlement.
It is also made clear that the arrears of compensatory allowance would be calculated and paid to the petitioners within a period of four months from the date, that a certified copy of this order is supplied to the respondents.
No costs.
Dasti order.
Petition allowed.