Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The seven petitioners, in this case, were candidates for the posts of Principals in Government Senior Secondary Schools which formed a part of the Haryana Education Services, Class-II.
The posts were advertised by the Haryana Public Service Commission.
The petitioners had competed.
They claim to have been selected.
However, in view of the interim orders passed in Letters Patent Appeal Nos. 263 and 562 of 1994, they were not appointed.
The petitioners pray for the issue of a writ in the nature of Mandamus directing the respondents viz. State of Haryana and the Director of Secondary Education to appoint them.
They also pray that the interim orders passed in the aforesaid two appeals be modified.
2.
A short Written Statement has been filed on behalf of respondent Haryana Public Service Commission.
It is not disputed that the petitioners have been duly selected.
No Written Statement has been filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2.
No one has appeared on behalf of any of the respondents.
In this situation, it can be safely assumed that the averments made in the petition have been admitted by the respondents.
3.
Mr. Surya Kant, learned counsel for the petitioners has been heard.
4.
It is undisputed that the petitioners have competed.
They were selected.
Their names have been recommended by the Commission to the State Government.
Still further vide letter dated September 8, 1995, the Director had requested the department of Health Services to have the petitioners medically examined.
The learned counsel for the petitioners submits that in fact they were actually found fit by the Medical Board.
Even their antecedents are said to have been duly verified.
Still further, both the Letters Patent Appeals have been decided by a separate order.
The appeals have been dismissed and the interim orders stand vacated.
5.
It is true that mere selection does not confer any right on the selected candidates to claim a writ of Mandamus or a direction to the authorities for appointment, yet when the candidates have been selected, the authority cannot refuse to appoint them except for a good and valid reason.
No reason has been advanced for denying the appointment to the petitioners so far.
In this situation, it appears to be just and fair to direct respondent Nos. 1 and 2 to consider the claim of the petitioners for appointment to the posts of Principals of Senior Secondary Schools in Haryana Education Services, Class- II.
The needful shall be done within two months from the date of receipt of a certified copy of this order.
Since no one has appeared on behalf of the respondents to contest this petition, there shall be no order as to costs.
The Writ Petition is disposed of in the above terms.