THB Chalapathi, J - The petitioner having passed the Punjab State Assistants Grade Examination, had been promoted as Assistant on 15.10.l984 and joined as such on 16101984.
Respondent No. 3, who was senior to the petitioner in the cadre of clerks did not pass through the said examination.
Therefore, he was not promoted.
Later, respondent No. 3 passed the test conducted in the year 1985 and he was promoted on 25111985.
The State of Punjab increased the number of chances to clear the Punjab State Assistants Grade Examination to two chances by an order dated 5121984.
Again, it was increased by an order dated 1691985 to four chances.
On the ground that the chances for clearing the examination have been increased, Respondent No. 3 was placed as Senior in the seniority list which was published on 24121985 (Annexure P-7).
The petitioner filed this petition challenging the said seniority.
2.
The seniority of Assistants is governed by the Punjab District Service Class-II Rules, 1976.
Rule 11 of the said rules reads as follows :  "The seniority inter se of members of service in each cadre shall be determined by their continuous appointments to that cadre of the service."
3.
Thus, it is clear the inter se seniority of the persons working in the cadre of Assistants has to be determined on the basis of their continuous length of service.
When respondent No. 3 has been promoted only in 1985, he cannot claim seniority in the face of Rule 11.
The amendment to the Punjab State Assistants Grade Examination Rules, 1984, cannot be read into the Punjab District Service Class-III Rules, 1976.
The admitted position is that the Punjab District Service Class-III Rules, 1976 have not been amended.
Simply because some more chances have been given to Clerks for getting promotion as Assistant by clearing the examination under the Punjab State Assistants Grade Examination Rules, 1984, a person who clears the examination subsequently, cannot claim seniority over the persons already promoted on the basis that in a subsequent chance, he has cleared the examination.
There is specific rule governing the seniority in the special rules.
The amendment made in Punjab State Assistants Grade Examination rules which prescribe the examination to be passed in certain number of chances cannot have any overriding effect on the Punjab District Service Class-III Rules, 1976.
There cannot be any dispute that merit is to be taken into account, that is the intention in providing for examination for promoting the Clerks to the posts of Assistant.
When a person who failed in the examination cannot be said to be more meritorious than the person who has cleared the examination in the first chance simply because at a later point of time, the Government has chosen to increase number of chances to clear the examination.
I am, therefore, of the opinion that the seniority list (Annexure P-7) is liable to be quashed.
4.
I accordingly quash the seniority list Annexure P-7.
Consequently, the order passed on the representation made by the petitioner vide Annexure P-11 is also quashed.
The petitioner is directed to be treated as senior to all those persons who had passed the examination subsequent to the date of passing of the examination by the petitioner.
The department is accordingly directed to prepare the seniority list in the light of this Judgment and the petitioner is also entitled to all consequential benefits on the basis of seniority so determined.
5.
The Writ Petition is accordingly allowed.
Petition allowed.