TS Doabia, J - That the petitioner was a Booking Manager.
On 3rd December, 1987 an order was passed.
He was to be promoted as Stores Officer Tickets, Srinagar.
That order was passed after his case was cleared by the Departmental Promotion Committee.
The order passed is as annexure `A'.
This order in so far as relevant for the purpose of this petition reads as under :  "Reference : D.P.C.
Recommendation dated 3121987.
Sanction is hereby accorded to the promotion of the following employees from the pay scale of Rs. 1050-2250 to the pay scale of Rs. 1500-2750 plus COLA against the posts shown hereunder :-  13.
GM Dar Stores Officer Tickets, Srinagar.
The promotees shall be on probation for a period of six months in the first instance and its continuation in the promoted cadre is subject to satisfactory performance.
The promotion will have effect from the date promotees report at their new place of postings.
By Order."
The petitioner was unable to reap the benefit of above order.
This was on the account that there was failure on the part of petitioner to produce the matriculation certificate.
The requirement to produce the matriculation certificate is indicated in order dated 10th December 1987.
This is annexure `B'.
The petitioner produced a School Leaving Certificate indicating that he had passed Ist year of the Higher Secondary School, Srinagar (Kashmir).
The petitioner wanted the certificate to be treated as matriculation certificate.
He placed reliance on notification issued by the Jammu and Kashmir Board of School Education.
The copy of the said notification is an annexure `E'.
This notification reads as under :-  "In supersession to this office Notification Nos. 2, 7/Aud dated 27th August, 1968 and 18th June, 1969, the Chairman has, under sub-section 4 of Section 17 of the Jammu and Kashmir Secondary Education Act, 1965, been pleased to accord equivalence to the Higher Secondary Core Examination of this Board or of the erstwhile University of J&K with the Matriculation examination for purposes of admission to Higher classes subject to the condition that such candidates as intend to offer Mathematics as one of the subjects in pre-university course will be required to clear Mathematics or Arithmetic, Domestic Arithmetic and House Hold Accounts as the case may be, of the Matriculation examination before appearing in the pre-University examination.
The respondent-authorities expressed an opinion that this notification is relevant only for giving benefit to those candidates who are to seek admission for higher classes.
In this view of the matter a view was expressed that his certificate cannot be treated as equivalent matriculation examination.
After forming this view annexure `D' was issued.
For facility of reference is reproduced below :- "Whereas Shri Gh.
Mohd Dar was promoted against the post of Stores Officer vide this office order No. SRTC/DPC/EC-iii/3421 dated 9121987; Whereas the said Shri Dar was asked to produce the Matriculation Certification which is the requirement of the rules; Whereas the said Shri Dar produced Higher Secondary Examination Certificate and a copy of notification No. F-ACD/Board/75 dated 17975; Whereas Higher Secondary core examination has been declared equivalent to Matriculation examination for purpose of admission to higher classes only; Whereas it is evident that Higher Secondary examination is not equivalent Matriculation examination which is brought out by the notification discussed; Now, therefore, order No. JKSRTC/DPC/EC-iii/3421 dated 9287 in so far as it relates to Shri Gh.
Mohd Dar is revoked."
The question as to whether the matriculation examination is pre-requisite for seeking promotion has not been brought out in the counter filed by the respondent.
The respondents have not filed any counter.
As a matter of fact in the seniority list of officials the name of Shri Dar appears at Serial No. 17.
He has been treated as having matriculation qualification.
If this be the position and as the authorities were treating the petitioner as possessing matriculation certificate then it has to be presumed that the qualification which was possessed by the petitioner when he joined the service was treated as equivalent to matric.
Independently of the above in the notification annexure `E' the respondent authorities have treated the matriculation qualification as good enough for seeking admission for higher classes.
This notification is to be treated good and valid for all purposes.
In this view of the matter stand taken by the respondent in the order cannot be sustained.
The petitioner was wrongly denied promotion.
The order as annexure `D' is set aside.
The petitioner would be entitled to all monetary benefits.
Petition allowed.