TS Doabia, J - Petition admitted with the consent of the parties taken up for final disposal.
2.
Government Medical College Jammu has invited application for the post of demonstrator in Physiology and Bio-Chemistry.
The essential qualification has been indicated as MBBS with field service certificate for two years.
Copy of advertisement notice has been placed as annexure `A'.
Petitioner is aggrieved qua the qualification which has been prescribed for filling the post.
3.
Petitioner submits that previously, M.Sc.
Bio-Chemistry qualification was found to be sufficient for the post of demonstrator in Government Medical College.
Names of some of persons who have been holding the posts have been given in paragraph 5(ii) of the writ petition.
Petitioner submits that she has been an outstanding student.
As per her fourteen published papers are to her credit.
It is submitted that qualification for MBBS has been fixed in breach of J&K Medical Service Recruitment Rule, 1979.
It is stated in the schedule appended to the rule, in fact M.Sc.
qualification has been considered to be sufficient for the post of demonstrator.
It is submitted that qualification fixed are not in accordance with rule referred to above.
4.
Respondent No. 2 has filed objections.
5.
It is admitted that for the post of demonstrator M.Sc.
qualification in Bio-Chemistry is basic qualification.
Petitioner's assertion that earlier persons possessing same qualification also were given appointment has not been denied.
If this be the position then petitioner is well within her rights to contend that in notification as contained in schedule II attached with Medical Recruitment Rules, 1979 the basic qualification is M.Sc.
Bio-Chemistry and therefore, she is further right in her submission that she has been wrongly excluded.
There is thus apparent merit in the contention put across by the petitioner.
6.
It be seen that on 4th of August, 1997, respondents were directed to accept the application of the petitioner and she was permitted to compete for the post of demonstrator.
As petitioner is now found fully eligible under rules, she be now considered for the post of demonstrator in Bio-Chemistry, Government Medical College.
This petition is allowed accordingly.
Petition allowed.