TS Doabia, J - The petition has come to be filed under following circumstances :  The petitioner is working as Assistant Executive Engineer.
He has to pass a test.
The relevant Rule 9 which deals with the method and manner in which the marks are to be given reads as under :  "(i) The Minimum pass marks shall be 40% in each paper and 45% in aggregate.
(ii) A candidate who appears in all the papers at a time and passes in all but one paper, may be given grace marks not exceeding 10 by the Commission to enable him to secure the minimum number of pass marks in the paper in which he fails; provided that he has already obtained the aggregate prescribed without such grace marks.
(iii) Candidate who obtain 50% or more marks in any paper but fails in the examination as a whole, shall be exempted from appearing in that paper.
(iv) A candidate who appears in all the papers at a time and passes in all the papers individually, but fails to secure the aggregate marks prescribed may be given grace marks not exceeding 10 by the Commission in order to enable him to secure the minimum aggregate, as the case may be."
2.
The petitioner's case fell under Rule 9((iv).
He appeared in two papers.
He failed to obtain 45% marks in the aggregate.
Even if he is given 10 marks as contemplated by the aforementioned Rule, even then he is unable to make the grade.
It is under these circumstances, he is challenging the validity of the Rule.
He also submits that Rule is not being properly implemented.
His contention is that if the spirit behind the Rule is taken into consideration, then the maximum marks in each paper should be brought down to 100.
Thereafter, assessment should be made proportionately and 10 marks should be added to the aggregate.
3.
It be seen that in paper A the maximum marks are fixed at 150; for paper B the maximum marks fixed are 100.
The total number of marks comes to 250.
When calculating the aggregate, i.e. 250, 45% would naturally come to 11250.
The petitioner got 61, marks in paper A and 4066 marks in paper B.
The total number of marks which he thus got was 10166.
If 10 marks as contemplated by clause 4 (iv) are added, the petitioner would be getting 11166 marks.
If the figure is rounded off, he would be getting 112 marks.
Thus, on mathematical calculation, he still is unable to make the grade.
It is under these circumstances, it is submitted that where marks have been indicated as 150, those should be notionally brought down to 100, and thereafter the calculations should be made.
4.
It is not in dispute that in the syllabus and the Rules, the maximum marks which are indicated are 150 for paper A and 100 for paper B Thus, the Rules are clear.
Under the Rules, the Examiner who set the paper has no option.
He is to assess the merit of the candidate in terms of the parameters prescribed under the Rules.
When those Rules are interpreted, there is no room for giving any interpretation which may help the petitioner.
5.
It be seen that even if the grace marks are taken into consideration, the petitioner gets no relief.
As the petitioner after getting benefit of grace marks is missing the grade by 50 marks, the State may if so permissible relax the rule otherwise this petition is found to be without any merit and is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.