TS Doabia, J - Petitioner in person.
Respondents represented by Mr. M Baru, AAG.
"The power to make provisional appointment is not a charter for arbitrary preference.
It is no administrative licence to ignore the service conditions of serving personnel.
Provisional appointments cannot be made in violation of the rules, though, in very urgent cases, this power may be invoked when rules cannot be complied with.
A provisional appointment cannot be continued endlessly jeopardizing the rights of the employees governed by specific service rules".
2.
The above is the precise argument raised in this petition.
The petitioner submits that the respondent authorities while passing order annexure "B" on 1111997 have completely ignored the concept of seniority.
The specific plea taken is that the petitioner is senior to Kirpal Singh whose name is mentioned at S. No. 2 in the order annexure "B".
This is dated 1111997.
3.
The petitioner further submits that she made a representation in this regard.
Copy of this has been placed on record as annexure "C".
4.
Objections have been filed.
Petition is admitted.
With the consent of the parties, it is taken up for final disposal.
5.
In the objections all that has been stated is that on account of specific qualifications possessed by Kirpal Singh referred to above, he has been given temporary charge of the post of Preservation Assistant.
It is stated that this is only ad hoc arrangement and it confers no right on the petitioner.
The fact that the aforementioned person is not getting any additional monetary benefits has also been highlighted.
6.
No doubt in the order dated 1111997 it has been clearly mentioned that the incumbent who has been appointed as Preservation Assistant would hold the post purely on temporary basis without prejudice to seniority of others.
But the fact remains that this ad hoc promotion does not create some right in favour of the person figureing at S. No. 2 of the said order who is working against a particular post.
The practice of making ad hoc arrangements for varying periods for long time results in breach of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
It is nothing but archaic policy since de-recognised under the system established under the Constitution.
7.
In view of the above, a direction is given to the respondent-authorities to consider the claim of the petitioner for the post to which person named at S. No. 2 in the order Annexure "B" has been posted.
Let the claims of the petitioner and all other eligible persons be considered within a period of three months.
The period of three months would begin from the date a copy of this order is made available to the respondent authorities by the petitioner.
Disposed of accordingly.
Petition allowed.