RC Gandhi, J - Petitioner is seeking a writ of mandamus commanding the respondents to forward his case to the DPC for consideration of his promotion to the next higher post and to regularise his services as Tehsil Supply Officer (TSO).
2.
The petitioner under Govt. Order No. 962-GD of 1982 dated 17.4.1992 was transferred, retaining his lien and promotional prospects etc. in the parent department, from the Directorate of Evaluation and Statistics to District Youth Welfare Office, Poonch, against an available vacancy of Statistics Assistant.
By another Govt. Order No. 39-GD of 1984 dated 411984 the petitioner came to be transferred temporarily from the District Youth Services and Sports Office, Poonch, to the Directorate of Food and Supplies, Jammu, against the available vacancy of Senior Asstt/Salesman/Storekeeper, retaining his lien in his parent department.
The Director of Economics and Statistics, on the application of the petitioner while working as a Senior Assistant in the Food and Supplies Department, under his order No. 144-DES/Camp of 1995 dated 941995, terminated the lien of the petitioner in the Economics and Statistics Department considering him to have been absorbed in the Food and Supplies Department.
Respondent No. 3 issued a tentative seniority list of Senior Assistants in the year 1991 showing the petitioner at S. No. 47 therein.
Respondent No. 2, under his order No. 17-FSJ of 1997 dated 30.1.1997, without prejudice to the seniority of others, transferred the petitioner and posted him as incharge TSO Mandi temporarily in his own pay and grade with the clear stipulation that this arrangement will not confer any right or claim for promotion to the post of TSO.
The petitioner on the strength of the aforesaid circumstances, seeks regularisation of this services as TSO and reference of his case to the DPC seeking consideration for the next higher post.
3.
Respondents have filed objections stating therein that the petitioner has not approached the respondents making any demand for justice which is pre- requisite for seeking a relief of the issuance of a writ of mandamus and proper remedy, therefore, available to the petitioner was to approach the respondents before filing the present writ petition.
It is further stated that the petitioner is basically an employee of the Economics and Statistics Deptt.
wherefrom he had been transferred to the District Youth Welfare Office and subsequently to the Food and Supplies Department retaining his lien in the parent department.
The petitioner has not been absorbed in the service of respondent No. 2 and the termination of his lien by the Director, Economics and Statistics is based on no evidence and only on the application of the petitioner.
The case of the petitioner along with others was considred for absorption of his services in the Food and Supplies Deptt.
by the General Administration Department (GAD), in reference to the letters dated 26101989 and 11.1.1990 of respondent No. 2 and it was decided and conveyed under No. GAD-Estt/90 dated 2521991 that the petitioner shall be reverted to his parent department as and when he becomes eligible for promotion in his original cadre.
Respondents have annexured a copy of this letter as Annexure R1 with their objections.
It is also stated that the petitioner has erroneously and inadvertently been shown in the tentative seniority list issued on 911991 wherein objections were invited from all the concerned which is evident otherwise also in view of the letter dated 2521991 of the GAD which sufficiently shows that the petitioner is an employee of the Economics and Statistics Department and has to be reverted to his parent department.
Merely because the petitioner's name figures in the seniority list, though erroneously, it cannot be considered as a conclusive proof that the petitioner has become a member of the service of the Food and Supplies Department and entitled to promotion.
4.
During the course of arguments Mr. Azad sought to produce the absorption order of the petitioner issued by the Food and Supplies Department.
The file was reserved for orders providing him an opportunity to produce the same on or before 23rd July, 1997.
But he has not been able to produce such an order.
5.
I have heard learned Counsel for the parties and perused the record.
6.
For seeking the relief of reference of the case to the DPC the petitioner has to make out that he is a member of the service of the department and being a member of such service is entitled to seek consideration for promotion to the next higher post.
The petitioner has been transferred to the Food and Supplies Department by retaining his lien in the parent department.
The submission of Mr. Azad that his lien has been terminated after his being absorbed in the Food and Supplies Department, by the Director of Economics and Statistics Department and, therefore, the petitioner is absorbed as a member of the service of the Food and Supplies Department, is misconceived.
In view of the stand taken in the objections filed to the maintainability of the petition and the letter dated 2521991, the petitioner has not been absorbed in the service of the Food and Supplies Department and liable to be reverted back to his parent department.
The termination of petitioner's lien by the Director of Economics and Statistics Department, is on the representation of the petitioner based on the tentative seniority list issued by the Food and Supplies Department on 971991.
The respondents have categorically submitted that the name of the petitioner has been reflected erroneously in the seniority as he is not a member of the service of Food and Supplies Department.
The Head of the Department under Rule 12 of the J&K Civil Services (Decentralisation of and Recruitment to Non-gazetted Service) Rules, 1969, has to frame the seniority list of all the members of the service of his department and to circulate it amongst the members of the said service.
The petitioner has not been absorbed as per the stand taken by respondent No. 2.
Therefore, his name could not have been reflected in the seniority list.
The submission of Mrs. Shekhar that the name of the petitioner has been shown erroneously in the seniority list, has substance.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner also could not show by any evidence that he has been absorbed in the service of respondent No. 2 by any express order issued by the competent authority.
Once the petitioner is found to have not been absorbed, the termination of the lien by the Director of Economics and Statistics, is upon the misrepresentation of the petitioner making him to believe that he has been absorbed, does not vest any right in him to claim that he has become a member of the service of respondent No. 2 or his lien stood terminated legally.
It is admitted position that the petitioner cannot claim absorption as a matter of right on his transfer to the department of respondent No. 2.
It is for respondent No. 2 exclusively to absorb the petitioner or repatriate him to his parent department.
The petitioner is not found to have been absorbed in the service of Food and Supplies Department.
Therefore, he has no right to ask for his consideration for promotion against a post borne on the cadre strength of the Food and Supplies Department.
The petitioner is not found entitled to the relief for reference of his case to the DPC for promotion.
7.
The next relief claimed for by the petitioner in the petition is that his services be regularised as Tehsil Supply Officer.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner has not shown any law which comes to the aid of the petitioner seeking regularisation on his transfer to the department of Food and Supplies.
Respondent No. 2 has taken up the matter with the GAD who too have decided to revert the petitioner to his parent department i.e. Economics and Statistics.
The submission of Mr. Azad that the petitioner is looking after the work of TSO and, therefore, is entitled to regularisation of his services, is again untenable.
Merely because he has been directed to look after the work of a higher post in his own pay and grade, does not vest any right in the petitioner to ask for regularisation.
The post of TSO is required to be filled up from the feeding category, being promotional post, from amongst Senior Assistants and other eligible feeding categories on the cadre strength of the service of the Food and Supplies Department.
The petitioner being not a member of the Food and Supplies Department's service, is also not entitled to this relief.
8.
For the aforesaid reasons writ petition fails and is accordingly dismissed.
Petition dismissed.