GS Singhvi, J - Whether the decision of the Haryana Public Service Commission (for short `the Commission') not to interview the petitioner for recruitment as Principal, Government Senior Secondary School, is vitiated by arbitrariness and violation or constitutional right of equality in the matter of employment guaranteed to him under Article 16 of the Constitution, is the only question which needs adjudication in this petition.
2.
Perusal of the averments made in the writ petition and the record produced by Shri HN Mehtani, learned counsel appearing for the Commission, shows that the application dated 23121998 submitted by the petitioner in response to the advertisement Annexure P1 was forwarded by the Principal.
Government Senior Secondary School, Badli (Rohtak) where he was employed at the relevant time, to the District Education Officer, Rohtak.
That application is shown to have been diarised in the office of the Commission at No. 11834 dated 1231997.
However, as the forwarding letter along with which the application form and the enclosed documents were received in the office of the Commission is not available in the record, no conclusive finding can be recorded about the date on which the District Education Officer, Rohtak and/or the Director, Secondary Education, Haryana forwarded the petitioner's application to the Commission.
3.
It also appears from the record that the petitioner had submitted an advance copy of the application to the Commission which was received in the Commission's office before the expiry of the date specified in the advertisement.
However, the same was not entertained because the petitioner had not enclosed fee of Rs. 10/- along with it.
Vide Annexure P2, the Secretary of the Commission wrote to the petitioner that he cannot be called for interview because he had not deposited the required fee.
The petitioner pleaded with the Commission that he had submitted application along with the required fee through proper channel and, therefore, he may be interviewed along with others.
However, vide letter Annexure P5 dated 1541998, the Secretary of the Commission communicated rejection of his request.
4.
The petitioner has challenged the impugned decision of Commission on the ground of arbitrariness and violation of his fundamental right to equality in the matter of employment.
His contention is that the submission of application through proper channel should be treated as sufficient for considering his candidature and he cannot be penalised for the fault, if any, of the authorities of the Education Department who delayed the transmission of the application to the Commission.
Another contention of the petitioner is that the Commission should not have overlooked the fact that the application, accompanied by fee, which was sent through proper channel had, in fact, been received much before the date of interview and there was no other impediment in the consideration of his candidature.
5.
We have heard Shri R.K. Malik and Shri HN Mehtani and are of the opinion that the impugned decision of the Commission should be invalidated on the ground of arbitrariness.
The advertisement and the instructions issued by the Commission required the in-service candidates to apply through proper channel.
Therefore, the petitioner had no option put to submit his application through the Principal, Government Senior Secondary School, Badli under whom he was working at the relevant time and admittedly that the petitioner had done.
Further transmission of the application by the departmental authorities was not in the control of the petitioner.
Therefore, the delay, if any, on their part in sending the application to the Commission cannot be made ground to deny consideration to the petitioner.
6.
Shri Mehtani conceded that being an in-service candidate, the petitioner was bound to submit application through proper channel and that the application submitted by him directly (with the prescribed fee) would not have been entertained if he had not submitted another application through proper channel but argued that in order to avoid the rejection of his candidature, the petitioner should have submitted advance copy of the application along with the requisite fee and his failure to do so constituted a valid ground for rejection of the same.
In our view, this contention of Shri Mehtani cannot withstand scrutiny.
As already observed above, the applications were to be made by the in-service candidates through proper channel, else the same were liable to be rejected by the Commission.
If a candidate like the petitioner was to submit advance copy of the application and it was received in the Commission's office after expiry of the date specified in the advertisement, the latter was not bound to entertain the same.
In such a situation, the Commission could legitimately contend that the postal authorities do not act as its agent for the purpose of receiving the application for recruitment.
Therefore, non-submission of advance copy of the application or submission of such copy without requisite fee cannot justify rejection of the application of an in-service candidate if he has submitted the same through proper channel along with the requisite fee.
7.
Admitted facts of this case show that the petitioner had submitted application through proper channel much earlier than the last date fixed for receipt thereof and though forwarded belatedly, it was received by the Commission two months before the date of interview.
In these circumstances, there was no justification for not entertaining the petitioner's candidature.
8.
Shri Mehtani submitted that the Commission does not have any control on the government officers and there is no mechanism by which it can compel the Heads of Departments/Officers to send the applications of in-service candidates before the expiry of the last date and, therefore, its decision to reject the application received after the expiry of the last date should not be nullified on the ground of arbitrariness or discrimination.
He submitted that the process of selection may get bogged down and may even be frustrated due to delayed receipt of application.
In our opinion, this aspect required a serious consideration by the government.
This type of problem can be avoided if the government issues instructions to all the Heads of Departments/Heads of offices to ensure forwarding of applications within seven days of the submission thereof by the in-service candidates.
The Commission can also consider the desirability of fixing about four weeks time for the purpose of receipt of applications through proper channel.
However, the candidates cannot be penalised for the fault of others.
9.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is allowed.
The rejection of the petitioner's candidature is declared illegal.
Annexures P2 and P5 are quashed.
Since the petitioner has already been interviewed in pursuance of the interim order passed on 2051998, the Commission should declare the result of his selection along with other candidates interviewed by it.
If the result of other candidates has already been notified, then the result of the petitioner's interview be declared within two weeks of the submission of a certified copy of this order by the petitioner.
10.
In order to obviate recurrence of the situation like the one which has arisen in the present case, we direct the government to issue written instructions to all the Heads of the Departments/Heads of Offices to forward the applications of the in-service candidates to the recruiting agencies, like the Haryana Public Service Commission and the Haryana Staff Selection Commission within seven days of the receipt thereof.
Petition allowed.