THB Chalapathi, J - This writ petition is filed seeking a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to release the pensionary benefits and encashment of earned leave standing to the credit of the petitioner and group insurance scheme with interest at the rate of 18%.
The petitioner joined the service of the State Government in the year 1955 as JBT teacher.
He retired from service on 31.8.1993.
There is no dispute that the petitioner was having to his credit earned leave of 239 days.
The department allowed him the encashment of learned leave to the extent of 64 days only.
According to the department, the petitioner is entitled to encashment of earned leave of 64 days.
According to them, the remaining 175 days of earned leave were earned by the petitioner while working on attending some seminars during summer vacations and according to them, the petitioner was not entitled to encash the earned leave earned by him during the summer vacations, in view of the instructions given in the letter bearing No. 11/30/87-IFR-2 dated 2941987.
But nothing has been placed by the respondents on record to show that the leave of 175 days was earned by him during summer vacations while attending the seminars.
Even in the letter dated 2941987 which has been placed on record as Annexure R-3, there is no mention that he is not entitled to encash the earned leave earned by him while attending seminars during summer vacations.
A reading of Annexure R-3 clearly shows that encashment of leave shall be admissible to Teachers as applicable to the other government servants subject to the fulfilment of the prescribed conditions.
It is not denied that the Government employee is entitled to encash the earned leave upto 240 days.
In these circumstances, I am of the opinion that the petitioner is entitled to encash the earned leave of 239 days which stands to his credit.
2.
The petitioner further claims that he is entitled to group insurance scheme.
In paragraph 11 of the written statement, it has been stated that the benefit of group insurance scheme has also been given to the petitioner.
This fact has also not been denied by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
Therefore, the claim of group insurance scheme is fully satisfied.
3.
I accordingly allow the writ petition in part and direct the respondents to extend the benefit of leave encashment of 239 days of earned leave which has stood to the credit of the petitioner.
The respondents shall pay the amount of leave encashment after deducting the amount already paid to him in respect of the encashment or earned leave within 3 months from today with interest at 6% per annum from the date of retirement till the payment of the amount due to the petitioner on the balance of leave encashment.
4.
With the above observations, this petition stands disposed of.
Petition partly allowed.