NK Sodhi, J (Oral) - Petitioner is working as Assistant Grade-II (Depot) with the Food Corporation of India at Jalalabad District Ferozepur.
He along with several others was promoted to the next higher post of Assistant Grade-I (Depot) on 2981991.
These promotions were subject to vigilance clearance and the concerned authority was directed to ensure that no vigilance case was pending/contemplated against any of the promoted officials including the petitioner.
The promotion order of the petitioner was not released as according to the respondents departmental inquiry was contemplated against him.
It was at that stage that he filed the present writ petition in the year 1992 under Article 226 of the Constitution for a direction to the respondents to release his promotion orders.
After the admission of the writ petition disciplinary proceedings were initiated against the petitioner for a minor penalty and he was served with a charge-sheet dated 2491992.
He submitted his reply to the charges levelled against him and the same was considered by the Senior Regional Manager who found that the explanation furnished by the petitioner was satisfactory.
The proceedings were accordingly dropped as per order dated 18.6.1993.
In spite of this, the petitioner has not been promoted till date.
2.
Since the written statement was filed before the writ petition was admitted the only stand taken therein is that disciplinary proceedings were contemplated against the petitioner and, therefore, his promotion order was not being released.
3.
Having heard counsel for the parties, I am of the view that the writ petition deserves to succeed.
The petitioner having been promoted as Assistant Grade-I in August, 1991 and the disciplinary proceedings initiated against him having been dropped, there is no reason why his promotion order should be withheld.
It is unfortunate that the Corporation and its senior officers did not release the promotion order of the petitioner even after the disciplinary proceedings against him were dropped in the year 1993.
4.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed and the respondents are directed to promote the petitioner as Assistant Grade-I (Depot) w.e.f.
2981991 with all consequential benefits including arrears of salary.
The petitioner will have his costs which are assessed at Rs. 5,000/-.
Petition allowed.