TS Doabia, J - The petitioners are working as Ziladars.
They were appointed as Canal Darogas.
For this reliance is being placed on Annexure "P/2".
This order came to be passed on 31.8.1978.
The order annexure "P/2" reads as under :-  "Sanction is hereby accorded to the ad hoc promotion/adjustment of below mentioned seniormost Ziladars as Canal Darogas created vide Government Order No. PW-440 of 1978 dated 981998 in their own pay and grade with special pay as admissible under Article 27(C) of J&K CSR for six months."
The grievance of the petitioners is even though they were given higher assignment of Canal Darogas, but they were not given the actual pay which is attached to post of Canal Darogas.
They submit that respondent-State should be directed to :  (i) Confirm the petitioners as Canal Darogas.
(ii) To pay the emoluments to which they are entitled to for having worked as Canal Darogas.
The petitioners have since retired, therefore, whatever decision is taken with regard to points (i) and (ii) above, would be taken into consideration in the matter of calculating the pensionary benefits also.
A perusal of annexure "P/2" does indicate that ad hoc promotions were given to the petitioners.
However, it was mentioned that the petitioners would work in their own pay and grade and would be entitled only to special pay as admissible under Rule 27(c) of the J&K CSR.
This writ petition is disposed of with the following directions :  (i) The respondent-State would examine as to whether there existed permanent vacancies of Canal Darogas at the time when the petitioners retired from service; (ii) If permanent vacancies were there, then the claims of the petitioner for confirmation against permanent posts would be considered; (iii) Claims of petitioner in terms of Regulation 85 of J&K CSR, which lays down that when a person performs duties of a higher office, then he becomes entitled to payment of current duties charge would also be considered.
This aspect of the matter would also be taken into consideration.
After taking appropriate decision, whatever financial benefits are found to have accrued to the petitioners, would be released to them.
Let appropriate decision be taken within a period of three months.
The period of three months would begin from the date copy of this order alongwith a copy of the writ petition and annexures thereof are made available to the respondents by the petitioners.
In case for any practical reason it is not possible to dispose of the matter within the aforementioned period, then the respondents would be at liberty to seek extension of time.
But in that eventuality, they would have to explain each and every day's delay.