Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner, constable in Police, was dismissed from the service vide order dated July 19, 1988 passed by the Director General of Police.
He prays that the order be quashed and that he be reinstated in service.
A few facts as relevant for the decision of the case may be briefly noticed.
2.
The petitioner was recruited as a Constable in the year 1973.
In the year 1986 the petitioner was posted at Rohtak.
It was alleged that he had consumed alcohol on December 26, 1986 at about 700 pm and that he had abused different people in a "drunken condition".
The petitioner was charge-sheeted.
An enquiry was held.
He was given an opportunity to show cause.
He was also granted personal hearing by the Superintendent of Police.
Vide order dated September 13, 1987, a penalty of "stoppage of four future increments" was awarded to the petitioner.
He filed an appeal.
The Deputy Inspector General of Police vide order dated November 19, 1987 reduced the penalty to stoppage of four increments without cumulative effect.
Still not satisfied, the petitioner filed a revision petition before the Director General of Police.
On consideration of the matter, he took the view that the petitioner's misconduct was serious and called for "a severe penalty".
Consequently, on April 9, 1988 a Show Cause Notice was issued to the petitioner calling upon him to explain as to why the penalty be not enhanced to that of dismissal.
The petitioner submitted his reply.
Vide order dated July 19, 1988 the Director General of Police ordered the petitioner's dismissal from service.
Hence this petition.
3.
The petitioner inter alia alleges that the action of the respondents in awarding the penalty is violative of the Punjab Police Rules.
In particular, it has been pointed out that the provisions of Rule 16.2(1) have not been kept in view.
Furthermore, it has also been averred that consumption of alcohol while the petitioner was not on duty did not constitute any misconduct so as to call for the imposition of any penalty.
4.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents by the Superintendent of Police.
The petitioner's claim has been controverted.
5.
Mr. HS Gill, learned counsel for the petitioner, has submitted that he had an unblemished record of service since the year 1973.
In fact, 24 commendation certificates had been awarded to him prior to the passing of the impugned order.
According to the learned counsel, the petitioner was not on duty at the time he is alleged to have consumed alcohol and was actually in the barrack in the Police Lines.
In view of these facts, learned counsel submits that the extreme penalty of dismissal was too harsh.
Still further, learned counsel has submitted that more than 10 years have elapsed since the petitioner was dismissed from service.
He is in a bad shape.
If he is now reinstated in service, he will not claim any arrears of salary.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioner has been controverted by Mr. Bishnoi, learned counsel for the respondents.
6.
It is not disputed that the petitioner had served for 15 years when he was ordered to be dismissed from service.
During this period he had been awarded as many as 24 commendation certificates.
Still further, nothing has been pointed out to show that there was any blemish on the petitioner's record of service.
Furthermore, Mr. Bishnoi has not been able to refer to anything on the record which may even remotely suggest that the petitioner had consumed alcohol while he was on duty.
It is, no doubt, correct that the Director General of Police had rejected the petitioner's submission with the observation that he had not made such an assertion before the Enquiry Officer.
Yet, there is nothing on record to suggest that the petitioner was on duty at 7 pm on December 26, 1986.
Still further, keeping in view the petitioner's past record of service, it appears that the penalty of dismissal from service would be too harsh.
In any event, he has now remained out of the service for the last more than 10 years.
He has instructed his counsel to state that he would not claim any arrears of salary.
In this situation, the petitioner has apparently suffered enough punishment for the misconduct.
The loss of salary for a period of 10 years would be an adequate punishment in the circumstances of the case.
7.
In view of the above, the order dated July 19, 1988, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-7 with the writ petition, is set aside.
Resultantly, it is ordered that the petitioner shall be reinstated in service.
The intervening period shall be treated as leave without pay.
He will be given the benefit of continuity of service.
However, he would not be entitled to any arrears of salary.
The petitioner shall be allowed to join duty forthwith.
In the circumstances, no costs.