HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was enrolled in the Army on 17th October, 1965 and was attested as a Jawan on 24th February, 1967.
He was promoted as Naib Subedar w.e.f.
7th July, 1987 and as an acting Subedar Major from 121993.
As per the original terms of the petitioner's appointment and the rank that he was holding, he was required to superannuate on 1st March, 1995.
The petitioner, however, taking recourse to Annexure R-2 dated 16th December, 1976, sought an extension in his service up to 52 years or 4 years of service as Subedar Major whichever was earlier.
The petitioner was accordingly screened by the Departmental Promotion Committee in its meeting held on 6th September, 1993 to 8th September, 1993 and was held entitled to the extension in service from 1st March, 1995 to 31st January, 1997 on three conditions :-  (a) that he should earn annual confidential report not less than `Average', (b) should remain in Medical Category `AYE' or low medical category (temporary), and  (c) should not earn any red ink entry/recordable censure.
It appears, however, that the petitioner was medically examined on 25th July, 1995 by a Medical Board at 174 Military Hospital and it was found that he was suffering from `Inferior wall mycordial infraction and essential hypertension' and he was ordered to be discharged from service as being medically unfit w.e.f.
31st May, 1996 (AN) vide Annexure P-2 dated 10th November, 1995.
Annexure P-2 has been impugned in the present petition.
2.
Notice of motion was issued in the case and a reply has been filed on behalf of the respondents.
It has been pleaded that the petitioner had been granted extension in service up to 31st January, 1997 on the three conditions set out above and as the second condition stood infringed inasmuch that he stood relegated to medical category `BEE' (permanent) noted above, his discharge was in order.
3.
Mr. RK Joshi, the learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that the petitioner had been granted extension in service in terms of Annexure R-2 and, as such, he should have been allowed to continue in service up to that date.
He has also urged that it was evident from the document Annexure P-7 dated 15th December, 1995 that the petitioner was a very active and an efficient soldier and he ought to have been retained in service till the date of his superannuation.
Mr. Joshi has also argued that in the light of the government instructions Annexure P-11 dated 29th June, 1996, that an army personnel who had been placed in low medical category was to be offered an alternative or an sheltered appointment until he was due for normal discharge, and as this instruction had also not been complied with, the petitioner should be deemed to have continued in service up to the date of his superannuation i.e. 31st January, 1997.
4.
He has finally urged that the petitioner's claim to disability pension had been wrongly rejected by the CCDA (Pensions) Allahabad which was not the competent authority to take a final decision in the matter and this pension should be made payable to the petitioner on account of the disability that he had contracted during his tenure of service.
5.
As against this Mr. Kamal Sehgal, the learned standing counsel appearing for the respondent-Union of India, has pointed out that the petitioner had been granted an extension in service upto 31st January, 1997, but his extension was conditional inasmuch as that the petitioner had to remain in a viable medical category.
He has urged that as the petitioner had been down- graded by the medical board held in 1995 the petitioner had been rightly discharged from service.
Dealing with Mr. Joshi's second argument Mr. Sehgal has argued that although it is true that the army authorities were alive to the responsibility that lay on them in terms of Annexure P-11 and to offer some alternative or light duty to the personnel who had been rendered medically unfit, yet this policy was only a directive and did not confer any right on the petitioner.
He has urged that in any case, the time factor had now intervened and the petitioner in any case was not entitled to re- employment.
He has finally pleaded that the petitioner had been informed that his case for the grant of disability pension had been rejected and he had been advised to file an appeal if he so desired.
6.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties I am of the opinion that there is no merit in the petition.
It will be noticed that the petitioner was to superannuate on 3111997 in the course of his extended term of employment under the instructions Annexure R-2.
He had, however, been given an extension in service in terms of the policy Annexure R-2, on three conditions - one of them being that he was to remain medically fit.
It has not been denied that the petitioner had been screened by a Medical Board which had down-graded him to permanent low medical category `BEE'.
It is therefore evident that one of the three conditions under which the petitioner had been granted an enhanced tenure in terms of Annexure R-2 stood violated.
The petitioner's discharge from service w.e.f.
31st May, 1996 was, therefore, in order.
The reliance placed by the petitioner's counsel on Annexure P-7, a letter of recommendation by the Commanding Officer of the petitioner's Unit, is to no avail.
There can be no doubt that the certificate Annexure P-7 had rated the petitioner as being a highly dedicated and a loyal soldier and an asset to the unit, but in the light of a categoric finding of the Medical Board that he was unfit to be retained in service, the certificate Annexure P-7 can rally have no meaning.
7.
It is also evident from Annexure P-11 dated 29th June, 1996 on which reliance has been placed by the petitioner in order to make a claim to an alternative or sheltered appointment that the said guidelines are only a recommendation as in paragraph 2 thereof it has been clearly laid down that every effort should be made to provide alternative/sheltered appointment provided it is in public interest to do so.
Admittedly, this was a laudable object but it created no right in the petitioner.
8.
I am, however, of the opinion that the petitioner's claim to disability pension has not been fully examined.
Although Mr. Sehgal has pointed out that the petitioner had been informed about the rejection of his claim, yet from the facts that have come out from the pleadings, it appears that the matter has not been adequately processed.
It is accordingly directed that the petitioner will undergo a fresh medical examination before the relevant board and his claim to disability pension will be re-examined in the light of the comments that will follow.
The Medical Board will take its proceedings in Chandigarh within the next two months.
A copy of this order be given to the counsel for the parties dasti.
9.
This petition is dismissed with the above observations.
Petition dismissed.