RS Mongia, J (Oral) - The appellant Surjit Misree was working as a Lecturer in English on regular basis in RJ College, Rewari from September 7, 1974 to March 31, 1981.
As per the averments of the appellant which he made in the writ petition, the RJ College had been closed down and, therefore, he became surplus.
Though, according to respondent No. 3-Nirankari Baba Gurbachan Singh Memorial College, Sohna, the petitioner had not become surplus in RJ College but his services were terminated on account of his remaining unauthorisedly absent from duty.
Be that as it may, we are not determining this point in this appeal.
The appellant applied to the Deputy Director, Higher Education for absorption in any Government College/State Aided College.
Since, this was not done, he filed writ petition No. 9768 of 1989.
During the pendency of the writ petition, respondent No. 3-College had advertised a post of Lecturer in English.
Petitioner-appellant also applied for that post and was placed at serial No. 2 in the merit list by the Selection Committee.
The candidate, who was placed at serial No. 1 did not join.
Therefore, petitioner-appellant moved a miscellaneous application in the writ petition that he may be absorbed by respondent No. 3-College (in fact when the writ petition was filed and miscellaneous application was made, respondent No. 3 was not a party in the writ petition).
The following order was passed on the miscellaneous application on 3181989:  "Despite two adjournments granted to the State, no reply is forthcoming and now more time is sought to file one.
It was observed by us on August 10, 1989 that the matter was urgent and could not brook delay.
In this situation, while granting an adjournment to the State for 3111989, we make an interim direction that the vacancy referred to in paragraph 7 of the petition by the Nirankari College, Sohna be given to the petitioner and he be posted there forthwith but subject to the result of the writ petition."
Pursuant to the aforesaid order, petitioner was taken in service by respondent No. 3-College.
It is the case of the petitioner-appellant that the post in the College against which the petitioner was working became surplus and his services were terminated on 2361993, which led him to amend the writ petition, challenging the order of his termination of service.
That writ petition has been dismissed by the learned single Judge vide the impugned judgment dated 16th May, 1995.
It may be observed here that while dismissing the writ petition, the learned single Judge in the concluding portion of the judgment had observed as under :  "Mr. Bhandari on behalf of the respondent does not dispute the fact that the petitioner's performance has been good.
He, however, submits that his services had to be terminated only on account of the non-availability of a vacancy.
In such a situation and on the available material, it is not possible to give any definite directions to the respondents to consider his claim for absorption against any post.
However, if the petitioner has any legitimate grievance in this behalf, he may submit a representation to respondent No. 2 who would consider it and in case it is found that vacancy is available, and the petitioner is qualified therefor, his claim for appointment to such a vacancy shall be considered in accordance with law."
2.
During the pendency of this Letters Patent Appeal, respondent No. 3- College advertised the post of a Lecturer in English in The Tribune dated 3081998.
A miscellaneous application had been filed by the appellant that since the post is available in respondent No. 3-College, he may be absorbed against the said post.
It may further be observed here that learned counsel for the petitioner has stated on instructions from his client that nobody turned up for interview for filling-up the post of Lecturer in English which was advertised on 3081998 and the post is still lying vacant and has not been regularly filled.
3.
In the aforesaid circumstances, we consider it appropriate to dispose of the Letters Patent Appeal by observing that let the directions given by the learned single Judge, as quoted above, be carried out by respondent No. 2 i.e. Director, Higher Education and consider the case of the appellant for absorption against the post which is stated to be lying vacant in respondent No. 3-College.
We may must observe here that our aforesaid directions would not come in the way of respondent No. 2 to consider the case of the appellant for his absorption in any other College.
Let these directions be carried out within a period of two months.
4.
The miscellaneous application as well as Letters Patent Appeal stand disposed of accordingly.
A copy of this order be immediately sent to the Director, Higher Education, Haryana.