HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner passed the B.Sc.
Part-I Examination from the Kurukshetra University in July, 1996; the Part-II Examination in April, 1997 and appeared in the Part-III Examination in May/June, 1998.
The University published a Hand Book of Information for admissions to various Post Graduate courses, including M.Sc.
(Zoology) for the year 1998-99.
The last date for the submission of application was fixed as 6th July, 1998, and the 11th July, 1998 was notified as the date of the entrance test and it was further provided that the first list of successful candidates would be put up on the Board on 15th July, 1998, the second on 18th July, 1998, the third on 22nd July, 1998 and the fourth and final list on 24th July, 1998.
The petitioner submitted her form for admission to the M.Sc.
(Zoology) on 15th June, 1998, appending therewith all the relevant certificates, except the certificate for the B.Sc.
Part-III Examination as the said certificate had not been received by her till that date.
As the petitioner's name did not figure in the list published on 15th July, 1998 and 18th July, 1998, she approached the Department of Zoology, Kurukshetra University, on 21st July, 1998 and on enquiry she was informed that she had not been called for interview as she had not submitted her B.Sc.
Part-III certificate and was, therefore, not eligible for admission.
Aggrieved thereby the present petition has been filed.
2.
On notice of motion, a reply has been put in on behalf of the respondent- University and the stand taken is that as per the Hand Book of Information all relevant certificates were to be appended with the application form, failing which the forms would not be entertained, but keeping in view the hardship suffered by some of the candidates on account of late receipt of their testimonials, the Vice Chancellor had ordered on 14th July, 1998 that the detailed marks card of the candidates who had appeared in their examinations in April, 1998 be accepted two days before the display of the first list and despite the fact that this notice had been put on the notice board, the petitioner had not submitted her detailed marks card for the B.Sc.
Part III up to 21st July, 1998.
The petitioner's claim that she was at Srl.
No. 3 in order of merit has been denied by stating that as the application form submitted by her incomplete and she had not been called for interview, her final merit had not been tabulated.
3.
Mr. SP laler, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner, has raised two basic arguments before me.
He has first and foremost argued that the certificate of the B.Sc.
Part-III Examination had to be issued by the respondent-Kurukshetra University itself and as admission was being sought to the M.Sc.
(Zoology) in this very University and as the petitioner was a in- house student, the requirement that the certificate to be appended with the application form was redundant.
He has also urged and it was the admitted position that the petitioner had submitted her application form well within time and long before the last date i.e. 6th July, 1998 and as other candidates had been permitted to make good the defects in their application forms, the petitioner could not be denied the concession.
He has also urged that once a concession had been given vide letter dated 14th July, 1998, this concession had to be properly notified so that it could be made known to all concerned.
4.
As against this Mr. RS Chahar, the learned counsel appearing for the respondent-University, has rested his arguments on the stand taken in the written statement and has argued that the application forms duly filled and complete in all respects were, in fact, to be filed by 6th July, 1998, and it was only as a matter of concession that the Vice Chancellor had in his communication dated 14th July, 1998, allowed the candidates to submit their certificates up to two days before the display of the first list i.e. up to 13th July, 1998.
He has pointed out that had the petitioner been vigilant she would have become aware of the notice that had been put up in the Department in the light of the Vice Chancellor's order.
5.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length and have gone through the record.
Mr. Laler's first point that as the petitioner was an in-house student of the Kurukshetra University she was not required to attach the B.Sc.
Part-III certificate to be issued by the said University cannot stand scrutiny.
In Section-VII of the Information Brochure dealing with the admission procedure, a specific direction has been issued that candidates must attach all the documents and testimonials along with their applications for determining their eligibility and merit and that incomplete and late applications will not be considered.
This caution has been held out twice over subsequently as it finds mention that all original documents were to be produced at the time of the interview and no excuse for their non-production would be entertained and yet again that all application forms for admission were to reach the University on the scheduled date and time given in the Hand Book of Information complete with all requisite documents as listed in the application form.
To my mind, the mere fact that the petitioner had cleared her B.Sc.
Part-III from the Kurukshetra University would not discharge her from this obligation.
It bears notice that a very large number of students take their qualifying examinations for admission to higher courses in the same University and if the onus was placed on the University to co-relate each student with his earlier course, it would be an exercise well beyond its control on account of the sheer magnitude and complexity of the admission process.
Moreover, the information brochure binds the candidates to its contents and no deviation can be permitted on that account merely because the candidate happens to be an in-house candidate.
6.
Mr. Laler's other argument, however, merits acceptance.
The letter dated 14th July, 1998, issued by the Vice Chancellor's office is reproduced below :  To  The Chairpersons of all the University Teaching  Departments, KU Kurukshetra.
Sir/Madam,  It has been noticed that some of the candidates have not submitted their detailed marks card (D.M.C.)
along with the Admission Forms for admission to various courses given in the Hand Book of Information 1998-99.
To avoid hardship to the students, the Vice Chancellor has ordered that D.M.C.
of the candidates who had appeared in their qualifying examination in April, 1998 be accepted two days before the display of first list.
You are requested to take action accordingly.
Yours faithfully, Sd/- Dy.
Registrar (Academic)" It will be seen that this letter could not have been technically applicable for the interviews held on 15th July, 1998 as the time gap of two days was just not available and could, at best, be attracted to the later dates.
As this letter specifically fixes the date by which the certificates could be accepted, I am of the opinion that no deviation therefrom could be permitted and the acceptance of the certificates of the other candidates thereafter was also not in order as it is the admitted position that the certificates of some of the candidates had been received after 13th July, 1998.
To my mind this was impermissible.
It is also evident that the letter aforesaid could be said to have any substantial meaning only in case it had been properly notified, as it was not possible for a student to make enquiries on each and every day about the on-going admission process.
It is evident from a reading of the letter that it had been addressed to the Chairpersons of all the University Teaching Departments with copies to the Dean, Academic Affairs, Kurukshetra, Secretary to the Vice-Chancellor and the Assistant Registrar Office of the Registrar of the University and to no one else.
Even accepting that the notice had been put up on the Notice Board of the Department, yet it would not tantamount to adequate publicity to all concerned.
7.
This petition is accordingly allowed and a direction is issued to the respondent-University to determine the petitioner's merit and in case she is found entitled to admission on that basis, grant her admission forthwith against an additional seat to be created for her.
It is also clarified that her attendance shall be computed from the date she is granted admission as a consequence of this order.
No costs.
Order dasti.
Petition allowed.