Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - Is the action of the respondents in ordering the recovery of Rs. 1,71,916/- from the petitioner in conformity with law ?
This is the short question that arises in this case.
2.
The petitioner who has since retired from service was working as a Sub Divisional Engineer in the Public Works Department (Buildings and Roads).
He was served with a memorandum dated October 27, 1988.
He was informed that it was proposed to take action against him under the provisions of rule 10 of the Punjab Civil Service (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970.
A detailed charge sheet along with the statement of charges and allegations, list of witnesses and documents etc. was served on the petitioner.
On receipt of this memorandum, the petitioner submitted his reply vide letter dated November 11, 1988.
A copy of this reply has been produced as Annexure P-2 with the writ petition.
Thereafter, the petitioner was conveyed the order dated May 4, 1992.
A copy of this order has been produced as Annexure P-4 with the writ petition.
In this order, after noticing the allegations, it has been mentioned that the petitioner had submitted his reply on which comments were sought from the Executive Engineer, Superintending Engineer and the Chief Engineer.
After examination, the Government had found that Shri Gurmel Singh, Sub Divisional Engineer (Retd.)
is prima facie responsible for the loss to the tune of Rs. 1,71,916/-.
The details of the loss were mentioned and the penalty for the recovery of this loss was imposed.
The petitioner alleges that the order is illegal and prays that it be quashed.
3.
The claim made by the petitioner has been controverted by the respondents.
4.
Learned counsel for the parties have been heard.
5.
Mr. Suryakant, learned counsel for the petitioner, has contended that the order is violative of the principles of natural justice inasmuch as it is based on material which was never conveyed to the petitioner.
Secondly, it has been contended that the submissions made by the petitioner in reply to the charge sheet have not been considered by the respondents.
Thus, the order is vitiated.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioner has been controverted by the learned counsel for the respondents.
6.
It is the admitted position that on receipt of the charge sheet, the petitioner had submitted a detailed reply.
A copy of this reply has been produced as Annexure P-2 with the writ petition.
It is at pages 31 to 45 of the paper book.
It is further the admitted position that the comments of the Executive Engineer, Superintending Engineer and the Chief Engineer were obtained.
What were the comments ?
Was the stand of the petitioner found to be correct or false ?
What were the reasons ?
These questions remain unanswered.
Admittedly, the petitioner was not informed about the comments.
Not only that, even his reply has not been considered.
It has only been observed that the comments on the representation of Shri Gurmel Singh Sub Divisional Engineer (Retd.)
were sought from ......... and the same were examined at length by the Government and found that Shri Gurmel Singh Sub Divisional Engineer (Retd.)
was prima facie responsible for the loss to the tune of Rs. 1,71,916/-.
The petitioner's reply has not been even noticed.
Why has it been rejected ?
Which part of it is incorrect ?
Nothing has been indicated.
7.
In view of the above, the impugned order cannot be sustained.
It is, consequently, set aside and the writ petition is allowed.
If any retiral benefits of the petitioner have not been released so far, the respondents shall do so forthwith.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.