Arun Kumar Goel, J - This appeal is directed against the judgment passed by a learned Single Judge of this Court in O.W.P.
No. 667/97.
By means of impugned judgment, it was directed that the respondents-authorities would treat the writ petition as a representation and take such decision as is permissible under law within a period of six months.
This period was to commence from the date, when copy of the order passed by the Court was made available to the authorities alongwith the writ petition and Annexures.
On decision being taken, it was to be indicated to the counsel for the petitioner.
It is this decision, which has been questioned in this appeal by the appellants, who were the original petitioners in the writ petition filed by them.
2.
The appellants had questioned Note No. 3 appended to the Schedule annexed with SRO-180 of 1997 dated 2651997, whereby ratio of 1:3 was provided for recruitment between Degree-holders and Diploma-holders Engineers to the post of Junior Engineers Grade-II.
Sum and substance of the pleadings of the appellants urged in the writ petition was that higher qualification and better professional service should have been the criteria taken into account by the authorities concerned while framing of SRO, thus instead of ratio 1:3 for the post of Junior Engineer Grade-II between Degree-holders and Diploma-holders, it should have in fact been 3:1.
The basis for such claim by the appellants was that they obtained their degree after six years of their matriculation.
On the other hand, the Diploma-holders get their degree after three years of their matriculation.
Thus the number of Degree-holders is doubled during the period, one batch of degree-holders comes out of this Institution.
3.
Discrimination was the other ground put up in support of the petition and pendency of SWP No. 533/88 was urged as an additional ground for the grant of relief prayed for.
Having made representations to the Government, which remained un-attended compelled them to approach the Court in the Writ Petition.
On the other hand, case of the respondent-State is that the writ petition is not maintainable as there is no violation of any legal, constitutional or statutory right as claimed by the appellants.
While elaborating its case further it was pleaded that the post now designated as Junior Engineer was earlier designated as Sectional-Officer and prior to it overseer.
This post was in fact manned by Degree-holders and keeping in view the number of Degree-holders coming out of the Colleges, ratio of 1:3 was fixed with a view to provide an additional entry point to them.
In fact Degree-holders are entitled to be recruited as Assistant Engineers through Public Service Commission, which is the entry point for them.
This entry point is the exclusive right available to the Degree-holders; whereas 20 out of 100 posts of Assistant Engineers are meant for Departmental Promotees from amongst Diploma-holders to this post having requisite number of years service as Junior Engineer.
Remaining 80 posts go to the Degree-holders.
It has further been pointed out that the matter had been receiving attention of the Government on the representations made by different Associations of Degree- holders and Diploma-holders and a Committee was constituted to examine the matter.
The recommendations made by the Committee were accepted by the Government except a few points therein, which lad to the issuance of Government Order No. G-Estt-13/87 on 2961997.
This was protested to by the students as well as Graduate Engineers Associations in the State, as according to them recruitment of all the Graduate Engineers to the post of Junior Engineer could not be done, because they should not be equated with the Diploma-holders.
It was further urged by the Associations that the post of Assistant Engineers to be re-designated for promotion to the post of Assistant Executive Engineers.
4.
It was also pointed out by the Government that after having joined as Junior Engineer, a Degree-holders could compete for the post of Assistant Engineer.
Thus even if he failed for the later job, his working as Junior Engineer was not disturbed.
Whereas Diploma-holders could only compete at the initial point for the post of Junior Engineer and of course, and were liable to be considered for promotion to the post of Assistant Engineers, against 20 per cent posts subject to his fulfilling other conditions as per rules.
And in case a Degree-holders joined as Junior Engineer Grade-II, he was entitled to eight advance increments.
It was also the case of the State that simply because Degree-holders have higher qualification, would not be a ground to change the ratio as mentioned in the schedule and as claimed by the petitioners, which according to it was correct and called for no interference.
It is also the case of the respondents that SRO-180 of 1997 dated 2651997 is legally valid and calls for no interference.
Ratio being not justifiable was another ground pressed into service for rejecting the claim of the appellants.
5.
Learned counsel appearing for the appellants have submitted that the SRO is bad in law as it creates discrimination between Degree-holders and Diploma-holders, besides this there is no nexus between the ratio of 1:3 as fixed in the impugned SRO.
It is also the case of the appellants that before fixing the ratio, exercise of collecting data regarding the number of Degree- holders and Diploma-holders should have been carried out and it was only thereafter that the ratio, if any, could be fixed by the petitioners.
Endeavour on the part of the State should have been to add efficiency by recruiting higher qualified persons, who were available and by fixing the ratio in question, this object has been defeated.
6.
Further argument in support of this appeal was that ratio would mean within two similar classes and while doing so, it can never be meant to put two unequals as equals as in the present case.
Therefore, while fixing the ratio on the basis of educational qualification as in the present case, respondents' action has no legal sanction behind it.
Ratio in the present case provides bigger number of jobs to the lesser qualified persons, when persons with higher qualification are available and are willing to serve.
Not only this it was also urged that while treating the equality as a positive act, respondents have given it in favour of the lesser qualified person, i.e., Diploma-holders by providing larger number of them at the time of fixing ratio, which will further result in adding to in-efficiency.
Therefore, on this ground also, it was urged that the SRO No. 180 of 1997 was liable to be struck down.
While controverting all these pleas urged in support of this appeal, learned Advocate General submitted that prior to the issuance of SRO, Diploma-holders were eligible for being appointed as Junior Engineers.
By means of SRO-180 of 1997, Degree-holders have been put into the exclusive domain meant for the Diploma-holders.
It was further pointed out by Mr. Goni, that reservation if any, has been provided in favour of the Degree-holders.
While referring to the record produced for perusal of the Court, it was pointed out that after being faced with SRO-90 of 1988, which is a subject-matter of SWP No. 533/88 before Srinagar Wing of the Court, present SRO came to be issued.
Another ground urged on behalf of the respondents while praying for dismissal of this appeal is that scope of case can't be allowed to be extended by the appellants in this appeal, than what was set out in the main writ petition.
It was further pointed out that it is a admitted case of the appellants that both the degree-holders and Diploma-holders are separate identified then it is not understood as to what is the rational basis to question the ratio fixed by the Government in the SRO in question.
Selection of candidates having not been questioned and thus in no case their appointments could be impugned by the appellants.
S/Shri D.S.
Chauhan and Anil Sethi, Advocates appearing for some of the Diploma-holders and selected candidates supported the stand of the State and submitted that State by framing of the SRO has made an attempt to come out of a situation, otherwise 100 per cent recruitment to the post of Junior Engineers should have been kept exclusively for Diploma-holders.
It was also urged by them that in the absence of selected candidates, no order to their detriment could be passed by the court.
7.
In 1995 Supp(4) SCC 718, Nageshwar Prasad and others v. Union of India and others, Supreme Court while examining a case relating to prescription of specific quota of 50:50 basis to the post of Assistant Engineer from Degree- holders with three years experience and for Diploma-holders with seven years experience, held that such criteria was not arbitrary and thus not violative of Article 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
8.
In AIR 1983 SC 803, State of Maharashtra v. Chandrabhan, amongst other things it was observed that public employment is property of nation which has to be shared equally subject of course to the qualification necessary for holding the office or post, however, it should not be monopolised by any particular section of this country in the name of efficiency, though efficiency cannot altogether be ignored.
9.
In 1989 Supp.
(1) SCC 116, Roop Chand Adlakha and others v. Delhi Development Authority and others, Supreme Court while examining the reasonableness of classification with reference to Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India, held as under :-  "A larger number of authorities were cited on either side.
We may first examine the cases relied upon by the High Court in support of its conclusion.
The inherent distinction between a person with a degree and one who is merely a Diploma-holder is much too obvious.
But the question that falls for consideration, in the context such as the present one, is whether the differences have a reasonable relation to the nature of the office to which the promotion is contemplated.
The idea of equality in the matter of promotion can be predicated only when the candidates for promotion are drawn from the same source.
If the differences in the qualification have a reasonable relation to the nature of duties and responsibilities, that go with and are attendant upon the promotional post, the more advantageous treatment of those who possess higher technical qualifications can be legitimised on the doctrine of classification.
There may, conceivably, be cases where the differences in the educational qualifications may not be sufficient to give any preferential treatment to one class of candidates as against another.
Whether the classification is reasonable or not must, therefore, necessarily depend upon facts of each case and the circumstances obtaining at the relevant time.
When the State makes a classification between two sources, unless the vice of the classification is writ large on the face of it, the person assailing the classification must show that it is unreasonable and violative of Article 14.
A wooden equality as between all classes of employees irrespective of all distinctions or qualifications, or job requirements is neither constitutionally compelled nor practically meaningful.
This court in GM South Central Railway v. AVR Siddhanti observed :- (SCC p. 343 SCC (L&S) p. 298, para 20) "A wooden equality as between all classes of employees regardless of qualifications, kind of jobs, nature of responsibility and performance of the employees is not intended, nor is it practicable if the administration is to run.
Indeed, the maintenance of such a 'classless' and undiscerning `equality' where, in reality, glaring inequalities and intelligible differentia exist, will deprive the guarantee of its practical content.
Broad classification based on reason, executive pragmatism and experience having a direct relation with the achievement of efficiency in administration, is permissible.
In T Devadasam v Union of India this Court observed : "What is meant by equality in this article is, equality amongst equals.
It does not provide for an absolute equality of treatment to all persons in utter disregard in every conceivable circumstances of the differences such as age, sex, education and so on and so forth as may be found amongst people in general.
Indeed, while the aim of this article is to ensure that invidious distinction or arbitrary discrimination shall not be made by the State between a citizen and a citizen who answer the same description and the differences which may obtain between them are of no relevance for the purpose of applying a particular law reasonable classification is permissible.
It does not mean anything more.
19.
But then the process of classification is in itself productive of inequality and in that sense antithetical of equality.
The process would be constitutionally valid if it recognises a pre-existing inequality and acts in aid of amelioration of the effects of such pre-existent in-equality.
But the process cannot in itself generate or aggravate the inequality.
The process cannot merely blow up or magnify insubstantial or microscopic differences on merely meretricious or plausible differences.
The over, emphasis on the doctrine of classification or any anxious and sustained attempts to discover some basis for classification may gradually and imperceptible deprive the article of its precious content and end in replacing doctrine of equality by the doctrine of classification.
The presumption of good faith in and of constitutionality of a classification cannot be pushed to the point of predicating some possible or hypothetical but undisclosed and unknown reason for a classification rendering the precious guarantee of equality "a mere rope of sand".
20.
"To over do classification is to undo equality."
The idea of similarly or dissimilarity of situations of persons, to justify classification, cannot rest on merely differential which may, by themselves be rational or logical, but depends on whether the differences or logical, but depends on whether the differences are relevant to the goals sought to be reached by the law which seeks to classify.
The justification of the classification must needs, therefore, to be sought beyond the classification.
All marks of distinction do not necessarily justify clarification irrespective of the relevance or nexus to objects sought to be achieved by the law imposing the classification."
10.
On the matter relating to scope of judicial review by this Court in the present proceedings, reliance was placed on AIR 1997 SC 1390, State of Bihar and others v. Subash Singh and AIR 1979 SC 1628, Ramana Dayaram Shetty v. The International Airport Authority of India and others.
11.
In AIR 1980 SC 1992, M/s. Kasturi Lal Lakshmi Reddy v. The State of Jammu and Kashmir and another, it was held that the Government does not have unlimited discretion in the matter relating to grant of government largesses.
Such action must satisfy the test of reasonableness and public interest.
It was further held in this judgment that every activity of Government has a public element in it and it must therefore be informed with reasons and guided by public interest.
Further it was held that every action taken by the Government must be in public interest and it cannot act arbitrarily and without reason, and in case it does so, such an action would be liable to be invalidated.
12.
In AIR 1986 SC 210, B Prabhakar Rao and others v. State of Andhra Pradesh and others, it was observed that when an ordinance of the Government is questioned, then the relief claimed would be against the Government and not against those persons affected by it.
Therefore absence of such persons would not make the petition unmaintainable."
13.
In AIR 1993 SC 929, Y Srinivasa Rao v. J Veeraiah and others, while considering the question relating to dealership of a fair price shop, it was observed as under :-  "6.
The decision to prefer an uneducated person over an educated person amounts to allowing premium on ignorance, incompetence and consequently inefficiency.
The only fault of the appellant is to have pursued his studies beyond 10th class of his school.
If he had discontinued his career as a student even earlier, say after passing 7th or 8th class, he would have been running the shop today.
This clearly amounts to gross arbitrariness and, therefore, illegal discrimination.
Pursuing this line the State will have to be going in search of a more inefficient person and we do not know where this process would end.
If we assume that since a better qualified person has got a better chance to succeed in life, an intelligent applicant who can run the shop efficiently should be rejected and a dim-witted fellow should be selected.
This is an absurd situation.
7.
The argument of the learned State counsel that a better qualified person is not likely to stick to the job, is not spelt out by the Government Orders.
In any event, with a view to ensure that a person not interested in running the business may not obtain the settlement of the shop merely on the basis of his qualifications, can be taken care of by imposing appropriate conditions, say, by restricting the choice to local inhabitants, and, or requiring furnishing of guarantee for running the business for a number of years.
We, therefore, do not find any rationale in adopting the policy as indicated on behalf of the respondent.
So far the interview fixed as the sole criterion in the present case according to the impugned judgment is concerned, the same in absence of a guideline leaves the matter to the whims of the individual officer holding the interview.
The exercise of such unbridled power will be clearly violative of Article 14.
The policy referred to by the State counsel as contained in one of the Government Orders and relied upon before us in support of the impugned judgment, therefore, must held to be unconstitutional."
14.
In 1997(1) SCT 623 (SC) : 1997(1) SCC 253, Commissioner, Corporation of Madras v. Madras Corporation Teachers' Mandram and others, while examining the scope of judicial interference with creation of posts and prescription of qualifications, it was held as under :-  "4.
Learned Counsel for the respondents, in fairness, was unable to meet the contention but he sought to sustain this order on the ground that appointment by transfer affects in-service candidates.
We cannot go into it because it is not the subject-matter in this case.
Under these circumstances, as stated earlier, the question is whether the Tribunal can give direction to create a post or to prescribe the minimum qualifications for the post ?
It is a well- settled legal position that it is the legal or executive policy of the Government to create a post or to prescribe the qualifications for the post.
The court or tribunal is devoid of power to give such direction.
The impugned direction, therefore, is clearly illegal."
In AIR 1989 SC 2060, State of Andhra Pradesh and another v. Sadanandam , it was held as under :-  "It is not for judicial bodies to sit in judgment over the wisdom of the executive in choosing the mode of recruitment or the categories from which the recruitment should be made as they are matters of policy decision falling exclusively within the purview of the executive."
15.
In AIR 1967 SC 839, Govind Dattatray Kelkar and others v. Chief Controller of Imports and Exports and others, while considering the matter relating to recruitment to posts from different sources and ratio between such sources in relation to its adequacy, it was held that it depends upon facts of each case as well as requirements and needs thereof.
It was further held that unless ratio is too unreasonable as to amount to discrimination, court cannot strike it down or suggest different one in the following words :-  "(16) But, it is said that if the system of rotation was necessary, the Government should have applied the ratio of 50:50 and not 75:25.
When the recruitment to certain posts is from different sources, what ratio would be adequate and equitable would depend upon the circumstances of each case and the requirements and needs of a particular post.
Unless the ratio is so unreasonable as to amount to discrimination, it is not possible for this Court to strike it down or suggest a different ratio.
Nothing has been placed before us to show that the ratio of 3:1 is so flagrant and unreasonable as to compel us to interfere with the order of the Government."
16.
In AIR 1985 SC 167, Prabodh Verma and others v. State of Uttar Pradesh and others, and in 1998(1) SCT 533 (SC) : AIR 1998 SC 331, Arun Tiwari and others v. Zila Mansavi Shikshak Sangh and others, it was held that in the absence of affected persons selected/appointed as per provisions decision of the application by the Administrative Tribunal without making such parties and without issuing them notices was held to be illegal.
17.
In AIR 1990 SC 535, J Ranga Swamy v. Govt. of Andhra Pradesh and others, amongst other things it was observed that relevance and suitability of qualification prescribed for a post is not to be considered and assessed by the Court.
In case of any grievance in that behalf appropriate authority can be moved for review of prescribed qualifications.
18.
In AIR 1968 SC 349, The State of Mysore and another v. P Narasinga Rao, while considering the matter relating to equality of opportunity in matters of public employment in relation to reasonable classification, it was held as under :  "The relevant law on the subject is well settled.
Under Article 16 of the Constitution, there shall be equality of opportunity for all citizens in matters relating to employment or appointment to any office under the State or to promotion from one office to a higher office thereunder.
Article 16 of the Constitution is only an incident of the application of the concept of equality enshrined in Article 14 thereof.
It gives effect to the doctrine of equality in the matter of appointment and promotion.
It follows that there can be a reasonable classification of the employees for the purpose of appointment or promotion.
The concept of equality in the matter of promotion can be predicted only when the promotees are drawn from the same source.
This Court in dealing with the extent of protection of Article 16(1) observed in General Manager, Southern Rly.
v. Rangachari, 1962(2) SCR 586 at p. 596 : AIR 1962 SC 36 at pp. 40-41 : "Thus construed it would be clear that matters relating to employment cannot be confined only to the initial matters prior to the act of employment.
The narrow construction would confine the application of Article 16(1) to the initial employment and nothing else; but that clearly is only one of the matters relating to employment would inevitably be the provision as to the salary and periodical increments therein, terms as to leave, as to gratuity, as to pension and as to the age of superannuation.
These are all matters relating to employment and they are, and must be, deemed to be included in the expression `mattes relating to employment' in Article 16(1) ............This equality of opportunity need not be confused with absolute equality as such.
What is guaranteed is the equality of opportunity and nothing more.
Article 16(1) and (2) does not prohibit the prescription of reasonable rules for selection to any employment or appointment to any office.
Any provision as to the qualifications for the employment or the appointment to office reasonably fixed and applicable to all citizens would certainly be consistent with the doctrine of the equality of opportunity; but in regard to employment like other terms and conditions associated with and incidental to it, the promotion to a selection post is also included in the matters relating to employment, and even in regard to such a promotion to a selection post all that Article 16(1) guarantees is equality of opportunity to all citizens who enter service.....
In this connection it may be relevant to remember that Article 16(1) and (2) really give effect to the equality before law guaranteed by Article 14 and to the prohibition of discrimination guaranteed by Article 15(1).
The three provisions form part of the same constitutional code of guarantees and supplement each other.
If that be so, there would be no difficulty in holding that the matters relating to employment must include all matters in relation to employment both prior and subsequent, to the employment which are incidental to the employment and form part of the terms and conditions of such employment."
The argument was stressed on behalf of the respondent that success in the SSLC examination had no relevance to the post of tracer and the tracers of the erstwhile State of Hyderabad who were allotted to the new State of Mysore were persons similarly situated and there was no justification for making a discrimination against only some of them by creating a higher pay scale for tracers who had passed the SSLC examination.
It was contended for the respondent that all the tracers who were allotted to the new State of Mysore were persons who were turning out the same kind of work and discharging the same kind of duty and there was no relational basis for making two classes of tracers, one consisting of those who had passed the SSLC examination and the other consisting of those who had not.
In our opinion there is no justification for the argument put forward in favour of the respondent.
It is well settled that though Article 14 forbids class legislation, it does not forbid reasonable classification for the purposes of legislation.
When any impugned rule or statutory provision is assailed on the ground that it contravenes Article 14, its validity can be sustained if two tests are satisfied.
The first test is that the classification on which it is founded must be based on an intelligible differentia which distinguishes persons or things grouped together from others left out of the group, and the second test is that the differential in question must have a reasonable relation to the object sought to be achieved by the rule or statutory provision in question.
In other words, there must be some rational nexus between the basis of classification and the object intended to be achieved by the statute or the rule.
As we have already stated, Article 14 and 16 form part of the same constitutional Code of guarantees and supplement each other.
In other words, Article 16 is only an instance of the application of the general rule of equality laid down in Article 14 and it should be construed as such.
Hence, there is no denial of equality of opportunity unless the person who complains of discrimination is equally situated with the person or persons who are alleged to have been favoured; Article 16(1) does not bar a reasonable classification of employees or reasonable tests for their selection.
It is true that the selective test adopted by the Government for making two different classes will be violative of Articles 14 and 16 if there is no relevant connection between the test prescribed and the interest of public service.
In other words, there must be a reasonable relation of the prescribed test to the suitability of the candidate for the post or for employment to public service as such.
The provisions of Article 14 or Article 16 do not exclude the laying down of selective tests, nor do they preclude the Government from laying down qualifications for the post in question.
Such qualifications need not be only technical but they can also be general qualifications relating to the suitability of the candidate for public service as such.
It is, therefore, not right to say that in the appointment to the post of tracers the Government ought to have taken into account only the technical proficiency of the candidates in the particular craft.
It is open to the Government to consider also the general educational attainments of the candidates and to give preference to candidates who have better educational qualifications besides technical proficiency of a tracer.
The relevance of general education even to technical branches of public service was emphasised long ago by Macaulay as follows :  "Men who have been engaged, up to one and two and twenty two, in studies which have no immediate connection with the business of any profession, and the effect of which is merely to open, to invigorate, and to enrich the mind, will generaly be found, in the business of every profession, superior to men who have at eighteen or nineteen devoted themselves to the special studies of their calling.
Indeed, early superiority in literature and science generally indicates that existence of some qualities which are securities against vice- industry, self-denial a taste for pleasures not sensual, a laudable desire of honourable distinction, a still more laudable desire to obtain the approbation of friends and relations.
We, therefore, think that the intellectual test about to be established will be found in practice to be also the best moral test that can be devised."
(Hansard, Series, 3, CXXVIII, 754, 755).
In our opinion, therefore, higher educational qualifications such as success in the SSLC examination are relevant considerations for fixing a higher pay scale for tracers who have passed the SSLC examination and the classification of two grades of tracers in the new Mysore State, one for matriculate tracers with a higher pay scale and the other for non-matriculate tracers with a lower pay scale is not violative of Article 14 or 16 of the Constitution."
19.
Validity of ratio fixed as 1:3 between Degree-holders and Diploma- holders is to be examined in the light of aforesaid law as applicable to the facts of present case.
As already noticed, for a Diploma-holder only entry point is to the post of Junior Engineer.
He cannot venture into the job of Assistant Engineer or for that matter where qualification prescribed is higher.
It could not be disputed during the course of hearing of this appeal by the learned Counsel appearing for appellants that this position is factually not correct.
On the other hand a Diploma-holder in addition to being eligible for being considered and appointed as Junior Engineer, is also entitled to be considered for the post of Assistant Engineer through Public Service Commission which is a gazetted post.
In addition to this on account of his being a graduate engineer, a Diploma-holder gets eight increments when he joins as a Junior Engineer which benefit is not available to a Diploma- holder.
Who when considered for promotion to the post of Assistant Engineer must have put in requisite number of years of service as Junior Engineer against 20 posts out of 100 of Assistant Engineer.
20.
Before this, another question that needs to be seen is as to whether the ratio fixed tentamounts to reservation from two different sources for recruitment to the post of Junior Engineer or not.
It is not in dispute that it is exclusively within the domain of executive to prescribe qualification to a post.
No court can give direction to prescribe qualification as it is purely within the executive policy of the State to do so.
Only thing that can be examined by the court is whether it is arbitrary or not.
In this behalf it may also be appropriate to observe that Article 14 of the Constitution of India does not prohibit reasonable classification.
While fixing the ratio of 1:3 as noted above, intelligible differentia that appears to be is that the Diploma-holders have larger and bigger avenues open to them in the matter of seeking public employment, whereas Diploma-holders do not have such avenues.
Thus the object sought to be achieved is that those who have lesser avenues in the matter of public employment as compared to those having larger avenues have been provided larger ratio.
In this context it may be appropriate to notice here that so far the Diploma-holders are concerned, they not only get eight additional increments at the time of their initial recruitment as Junior Engineers, besides getting a chance to direct entry as Assistant Engineer, but they can further undertake the teaching job as Lecturers in ITI etc. which is not the case with the Diploma-holders.
In the facts of this position it cannot be said that there is any inequality of opportunity, muchless discrimination while fixing the ratio by means of impugned SRO between the two sources.
Similarly Article 16(1) does not prohibit reasonable classification based on reasonable tests.
Thus it cannot be said that the ratio fixed in the impugned SRO is hit by Article 14 or 16 of the Constitution of India.
21.
So far power of judicial review by this Court is concerned, it cannot be disputed.
Only thing to be seen is whether any provision of the Constitution is violated or not.
If the answer is in the affirmative, then this court would not hesitate in striking down such provision of rule.
22.
While framing the SRO, which deals with the rules relating to recruitment and promotion to different posts in the department prescribing qualification as well as different sources, is again the domain of respondents.
Record produced by the learned Advocate General indicates that at one stage when it was decided that all posts of Junior Engineer be filled in from amongst the Degree-holders was seriously objected to by the students as well as Degree- holder Engineers, as according to them in no case they could be equated with the Diploma-holders.
This position is clear from the stand taken by the respondents in their objections.
After taking stock of whole situation as well as facts, ratio has been fixed in the SRO in question to the post of Junior Engineer and it cannot be said by any stretch of imagination that it tantamounts to reservation so as to call for interference in this appeal.
23.
It may also be worthwhile to mention here that reservation, if any, is provided to the Degree-holder Engineers to the extent of 25% by fixing the ratio of 1:3 between them and Diploma-holders.
In this view of the matter the argument that inequals are being put at par does not hold good.
This court cannot loose sight of the fact that if the plea of fixing ratio as 3:1 against the one prescribed in the SRO is accepted, it will lead to graver situation because on the showing by the appellants number of Diploma-holders get doubled within the period one batch of Diploma-holders comes out of the College.
That being so it will lead to bigger unemployment as compared to that of Diploma-holders, besides other facts.
In the face of this position it cannot be said that the ratio fixed by the impugned SRO suffers from any legal infirmity calling for interference in the present proceedings.
So far the argument that object while framing the rules is to add efficiency by recruiting people with higher qualification is concerned, suffice it to say that when minimum qualification required for the post of Junior Engineers is Diploma-holder, then while accepting candidates from amongst such persons best available need to be recruited.
While examining the matter of relating to qualification in relation to a particular post, it can never be the object of any rule to ignore the persons fulfilling the requisite qualifications to be excluded from the zone of consideration and persons with higher qualifications to be given preference over them.
24.
Another reason to turn down the plea of reversing the ratio from 1:3 to 3:1 amongst Degree-holders and Diploma-holders is that it will lead to virtual unemployment of the latter category.
This is so when the stand of the appellants is that number of candidates passing out as Diploma-holders is double as compared to Degree-holders in the same period.
This plea instead of achieving any object would rather defeat the directive principle of State policy enshrined under Article 41 of the Constitution of India which amongst other things speaks of State providing within the limits of its economic capacity and development to make effective provisions for securing the right to work.
25.
Precedents referred to hereinabove also do not in any manner advance the case of the appellants.
Especially when it is not disputed that the diploma is the basic qualification for the post of Junior Engineer, keeping in view the nature, responsibility and job.
Their only case is because people with higher qualification are available and are ready to work, therefore, they need to be preferred by changing the ratio as claimed by them.
While considering this case it also cannot be said that the case of both the categories of Degree-holders and Diploma-holders lacks either reasonable classification or good faith on the part of the framers of the SRO impugned.
On the other hand, it makes an attempt to balance the situation while providing public employment from two different sources to the post of Junior Engineer.
With a view to give advantage of the higher qualification to a Degree-holders recruited to the post of Junior Engineer, eight advance increments are provided to such entrant.
This is additional advantage available to the persons belonging to the category of the appellants when they join as a Junior Engineer.
No benefit can be given to the appellants on the basis of the decision of Y Srinivasa Rao v. J Veeraiah and others (supra).
It is a case on its own facts while considering the matter relating to allotment of a fair price shop.
It is no body's case in the present appeal that Diploma-holders do not either possess or fulfill basic minimum qualification to the post of Junior Engineer.
Whole thrust of the case of the appellants is that because they possess higher qualification so ratio fixed in the SRO needs to be reversed.
26.
It is also clear from the facts of this case except for candidates belonging to Diploma-holders' category possessing higher qualification, there is no other plausible reason given by them for reversing the ratio.
They appear to be interested in their own cause whereas respondents has to take stock of entire situation, and then form service conditions including source of recruitment as has been done in the present case.
SRO impugned in the writ petition falls within the purview of the rule making power of the Government conferred on it under Section 124 of the Constitution of Jammu and Kashmir.
Here it may also be appropriate to notice that Article 14 in its application provides every citizen to be treated alike without any discrimination, thus equality in fact exists.
Not only this, but equality clause further prohibits the State from discriminating amongst its citizens on any grounds.
Still inequality in fact without differential treatment between two inequals can subsist.
Thus with a view to reduce the gap between inequality in results and equality in fact, protective discrimination, if it can be so termed so in the present case provides equality of opportunity.
Equality in law certainly would not be real equality.
In the circumstances equality of opportunity depends not merely on absence of disparities in educational qualifications as claimed by the appellants but on the availability of opportunities of employment.
The State must, therefore, resort to protective discrimination for making people, who in fact are unequal, equal in specific areas.
In these circumstances it appears that the State while framing SRO in question thought it fit to take into account which existed between a Degree-holder and a Diploma-holder and then took affirmative action by providing the ratio of 1:3 making reservation for the Degree-holders in the bastion meant for Diploma- holders.
In fact such affirmative action though claimed to be discriminatory by the appellants is in fact a calculated attempt on the part of State to provide an additional avenue of entry into State service in favour of persons belonging to the category of appellants i.e. Degree-holders.
27.
In this context it may also be noticed that the ratio on the basis of educational qualification cannot be reversed as claimed by the appellants on the basis of higher qualification obtained by the Degree-holders or say on merit mantra.
Discrimination as claimed by the appellants is not a matter simply to be examined by examining the same on the basis of legal equality.
Besides this, its existence also does not merely depend on the absence of disabilities but on the persons of abilities and opportunity for excellence in each cadre/grade.
Thus where there is inequality in fact, legal equality always tends to accentuate.
Consequently in order to bring real equality affirmative action as in the present case by enacting the SRO in question meets the requirement, and further such an affirmative action though apparently discriminatory as claimed by the appellants, is calculated to produce equality in results on a broader basis by eliminating de facto inequalities by prescribing the ratio in question.
And even if such an action can be taken to be discriminatory, if at all it can be termed so, still protective discrimination is a contour to bring equality which is facet of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
That being so between competing rights of Degree-holders and Diploma-holders in the matter of fixation of ratio as per SRO doctrine of violation of Article 14 has no role to play because protective discrimination is a specie of Article 16, it does not deny equality amongst such classes.
28.
For the foregoing reasons there is no merit in the appeal and the same is accordingly dismissed, consequently Note 3 appended to the Schedule annexed to SRO 180 of 1997 dated 2651997 fixing the ratio of 1:3 between degree holders and Diploma-holders to the post of Junior Engineer Grade-II is upheld.
No costs.
LPA (W) No. 63 of 1998  29.
I have had the benefit of reading the judgment of learned Brother Goel, J in draft.
Despite the great respect, he commands at my hand, I regret my inability to persuade myself to agree with him.
According to me the rule which has prescribed the ratio of 1:3 for degree and diploma engineers for recruitment to the post of Junior Engineer Grade-II deserves to be quashed and not up-held.
To sustain and stand, it is stated below :-  30.
The Jammu and Kashmir Engineering Subordinate Service Recruitment Rules, 1997 (hereinafter `the Recruitment Rules') made under Section 124 of the State Constitution were notified by SRO 180 dated 2651997.
The Executive cadre of the service includes Junior Engineer Grade-I and Grade-II.
The method of recruitment to the Executive cadre of the service is prescribed in schedule II-A The only source of recruitment to the post of Junior Engineer Grade-I is by promotion from the cadre of Junior Engineer Grade-II.
But Degree- holders Junior Engineer Grade-II becomes eligible for promotion after five years as against ten years by the Diploma-holder.
So it is the qualification and method of recruitment which is germane to resolve the controversy.
This as per the Schedule-II-A is as follows :  Class Category Designation Grade of the post + Qualification for direct recruitment + Method of Recruitment.
II Junior Engi-neer Grade-II 1760-3200 3 years Diploma in Civil/Electrical and Mech.
Engineering from Govt. recognised University Degree in Civil/Mech Electrical Engineering or AMIE Sec (A&B) India + (i) 90% by direct recruitment.
(ii) x x x x x x Note-1 x x x  Note-2 x x x  x x x  Note-3 : The appointment of Junior Engineer to Grade-II shall be made in the ratio 1:3 between degree and diploma holders respectively The petitioners have thrown challenge to this note which according to them offends Article 14 and 16 of the Constitution as the classification is not founded on an intelligible differentia.
Here it is obvious that higher qualification i.e. degree in Engineering is on discount because diploma holders are being preferred.
Since the recruitment rules prescribe diploma as well as degree in Engineering as the qualification, the question arises whether qualification prescribed for eligibility can be further subjected to the ratio or quota in which direct recruitment is to be made from degree and diploma Engineers.
It is settled law that Article 14 forbids class legislation, but does not forbid classification.
But permissible classification must satisfy two conditions namely, (i) it must be founded on intelligible differentia which distinguishes persons or things grouped together from the other left out group; and (ii) the differentia must have a rational relation to the object sought to be achieved by the statute in question.
The differentia and object are however, different and it therefore, follows that the object by itself cannot be the basis of the classification.
The first test is not satisfied because both diploma and degree holders have been grouped together while prescribing eligibility qualification for recruitment to the post of Junior Engineer Grade-II because while it is the prerogative of the executive to prescribe qualification and eligibility for the post it is the domain of the body entrusted to make selection to pick the best on the basis of merit and suitability.
Mere fixing ratio in which recruitment is to be made after grouping them together, amounts to reservation which is not permissible under Article 16 of the Constitution What is the basis for fixing the ratio at the entry level is neither traceable nor has been justified on any other ground.
The only justification offered is number of un-employed Diploma-holders being more, higher percentage has been reserved for them.
However, hitherto classification on the basis of higher educational qualification has been up held by the Apex court in a catena of decisions only in the matter of promotion to higher posts or for giving higher pay scales.
No decision of any court dealing with the reservation of posts at the entry level on the basis of qualification was cited at the bar and I confess my inability to find one despite whatever little effort I could make.
31.
All the decisions starting from the State of J&K v. Triloki Nath Khosa, 1974(1) SCC 19; Roop Chand Adalaka v. Delhi Dev Authority, 1989 Supp.
(1) SCC 116; Sham Kant Narain Despande v. Maharashtra Industrial Dev.
Corporation, 1993 Supp.
(2) SCC 194; P Marugasan v. State of TN, 1993(2) SCC 340; Nageswar Prasad v. Union of India, 1995 Supp(4) SCC 718; TR Kothandaraman v. TN Water Supply and Drainage Board, 1994(4) SCT 763 (SC) : 1994(6) SCC 282; JN.
Goel and others v. Union of India, 1997(1) SCT 792 (SC) : 1997(2) SCC 440; Rajasthan State Electricity Board Accountants Association v. Rajasthan State Electricity Board, 1997(2) SCT 18 (SC) : 1997(3) SCC 103 and Union of India v. R Iyyaswamy, 1997(4) SCT 557 (SC) : 1997(7) SCC 727 only deal with educational qualification as a classification for promotion in service.
In this view I am fortified by the decision in TN Kothandaraman's case (supra) :  "The aforesaid bird's eye view of important decisions of this court on the question of prescribing quota in promotion to higher post based on the educational qualification makes it clear that such a qualification can in certain cases be a valid basis of classification; and the classification need not be relatable only to the eligibility criteria, but to restrictions in promotion as well.
Further, even if in a case the classification would not be acceptable to the court on principle, it would before pronouncing its judgment, bear in mind the historical background.
It is apparent that while judging the validity of the classification, the court shall have to be conscious about the need for maintaining efficiency in service and also whether the required qualification is necessary for the discharge of duties in the higher post."
Their Lordships finally concluded as follows :  "From what has been stated above, the following legal propositions emerge regarding educational qualification being a basis of classification relating to promotion in public service : (1) Higher educational qualification is a permissible basis of classification, acceptability of which will depend on the facts and circumstances of each case.
(2) Higher educational qualification can be the basis not only for barring promotion, but also for restricting the scope of promotion.
(3) Restriction placed cannot however go to the extent of seriously jeopardising the chances of promotion.
To decide this, the extent of restriction shall have also to be looked into to ascertain whether it is reasonable.
Reasons for this are being indicated later.
(Emphasis supplied) The proposition that educational qualification can be made the basis for classification relating to promotion in public service was again reiterated in JN.
Goel's case (supra) which reads :-  "The decisions of this court have laid down that educational qualifications can justifiably be made the basis for classification for the purpose of promotion to the higher post.
In State of J&K v. Triloki Nath Khosa (supra), there was a similar provision in the Jammu and Kashmir Engineering (Gazetted Service) Recruitment Rules, 1970, whereunder only graduate Assistant Engineers were eligible for promotion to the post of Assistant Executive Engineers.
The validity of the said rule was challenged by Diploma-holder Assistant Engineers on the ground of violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution and the provision was struck down by Jammu and Kashmir High Court, but, on appeal, the rule was up held as valid by this Court.
It was held : `Formal education may not always produce excellence but a classification founded on variant educational qualifications is, for purposes of promotion to the post of an Executive Engineer, to say the least, not unjust on the face of it......" 11.
In that case also an argument was advanced that Diploma-holders could comfortably fill higher posts for over three decades and no reason was shown why they shall be rendered wholly ineligible even for being considered for promotion to the post of Executive Engineer.
The Court has, however, held :  "Efficiency which comes in the trail of higher mental equipment can reasonably be attempted to be achieved by restricting promotional opportunities to those possessing higher educational qualifications."
(Emphasis supplied) 32.
It is thus clear that classification on the basis of educational qualification was up held on the ground of ensuring efficiency in service on higher posts.
33.
In Rajasthan SEB Accountants Association's case (supra) their Lordships reiterated the law in Narasing Rao's case that educational qualification can be made the basis of classification of employees in State Service in the matter of pay scales and promotions holding that :  "9.
As per the decisions of this Court the position is well settled that educational qualifications can be made the basis for classification of employees in State Service in the matter of pay scales, promotion etc.
Provisions for giving higher pay scale to employees possessing higher qualifications have been upheld as valid by this Court (See State of Mysore v. P Narasing Rao (supra) and Markendeya v. State of AP, 11 1989(3) SCC 191).
Similarly in the matter of promotion classification on the basis of educational qualifications so as to deny eligibility for promotion to a higher post to an employee possessing lesser qualification or requiring longer experience for those possessing lesser qualifications has been upheld as valid by this Court.
10.
In Triloki Nath Khosa (supra) this court has upheld the provisions of the Jammu and Kashmir Engineering (Gazetted) Service Recruitment Rules, 1970, whereby eligibility for promotion to the post of Executive Engineers was confined to Assistant Engineers, who possessed a degree in Engineering and Assistant Engineers, who were Diploma-holders, were ineligible for such promotion.
The said provision was upheld on the ground that it was made with a view to achieving administrative efficiency in the Engineering Service.
On behalf of the Diploma-holder Assistant Engineers it was urged that Degree- holders (direct recruits) and Diploma-holders (promotees), having been appointed as Assistant Engineers on equal terms they constitute an integrated class and for purposes of promotion they cannot be classified on the basis of educational qualifications.
Rejecting the said contention it was held that though persons appointed directly and by promotion were integrated into a common class of Assistant Engineers, they could, for purposes of promotion to the cadre of Executive Engineers, be classified on the basis of educational qualifications.
11.
In Roop Chand Adlakha (supra) under the relevant rules Junior Engineers were eligible for promotion to the post of Assistant Engineer.
Up-holding the validity of the said provisions their lordships held : "The inherent distinction between a person with a Degree and one who is merely a Diploma-holder is much too obvious.
But the question that falls for consideration, in the context such as the present one, is whether the differences have a reasonable relation to the nature of the office to which the promotion is contemplated.
The idea of equality in the matter of promotion can be predicted only when the candidates for promotion are drawn from the same source.
If the difference in the qualification has a reasonable relation to the nature of duties and responsibilities, that go with and are attendant upon the promotional post, the more advantageous treatment to those who possess higher technical qualifications can be legitimised on the doctrine of classification.
There may, conceivably, be cases where the differences in the educational qualifications may not be sufficient to one class of candidates as against another.
Whether the classification is reasonable or not must, therefore, necessarily depend upon facts of each case and the circumstances obtaining at the relevant time.
When the State makes a classification between two sources, unless the vice of the classification is writ large on the face of it, the person assailing the classification must show that it is unreasonable and violative of Article 14."
The decisions of the Apex Court have laid down that (i) educational qualification can justifiably be made the basis for classification for the purposes of promotion to higher post because efficiency can "reasonably be attempted to be achieved by restricting promotional opportunities to those possessing higher educational qualification", and (ii) educational qualification can also be made the basis for classification of employees possessing higher qualification.
But the justification for this is the inherent distinction between a person with a degree and one who is merely a Diploma-holder.
In Roop Chand Adalkha (supra) it has been observed that `If the difference in the qualification has a reasonable relation to the nature of duties and responsibilities that go with and are attendant upon the promotional post, the more advantageous treatment of those who possess higher technical qualification can be legitimized on the doctrine of classification : So it is only in case of higher technical qualification that can justify classification but that too in case of promotion and higher pay scale.
In case of direct recruitment only preference for higher qualification is permissible.
34.
Their Lordships further observed that, "There may, conceivably, be cases where the differences in the educational qualification may not be sufficient to give any preferential treatment to one class of candidates against another."
35.
It is a case where classification is not good because having prescribed diploma and degree in Engineering as qualification for the post of Junior Engineer Grade-II, fixing the ratio in which diploma holders are to be recruited is not a reasonable classification because having grouped them together reserving two-third posts for a class possessing lesser qualification does not satisfy the twin conditions laid down in DD Joshi v Union of India, AIR 1983 SC 420 :  "It is well-settled and not controverted on behalf of the respondents that Article 14 forbids class legislation but does not forbid classification for the purpose of legislation.
It is equally well settled that in order to meet the test of Article 14(i) of the classification must be based on ineligible differentia which distinguishes persons or things that are grouped together from those that are left out of the group; and (ii) the differentia must have a rational nexus to the objects sought to be achieved by the legislative or executive action under challenge."
Reservation of two-third of the posts for Diploma-holders at the entry level while leaving only one-third for the Degree-holders when both are eligible for the post has not been justified even on the basis of job requirement.
Such a classification, therefore, is arbitrary and suffers from the voice of discrimination as it is neither founded on the basis of intelligible differentia nor has any rational relation to the object sought to be achieved which in this case is to select and appoint Junior Engineer Grade-II, out of Diploma and Degree-holders.
Even preference can be given only for higher qualification, though it is otherwise in this case.
36.
Brother Goel has justified the State action on the ground of protective discrimination and affirmative action to remove inequality among the equals.
37.
However, the concept of "protective discrimination" and the term "affirmative action" are traceable only to Article 14(4), 16(4-A) and not to Article 14 of the Constitution as laid down in Ashok Kumar Gupta v. State of UP, 1997(2) SCT 381 (SC) : 1997(5) SCC 201 holding :-  "By abstract application of equality under Article 14, every citizen is treated alike without there being any discrimination.
Thereby, the equality in fact subsists.
Equality prohibits the State from making discrimination among citizens on any ground.
However, inequality in fact without differential treatment between the advantaged and disadvantaged subsists.
In order to bridge the gap between inequality in results and equality in fact, protective discrimination provides equality of opportunity.
Those who are unequals cannot be treated by identical standards, Equality in law certainly would not be real equality.
In the circumstances, equality of opportunity depends not merely on the absence of disparities but on the presence of abilities and opportunities.
De jure equality must ultimately find its raison detre in de facto equality.
The State must, therefore, resort to protective discrimination for the purpose of making people, who are factually unequal, equal in specific areas.
It would, therefore, be necessary to take into account de facto inequality which exists in the society and to take affirmative action by giving preferences and making reservation in promotions in favour of the Dalits and Tribes or by `inflicting handicaps on those more advantageously placed" in order to bring about equality.
Such affirmative action, though apparently discriminatory, is calculated to produce equality on a broader basis by eliminating de facto inequality and placing Dalits and Tribes on the footing of equality with non-tribal employees so as to enable them to enjoy equal opportunity and to unfold their full potentiality.
Protective discrimination envisaged in Articles 16(4) is the armour to establish the said equilibrium between equality in law and equality in results as a fact to the disadvantaged.
The principle of reservation in promotion provides equality in results."
But this case is not covered under Article 16(4) and, therefore, bad in law.
Moreover, the reservation of two-third seats even under Article 16(1) will not be intra vires in view of the law laid down in Indra Sawhney v. Union of India, 1993(1) SCT 448 (SC) : 1992 Supp(3) SCC 215 holding that :  "744.
The aspect next to be considered is whether clause (4) is exhaustive of the very concept of reservations ?
In other words, the question is whether any reservations can be provided outside clause (4) i.e. under clause (1) of Article 16.
There are two views on this aspect.
On a fuller consideration of the matter, we are of the opinion that clause (4) is not, and cannot be held to be exhaustive of the concept of reservations; it is exhaustive of reservations in favour of backward classes alone.
Merely because, one form of classification is stated as a specific clause, it does not follow that the very concept and power of classification implicit in clause (1) is exhausted thereby.
To say so would not be correct in principle.
But, at the same time, one thing is clear.
It is in very exceptional situations, and not for all and sundry reasons - that any further reservations, of whatever kind, should be provided under clause (1).
In such cases, the State has to satisfy, if called upon, that making such a provision was necessary (in public interest) to redress a specific situation.
The very presence of clause (4) should act as a damper upon the propensity to create further classes deserving special treatment.
The reason for saying so is very simple.
If reservations are made both under clause (4) as well as under clause (1) the vacancies available for free competition as well as reserved categories would be a correspondingly whittled down and that is not a reasonable thing to do."
This apart one of the question before their Lordships was whether the reservation of 10% of the post in favour of other economically backward sections of the people who are not covered by any existing schemes of reservation was permissible under Article 16.
The question was answered as follows :  "This clause provides for a 10% reservation (in appointment/posts) in favour of economically backward sections among the open competition (non-reserved) category.
Though the criteria is not yet evolved by the Government of India, it is obvious that the basis is either the income of a person and/or the extent of property held by him.
The impugned Memorandum does not say whether this classification is made under clause (4) or clause (1) of Article 16.
Evidently, this classification among a category outside clause (4) of Article 16 is not and cannot be related to clause (4) of Article 16.
If at all it is relatable to clause (1).
Even so, we find it difficult to sustain.
Reservation of 10% of the vacancies among open competition candidates on the basis of income/property-holding means exclusion of those above the demarcating line from those 10% seats.
The question is whether this is constitutionally permissible ?
We think not.
It may not be permissible to debar a citizen from being considered for appointment to an office under the State solely on the basis of his income or property-holding.
Since the employment under the Sate is really conceived to serve the people (that it may also be a source of livelihood in secondary) no such bar can be created.
Any such bar would be inconsistent with the guarantee of equal opportunity held out by clause (1) of Article 16.
On this ground alone, the said clause in the office Memorandum dated May 25, 1991 fails and is accordingly declared as such."
38.
The State has not justified the reservation in favour of Diploma-holders on the ground of economic backwardness and rightly so because this is provided under Reservation Rules issued under Notification SRO 126 of 1994.
39.
If one is to go by the oral submissions made by the learned Advocate General the only justification is to provide additional avenues of entry in Government service for the Diploma-holders.
This by itself is sufficient to annual the Note because such a reservation is not contemplated by Article 16.
Moreover, so far higher educational qualification has been held to be a permissible basis of classification only to achieve efficiency in service and not to provide employment.
This cannot be justified in favour of those possessing lesser qualification because efficiency in public service cannot be compromised as observed in TR Kothandaraman's case (supra) holding -  "The aforesaid bird's eye view of important decisions of this court on the question of prescribing quota in promotion to higher post based on the educational qualification makes it clear that such a qualification can in certain cases be a valid basis of classification and the classification need not be relatable only to the eligibility criteria, but to restrictions in promotion as well.
Further, even if in a case the classification would not be acceptable to the court on principle, it would, before pronouncing its judgment, bear in mind the historical background.
It is apparent that while judging the validity of the classification, the court shall have to be conscious about the need for maintaining efficiency in service and also whether the required qualification is necessary for the discharge of duties in the higher post.
The aforesaid propositions seem indisputable to us.
We, however, propose to project two other determinants, or to put in differentially, introduce two more spokes in the wheel.
They are call of social justice and importance of education.
In view of the inter-relationship which exists in the fundamental rights, which got established by the decision in Bank Nationalisation case, 1970(3) SCR 530, we have to see, while examining the provision on the anvil of Article 14 is offended in any way.
This Article has expanded its reach almost phenomenonly.
For the purpose of the cases at hand we may not dwell upon that : it would be enough to note that even education (up to primary stage) was held by a constitution Bench to be a part of Article 21 in Unnikrishnan v. State of Andhra Pradesh, 1993(2) SCT 512 (SC) : 1993(1) SCC 645.
The importance of education has been well brought home by Mohan J (a majority Judge) in his concurrent judgment by stating that education is a preparation for living and for life, here and here-after and that "(v) victories are gained, peace is preserved, progress is achieved, civilisation is built up and history is made not on the battlefields but in educational institutions which are seed-beds of culture where children in whose hands quiver the destinies of the future are trained".
So whatever view we take has to be one which does not play down the importance of education."
40.
In case the ratio of 1:3 fixed for degree and Diploma-holders as fixed by Note-3 for direct recruitment in the lowest rung of Engineering service is maintained it will not only affect efficiency in service but also play down the importance of education as if the higher education is a discount.
The fact that Diploma-holders require 10 years experience as Junior Engineer as against five years for promotion to the post of Junior Engineer Grade-I as accepted in the rules itself stares at the aforesaid provision providing two- third reservation for the diploma holders.
So the ratio in which the degree and Diploma-holders are to be recruited in service does not satisfy the condition as it is neither founded on any intelligible differentia to distinguish them when they have been grouped together for eligibility to the post nor the differentia has any rational nexus to the object sought to be achieved which is constitution and recruitment to the Engineering service.
Hence, the LPA is allowed.
The order impugned directing the Government to re-consider the recruitment rules, which amounts to dismissal of the writ petition, is set aside.
Consequently Note-3 of schedule II-A to the Recruitment Rules is quashed.
Without any order as to costs.
Per Kawoosa, J  41.
On the examination of the constitutional validity of Note 3 appended to Schedule II-A of SRO 180 of 1997, governing the Engineering Subordinate Services, difference of opinion has arisen between two brother Judges of this Court while sitting in a Division Bench.
The Division Bench, comprising brothers AK Goel, J and brother OP Sharma, J, was hearing a Letters Patent Appeal.
Whereas brother Goel, J has held the aforesaid Note 3 of SRO 180 of 1997 as intra vires, brother Sharma, J has held it to be ultra vires the Constitution.
Divergence of opinion between the two brother Judges has resulted into formulation of a point of reference under Sub-rule (2) of Rule 23 of the Jammu and Kashmir High Court Rules as follows :-  "Whether Note 3 of Schedule II-A of SRO 180 of 1997 in intra vires or not ?"
The reference has ultimately landed in my Court to decide it as third Judge.
42.
Facts have been detailed out by both the brother Judges in their respective judgments.
However, I think that the facts barely needed to appreciate the point of reference are necessary to be given here.
43.
The Jammu and Kashmir Engineering Subordinate Service Recruitment Rules, 1997 have been notified vide SRO 180 dated 26th May, 1997.
Executive Cadre of the Service in terms of the aforesaid Rules includes Engineers Grade-I and Grade-II.
Method of recruitment to the service is prescribed in Schedule II-A appended to the aforesaid Rules.
The only source of entry into the Service of Grade-I Junior Engineers is by promotion from the cadre of Junior Engineers Grade-II.
The Degree-holder Junior Engineers Grade-II become eligible for promotion to Junior Engineer Grade-I after 5 years, while the Diploma-holder Junior Engineers Grade-II become eligible for such promotion to Junior Engineers Grade-I after 10 years.
As regards the appointment to Junior Engineer Grade-II, the rules provide 90% of the posts to be filled up by direct recruitment from amongst the candidates possessing 3 years Diploma in Civil/Elect/Mech.
Engineering or Degree in the same disciplines of Engineering.
Note 3 appended to Schedule II-A under the column "Method of Recruitment" against Class III posts i.e.
Junior Engineer Grade-II, reads as under :-  "Note 3.
The appointment of Junior Engineer to Grade-II shall be made in the ratio 1:3 between degree and diploma-holders respectively."
The above quoted Note 3 appended to Schedule II-A has offended the Degree- holder Engineers.
Consequently, they challenged it through the medium of a writ petition (CWP No. 667/97).
The learned writ court disposed of the writ petition directing the official respondents to treat the writ petition as a representation and take a decision thereon in accordance with law within six months.
44.
The order of the writ court was questioned before the Division Bench through the medium of Letters Patent Appeal.
The Division Bench proceeded to decide the case as a whole while dealing with the Letters Patent Appeal, and the two brother Judges, as said above, delivered two dissenting judgments, culminating into the present reference.
45.
Heard arguments.
46.
The case of the Degree-holders is that Note 3 appended to Schedule II-A is ultra vires the Constitution as, according to them, the ratio 1:3 fixed for purposes of recruitment between them and the Diploma-holders is not only arbitrary and unreasonable, but has no nexus with the object of classification based on educational qualification.
It is to discourage the attainment of higher qualifications.
They have urged that higher qualifications and better professional training should have been the criteria taken into account by the concerned functionaries of the State Government while framing the Rules.
According to them, the ratio for purposes of appointment to Junior Engineer Grade-II between them and the Diploma-holders should have been 3:1 instead of 1:3 as provided in the aforesaid Note 3.
Their claim is based on the fact that a Degree-holder obtains the Degree in Engineering 7 years after Matriculation; whereas the Diploma-holder gets the Diploma only 3 years after Matriculation.
Their contention is that only efficiency and high technique in the Engineering Services should be the object for making any classification with regard to the service.
This could give a fillip to the superior Engineering service.
It is pleaded that the ratio in question does not have any reasonable nexus with the object of efficiency.
47.
The contention put across is that Diploma-holders have only one point of entry into the Engineering Service.
Secondly, they obtain Diploma in Engineering only after three years of Matriculation, so their production rate is more than double the Degree-holders in a given period of time.
In view of their being available in plenty, they should get a preferential treatment in entering into the Engineer in Services.
Therefore, according to Mr. Kohli, LC for the Diploma-holders, the ratio of 1:3 is a valid classification and does not offend Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
48.
It would be in place to extract below the observations made and views taken by the two brother Judges in their respective judgments on various issues argued before them :  Observations and views of brother Goel, J "Validity of ratio fixed as 1:3 between Degree-holders and Diploma-holders is to be examined in the light of aforesaid law as applicable to the facts of present case.
As already noticed, for a diploma holder only entry point is to the post of Junior Engineer.
He cannot venture into the job of Assistant Engineer, or for that matter, where qualification prescribed is higher.
It could not be disputed during the course of hearing of this appeal by the learned Counsel appearing for the appellants that this position is factually not correct.
On the other hand a Degree-holder in addition to being eligible for being considered and appointed as Junior Engineer, is also entitled to be considered for the post of Assistant Engineer through Public Service Commission which is a gazetted post.
In addition to this, on account of his being a graduate Engineer, a Degree-holder gets eight increments when he joins as Junior Engineer which benefit is not available to a Diploma-holder, who when considered for promotion to the post of Assistant Engineer must have put in requisite number of years of service as Junior Engineer against 20 posts out of 100 of Assistant Engineer."
"It cannot be said that there is any inequality of opportunity, muchless discrimination while fixing the ratio by means of impugned SRO between the two sources.
Similarly, Article 16(1) does not prohibit reasonable classification based on reasonable tests.
Thus it cannot be said that the ratio fixed in the impugned SRO is hit by Article 14 or 16 of the Constitution of India."
"It may also be worthwhile to mention here that reservation, if any, is provided to the Degree-holder Engineers to the extent of 25% by fixing the ratio of 1:3 between them and Diploma-holders.
In this view of the matter, the argument that unequals are being put at par does not hold good......" "Another reason to turn down the plea of reversing the ratio from 1:3 to 3:1 amongst Degree-holders and Diploma-holders is that it will lead to virtual unemployment of the latter category.
This is so when the stand of the appellants is that number of candidates passing out as Diploma-holders is double as compared to Degree-holders in the same period.
This plea instead of achieving any object would rather defeat the directive principle of State policy enshrined under Article 41 of the Constitution of India which amongst other things speaks of State providing within the limits of its economic capacity and development to make effective provisions for securing the right to work."
"It is nobody's case in the present appeal that diploma-holders do not either possess or fulfil basic minimum qualification to the post of Junior Engineer.
Whole thrust of the case of the appellants is that because they possess higher qualification so ratio fixed in the SRO needs to be reversed."
Observations and views of brother Sharma, J "Mere fixing ratio in which recruitment is to be made after grouping them together amounts to reservation which is not permissible under Article 16 of the Constitution What is the basis for fixing the ratio at the entry level is neither traceable nor has been justified on any other ground."
"The only justification offered is number of unemployed diploma holders being more, higher percentage has been reserved for them.
However, hitherto classification on the basis of higher educational qualification has been up held by the Apex court in a catena of decisions only in the matter of promotion to higher posts or for giving higher pay scales.
No decision of any Court dealing with the reservation of posts at the entry level on the basis of qualification was cited at the bar and I confess my inability to find one despite whatever little effort I could make."
"If one is to go by the oral submissions made by the learned Advocate General, the only justification is to provide additional avenues of entry in Government service for Diploma-holders.
This by itself is sufficient to annul the Note because such a reservation is not contemplated by Article 16.
Moreover, so far higher educational qualification has been held to be a permissible basis of classification only to achieve efficiency in service and not to provide employment.
This cannot be justified in favour of those possessing lesser qualification because efficiency in public service cannot be compromised."
"In case the ratio of 1:3 fixed for degree and Diploma-holders as fixed by Note 3 for direct recruitment in the lowest rung of Engineer Services is maintained, it will not only affect efficiency in service, but also play down the importance of education as if the higher education is a discount.
The fact that diploma holders require 10 years experience as Junior Engineer as against 5 years for promotion to the post of Junior Engineer Grade-I as accepted in the rules itself stares at the aforesaid provision providing two- third reservation for Diploma-holders.
So the ratio in which the degree and diploma holders are to be recruited in service does not satisfy the condition as it is neither founded on any intelligible differentia to distinguish them when they have been grouped together for eligibility to the post, nor the differentia has any rational nexus to the object sought to be achieved which is constitution and recruitment to the Engineering Service."
49.
It is worth mentioning here that in their writ petition, the Degree- holders have prayed for quashment of the aforesaid Note 3 appended to Schedule II-A annexed with SRO 180 of 1997.
This is the main prayer made in the writ petition.
The second prayer for the issuance of the writ of mandamus has been made by way of a consequential relief.
Since the brother Judges are at poles apart in their views regarding the constitutional validity and reasonableness of the impugned Note 3 of the SRO, the matter, therefore, calls for a fresh exercise on various propositions of law emerging from the rival arguments and pleas of the parties.
In my view, the answer to the reference depends upon the determination of the following questions involved and emerging from the rival arguments :  1.
Whether classification between Diploma-holder and Degree-holder Engineers based one educational qualification is permissible ?
2.
Whether such classification is permissible at the time of initial recruitment in a public service ?
and 3.
Whether the impugned Note 3 providing inferior qualification as the basis of classification with the object of removing and/or reducing unemployment is constitutionally valid ?
50.
It is well settled now that though Article 14 of the Constitution forbids class legislation, it does not forbid reasonable classification.
When any impugned Rule or statutory provision is assailed on the ground that it contravenes Article 14, its validity can be sustained if two tests are satisfied.
The first one is that the classification on which it is founded must be based on an intelligible differentia which distinguishes persons or things grouped together from others left out of the group; and the second one is that the differentia in question must have reasonable relation to the object sought to be achieved by the rule or statutory provision is question.
In other words, there must be some rational nexus between the basis of classification and the object intended to be achieved by the statute or the rule.
51.
The Apex Court in a catena of authorities has examined the question of classification based on qualification and has held it to be valid.
Way back in 1962, the case General Manager Southern Railways and another v. Rangachari (supra) came up before the Apex Court and it was held that classification on the basis of education is valid.
Again in case Govind Dattatray Kelkar and others v. Chief Controller of Imports and Exports and others (supra), the Apex Court examined the same question and held that classification is prima facie valid unless it is otherwise shown to be unreasonable and violative of Article 16 of the Constitution Onus lies on those who challenge its validity.
Similarly, in SG Jaisinghani v. Union of India and others, AIR 1967 SC 1427 classification on the basis of qualification has been held intra vires.
Identical view was taken by the Apex Court in the following cases also :-  (i) State of Mysore and another v. P Narasinga Rao, AIR 1968 SC 349; (ii) State of J&K v. Triloki Nath Khosa and others, AIR 1974 SC 1; (iii) Y Srinivasa Rao v. J Veeraiah and others, AIR 1993 SC 929; (iv) Roop Chand Adlakha and others v. Delhi Development Authority and others, 1989 Supp.
(1) SCC 116; (v) TR Kothandaraman v. TN Water Supply and Drainage Board and others, 1994(6) SCC 282; and  (vi) Nageshwar Prasad and others v. Union of India and others, 1995 Supp(4) SCC 718.
In light of the fact that classification on the basis of educational qualification has been held to be valid by the Apex Court, I need not go into this question.
As a matter of fact, the learned Counsel for the parties are not at variance on this question.
52.
The second question is whether such classification is permissible at the time of initial recruitment in public services.
The challenge to the impugned rule is essentially made on the grounds that the quota by way of reservation provided to Diploma-holders at the entry point in the service is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
Mr. DC Raina, learned Counsel for the Diploma-holders has argued that such classification is not permissible at all at the time of initial recruitment in public service.
His contention is that the classification no doubt, is allowed but only for purpose of giving promotions and restricting the promotions in order to create efficiency in public services.
53.
I have, however, failed to persuade myself to agree with the arguments of learned Counsel for the Degree-holders or any proposition based on such argument.
It is so, because it is Article 16 of the Constitution only on which the classification is founded and this Article provides equal opportunity for all citizens in matters relating to employment i.e. appointment to any office or to promotion matters from one office to another office thereunder.
It is a fact that all the cases which have come before the Apex Court for the examination of such classification related to promotion matters only.
Right from 1962 till now, the question before the Apex Court in the various cases cited supra was only regarding the promotions.
Squarely to say, classification regarding the initial appointment to a service has not been the point involved.
It, however, does not mean that the Apex court has laid down any law against this.
I am saying so because neither the counsel for the parties have cited any such case before me, nor have I ever come across any such judgment.
It is also a fact that in various cases the Apex Court has clearly held that classification with regard to the promotions is allowed.
As the question of initial recruitment in the cases cited before me was not before the Apex Court, so their lordships have not gone to this aspect of the matter, but that fact does not mean that the Apex court has rejected or disallowed classification at the stage of recruitment to a service.
Since this question is involved in the case in hand, court proceeds to examine and adjudicate upon this aspect of the matter.
54.
Equal opportunity in the matter of employment under Article 16 of the Constitution does not relate only to promotions and a pedantic approach cannot be made.
Wider interpretation is to be given to the word "employment" which, I think, includes the initial appointment, promotions, grades upto the pensionary benefits of a Government servant.
Even the Apex Court in certain cases has interpreted Article 16 of the Constitution in the manner to include the stage of initial recruitment upto the pensionary benefits in the word "employment" and the classification also with regard to the appointments has not been disallowed or discouraged.
55.
In General Manager, Southern Rly.
v. Rangachari (supra), the Apex Court has held as under :-  "15.
This equality of opportunity need not be confused with absolute equality as such.
What is guaranteed is the equality of opportunity and nothing more.
Article 16(1) or (2) does not prohibit the prescription of reasonable rules for selection to any employment, or appointment to any office.
Any provision as to the qualifications for the employment or the appointment to office reasonably fixed and applicable to all citizens would certainly be consistent with the doctrine of the equality of opportunity; but in regard to employment, like other terms and conditions associated with and incidental to it, the promotion to a selection post is also included in the matters relating to employment, and even in regard to such a promotion to a selection post all that Article 16(1) guarantees is equality of opportunity to all citizens who enter service.
16.
If the narrow construction of the expression, "matters relating to employment" is accepted, it would make the fundamental right guaranteed by Article 16(1) illusory.
In that case, it would be open to the State to comply with the formal requirements of Article 16(1) by affording equality of opportunity to all citizens in the matter of initial employment and then to defeat its very aim and object by introducing discriminatory provisions in respect of employees soon after their employment.
Would it, for instance, be open to the State to prescribe different scales of salary for the same or similar posts, different terms of leave or superannuation for the same or similar posts ?
On the narrow construction of Article 16(1) even if such a discriminatory course is adopted by the State in respect of its employees that would not be violative of equality of opportunity guaranteed by Article 16(1).
Such a result could not obviously have been intended by the Constitution.
In this connection it may be relevant to remember that Article 16(1) and (2) really give effect to the equality before law guaranteed by Article 14 and to the prohibition of discrimination guaranteed by Article 15(1).
The three provisions form part of the same constitutional code of guarantees and supplement each other.
If that be so, there would be no difficulty in holding that the matters relating to employment must include all matters in relation to employment both prior and subsequent, to the employment which are incidental to the employment and form part of the terms and conditions of such employment."
(Emphasis supplied) In case Govind Dattatray Kelkar and others v. Chief Controller of Imports and Exports and others (supra), the Apex Court has held as under :  "12.
The relevant law on the subject is well settled and does not require further elucidation.
Under Article 16 of the Constitution, there shall be equality of opportunity for all citizens in matters relating to employment or appointment to any office under the State or to promotion from one office to a higher office thereunder.
Article 16 of the Constitution is only an incident of the application of the concept of equality in the matter of appointment and promotion.
It follows that there can be a reasonable classification of the employees for the purpose of appointment or promotion.
The concept of equality in the matter of promotion can be predicated only when the promotees are drawn from the same source.
If the preferential treatment of one source in relation to the other is based on the differences the said two sources, and the said differences have a reasonable relation to the nature of the office or offices to which recruitment is made, the said recruitment can legitimately be sustained on the basis of a valid classification.
There can be cases where the differences between the two groups of recruits may not be sufficient to give any preferential treatment to one against the other in the matter of promotions and, in that event a court may held that there is no reasonable nexus between the differences and the recruitments......" (Emphasis supplied) Identical and similar views were expressed by the Apex Court in the following two cases :-  (i) SG Jaisinghani v. Union of India and others, AIR 1967 SC 1427; and  (ii) The State of Mysore and another v. P Narasingha Rao, AIR 1968 SC 349.
From the above authorities, it is evident that classification is allowed not only with regard to promotions, but it is permissible even at the time of initial recruitment/appointment to a service as well.
It is a different matter that even at the time of initial recruitment the basis for classification is to be necessarily kept in view i.e. it should have nexus with the object.
If at the initial stage of recruitment efficiency is the paramount object, I do not think that such a classification is disallowed by Article 16 of the Constitution  56.
Whether unemployment of Diploma-holder Engineers, as the object of the impugned Note 3 and the legislative intention guaranteeing their appointment as Junior Engineer, in the Subordinate Engineering Service, as against Degree-holder Engineers, in the ratio of 3:1, is constitutionally valid or invalid, is the next question involved.
57.
The challenge to the impugned Rule is essentially made on the grounds that the quota, by way of reservation provided to Diploma-holders, at the entry point in the service, is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
The impugned Rule intends to provide more chances of recruitment to the Diploma-holders in the Service as against Degree-holders, when reverse should have been the case.
It is further urged that inferior qualification has been made the basis of discrimination between the two categories, and that the basis of discrimination has no intelligible nexus with the nature of office to which appointments are to be made.
According to Mr. DC Raina, learned Counsel for Degree-holders, theory of classification cannot be allowed to be extended to the cause of unemployment only so as to subvert or submerge the same.
While being called upon to decide whether classification in question is constitutionally valid, excellence and efficiency in service should be the paramount consideration.
58.
Defending the impugned rule, it is contended that cadre management is the prerogative of the employer and cannot be questioned.
It is further submitted that fixation of ratio between the two sources of recruitment is a policy matter and is not subject to judicial review.
It is further stated that the strength of Diploma-holders being greater than Degree-holders, the employer in its wisdom has considered it necessary and in public interest to appoint Diploma-holders more in number than Degree-holders at the level of Junior Engineer in the service to deal with unemployment problem of Diploma-holders.
The impugned rule is reasonable and not discriminatory, urge the respondents.
59.
In order to resolve the controversy, it is necessary first to notice some of the well established principles laid down by the Apex Court in the context of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
(a) The power of rule making under proviso to Section 124 (corresponding to the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India) is legislative in character.
The only test such a rule has to pass is that of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution; (b) Though, before making any recruitment, it is not necessary for the competent authority to frame rules under proviso to Section 124 of the Constitution of J&K, but once the rules have been framed, they have to be followed provided they are constitutionally valid (See AIR 1978 SC 327 and AIR 1997 SC 1030); (c) When recruitment to certain posts is made from different sources, what ratio between them will be reasonable will depend upon the requirement and needs of the posts.
If the ratio is unreasonable, amounting to discrimination, it can be struck down, but the court cannot suggest a different ratio.
It will be for the employer to work out reasonable ratio in appointment between two sources of recruitment (AIR 1967 SC 839); (d) The employer can provide preferential treatment to one source of appointment in relation to another source.
But the preferential treatment has to be based on well recognised differences between the two sources and the differences should have reasonable relation to the nature of the office to which appointments have to be made (AIR 1967 SC 839); (e) That the qualifications prescribed for appointment should have rational nexus with the requirements of the service and the appointment should be in the interest of public service (1994(4) SCC 491; AIR 1968 SC 349; AIR 1977 SC 1237).
60.
In the instant case, the impugned rule clearly provides that the appointment of Diploma holders at the level of Junior Engineer Grade-II has to be more in number than that of Degree holders.
The ratio 1:3 clearly demonstrates this position.
The impugned rule does not show the purpose as to why Diploma holders are provided greater opportunity in appointment than Degree holders, when both qualify for appointment as Junior Engineers in the service.
In the counter-affidavit, the purpose disclosed by the Government is "unemployment" of Degree holders, being more in number than that of Diploma holders.
However, during the course of arguments the purpose disclosed by the learned Advocate General is "unemployment" of Diploma holders, being more than that of Degree holders.
If unemployment is the purpose and object of the rule, and the ratio of 1:3 has been fixed in that context, does the rule violate Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution is the question, I proceed to deal with.
In my opinion removal of unemployment among Diploma holders, by resort to the ratio 1:3, in the public service is not permissible.
61.
Engineering Service is one of the important services.
It is a well recognised public service and is primarily involved in the implementation of developmental programmes.
Its importance cannot be underestimated.
In a social welfare State, Engineering Service requires men of higher qualifications, up-right and efficient.
Essentially it is a technical service, and men with skill and higher technical qualifications need to man the posts borne in the service.
Over the years there has been considerable advancement in Engineering and the field has become highly competitive.
In my opinion removal of unemployment among Diploma holder Engineers does not constitute a legitimate object, having regard to the nature of the office to which appointments are to be made.
In fact, reduction or removal of unemployment cannot constitute a legitimate object of public services.
Over the years efficiency in the services has been emphasized by the courts.
It is in the larger interests of society and public that highly qualified technical personnel hold positions of responsibility in the public services.
The impugned rule seeks to achieve the object of removal or reduction in the unemployment of Diploma holder Engineers by making their qualification, which is admittedly inferior to that of Degree holders, as the basis.
In my opinion higher qualification has to be the valid basis for discrimination in the interests as of public service.
In my view I am supported by several decisions of the Apex Court.
62.
In case "The State of J&K v. Triloki Nath Khosa and others" (supra), the Apex Court held as under :-  "55.
We are, therefore, of the opinion that though persons appointed directly and by promotion were integrated into a common class of Assistant Engineers, they could, for purposes of promotion to the cadre of Executive Engineers, be classified on the basis of educational qualifications.
The rule providing that graduates shall be eligible for such promotion to the exclusion of Diploma holders does not violate Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution and must be up-held.
56.
But we hope that this judgment will not be construed as a character for making minute and microcosmic classifications.
Excellence is, or ought to be, the goal of all good government and excellence and equality are not friendly bed-fellows......" In case V Srinivasa Rao v. J Veeraiah and others (supra), the Apex Court has held as under :- "6.
The decision to prefer an uneducated person over an educated persons amounts to allowing premium on ignorance, incompetence and consequently inefficiency.
The only fault of the appellant is to have pursued his studies beyond 10th class of his school.
If he had discontinued his career as a student even earlier, say after passing 7th or 8th class, he would have been running the shop today.
This clearly amounts to gross arbitrariness and, therefore, illegal discrimination.
Pursuing this line, the State will have to be going in search of a more inefficient person and we do not know were this process would end.
If we assume that since a better qualified person has got a better chance to succeed in life, an intelligent applicant who can run the shop efficiently should be rejected and a dim witted fellow should be selected.
This is an absurd situation."
In case Roop Chand Adlakha and others v. Delhi Development Authority and others (supra), it was observed :- "18.
A large number of authorities were cited on either side.
We may first examine the cases relied upon by the High Court in support of its conclusion.
The inherent distinction between a person with a degree and one who is merely a Diploma holder is much too obvious.
But the question that falls for consideration, in the context such as the present one, is whether the differences have a reasonable relation to the nature of the office to which the promotion is contemplated.
The idea of equality in the matter of promotion can be predicated only when the candidates for promotion are drawn from the same source.
If the differences in the qualification have a reasonable relation to the nature of duties and responsibilities, that go with and are attendant upon the promotional post, the more advantageous treatment of those who possess higher technical qualifications can be legitimaised on the doctrine of classification.
There may, conceivably, be cases where the differences in the educational qualification may not be sufficient to give any preferential treatment to one class of candidates as against another.
Whether the classification is reasonable or not must, therefore, necessarily depend upon facts of each case and the circumstances obtaining at the relevant time.
When the State makes a classification between two sources, unless the vice of the classification is writ large on the face of it, the person assailing the classification must show that it is unreasonable and violative of Article 14.
A wooden equality as between all classes of employees irrespective of all distinctions or qualifications, or job requirements is neither constitutionally compelled nor practically meaningful."
In TR Kothandaraman v. TN Water Supply and Drainage Board (supra), the Apex Court held as under:-  "13.
The aforesaid bird's eye-view of important decisions of this Court on the question of prescribing quota in promotion to higher post based on the educational qualification makes it clear that such a qualification can in certain cases be a valid basis of classification; and the classification need not be relatable only to the eligibility criteria, but to restrictions in promotion as well.
Further, even if in a case the classification would not be acceptable to the Court on principle, it would, before pronouncing its judgment, bear in mind the historical background.
It is apparent that while judging the validity of the classification, the Court shall have to be conscious about the need for maintaining efficiency in service and also whether the required qualification is necessary for the discharge of duties in the higher post.
14.
The aforesaid propositions seem indisputable to us.
We, however, propose to project two other determinants, or to put it differently, introduce two more and spokes in the wheel.
They are call of social justice and importance of education.
In view of the inter-relationship which exists in the fundamental rights, which got established by the decision in Bank Nationalisation case, we have to see, while examining the provision on the anvil of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution, whether Article 21 is offended in any way.
This Article has expanded its reach almost phenomenally.
for the purpose of the case at hand we may not dwell upon that - it would be enough to note that even education (upto primary stage) was held by a Constitution Bench to be a part of Article 21 in Unni Krishnan, JP.
v. State of AP The importance of education has been well brought home by Mohan, J, (a majority Judge) in his concurrent judgment by stating that education is `a preparation for living and for life, here and hereafter' and that education is `at once a social and political necessity', and that `victories are gained, peace is preserved, progress is achieved, civilisation is built up and history is made not on the battlefields - but in educational institutions which are seed beds of culture, where children in whose hands quiver the destinies of the future, are trained.'
.......So, whatever we take has to be one which does not play down the importance of education."
Law laid down by the Apex Court, as is evident, is that, it is the higher qualification only which can be made the basis for discriminative classification.
Here in the instant case, the matter appears to be quite reverse, inasmuch as the impugned Note 3 of Schedule II-A appended to SRO 180 provides three Diploma holders as against one Degree holder to be appointed to the service.
In effect, merit (higher classification) has been converted into de-merit and the Diploma holders have been given a premium for their lesser qualification.
63.
No decision to the contrary has been cited before me, nor I have come across any decision where inferior qualification has been allowed to be made basis of discrimination, protecting less qualified persons in the matter of appointment against better qualified persons.
I must, however, hasten to add that I do not mean that a less qualified person can never be appointed.
It will essentially depend upon the nature of the office, its functions, duties and responsibilities of the post to which appointments are to be made.
The impugned rule does not satisfy the twin test of Article 14 of the Constitution.
The object sought to be achieved is outside the purview of the service and there is no intelligible nexus between inferior qualifications- basis of discrimination - and the nature of the office of Junior Engineer to which appointments are to be made.
The basis of discrimination also has no intelligible nexus with the promotion of efficiency in the service.
Court can validly scrutinise the basis of legislation on the ground of reasonability.
There are catena of authorities of the Apex Court in which it has been held that if a legislative Act or a subordinate legislation is not reasonable one, court can declare it ultra vires the Constitution.
Here in this case, it is apparent on the basis of record that the ratio of 1:3 fixed is violative of Article 16 of the Constitution, not only on the ground that it has no nexus with the object, but the ratio itself is unreasonable.
It is open to the court to look beyond the basis of classification and the purpose of law.
The arbitrariness in the fixation of ratio between the two sources of recruitment is evident when judged in the context of felt needs of the time, informed by experience.
Removal or reduction of unemployment among Diploma holders and the legislative intention of ensuring their employment by protected discrimination in the form of the impugned ratio at the entry point in the service clearly violate the mandate of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
64.
The argument of the learned Advocate General that Diploma holders have only one entry point to get inducted into the Engineering Service, while the Degree holders have several avenues and benefits available to them, is not attractive.
Learned counsel for the Degree holders in this context has argued that the impugned ratio of 1:3 does not only restrict the induction of highly qualified persons in technical services, but the feeding channel to the post of Assistant Engineer, insofar as the Degree holders are concerned, will go dry.
There seems to be a great logic in this argument.
65.
In terms of the Schedule appended to the Jammu and Kashmir Engineering (Gazetted) Services Recruitment Rules, 1978, notified vide SRO 209 of 1992, 20% of the posts of Assistant Engineers are meant to be filled in by direct recruitment through State Public Service Commission from amongst the Degree holders.
Rest of the 80% posts are meant to be filled in by promotion from amongst the Junior Engineers and the percentage fixed is 60% of the total from amongst Degree holder Junior Engineers and 20% from amongst Diploma holder Junior Engineers.
It is thus seen that the ratio of promotion fixed between Degree holder and Diploma holder Junior Engineers is 3:1.
The intake ratio of Diploma holders in terms of the impugned ratio into the Subordinate Engineer Service is only 1 as against 3 Diploma holders.
The drop-away ratio from the feeding channel prescribed by SRO 209 of 1992 of these Diploma holders is 3 as against 1 Diploma holder.
In other words, the ratio between the requirement of Degree holders to man the posts of Assistant Engineers and their availability in the feeding channel comes to 3:1, i.e. as against the need of three Degree holders only one Diploma holder would be available in the feeding channel for promotion.
That would lead to drying up of the feeding channel giving rise to a chaotic situation.
Time would ultimately come when there would be a vacuum in the higher Engineering Service, which requires higher technical proficiency, inasmuch as hardly a few Degree holders would be available for manning the posts of Assistant Engineers and the posts higher in rank thereto.
66.
The argument of the learned counsel for Diploma holders that the Diploma holders on their appointment as Junior Engineers get eight advance increments is also devoid of any force.
After all, the higher start of pay given to a Diploma holder appointed to the service on the basis of the impugned ratio cannot, by any stretch of imagination, be a recompense for the inequality meted out to a candidate left out of the selection for the fault of his having chosen to pursue a higher technical course.
It cannot also counterbalance the pain of discrimination suffered by a candidate in wait of induction into the service on account of an unreasonable ratio.
67.
Attempt was made by both the sides to discuss in detail SRO 209 of 1992 which governs the eligibility criteria and recruitment to the Engineering (Gazetted) Services, but I hesitate to go in detail into that SRO, because I am desired to decide only the point of reference relating to SRO 180, not beyond that.
68.
It was urged that since in a given period of time the production rate of Diploma holders is more than double the Degree holders, therefore, the Diploma holders are entitled to a larger and bigger share in the recruitments.
The argument advanced is that, Diploma is obtained only three years after Matriculation whereas Degree is obtained 7 years after Matriculation.
Thus during the same period of 7 years, as against one Degree holder, two Diploma holders are produced and the 3rd Diploma holder also completes one year of the course.
As simple the mathematical calculation, as wholly misconceived the argument is, production rate is related to, or determinable by, neither the qualifying examinations, nor the duration of a course.
Such an eventuality could arise only if (i) admissions to both the courses were made after Matriculation, and (ii) after the admission of a batch of students in either college, the next batch of students, desirous of seeking such admissions, would have to wait for the completion of the respective courses by the earlier batches.
In a continuous yearly process of admission of new batches and completion of the respective courses by earlier batches, such an eventuality is impossible.
It might have been a one time exception long long before that as against one batch of Degree holders three batches of Diploma holders completed their respective courses.
Thereafter, a uniformity in the out-going batches is automatically maintained from the year the first batch of Degree holders completed their 5 years course.
69.
The impugned note 3 demonstrates the legislative intention that the post of Junior Engineer can be manned both by an inferior qualified person (Diploma holder) as also by a better qualified person (Degree-holder).
Prescribing qualifications for a post is the prerogative of the Government and its validity can only be judged if there is no nexus between the prescribed qualification and the requirement of the post or the office to which the appointment is intended to be made.
The employer having determined the requirement of the post and the qualification, the point at issue is that for the discharge of the responsibilities and duties of the post of Junior Engineer should be employer encourage less qualified persons when better qualified persons are equally available.
In order to ensure equality on realistic basis, it is necessary that the ratio between less qualified and more qualified persons is balanced in a manner that equal opportunity is provided to both categories.
Legislative bias in favour of less qualified persons neither promotes efficiency in the service, which in my opinion is of paramount importance, nor does it have any nexus with the purpose of the service for which it is constituted.
By providing a balanced ratio, not only the object of efficiency is ensured in the service, but even less qualified persons also stand a chance to serve.
The responsibilities attached to the post of Junior Engineer can be discharged by the persons from both sources, but one being better qualified than the other, it is believed that ultimately the service stands to gain and eventually the society is benefitted, having regard to the nature of the duties attached to the post.
I am afraid, that this court cannot suggest as to what should be the appropriate ratio between the two sources of recruitment, it being the prerogative of the executive.
A pragmatic approach has to be adopted in order to harmonize the requirements of public services with the aspirations of public servants.
In the case TR Kothandaraman and others v. Tamil Nadu Water Supply and Drainage and others (supra), the Apex Court held :-  "23.
The next question to be examined is about the extent of the preference given to the degree-holders.
At this stage, we may first give our reasons as to why this aspect is amenable to examination.
The rule making authority having made a diploma holder eligible for promotion, it follows that a Diploma holder does not suffer from such an infirmity as to make him totally unfit for holding the higher posts.
If that is so, question is whether the ratio could be made so inequitable as to mock at the guarantee of equality.
The right which has been conferred by one hand cannot be taken away by another; nor can the right be converted to a huck.
It must continue to be a meaningful right.
Too much emphasis on higher education may even cause dent to the cause of social justice, as it would be the poorer section of the society which would be deprived of its legitimate expectations.
The preference given to the Degree holders would, at the same time, give fillip to the desire to receive higher education, as such persons would always be favourably placed as compared to the lesser educated ones.
A harmony would thus be struck, by maintaining reasonableness in the ratio, between the call of social justice and the need for higher education, without in any way jeopardising the principal object of classification.
But then, no particular ratio can be spelt out which would satisfy these requirements, the reasonableness of the ratio shall depend on facts of each case."
In Triloki Nath Khosa's case (supra), their Lordships of the Apex Court have observed :-  "A pragmatic approach has, therefore, to be adopted in order to harmonize the requirements of public services with the aspirations of public servants.
But let us not evolve, through imperceptible extensions, a theory of classification which may subvert, perhaps submerge, the precious guarantee of equality.
The eminent spirit of an ideal society is equality and so we must not be left to ask in wonderment; what after all is the operational residue of equality and equal opportunity ?"
70.
During the course of arguments, it was pointed out on behalf of the Degree holders, that in the Power Development Department of the State there is no ratio provided for selection and appointments between the Diploma holders and Degree holder Engineers.
The appointments are made in the said department purely on the basis of merit obtained by the competing candidates in the test/interviews.
I am afraid, such a course cannot be directed to be adopted by the Court, as it is the prerogative of the Government to decide what method should be adopted and what not.
It would be for the Government to work out a suitable solution.
71.
I am convinced that the employer, in the light of the observations made in this judgment, and in particular having regard to the nature of appointment, duties and responsibilities attached to the post and, above all, to provide fillip to the efficiency in the service, would work out a proper, meaningful and effective solution, which may include a reasonable ratio as well.
72.
In light of the debate and discussions, observations and the principles of law quoted and laid down in this judgment, while agreeing with Brother OP Sharma, J in holding that the impugned Note 3 appended to Schedule II-A of SRO 180 of 1997 is ultra vires the Constitution, the reference stands answered.
73.
Having held that the impugned Note 3 of Schedule II-A appended to SRO 180 of 1997 is ultra vires the Constitution, the next question which arises is, what relief can be granted in the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case ?
Though this question is beyond the scope of reference, yet I feel that ends of justice would be met, if certain equitable propositions are made :-  74.
The admitted position is that the recruitment process was since initiated by the Service Selection Board, but in terms of an interim direction of the Court, the Government was restrained from making appointments.
Therefore, before parting with this reference, purely on the basis of equity, I provide :-  (i) that the State Government could work out a solution and/or prescribe a proper and reasonable ratio between the Diploma holder and Degree holder Engineers within a reasonable time, say eight weeks, in light of the observations made in this judgment; (ii) that in case some appropriate ratio between the two sources of recruitment is provided, the Selecting Authority could proceed accordingly and make appropriate recommendations.
It would be open for the Selecting Authority to re-notify fresh selection list in accordance with the newly prescribed ratio on the basis of tests and interviews/selection process already completed.
In case of deficiency of suitable candidates in either category, having regard to the number of posts for which selection process was initiated, it would be open for the Selection Authority to make good the said deficiency from the respective sources on the basis of merit obtained by the candidates in the selection process already completed.
(iii) These observations made in paras (i) and (ii) above shall not, however, be taken as directions from this Court.
Order accordingly.