Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner is aggrieved by the order of the Central Administrative Tribunal by which his prayer for a direction that his claim for promotion to the IAS the considered, was declined.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner was recruited to the Haryana Civil Service in the year 1975.
He was confirmed in the year 1977.
The petitioner claims that he had become eligible to be considered for promotion to the Indian Administrative Service in the year 1987.
It is alleged that prior to the year 1992, the claims of persons senior to him were considered.
However, in the year 1992, the Committee did not meet.
Thereafter, again from the year 1994-95 onwards, the Committee, has not met.
His prayer in a nut-shell is that the Committee should be directed to consider his claim for appointment by promotion to the IAS with effect from the year 1994-95.
3.
The Tribunal has rejected the petitioner's claim on the ground that he was due to retire on September 30, 1998 and that it "cannot give a direction to appoint a person after holding a meeting of the Selection Committee who would by that date stand retired from HCS."
4.
Mr. Ramesh Sharma, counsel for the petitioner submits that the reasoning adopted by the Tribunal is faulty.
Learned counsel for the parties have been heard.
5.
It is the admitted position that the petitioner was eligible to be considered for promotion in the year 1994-95.
It is also not disputed that his claim has not been considered.
Thus, the petitioner, even if he was approaching the date of retirement when the matter was pending before the Tribunal, had a right to be considered with effect from the due date and on being found suitable, he could be fictionally granted the relief which had been denied to him for no fault of his.
The relief could not denied to him merely because a statutory authority viz. the committee as constituted under the Indian Administrative Service (Appointment by Promotion) Regulations, 1995 had not met.
The respondents cannot be permitted to take advantage of their own wrong.
By sleeping over the matter, they cannot defeat the rights of a citizen available to him under the Constitution as well as the statutory provisions of the regulations.
6.
The right to equality of opportunity in matters of promotion is guaranteed under Article 16 of the Constitution.
The right cannot be stifled by an arbitrary failure to perform the duty imposed by statutory regulations.
By merely choosing to avoid the meeting, a citizen cannot be denied the right to be considered.
7.
Mr. CM Sharma, counsel for the respondent-Commission has contended that the petition suffers from the vice of delay.
8.
We are unable to accept this contention.
The respondent cannot be permitted to take advantage of its own wrong.
It is the Commission's own case that the committee could not meet during the years 1994-95, 1995-96 and 1996- 97 on account of the interim order of stay granted by the Tribunal in SP Gupta's case.
After the stay was vacated on December 3, 1996, the Commissioner took no steps for the meeting of the committee immediately.
If it had performed its duty and nominated a member for the Committee as constituted under the regulations, the petitioner's rights as guaranteed to him under the rules would not have been violated.
By merely failing to nominate a member and not allowing the committee to meet, the Commission can't be permitted to defeat the rights of the petitioner.
9.
It was then urged that the petitioner has since retired from service.
Even this cannot be a ground for refusing to consider his claim.
The right to be considered had accrued in the year 1994-95.
The respondents had failed to consider his claim.
They had not discharged their duty as enjoined upon them by law.
The wrong done to the petitioner can only be remedied by one method viz. directing the respondents to do the needful on the hypothesis that he was in service at the relevant time.
If the petitioner is found suitable for inclusion in the select list and if his turn for appointment comes against an available post in the promotion quota, he will be deemed to have been promoted with effect from the due date.
Consequential reliefs shall ensue in accordance with the rules.
10.
In view of the above, we allow the writ petition.
The order of the Tribunal is set aside.
It is directed that the petitioner's claim shall be considered with effect from the due date for each of the years.
The right shall be considered in respect of the vacancies which have occurred yearwise viz. 1994-95, 1995-96 and so on.
The needful shall be done within three months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
The petitioner is also entitled to his costs which are assessed at Rs. 5000/-.
Petition allowed.