SS Sudhalkar, J - The petitioner was appointed as Panchayat Secretary on 391974 and was placed under suspensation on 29476.
His services were terminated on 4676.
However, he was reinstated vide order dated 10101977 on the basis of the resolution of the Panchayat Samiti, Malout.
A copy of the order of the reinstatement has been appended as annexure P/2 which when translated into English reads as under :  "Panchayat Samiti, Malout has reinstated in service Shri Banwari Lal, Panchayat Secretary, vide resolution No. 4 dated 29.9.1977.
Shri Bansari Lal, Panchayat Secretary, shall be considered on leave without pay for the period he remained out of service till the date of his submitting the joining report and shall not be given any salary for this period.
If the work and conduct of Shri Banwari Lal is not found satisfactory, the matter shall be placed in the meeting of the Panchayat Secretary."
2.
The grievance of the petitioner is that on reinstatement as per aforesaid order, though the petitioner may not be entitled to any pay from the date of his termination to the date of reinstatement as that period was to be treated on leave without pay, yet he was entitled to get his pay fixed on his reinstatement and if he had been notionally drawing the pay during the period he remained out of service because of termination.
What the respondents, according to the petitioner, did was that he was given the basic initial pay of Panchayat Secretary on his reinstatement.
3.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties.
4.
From the order of reinstatment, it is evident that the petitioner was deemed to be in service as if termination order was never passed.
The only rider put in the reinstatement order was that for the period the petitioner remained out of service because of termination, that period would be treated as leave without pay.
The period which is treated as on leave without pay is to be counted for the purpose of increments and all other benefits as if the termination order does not exist at all.
Consequently, on reinstatment of the petitioner his pay had to be nationally fixed as if he remained in service throughout and whatever he would have drawn on the date of his reinstatement, had his service not been terminated, that pay should have been given to the petitioner.
5.
For the foregoing reasons, we allow this petition and direct the respondents to refix the pay of the petitioner as indicated above and pay him the arrears so calculated for the period of 3 years and two months prior to the filing of the present writ petition which was filed on 7.5.97.
These directions be carried out within a period of three months.
Needless to mention that on his reinstatement all other consequential benefits would also flow.
Petition allowed.