AK Mathur, CJ.
- This is a writ petition directed against the order dated 2881997 (Annexure P/1) passed by the Tribunal whereby the petition filed by the petitioner before the Tribunal was dismissed.
2.
The brief facts giving rise to this petition are that the petitioner was working as Peon in the Department of Planning and Statistics.
He worked on this post from 16th October, 1979.
In the year 1979, the petitioner was promoted on the post of Lower Division Clerk and he started his services in the same Department as LDC.
In the year 1982, some vacancies of Cashier and Accountant were advertised by the Commandant General Land Army, MP Bhopal, i.e., Respondent No. 2.
The petitioner through proper channel, applied for these posts.
A written examined was held and he qualified and then he faced the interview conducted by the Respondent No. 2.
Thereafter, the petitioner was appointed on the post of Cashier by the Respondent No. 2 in the pay scale of Rs. 240-460/-, vide order dated 1351982.
Thereafter, the petitioner was relieved from his Parent Department and he joined the services as Cashier in the Department of Respondent No. 2.
The petitioner was transferred from one place to another.
The Respondent No. 2 by order dated 18th September, 1982, reverted the petitioner to a lower scale i.e., Rs. 240-460/-.
However, subsequently, he was restored back to original pay scale.
Thereafter, the petitioner was relieved by the Respondent No. 2 by order dated 31st May, 1995.
In pursuance of this, the petitioner joined his Parent Department, i.e., Economics and Statistics Department.
This order dated 3151995 was challenged by the petitioner before the State Administrative Tribunal that since he was selected by the Respondent No. 2, therefore, he could not have been repatriated to his Parent Department.
That petition was contested by the State and the State justified the repatriation of the petitioner to his Parent Department.
It is also pointed out that meanwhile the Land Army Department has been abolished.
4.
The Tribunal after considering the matter, held that since the petitioner did not resign from his Parent Department and he has been repatriated to his Parent Department as he was on deputation, therefore, the order passed by the Respondent No. 2 repatriating the petitioner to his Parent Department cannot be quashed as the petitioner was on deputation and the deputationist has no right to the post.
Consequently, that petition is dismissed.
Hence, the present writ petition.
5.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
In fact, the petitioner appeared in pursuance of the advertisement, which was issued by the Department Respondent No. 2.
The advertisement which is relevant for our purposes, reads as under :  "GOVERNMENT OF MADHYA PRADESH  HEADQUARTERS LAND ARMY  DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE  ROOM No. 93,  VABLABA BRANCH BHOPAL.
No. LA(AGRO/789/81, Bhopal, dated the May, 1991.
Applications are invited for the following posts in the Land Army Project Offices.
1.
Cashier Rs. 246/460/- 2.
Accountant Rs. 220/375/- 3.
LDC Typist Rs. 169-300/- QUALIFICATIONS : For  1.
Graduate from a recognized University, one or two years experience of dealing with cash for  2.
Graduate from recognised University, one or two years experience of doing accounts work in a Government office.
B Com.
and accounts test passed candidates would be given preference.
3.
Graduate from a recognised University, Hindi Typing test passed from the MP Board of Shorthand and Typewriting, should possess speed of at least 30 words per minute of accurate typewriting.
Applications on plain paper stating age, qualifications, experience and enclosing testimonials should reach the office of the Land Army Headquarters by 20th of June, 1981.
Only persons willing to serve anywhere in the State need apply.
DIP 3413/81  STAFF OFFICER (FINANCE)  LAND ARMY HQ  BHOPAL."
In pursuance of this advertisement, the petitioner appeared in the written test which he successfully qualified and he was called for interview and thereafter, he was selected and appointed by order dated 1351982 in the pay scale of Rs. 246-460/-.
Therefore, assumption of the Tribunal that the petitioner was on deputation and the deputationist has no right, cannot be sustained.
In fact, it was an advertisement issued by the Government of MP Headquarters Land Army Department of Agriculture, and in that the petitioner appeared for regular selection and he came to be appointed.
Therefore, it was a regular selection for the post of Cashier carrying a pay scale of Rs. 246- 460/-, and therefore, it cannot be said that he was sent on deputation from one department to another.
It was a regular selection for the post and he was selected after undergoing regular selection for the post by a direct recruitment.
However, the petitioner's lien was not terminated in his parent department but that does not mean that the petitioner was on deputation.
The lien of the petitioner could not be terminated because the post on which he was selected, was not a permanent post.
The lien of Government servant cannot be terminated unless he acquires a lien in another Department.
Therefore, the petitioner continued in the department of Respondent No. 2 from 1351982 to 3151982.
But no order of appointing him on substantive post was passed for obvious reason that there was no permanent vacancy.
But, by this, it cannot be said that the petitioner was not regularly recruited against the temporary post.
His appointment cannot be brought to an end in this manner.
Therefore, just because his lien could not be terminated in his parent department, i.e., Economics and Statistics Department he cannot be treated on deputation and his regular selection cannot be brought to an end by repatriating to his parent Department.
Thus, the view taken by the Tribunal does not appear to be correct.
6.
However, we have been informed that the Land Army Department of Agriculture has already been abolished and this department does not exist and all the employees working in the Land Army Department of Agriculture have not been declared surplus and they have been absorbed in other department; therefore, no direction can now be given to the department to quash that order and restore the petitioner back to the post of Cashier in the Land Army Department of Agriculture.
However, we have observed that the order repatriating the petitioner to his parent department as L.D.C.
cannot be sustained.
If the petitioner had continued in the Land Army Department of Agriculture and this department has been abolished, then he would have been absorbed on an equated post in the pay scale of Rs. 246-460/-.
But, on account of wrong order passed by the department, i.e. order dated 3151985 repatriating the petitioner back to his parent department, he had to suffer and join back as L.D.C.
in his parent department.
The petitioner is entitled to all consequential benefits as have been given to the persons, who were declared surplus on account of abolition of the said department and the consequential benefits given to those employees should also be given to the petitioner.
Since, the petitioner has already joined back his parent department, therefore, no useful purpose would now be served by quashing the order dated 3151985 and directing his absorption on the equated post.
However, we hold that the order passed by the Respondent No. 2 dated 3151985 repatriating the petitioner back to his parent department, is bad and the petitioner is already working in the Planning and Statistics Department; therefore, he should be given all the benefits to which he was otherwise entitled on account of abolition of the Land Army Department of Agriculture and he being declared as surplus; therefore, the order of the Tribunal is set aside and the respondents are directed that the petitioner shall be given all the consequential benefits which otherwise he would have got, if he had continued in the Land Army Department of Agriculture.
This petition is allowed.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.