SS Sudhalkar, J - Petitioner Harbhajan Singh, who is Junior Engineer (Civil) in the Municipal Corporation, Amritsar claims seniority above the private respondents and challenges the promotion of respondents No. 8 and 11 to the post of Assistant Corporation Engineer in the Municipal Corporation.
2.
Petitioner and private respondents originally belonged to Punjab Water Supply and Sewerage Board (in short 'Board').
In the employment of the Sewerage Board, petitioner was senior to the private respondents.
In the year 1983, due to closure of Sub-Divisions of the Board, options were asked for from the Sectional Officers (Civil) for their absorption in other offices.
Respondents No. 6 to 16, 18 and 19 were declared surplus in the year 1983-84 and they were absorbed in service of the Municipal Corporation.
Subsequently, in January, 1995, petitioner was also absorbed in service of the Municipal Corporation after he was declared surplus.
3.
Petitioner relies on a letter dated 26111984 Annexure P-3, which consists a list of 15 Junior Engineers (Sectional Officers, including the petitioner).
The petitioner is placed at serial No. 1 in that list.
As per the letter, these Junior Engineers had become surplus.
Some important lines from the letter can be reproduced below.
"6.
And whereas, it has been decided that the persons to be appointed as Sectional Officers in the Municipal Corporations, Municipal Committees and Improvement Trusts shall be considered as fresh appointees and they will not be entitled to claim seniority or any other benefits or their past service except protection of their salaries."
It is also mentioned in the said letter that -  "the inter se seniority of these persons in the Municipal Corporations Services, Municipal Trust Services of Sectional Officers shall be in the same order as it was in the Punjab Water Supply & Sewerage Board.
The appointees shall be required to give a clear notice of one month in case any one of them may intend to resign at any stage."
(underlining ours) Relying on the above lines, the petitioner claims seniority over the private respondents.
4.
Respondents No. 1 and 2 have contended in the reply that those who joined Municipal Corporation cadre prior to the petitioner will be reckoned senior in the seniority list of the Sectional Officers in the Corporation cadre.
Moreover, the petitioner had given consent that he will be entitled to seniority from the date of joining the Municipal Corporation as per terms and conditions of his appointment order.
It is also contended that the seniority of Sectional Officers is not required to be determined in respect of the petitioner vis-a-vis the private respondents on the basis of their seniority in the Board where they were working prior to their appointment in the Corporation cadre, which is a fresh appointment by virtue of order dated 26111984 (Annexure P-3 supra).
It is also contended that private respondents No. 6 to 16, 18 and 19 were appointed and posted in three Municipal Corporations of the State vide orders dated 1831983, 441984, 1541983, 26.9.1983 and 18.5.1984, and they were assigned seniority from the date of their joining the Corporation service.
Petitioner was absorbed in the Corporation service vide order dated 26111984 (supra) and, thus, he was assigned seniority from the date of his joining the Corporation service.
Therefore, as the private respondents have joined the Municipal Service prior to the petitioner, they have been placed senior to the petitioner.
5.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, we find that the petitioner's case is without merit.
Petitioner relies on the seniority in the original service of the Board as also the above quoted lines of letter dated 26111984 (copy Annexure P-3) referred to above.
According to the learned counsel for the petitioner, though the new appointment will be considered a fresh appointment, the salaries of the persons absorbed are being protected and also that there is a mention of inter se seniority in the letter dated 26111984 (supra).
However, the mention of inter se seniority is of the persons who were absorbed along with the petitioner and not vis-a-vis the private respondents who were absorbed earlier.
Nothing is shown from the record that it was a policy to absorb all the persons of the petitioner's department in order of their original seniority.
It may be noted that after the private respondents were absorbed, any person who joined after them in the Municipal Corporation or was absorbed in the Municipal Corporation subsequently, could not stake his original seniority.
This is not a case where general scheme of absorption to include all the members of the Board was floated.
Moreover, if the petitioner was not absorbed earlier.
It can be either because his turn for retrenchment did not come or that he found it proper to remain in the original department till he was sure that he would be retrenched.
In the facts and circumstances of the case, the petitioner cannot claim seniority over any person who has joined in the Municipal Corporation before him by absorption or in any other manner.
Resultantly, this petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.