B Bhattacharya, J - This appeal is directed against a judgment dated 19.4.1989 passed by the learned Single Judge in CR 12753(W) of 1987 whereby the writ application filed by the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 was allowed only on the ground that the order dated 24.11.1981 passed by the appellant and impugned by the writ petitioners in the writ application was bad because of the clubbing together of the various heads of the liabilities and the levying of the penalty on the amounts clubbed in the said various heads for varying periods.
We have heard the learned Advocates for the parties and very carefully perused section 14B of the Employees' Provident Funds and Misc.
Provisions Act, 1952.
This section reads as under :-  "Where an employer makes default in the payment of any contribution to the Fund, (the Pension Fund or the Insurance Fund) or in the transfer of accumulations required to be transferred by him under sub-section (2) of Section 15 (or sub-section (5) of section 17) or in the payment of any charges payable under any other provision of this Act or of (Any Scheme or Insurance Scheme) or under any of the conditions specified under section 17, (the Central Provident Fund Commissioner or such other officer as may be authorised by the Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, in this behalf) may recover (from the employer by way of penalty such damages, not exceeding the amount of arrears as may be specified in the Scheme) : Provided that before levying and recovering such damages, the employer shall be given a reasonable opportunity of being heard".
A bare look at Section 14B clearly suggests that where an employer makes default in the payment of any contribution to the Fund, the Pension Fund, the Insurance Fund or in the transfer of accumulations etc. etc., the Provident Fund Commissioner or such other Officer as may be authorised, may recover from the employer such damages, not exceeding the amount of arrears, as may be specified in the scheme.
Power to recover damages, therefore, clearly is dependent upon the commission of default by the employer in respect of the various funds, including the Pension Fund, the Insurance Fund or the Provident Fund etc.
If, therefore, the employer commits defaults in respect of such funds and for varying periods, the Provident Fund Commissioner undoubtedly has jurisdiction to recover from the employer the damages as mentioned in the Section and for computing such damages there is no bar if the Commissioner clubs together various funds for which the defaults were committed, even if the defaults have been committed for varying periods.
2.
In the section there is nothing to indicate that for every individual case of default relating to every single period, the Commissioner has to make a separate order affecting recovery of damages.
The section, therefore, we have no doubt in our mind, permits the Commissioner to club all the cases of the default for all the periods and to make a composite order levying the penalty against the defaulting employer.
3.
In the view that we have taken, regarding the interpretation of Section 14B of the Act, we find ourselves in total disagreement with the view adopted by the learned Single Judge.
The learned Single Judge allowed the writ application by erroneously holding that the Section did not provide for or permit clubbing of various funds and for varying periods.
Since the writ application was allowed in the absence of the respondents and, as we are told even without the respondents having filed any affidavit-in-opposition the opposite point of view was not canvassed before the learned Single Judge.
4.
For the foregoing reasons, therefore, we allow this appeal and set aside the order of the learned Single Judge.
Since the writ application was allowed only the question of clubbing together of the funds and since other points urged in the writ application the writ petitioners were not considered by the learned Single Judge, we think that the ends of justice shall be property served if the writ application is re-heard on all questions which the parties may urge before the learned Single Judge.
5.
We, accordingly, restore the writ application to its original position and remand the same for hearing by the learned Single Judge.
The respondents in the writ application shall file affidavit-in-opposition within six weeks from today, affidavit-in reply thereto be filed by the writ petitioners within four weeks thereafter.
The writ petition shall be listed before the appropriate Single Judge three months hence.
There will be not orders as to costs.
Appeal allowed.