Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioners complain that their services were arbitrarily terminated vide order dated April 12, 1994.
They pray that the impugned order be set aside and that the respondents be directed to reinstate them forthwith.
They further pray that a writ of mandamus be issued directing the respondents to regularise their services.
2.
The respondents contest the petitioners' claim.
It has been averred that both the petitioners were appointed on part-time daily wage basis `Sweeper' and `Water Carrier' respectively.
They were engaged to work at the sales tax check barrier.
In April, 1994, the Government had taken a decision to abolish the barriers.
With the abolition of the barriers, the petitioners were rendered surplus.
Consequently, their services were terminated.
3.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
4.
Admittedly, the two petitioners had been engaged on June 1, 1982, and January 1, 1986, respectively.
The appointments were on part time basis.
They were paid at the rates fixed by the Deputy Commissioner.
It is not disputed that the sales tax barriers had been abolished.
As a consequence, their services were terminated.
In this situation, it cannot be said that the order of termination was arbitrary or unfair.
5.
Mrs. Chaudhary, learned counsel for the petitioners, points out that in Civil Writ Petition No. 2703 of 1995, the order of termination passed in respect of a part-time Sweeper viz. Sohan Lal had been set aside.
She consequently relies on the decision to contend that a similar order should be passed in the present case.
6.
The petitioners have produced a copy of the decision as Annexure A-1 with Civil Miscellaneous Application No. 15842 of 1997.
In this case, it was found by the Bench that the Assistant Excise and Taxation Officer had issued a certificate which showed that the employee was working on whole time basis.
On the basis of the certificate and the pleadings in an earlier petition, their Lordships had found "it just and proper to accept the assertion made by the petitioner that he worked as daily-wage employee between 2371982 and 15.4.1994."
The petitioners in the present case have produced no such certificate.
There is no evidence to indicate that they were not working on part-time basis.
In fact, the categoric assertion in the written statement that the petitioners were working on part-time basis has not been controverted by filing a replication.
7.
Learned counsel for the petitioners contends that vide order dated February 16, 1994, the services of nine employees had been regularised by the Department.
A copy of this order is on record as Annexure P-2.
It undoubtedly shows that the services of seven Labourers, one Water Carrier and one Sweeper had been regularised.
However, nothing has been pointed out to show that their cases were identical to those of the petitioners.
No other point has been raised.
In view of the above, no ground for interference is made out.
The writ petition is accordingly dismissed.
However, in the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.