Arun B Saharya, C.J.
- The appellants, who are Assistant Inspecting Officers, working in the Punjab State Cooperative Land Mortgage Bank Limited (hereinafter referred to as the Bank) (respondent No. 3), have challenged judgment dated 23rd May, 1998 passed by the learned Single Judge dismissing their Civil Writ Petition No. 1884 of 1986.
In the writ petition, they had challenged amendment dated 24th May, 1984, Annexure P2, and subsequent clarification dated 19th December, 1984, Annexure P3, made in the Rules framed by the Bank under Section 84-A of the Punjab Co-operative Societies Act, 1961 (hereinafter called the Act).
Section 84-A of the Act provided as under :-  "84-A Constitution of common cadre of employees of certain societies :-  (1) An apex society may suo moto, and when required to do so by the Registrar, shall, constitute a common cadre of all or specified class of employees in the service of that society or in the service of the central societies which are members of the apex society or in the service of the primary societies which are members of the apex society or the aforesaid societies.
(2) When a common cadre is constituted under sub-section (1) the apex society shall make rules for the regulation of recruitment and the conditions of service of such employee with the approval of the Registrar."
The Bank is an apex body.
In the exercise of powers vested in the Bank under Section 84-A of the Act, the Bank constituted a common cadre of all employees in its service and with the prior approval of the Registrar framed rules called the Punjab State Cooperative Land Mortgage Banks Service (Common Cadre) Rule, 1978 (hereinafter called the rules), Annexure P-1.
Provision was made in the Rules in Appendix II at Sr. No. 10 for promotion to the post of Accountant in the following terms :-  Sr.No., Name of Post, Qualifications for direct recruitment, Qualification for promotion.
10.
Accountants/Superintendents/Manager PLMBS, B.Com., BA, B.Sc.
Preferential qualifications: 1) Worked in any Cooperative/Commercial Bank for at least 5 years out of which 3 years must be in a supervisory capacity.
2) May have passed CAIIB Exam.
3) May have passed higher diploma in cooperation, Should have an experience of atleast 5 years as Junior Accountant/Asstt.
Inspecting Officer/Personal Assistant/Stenographer & should be a graduate.
Provided that the promotions from amongst the Junior Accountant/PAs/Stenographers/Asstt.
Inspecting Officers will be according to their numerical strength in each cadre.
Provided further that in case of non- graduate atleast 15 years service shall be necessary."
Later on, the rules were amended vide Annexure P-2, whereby the first proviso of the prescribed qualification for promotion to the post of Accountant from amongst the three categories of Junior Accountants, PA/Stenographers and Assistant Inspecting Officers according to their numerical strength in each cadre was omitted and provision was made for a joint seniority of the said three categories of officers for the purpose of promotion to the post of Accountant vide Annexure P-3.
2.
The said amendment to the rules was challenged by the petitioners primarily on two grounds.
Firstly, the main grievance of the appellants/petitioners was that the rules had not been amended in accordance with the provision made under Section 84-A of the Act.
Secondly, it was contended that the clubbing of three different cadres together for the purpose of promotion to the post of Accountant and framing common seniority for that purpose was detrimental to their interests and the same was arbitrary, discriminatory and ultra vires Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
The learned Single Judge rejected the challenge to the amendment vide Annexures P-2 and P-3 on both the grounds and dismissed the writ petition.
This has given rise to the present Letters Patent Appeal.
3.
So far as the challenge to Annexure P-2 and P-3 on the grounds of violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India is concerned, it is pertinent to note that all the three posts i.e. Assistant Inspecting Officers, Junior Accountants and PAs/Stenographers, carry equal pay, have the same qualifications and are equal status posts.
This is amply borne out from Appendix II of the Common Cadre Rules, Annexure P-1.
Moreover, these three categories of posts were clubbed together and the same constituted the source for promotion to the next higher post of Accountant even in the unamended rules Annexure P-1.
As a result of the amendment, the first proviso to the entry at Sr. No. 10 in Appendix II of the said rules regulating promotion to the higher post of Accountant was omitted vide Annexure P-2; and instead of the promotion being made according to the numerical strength of officers in each of the three feeder cadres, provision was made for promotion to the post of Accountant on the basis of joint seniority of officers in the feeder source of the three categories of posts i.e. Assistant Inspecting Officers, Junior Accountants and PAs/Stenographers, vide Annexure P-3.
Such a change in the method of promotion cannot be said to be unreasonable or arbitrary.
Indeed challenge to Annexures P-2 and P-3 on this ground was not even pressed by the learned counsel for the appellants at the time of hearing of the appeal.
4.
The main grievance of the appellants that the rules have not been amended in accordance with Section 84-A of the Act is based upon three grounds : (1) that there was no proposal emanating from the Bank for amendment of the rules; (2) that the tenor of Annexure P-2 shows that the Bank had made a 'representation' to the Registrar and that the Registrar had decided to make the amendment, instead of the Bank making the amendment to the rules with the approval of the Registrar; and (3) that there was no resolution passed by the Board of Directors of the Bank for making the amendment to the rules.
5.
The stand taken by the Bank in its written statement was that the Administrator of the Bank on 17th June, 1983 had made this proposal, along with certain other proposals, for amendment of the rules, and the same was sent by the Managing Director of the Bank to the Registrar for approval vide letter dated 20th June, 1983, Annexure R1.
In this letter, it is specifically stated that the employees union had sent certain proposals for additions/amendments sought to be made in the Common Cadre Rules and that after considering the same the Administrator of the Bank had approved on 17th June, 1983 some additions/amendments in the Common Cadre Rules of the Bank.
A request was made that the case be examined and approval accorded so that the additions/amendments may be made in the Common Cadre Rules.
6.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the Registrar, it was pleaded that the proposal to amend the Rules, as resolved by the Bank on 17th June, 1983, was moved by the Bank and the same was approved by the Registrar after due consideration of its merits.
Likewise the private respondents No. 4 to 9, who were opposing the writ petition, specifically pleaded in their written statement that on 17th June, 1983, the Administrator of the Bank, exercising all the powers of the Board of Directors under Section 27(3) of the Act passed a resolution to the effect that the promotions to the post(s) of Accountant be made on the basis of joint seniority list of Junior Accountants, Assistant Inspecting Officers and Personal Assistants/Stenographers.
7.
Thus it emerges from the combined reading of the pleading of the respondents that the employees' union had sought the addition/amendment and the Administrator of the Bank made the proposed amendment on 17th June, 1983, which was forwarded to the Registrar for approval vide letter dated 20th June, 1983, Annexure R1, and that the proposal for making the said amendment was approved by the Registrar vide Annexure P-2.
These facts specifically pleaded by the respondent were not controverted by the petitioners in the writ petition.
On these facts, which were borne out from the original record produced by the Bank and the Registrar, the learned Single Judge rightly held that it could not be successfully argued on behalf of the petitioners that the proposal for amending the Common Cadre Rules did not emanate from the apex body i.e. the Bank.
8.
Next, with reference to Annexure P-2, learned counsel for the appellants laid stress on the contents and the tenor of the impugned order of the Registrar to contend that it was evident from the language used therein that it was the Registrar himself who suo-moto made the amendment and directed the Bank to adopt the amendment in the rules.
It is no doubt true that in Annexure P2, it is stated that the office of the Registrar had received a "representation" regarding amendment of the provision at Sr. No. 10 of Appendix II, relating to promotion to the post of Accountant; and further it records that after considering the matter at length it was "decided" to amend the said provision.
It is apparent that the Registrar described the proposal for amendment sent by the Bank vide Annexure R1 as a "representation" and he proceeded to accord approval by saying that it was "decided" to amend the said provision in the Common Cadre Rules.
Here again, the learned Single Judge has quite rightly turned down the plea of the petitioners that the language used in Annexure P2 is not happily worded.
We too hold the same view.
9.
Lastly, we find no substance in the plea that the impugned amendment was not made by the Bank, merely on the ground that no such Resolution was passed by the Board of Directors of the Bank Section 27 of the Act postulates removal of the Committee of the Society and appointment of an Administrator to manage the affairs of the Society under sub-section (1); and sub-section (3) stipulates that the Administrator so appointed shall have powers to perform all or any of the functions of the Committee or of any officer of the Society and take such actions as may be required in the interest of the Society.
It is specifically pleaded in the written statements filed on behalf of the respondents that the employees' union had sought addition/amendment to the rules, and after considering the same the Administrator endorsed the proposed addition/amendment on 17th June, 1983 under Section 27(3) of the Act and the proposal was forwarded to the Registrar for approval vide letter dated 20th of June, 1983, Annexure R1.
These vital facts specifically pleaded in the written statement have not been controverted at all.
The appellants/petitioners did not file any rejoinder to the case set up by the respondents in their respective written statements.
Since the Administrator was performing the functions of the Committee of the Bank and acting in that capacity, he approved the proposal made by the employees' union for carrying out the said addition/amendment in the Common Cadre Rules on 17th June, 1983 under Section 27(3) of the Act.
Obviously, there was no resolution passed for this purpose by the Board of Directors of the Bank nor was any such resolution necessary as was sought to be contended on behalf of the appellants.
In view of the action taken by the Administrator of the Bank on 17th June, 1983 under Section 27(3) of the Act and approval of the same by the Registrar vide Annexure P2, we find no substance in the plea raised on behalf of the appellants for challenging the impugned amendment of the rules vide Annexures P2 and P3 on the ground that the amendment was not made in accordance with Section 84-A of the Act.
10.
In the light of the foregoing discussion and for the reasons recorded above, we uphold the finding of the learned Single Judge that the amendment was made in the Common Cadre Rules vide Annexures P2 and P3 in accordance with the provisions of Section 84-A of the Act.
11.
Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed.
No costs.
Appeal dismissed.