Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The three petitioners, members of the Punjab Armed Police, are aggrieved by the penalty of stoppage of increments.
Their appeals against the order having been rejected by the Deputy Inspector General of Police, they have filed the present writ petition.
A few facts may be briefly noticed.
2.
The petitioners were posted on guard duty at Chowk Ghantaghar, opposite Darshani Deori, Harmandir Sahib, Amritsar.
Inspector Abnashi Dass (who was later on promoted as Deputy Superintendent of Police) was the Incharge.
On April 25, 1983, Mr. AS Atwal, IPS, Deputy Inspector General of Police, Jalandhar Range, was shot by certain persons.
Alleging that the police personnel on duty had failed to take any action, departmental proceedings were initiated against Inspector Abnashi Dass and the petitioners.
Inspector Abnashi Dass was reinstated and the charge sheet against him was dropped vide order dated June 17, 1987.
Thereafter, vide order dated March 30, 1988, even the proceedings against the petitioners were dropped by the Commandant 80th Battallion PAP, Jalandhar Cantonment.
It was inter alia observed that "Inspector Abnashi Dass ...(now DSP of 12th Battalion) was present where the PAP reserve guard was stationed.....the charge sheet served upon him was dropped by the Director General of Police-cum-Secretary to Government Punjab, Internal Security, vide his order.....dated 20.7.87."
In view of this position, the Commandant held that he did not find any reason "to blame/hold guilty guard personnel of this Battalion."
Accordingly, the petitioners were exonerated of the charge levelled against them.
3.
On November 8, 1988, the Deputy Inspector General of Police, annulled the order passed by the Commandant as "it was passed without keeping in view the findings of the Inquiry Officer, show cause notice of dismissal and other relevant material on record."
Thereafter, show cause notice was issued to the petitioners and after considering their respective replies, penalty of stoppage of increments (three in case of petitioner No. 1 and two in case of petitioner Nos. 2 and 3) was imposed.
The Deputy Inspector General of Police rejected their appeals on October 31, 1989.
Hence this petition.
4.
The petitioners challenge the orders by which the order dated March 30, 1988, was annulled as also the orders passed by the disciplinary and the appellate authorities.
Copies of these orders are on record as Annexures P-2, P-3, P-4 and P-8, respectively.
The petitioners allege that the orders are contrary to the provisions of rules and suffer from the vice of discrimination.
5.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioners has been controverted.
It has been inter alia averred that the petitioners were silent spectators to the `gruesome tragedy'.
Thus, the orders of penalty are legal and valid.
6.
No one has appeared on behalf of the petitioners.
However, the record has been examined and the counsel for the respondents heard.
7.
It is the admitted position that Inspector Abnashi Dass was the senior police officer present alongwith the petitioners at the time of the unfortunate incident.
It is also the admitted position that departmental proceedings were initiated against all concerned, including Inspector Abnashi Dass.
While the Inspector was exonerated and promoted as a Deputy Superintendent of Police, the penalty of stoppage of increments was awarded to the petitioners.
How was the case of Inspector Abnashi Dass different from that of the petitioners ?
The written statement given no reasons.
The petitioners have specifically averred that they were "singled out" and were treated in a discriminatory manner.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, no reason for the differential treatment has been disclosed.
8.
It is undoubtedly correct that two wrongs never make a right.
However, it is not the case of the respondents that Inspector Abnashi Dass was wrongly exonerated.
It has also not been suggested that he was not posted alongwith the petitioners at the relevant time.
In fact, it is the admitted position that he was granted promotion to the post of Deputy Superintendent of Police.
In these circumstances, it is apparent that persons who were similarly situated were treated differently.
The respondents had adopted two different yardsticks without disclosing any reasons or basis therefor.
9.
In this context, it deserves mention that the Commandant who was the disciplinary authority had noticed the factual position and taken the view that the petitioners could not be blamed for the incident.
He had, therefore, dropped the proceedings against them and exonerated them.
This order was recalled merely on the basis of the findings recorded by the Inquiry Officer and the fact that show cause notice for dismissal had been issued.
Was the position different in case of Inspector Abnashi Dass ?
Were the charges not the same ?
There is no answer on behalf of the respondents.
In fact, it is the admitted position that Inspector Abnashi Dass being the senior-most had to pass orders or to give directions to the petitioners.
He had failed to do so.
Yet he was exonerated and the subordinates who had been given no directions were held to be guilty of failure to perform the duty.
The factual position appears to be that the petitioners could not have known as to what should be done when their senior had failed to give them any direction.
10.
Every State action has to be just and fair.
That is the basic requirement under Article 14 of the Constitution.
In the present case, it appears that the State has not acted fairly.
It is true that a wrongful exoneration of one person may not warrant the passing of a similar order qua another person.
However, in the present case, there is a peculiar situation.
The person who was the head of the force and was incharge of the constabulary was not only exonerated but even promoted.
A person who could have ordered the petitioners to take a particular action was not awarded any penalty for his failure to give the directions.
The subordinates were held to be guilty of having run away from the place of occurrence.
The action was not fair.
Consequently, it cannot be sustained.
Resultantly, though reluctantly, the impugned orders awarding the penalty of stoppage of increments as passed against the petitioners are set aside.
The arrears due to the petitioners shall be released.
11.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.