Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioners were appointed as Operation Theatre Assistants on ad hoc basis at the Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education & Research, Chandigarh, vide order dated December 15, 1992.
It was inter-alia provided that the services can be terminated "at any time without any notice on either side."
The petitioners were put on probation for a period of 2 years from the date of their appointment which period could be "extended further if found necessary".
The petitioners have continued in service since then.
However, their services were not regularised while those of Ms. Renu Saini etc. were ordered to be treated as regular.
Aggrieved by this action, the petitioners have filed this petition with a prayer that the orders passed in respect of respondent Nos. 2 to 4 be set aside and the respondent-Institute be directed to consider and regularise the services of the petitioners.
2.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the Ist respondent viz. Post Graduate Institute.
It has been inter-alia pointed out that the claim of the petitioners was considered by the Departmental Promotion Committee.
In view of their record the petitioners were not found suitable and, thus, the orders for their regular appointment were not issued.
3.
Learned counsel for the parties have been heard.
4.
Mr. Dadwal, learned counsel for the petitioners, contends that the initial period of probation had expired in December 1994.
No order of extension has been passed.
No adverse report has been communicated to the petitioners.
In this situation, there was no ground for overlooking the petitioners for the grant of regular appointment.
Learned counsel submits that the respondents have acted arbitrarily.
Still further, it had been pointed out that the claim of the petitioners can be considered against the vacancies which are available.
5.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioners has been controverted by Mr. Nehra who has appeared on behalf of the respondents.
Learned counsel has pointed out that the claim of the petitioners was compared with the other available candidates and the persons who were found suitable were granted regular appointment.
If the petitioners improve their performance, they may also be appointed on a regular basis.
Learned counsel has submitted that the petitioners have not been found to be suitable and thus they can have no cause for grievance.
6.
Learned counsel for the Institute has produced before us the original file.
A perusal of the file indicates that the Departmental Promotion Committee consisting of 4 Professors, the Administrative Officer and Dr. BR Thapar had met on November 17, 1997.
The Committee had considered the claim of 9 persons including the 2 petitioners.
It was found that petitioner No. 1 had earned 4 average reports for the year 1993-94 to 1996-97.
Even in the special report which was obtained, his performance was adjudged to be average.
Petitioner No. 2 had been assessed as good for the year 1993-94.
However, for the subsequent year, he had earned average reports.
In the special report, his assessment was good.
As against this, Ms. Renu Saini who has been selected had earned good reports for the year 1993-94 and 1996-97.
Even in the special report, her performance was adjudged as good.
Her reports for the year 1994-95 and 1995-96 were average.
Similarly, the reports of other candidates were also noticed.
Thereafter, respondent Nos. 2 and 3 were selected.
So far as respondent No. 4 is concerned, he was not found suitable by the Committee.
In fact, Ms. Kawalbir Kaur who had earned 3 good reports had been selected.
In view of the above, it is clear that the claims of the petitioners were duly considered by the Departmental Promotion Committee.
7.
It is true that the petitioners were not communicated any adverse remarks.
However, when the competent authority considers the claim of different persons, it is entitled to prefer a person with a good record to another who has an average record.
Mr. Dadwal is right in his submission that the average report cannot be treated as adverse.
It is, undoubtedly, so.
But average is less than good and when competing claims are being considered, the competent authority is entitled to prefer a person who is found to be good to another who is only average.
8.
Mr. Dadwal submitted that since the reports had not been conveyed, the petitioner's claim could not have been rejected on the basis thereof.
Learned counsel has referred to the decision of Single Bench in Raj Pati (Smt.) v. State of Haryana (Pb.
& Hry.)
Civil Writ Petition No. 8905 of 1993 decided on April 19, 1996 : 1996(3) SCT 351 (P&H).
In this case, the factual position was different from that in the present case.
It appears that initially the adverse entry had been expunged.
Subsequently, at a belated stage the order expunging the adverse remark was recalled and on this basis the petitioner therein was overlooked for promotion.
Still further, the petitioner had been found unsuitable on the ground that he had not earned 70% good reports.
On the contrary, it was a competitive consideration wherein persons with better record have been preferred to the others.
In view of this learned counsel can derive no advantage from the decision in Raj Pati's case (supra).
Mr. Dadwal has also referred to the decision of a Single Bench in Bhupinder Singh Sandhu v. State of Punjab, 1991(2) SLR 552 : 1991(2) SCT 246 (P&H).
The factual position in this case was again different.
It was found by the learned Judge that the consideration for promotion was not correctly made as "correct information had not been brought to the notice of the Commission."
Such is not the situation in the present case.
9.
The Ist respondent is an Institute of national importance.
The claim of the petitioners has been duly considered.
Persons with better record of service have been appointed on regular basis.
In the process, no rules, laws or instructions are shown to have been violated.
Thus, no ground for interference is made out.
10.
Faced with the situation, Mr. Dadwal submitted that more vacancies are available.
Mr. Nehra states that in case the petitioner's performance improves and if they are found suitable, their claim shall be considered.
We have no doubt that the needful shall be done in accordance with law.
The writ petition is, accordingly, disposed of.
No costs.
Petition disposed of.