Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was appointed to the Haryana Civil Medical Service (Class-II) as a Medical Officer vide order dated December 11, 1992.
She had actually joined duty on January 19, 1993.
Her services were ordered to be terminated vide order dated November 18, 1997.
A copy of this order is on record as Annexure P-10 with the writ petition.
The petition alleges that this order has been passed in violation of the provisions of the rules.
She prays that the order be quashed and that she be allowed to continue in service.
2.
The respondents controvert the petitioner's claim and allege that her services were terminated while she was still on probation.
She had been conveyed adverse remarks for the years 1994-95 and 1995-96.
In view of the adverse commits the action in terminating her services was legal and valid.
3.
Learned counsel for the parties have been heard.
4.
Admittedly, the petitioner was governed by the provisions of the rules called the "Haryana Civil Medical Service (Class-II) Rules, 1978."
Rule 11 stipulates that a person appointed to the service shall remain on probation for a period of two years.
The proviso to Clause 2 requires that "the total period of probation including extension, if any, shall not exceed three years".
5.
It is the admitted position that the petitioner had joined duty on January 19, 1993.
She was on probation.
The initial period of probation of two years had expired in January 1995.
The respondents could have extended the period by another year.
The maximum period of probation had expired on January 18, 1996.
Still further, in paragraph 6 the petitioner has made a categorical statement that "sufficient number of permanent posts" had already become available.
This specific averment has not been controverted in the written statement.
Thus, it is clear that the petitioner had completed the maximum period of probation on January 18, 1996 and no order regarding the termination of her services was passed within a reasonable period thereafter.
In fact, the impugned order which had been passed on November 18, 1997 (copy at Annexure P-10 with the writ petition) was actually issued to the petitioner vide letter dated January 7, 1998.
A copy of this communication is at Annexure P-11 with the writ petition.
In this situation, it appears that the petitioner had not only completed the period of probation on January 18, 1996 but also that the respondents had not apparently felt any need to terminate her services.
Resultantly, by operation of legal fiction she is entitled to be deemed to have been confirmed as a Medical Officer.
6.
Mr. Bishnoi, learned counsel for the respondents, contended that the petitioner had been conveyed adverse remarks for the years 1994-95 and 1995- 96.
In this situation, it is clear that the Government had never intended to confirm the petitioner.
We are unable to accept this contention.
7.
Mr. Bishnoi has very fairly produced before us the file containing the petitioner's Confidential Reports for the three years 1993-94, 1994-95 and 1995-96.
In all the three reports the petitioner has been graded as a good officer.
Her integrity and professional competence etc. have been found to be good.
The only comment which was conveyed to the petitioner was that she did not "maintain her headquarter."
The petitioner has explained this position and pointed out that there was no Government accommodation in village Kiorak where she had been posted.
In fact, even the Primary Health Centre was located in a room which used to be a part of residential house of the Veterinary Surgeon posted in the village.
The petitioner further claims that she had in fact hired a part of a private house and was staying in the village.
The fact that no Government accommodation was available in the village has not been denied.
The petitioner's averment that she had hired private accommodation has been controverted by saying that she "never informed the Civil Surgeon, Kaithal, regarding change of house at Kaithal supported by house rent receipt."
8.
Taking the circumstances cumulatively it cannot be said that the petitioner was found wanting so as to be considered unsuitable for continuance in service.
Still further, it cannot be forgotten that in the absence of Government accommodation it may not be easy for a lady Medical Officer to get suitable accommodation in a village.
Even if the petitioner had been unable to stay in the village for some time, it would not be fair to conclude that she was unfit to continue in service.
This is all the more so in view of the fact that she has been continuously graded as a good officer in all the reports.
9.
In view of the above, we are unable to sustain the impugned action of the respondents in terminating the petitioner's services.
Resultantly, the order dated November 18, 1997 which was issued to the petitioner vide letter dated January 7, 1998 is quashed.
The petitioner shall be deemed to have continued in service.
However, since she had not actually performed the duties of the post; we consider it appropriate to direct that she will not be entitled to claim any arrears of salary for the period she did not perform her duty.
Actually, even Mr. Surya Kant, learned counsel for the petitioner, has very fairly accepted this position in view of the fact that she must have been doing some private practice during this period.
The petitioner shall, of course, be entitled to the salary from the date she reports for duty.
The writ petition is allowed in the above terms.
No costs.
Petition allowed.