GS Singhvi, J - Whether the petitioner who is working as Physical Training Instructor in the service of Government of Punjab is entitled to the benefit of the amendments made by the Government of India in the Rules regulating the conditions of service of its employees and thus, he is entitled to continue in service upto the age of 60 years is the question that arises for determination in this petition.
2.
The petitioner has averred that the was appointed as Instructor Grade II in the service of Government of India, Ministry of Education.
In the year 1965, the Government of India decided to discontinue the scheme under which the persons like the petitioner had been appointed and the existing employees were decided to be absorbed in the services of the different States.
Accordingly, Draft Rules were framed by the Government of India for transfer of the National Disciplinary Scheme Instructors to the State Governments.
In furtherance of that decision, the services of the petitioner were placed with the Government of Punjab.
He was subsequently absorbed in the service of the Government of Punjab as Physical Training Instructor.
Presently he is working as Sports Incharge, Malerkotla.
3.
The petitioner has claimed that in terms of the amendment made in the service Rules by the Government of India extending the age of retirement of its employees he has the right to remain in service till the age of 60 years.
He has filed this petition apprehending that the respondent No. 1 and its officers may retire him at the age of 58 years.
4.
Shri Gurbachan Singh drew our attention to the Draft Rules framed by the Government of India in 1965 and urged that in view of the provisions contained in those Rules the petitioner has to be treated as an employee of the Government of India and he has the right to continue in the service upto the age of 60 years.
Learned counsel submitted that salary of the petitioner is still being paid by the Government of India and, therefore, his relationship of master and servant with the Government of India continues to subsist.
5.
Having considered the submission of the learned counsel in the light of documents placed on record, we are convinced that the petitioner's claim for being allowed to continue in service upto the age of 60 years cannot be accepted.
6.
No doubt, the petitioner was initially recruited in the service of Government of India but with the introduction of NDS programme in all the schools of the country in place of the existing programmes of Physical Education, National Disciplinary Scheme and ACC, it was decided to transfer NDS Instructions to the control of the State Governments concerned with effect from 131966.
For this purpose the Government of India framed Draft Rules, which have been reproduced in Annexure P-2.
The employees like the petitioner were given option for transfer to the service of the State Government or to get discharged from the service of NFC Directorate.
The petitioner exercised his option for transfer of his service to the State of Punjab and on that basis he was absorbed in the service of Government of Punjab.
In this manner he became a member of service in the State of Punjab.
His cadre was subsequently redesignated as Physical Training Instructor and for last about 30 years he is serving as an employee of the State of Punjab.
It can therefore, be said that the relationship of master and servant which existed between the Government of India and the petitioner ceased to exist since the date of his absorption in the service of the State of Punjab.
This being the factual position, it is not possible to accept the petitioner's plea that his service conditions should be governed by the amendments made in the Rules regulating the conditions of service of the employees of Government of India.
The power to enact law to regulate recruitment to the posts under the Government of Punjab and the service conditions of the persons appointed against such posts vests exclusively with the Legislature of Punjab and till the enactment of law by the State Legislature the Government of Punjab has the exclusive power to frame rules under proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution in such matters.
The sources of this power can be traced in Articles 245 and 246 read with entry 41 of List II of the 7th Schedule appended to the Constitution of India.
Therefore, neither the Parliament has got jurisdiction to enact law nor the President has got powers to make Rules for regulating the conditions of service of the employees of the Government of Punjab.
As a logical corollary, it must be held that the conditions of service of the employees of the State of Punjab cannot be regulated by the Rules framed by the President of India under proviso to Article 309 to the Constitution in respect of the employees of the Government of India.
7.
In view of the aforementioned conclusion, the petitioner who is an employee of the Government of Punjab cannot claim that he should be allowed to continue in service upto the age of 60 years on the basis of amendment made in the rules regulating the conditions of service of the employees of Central Government.
8.
The Draft Rules of 1965, on which reliance has been placed by Shri Gurbachan Singh cannot be enforced by issuance of mandamus because it has not been shown by the learned counsel that the same were subsequently notified in the official gazette.
Moreover, a careful reading of the provisions of the Draft Rules shows that the same were transitory in nature and were framed for protecting the past services of NDS Instructors in some respects.
In fact wholesome reading to those rules show that persons like the petitioner were to be absorbed in the services of the State Governments.
Therefore, the petitioner cannot derive benefit from the Draft Rules for strengthening his claim to remain in service upto the age of 60 years even though the rules regulating the conditions of service of Punjab Government employees provide for retirement at the age of 58 years.
9.
The other documents relied upon by the petitioner also do not support his plea.
Rather, a careful reading of Annexures P-3 to P-6 show that the Government of India has throughout treated persons like the petitioner as employees of the respective State Governments.
For reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.