SS Sudhalkar, J - Notice of the Civil Misc. application to Advocate General Punjab.
Mr. KS Ahluwalia, Addl.
AG, Punjab, accepts notice.
Copies of the applications have been handed over to him.
2.
C.M.A. No. 555 of 1998 has been filed in correct the clerical error which has arisen on accidental slip and omission in the judgment dated September 19, 1990 in LPA No. 303 of 1984.
It may be observed that the said judgment also disposed of L.P.A.s No. 259 and 295 of 1986.
At page 7 of the original judgment, it has been observed as under :-  "There is no denying the fact that the qualifications for the Temporary Engineers are the Degree in Engineering or its equivalent, whereas the officiating Sub Divisional Engineers need not have that Degree and officers from sources (2), (3) and (4) mentioned in the earlier part of the judgment, who are promoted to a Class II service, need not be degree-holders.
This would go to show that Temporary Engineers are a class in themselves and are different from the one who are Officiating as Sub Divisional Engineers."
3.
The different sources were stipulated by administrative instructions issued from time to time by the State Government prescribing quota for those sources which are mentioned in rule 4(b) of the 1941, Rules.
Rule 5 of 1941 Rules escaped the notice of the Bench, which inter alia provides that the Government may make appointments to the service from the classes mentioned in rule 4 provided that no person shall be appointed unless he possesses the qualification specified in rule 3 and some other conditions which are to be fulfilled, which are mentioned in the rules.
Rule 3 of the 1941 Rules specifically lays down that no person shall be appointed to the service unless he possesses one of the University degrees or other qualifications prescribed in Appendix A to the Rules.
Appendix A to the Rules prescribes qualification Degree or its equivalent.
It is not disputed that as per the rules, no person can be appointed unless he is a degree-holder or possesses equivalent qualification.
However, under proviso to rule 5, this qualification can be relaxed by the Government on the recommendation of the Chief Engineers of a person belonging to sources (2) or (3) who is of outstanding merit.
Consequently, we are of the opinion that the aforesaid paragraph in the judgment dated September 19, 1990, should read as under :  "There is no denying the fact that the qualification for the Temporary Engineers is Degree in Engineering or its equivalent.
So is the qualification for persons to be inducted to Class II from persons to be inducted to class II from sources (2) and (3) above subject to the proviso to rule 5 that if the Chief Engineers recommend that a particular person is of outstanding merit, the Government may relax that qualification.
However, the Temporary Engineers are a class in themselves and are different from the persons who are inducted from sources (2), (3) and (4).
4.
It may be observed here that by the changes in the paragraph as above, the conclusion in the judgment of the LPA does not change at all.
This change has been brought about just to straighten the record.
C.M.
application stands disposed of accordingly.
The office is directed to make necessary note in the original judgment.