GS Singhvi, J - This appeal is directed against the judgment of the learned Single Judge dismissing the writ petition filed by the petitioner for quashing the promotion of respondent as Accounts Officer.
2.
Vide notification dated December 23, 1966 the Governor of Punjab promulgated the Punjab State Accounts Service (State Service, Class-II) Rules, 1966 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Rules') for regulating recruitment on the post of Accounts Officer.
Rule 7 of the Rules, as it stood prior to the amendment made vide notification September 30, 1976 and as it stands after the issuance of the notification as well as Rule 17 on which reliance has been placed by respondent No. 2 and the learned Single Judge, read as under :-  Unamended: "7.
Method of Recruitment.
All posts in Service shall be filled in :-  (a) in the case of Accounts Officers -  (b) by promotion from amongst - (i) Assistant Accounts Officers and Treasury Officers of the Punjab Government (appointed as such by transfer under Rule 7(2)(1)(a) of the Punjab Finance and Accounts Services Class II Rules, 1959) with atleast three years service as such on the basis of their seniority of the Punjab State Subordinate Accounts (Class III) Service, and (ii) Senior Auditors working in the Local Audit Department, Punjab, who have passed the Subordinate Account Service Examination (Local Audit Department) and having at least six years' service as such: Provided that fifty per cent posts shall be filled in from amongst the persons specified in clause (i) and twenty-five per cent posts shall be filled in from amongst the persons specified in clause (ii).
(2) by transfer of :-  (i) Class II Officers in the employment of the Punjab Government, other than those mentioned in clause (i) of sub-rule (1) who have qualified Subordinate Accounts Service Examination or Divisional Test Examination and having at least three years' service in a gazetted post; and (ii) Government employees (other than those mentioned in sub-rule (1) and clause (i) of sub-rule (2) already in service of Punjab Government with experience in Finance and Accounts and having at least six years' service in posts requiring knowledge of Finance and Accounts : Provided that fifteen per cent posts shall be filled in from amongst persons specified in clause (i) and ten per cent posts shall be filled in from amongst persons specified in clause (ii).
(b) In the case of Assistant Accounts Officer, by promotion of Superintendents, Accountants and Senior Auditors who have passed the Subordinate Accounts Service Examination and have three years as such."
Amended: "(a) in the case of Accounts Officers -  (1) by promotion from amongst the Assistant Accounts Officers and the Treasury Officers of the Punjab Government appointed as such by transfer under rule 7(2)(1)(a) of the Punjab Finance and Accounts Services, Class II Rules, 1959, with at least three years service, as such, on the basis of their seniority in the Punjab State Subordinate Accounts (Class III) Service ........80%; (2) by transfer of the Treasury Officers of the Punjab Government, other than those covered by sub-clause (1) above, belonging to Punjab Finance and Accounts Class II Service, who have at least six years service as such ......20%".
"17.
Powers of relaxation :  Where the Government is of the opinion that it is necessary or expedient so to do, it may by order, for reasons to be recorded in writing relax any of the provisions of these rules with respect to any class or category of persons."
One post of Accounts Officer became available some time in the year 1977 for being filled under Rule 7(a)(2) of the Rules.
The appellant KS Battu who was appointed as Treasury Officer on 341963 by direct recruitment and the respondent No. 2 Malkiat Singh, was appointed on that post w.e.f.
1121970 by promotion, were eligible to be considered for promotion on that post.
However, by an order dated 2581977, the government promoted the respondent No. 2 as officiating Accounts Officer ignoring the fact that the appellant was senior to Shri Malkiat Singh.
He challenged the promotion of respondent No. 2 on the ground of violation of Rule 7 as well as Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
The respondent No. 1 defended the promotion of respondent No. 2 by placing reliance on Rule 17 of the Rules and pleaded that the government has relaxed the provisions of the rules in the respect of those officers, who qualified SAS examination upto June 1976.
3.
After hearing the parties, the learned Single Judge dismissed the writ petition and upheld the plea set up by the respondent No. 1 that the government could exercise the power of relaxing the Rules.
4.
Shri KS Bhullar, learned counsel for the appellant assailed the conclusion recorded by the learned Single Judge and argued that the respondent No. 2, who was junior to the appellant in the cadre of Treasury Officers by 12 points could not have been given precedence over the former.
Learned counsel argued that the power vested in the government under Rule 17 could not have been exercised for indirectly amending Rule 7(a)(2) and, therefore, the promotion of respondent No. 2 should be declared as ultra vires to the Rules.
He pointed out that the appellant had also sought permission for being sent on training for S.A.S.
in 1968 but his request was declined on the ground that he was already holding the post of Treasury Officer and submitted that the factum of passing of S.A.S.
examination by the respondent No. 2 could not have been made basis for overlooking the preferential claim of the appellant to be promoted as Treasury Officer.
The learned Deputy Advocate General conceded that under Rule 7(a)(2) the appellant has the prior right to be considered for promotion but pleaded that the promotion of respondent No. 2 may not be upset because he has already retired from service.
5.
We have considered the respective contentions urged by the learned counsel and agree with Shri Bhullar that the learned Single Judge has seriously erred in sustaining the promotion of respondent No. 2.
No doubt, the government is vested with the power to relax the provisions of the Rules with respect to any class or category of persons but this power cannot be used for direct or indirect amendment of the substantive rules.
The facts of this case show that the appellant as well as the respondent No. 2 were eligible to be considered for promotion as Accounts Officer as per their seniority.
Rule 7 does lay down that a candidate must have passed S.A.S.
examination as a condition precedent for being considered for promotion to the post of Accounts Officer.
Therefore, there was no occasion for the government to exercise the power under Rule 17 to give preference to the respondent No. 2 as against the appellant on the ground that he had cleared S.A.S.
examination.
With great respect to the learned Single Judge, we are unable to agree with the reason given by him that by exercising power under Rule 17 the government could create a class among the Treasury Officers who were eligible to be promoted under Rule 7(a)(2) of the Rules.
In our view the promotion of the respondent No. 2 is not only contrary of Rule 7(a)(2) but also Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
6.
For the reasons mentioned above, the appeal is allowed.
The impugned judgment is set aside.
The promotion of respondent No. 2 as Accounts Officer is declared illegal.
The respondent No. 1 is directed to consider the appellant for promotion as Accounts Officer in terms of Rule 7(a)(2) of the Rules and in accordance with the seniority.
If found suitable on the basis of evaluation of his service record, the appellant shall be given notional promotion on the post of Accounts Officer w.e.f.
2581977.
His pay and pension shall be notionally re-fixed w.e.f.
2581977.
This exercise shall be undertaken and completed with him four months of the submission of certified copy of this order by the appellant.
We, however, make it clear that this order shall not prejudicially affect the position of the respondent No. 2 in view of the fact that he already stands retired.
Appeal allowed.