HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner applied for taking the entrance test for the B.A.M.S.
Class which was held on 17th August, 1997.
She applied as a candidate belonging to the Backward Class B category and on the basis of her performance in the entrance test as also in the interview held on 15th September, 1997, she was granted admission as a BC `B' Category candidate.
She was, thereafter, called upon to deposit her fee for admission to the Shri Krishna Government Ayurvedic College, Kurukshetra and this too was deposited on 20th September, 1997.
One Shaveta daughter of Surab Singh who also claimed admission on the basis of her belonging to the BC `B' Category, filed Civil Writ Petition No. 14538 of 1997, impugning the admission of the present petitioner on the ground that she belonged to BC `A' category and as such, was entitled to admission in preference to the petitioner.
That petition was allowed by a Division Bench vide its judgment dated 27th November, 1997 and Shaveta aforesaid was granted admission and a direction was issued that the merit position pertaining to the two contestants should be reframed.
It is the conceded position that as a consequence of the order of the Division Bench dated 27th November, 1997, Shaveta has got admission whereas the petitioner also continues to be admitted in the college, in the light of the fact that the present writ petition had also been filed prior to the date of decision in C.W.P.
No. 14538 of 1997.
The case of the petitioner in the present petition is that she, in fact, belonged to the BC `A' category as well and she ought to have been granted admission against that category.
In support of this plea, the petitioner has placed primary reliance on Annexure P-5, a certificate indicating that she belonged to the Sunar Caste which concededly falls in the BC `B' Category.
2.
Mr. Raman Sharma, the learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that the petitioner had filed her application Annexure R-1/1 for taking the entrance test and in this form, she had admittedly mentioned that she belonged to BC `B' category.
He has, however, argued that alongwith the application Annexure R-1/1, the petitioner had appended certain other documents including a BC Certificate, Annexure P-6 (filed with the replication) which indicated that the petitioner belonged to the Sunar Caste.
3.
As against this, Mr. Balram, K Gupta, the learned counsel representing the University has urged that no BC Certificate had been appended with the application form and the petitioner could not base her claim on Annexure P-5 as the Certificate had been issued for the first time on 5th September, 1997, whereas the form had been filed on 2nd July, 1997.
He has also urged that the petitioner had identified herself as being in the BC `B' category as per her application and she could not claim admission as a BC `(A)' category candidate.
4.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that this petition deserves to succeed.
A perusal of Annexure R-1/1 the application form filed by the petitioner for taking the entrance test clearly notes a BC Certificate alongwith five other certificates making six in all had been filed.
In the place reserved for office use only the column "document wanting" has been left blank; the inference being that all the documents mentioned as having been filed alongwith the application form had, in fact, been filed.
In the light of this position, the petitioner's averment in the replication that Annexure P-6 had, in fact, been filed with the application appears to be correct.
It is also significant that the petitioner's father Ram Murti had filed an affidavit Annexure P-2 in form Appendix `G' given in the Admission Brochure in which he had stated that his ward belonged to BC `A' Category.
Admittedly, "Sunar Caste" is categorised as BC `A' Category.
It is also the conceded position that the respondents had, in fact, given admission to the petitioner as a BC `B' Category candidate and for turning her out at this belated stage and to state that no Caste Certificate had been filed alongwith the application form, is wholly unacceptable.
5.
It is also conceded now that the petitioner continues to be admitted in the Course despite the order of the Division Bench in C.W.P.
No. 14538 of 1997 dated 27th November, 1997. she has also undergone almost six months of the course in question.
It is further the conceded position that the petitioner would be entitled to admission as a BC `A' Category candidate on the basis of her merits.
I am, therefore, of the opinion that her admission should not be disturbed for these additional reasons as well.
This petition is, accordingly, allowed and a direction is issued to the respondents to regularise the petitioner's admission forthwith, Dasti order.
No costs.
Petition allowed.