THB Chalapathi, J - The petitioner has filed this writ petition seeking an issuance of a writ of certiorari to quash the order passed by the Ist respondent dated 691989 reverting the petitioner from the post of Clerk to Work Munshi.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as an ad hoc Clerk in the Ist-respondent Board in the year 1985.
The petitioner was reverted by the impugned order dated 691989 as Work Munshi.
According to the petitioner as he was appointed as Clerk, he cannot be reverted as Work Munshi.
Further it is averred that Work Munshi is not a source of promotion to the post of Clerk.
Therefore the order dated 691989 reverting him to the post of Work Munshi is illegal.
3.
In the written statement filed by the respondents, it is inter alia contended that the petitioner was working earlier as Work Munshi till November, 1985 and there were surplus posts of work Munshies.
The Work Munshies who were declared surplus were adjusted against the posts of Clerks/Pump Operators.
Therefore, the petitioner was appointed as a Clerk.
Since the posts of Work Munshies had fallen vacant, the petitioner was again posted as Work Munshi.
Therefore there is no illegality in the order reverting the petitioner to the post of Work Munshi.
It is further averred that the substantive post of the petitioner is that of Work Munshi and instead of retrenching the petitioner for want of vacancies, he was adjusted as a Clerk and he will be entitled to promotion in his own cadre, but not in the cadre of Clerks.
Since the petitioner obtained benefits under the order of appointment which was passed in order to avoid retrenchment, he cannot take any objection for his posting as Work Munshi.
4.
There is no dispute of the fact that the petitioner was posted as a Clerk by an order dated 13111985 which is annexed as Annexure P-1.
The said order shows that the petitioner was adjusted as a Clerk on ad hoc basis for a period of 89 days on a vacant post.
There is also no dispute that from 13111985 the petitioner has been working in the said post.
Order Annexure P-1 shows that it is a fresh order of appointment of the petitioner as a Clerk.
There is nothing in Annexure P-1 to show that the petitioner was temporarily adjusted as a Clerk.
There is also no dispute of the fact that in the order appended to the writ petition as Annexure P-1, it has been specifically mentioned that the seniority of the petitioner and others who have been appointed along with him, is to be maintained in the cadre of Work Munshies, but even according to the respondents, the posts of Work Munshies, became surplus and the Work Munshies working in the Ist respondent-Board have to be retrenched.
Therefore there is no question of maintaining any seniority of the posts which have become surplus and the incumbents of the said posts faced retrenchment.
Instead of retrenching the surplus staff, the Ist respondent Board has taken a decision to adjust those employees as Clerks by giving fresh appointments.
Therefore, in my opinion, the order Annexure P-1 is a fresh order of appointment.
Since the petitioner continued in that post for more than four years without any break he is deemed to have been regularly appointed.
The order dated 13111985 shows that the petitioner was appointed against a vacant post.
Therefore, he cannot be transferred and posted as a Work Munshi.
In this view of the matter, I am of the opinion that the order dated 691989 is liable to be quashed.
5.
I, accordingly, allow writ petition and quash the impugned order dated 691989 and direct the respondents to continue the petitioner in the post of Clerk.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.