HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - The Haryana Public Service Commission vide its advertisement dated 12111994 invited applications for nine posts of Assistant District Attorneys (Group-B) to be recruited on transfer basis.
The last date for receipt of applications was intimated as being the 12th of December, 1994.
The petitioner who at the relevant time was working as a Wasal Waki Navis in Tehsil Ellanabad being fully eligible for the post in question, submitted his application through proper channels to the Tehsildar.
The Tehsildar sent the same to the Deputy Commissioner, Sirsa on 23111994, who forwarded it to the Commissioner, Hisar and also sent a copy thereof to the Public Service Commission on 9th December, 1994.
It appears that as the application had been forwarded by the Deputy Commissioner somewhat belatedly, the application duly recommended by the Commissioner was received in the Haryana Public Service Commission on 6th January, 1995.
The petitioner was later informed vide Annexure P-4 dated 471994 that the Commission had considered the application and had decided not to call the petitioner for interview as the application had been received after the last date fixed for the receipt of applications.
The petitioner, thereafter, made a representation dated 12th July, 1995 Annexure P-5 to the petition enumerating the facts stated above and praying that as he had submitted his application well in time; the delay, if any, that had occurred was on account of laxity in the office of the Deputy Commissioner and as such, a lenient view may be taken in the matter.
This representation was rejected vide Annexure P-6 dated 29.8.1995 despite the fact that the Deputy Commissioner, Sirsa in his letter dated 27th July, 1995 Annexure P-7 had pleaded the case of the petitioner and had pointed out that the petitioner was not at fault and the delay had occurred on account of the laxity displayed in the office of the Deputy Commissioner, Sirsa and the Commissioner, Hisar Division.
It is against the order Annexure P-6 that the present writ petition has been filed.
2.
A reply has been filed on behalf of the respondents and the stand taken by the Commission is that the result of the selection had been declared on 14th September, 1995 and as the writ petition had been filed a month thereafter, it deserved to be dismissed on the ground of laches.
It has been highlighted that the petitioner's application had been received by the Commission 24 days late and had been rightly rejected.
In the reply filed by the Deputy Commissioner on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 to 3 it has been admitted that the Deputy Commissioner himself had recommended the case of the petitioner for reconsideration vide his letter dated 27.7.1995 (Annexure P-7) but in reply a vague attempt has been made to justify the action of the Commission in not entertaining the application.
3.
Mr. SK Sud, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner, has argued that the present selection was to be made on transfer basis and as the petitioner was not at fault whatsoever and the delay in the despatch of the application had to be attributed either to the Deputy Commissioner, Sirsa or the Commissioner, Hisar Division, the Commission ought to have taken a realistic view of the matter and ought to have accommodated the petitioner.
4.
As against this, the learned counsel for the respondents has argued that as the application form had admittedly been received late, the Commission had no option but to have rejected it.
5.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the documents on record.
It is the admitted case that the present selection pertains to one on transfer basis from amongst employees of the State Government.
We are, therefore, of the opinion that the Commission ought to have taken a lenient view in the mater, especially as the petitioner was admittedly not at fault.
Mr. Sharma, the learned counsel appearing for the Haryana Public Service Commission has argued that in the advertisement (Annexure P-1), it had been specifically mentioned that an application received late would not be entertained for any reason whatsoever.
We, however, find that there is no such stipulation in the advertisement.
We are, therefore, of the opinion that the Commission ought to have accommodated the petitioner and to have considered his case.
This petition is accordingly allowed, the order Annexure P-6 is quashed and a direction is issued to the Commission to entertain the application of the petitioner and to consider his case for appointment as Assistant District Attorney (Group-B) by interviewing him within four months from the date a certified copy of the judgment is received by it.
A direction is also issued to the State Government that in case the petitioner is found suitable, he shall be appointed forthwith and in case no vacancy is available just yet, in the first available vacancy.
Petition allowed.