RN Sahay, J - By this application under Article 226 of the Constitution of India the petitioner seeks a writ in the nature of certiorari to quash the order of the disciplinary authority dated 25th October, 1990 (Annexure-8) whereby he was awarded punishment of dismissal under clause 196(a) of the Bipartite Settlement, letter dated 61190 of the Regional Manager (Annexure- 9) intimating the order of dismissal and the appellate order dated 15491 (Annexure-14) dismissing the appeal preferred against the dismissal order.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as a peon in the Central Bank of India on 2041981.
In due course he was confirmed in service.
The petitioner asserts that his service record throughout was very satisfactory.
The petitioner was a non-matriculate when he entered the service of the bank.
In 1982 he appeared in an examination conducted by Hindi Vidyapith, Deoghar as a private candidate.
The certificate granted by the institution is treated to be equivalent to matriculation certificate.
Under the relevant rules, the petitioner was entitled to consideration of promotion to cadre of clerk without qualifying test if he passed in first division.
According to the petitioner he was declared passed in the 1st division.
He was given a certificate of having passed in first division and marks-sheet.
On 3283 the petitioner submitted an application alongwith the certificate granted by the Vidyapith praying that he may be promoted to the cadre of clerk.
The petitioner not only was not promoted but he was also served a notice by the bank that the petitioner had passed in 3rd division and not 1st division and the certificate and marks-sheet submitted by the petitioner were forged documents.
The notice is reproduced below:  "It has now come to bank's notice that actually Sri Singh has passed the said Parveshika examination of Hindi Vidyapith, Deoghar in third division and the certificate and marks-sheet furnished by him to the bank in support of his having passed in first division are forged.
It is thus found that Sri Arun Kumar Singh has cheated the bank with the clear intention to secure promotion from subordinate cadre to clerical cadre in terms of clauses 92 of Promotion Policy Agreement which is grossly prejudicial to the interest of the bank and the same constitutes gross misconduct on his part within the meaning of clause 195(J) of Bipartite Settlement."
3.
The petitioner was directed to submit his explanation to the Chief Manager of the bank as to why disciplinary action should not be taken against him for his said acts and omissions.
4.
The petitioner in order to submit his show cause gave an application to the Principal of the College from where he had appeared requesting him to verify the records and issue necessary certificate to him.
It is the petitioner's case that the Principal on verification of the record confirmed that the petitioner had actually passed in first division and had secured the marks as per marks-sheet supplied to him (Annexure 3 to the writ petition).
The petitioner armed with the letter issued by the Principal submitted his show cause to the bank.
It is pertinent to note here that no action was taken nor he was informed that his show cause was rejected and the proceeding was in contemplation.
The petitioner was not given promotion and he waited for three years and ultimately on 19386 he sent a letter requesting the respondents to take final decision as to whether they are treating him to have passed the concerned examination in third division or first division.
In case his first division certificate is not acceptable, he should be permitted to appear in the promotion test for clerical cadre.
The petitioner received the following memo (Annexure 4):  "Memo dated 2486  Mr. Kumar Singh  Reg: Your application dated 19386 asking for permission to appear in promotion test for clerical cadre.
In the caption subject we have been informed by the Regional office vide their letter No.
PRO PRS: 86: 452, dt. 2486 that since you have not been charge- sheeted/punished for any sort of gross misconduct as such you are hereby requested to apply for the promotion test scheduled to be held on 27.4.86 alongwith all enclosures required before 430 pm today to enable us to forward it to R/C today itself.
You are further requested to supply us one more copy of the representation to be kept as office record at R/O"  5.
The petitioner appeared in the written test.
He was informed vide Annexure-5 that he had qualified and should appear in the viva voce test on the date specified in the letter.
The petitioner appeared and was interviewed but he received no intimation whether he had been selected for promotion or not.
The petitioner further asserts that two other peons who also allegedly had filed forged certificates showing to have passed in first division were given promotion with effect from 111987 (Annexure 6).
6.
The petitioner filed a number of representations requesting the authority for promotion but no action was taken on the representations.
In the meantime he was posted as cash peon to Daftary to Muradpur Branch of the bank.
He again filed a representation for giving him due promotion.
This probably offended the authorities and on 7.12.86 a formal charge-sheet was served on the petitioner pursuant to the decision of the respondents, as extracted thereunder.
"A memo No. DAW/RO:MS/83/1100 dt. 27383 was issued to Sri Arun Kumar Singh, peon, presently working at Muradpur branch for his acts of omission and commission.
His explanation dt. 9683 to the memo has not been found satisfactory.
It has, therefore, been decided by the Bank to hold a regular departmental enquiry against Sri Singh on the following charges: Sri Singh submitted an application dt. 3283 to the Bank informing therein that he had passed the Parveshika Pariksha of Hindi Vidyapeeth, Deoghar with English and Mathematics in the First Division which was equivalent to matriculation and that was thus eligible for promotion to clerical cadre out-rightly.
It was further requested by Sri Singh in his said application to straightway promote him to clerical cadre in terms of the Bank's Promotion Policy Agreement.
His said application was accompanied with an attested copy of the certificate bearing printed No. 1607 dt. 8.10.82.
On being asked to furnish original mark-sheet and certificate he submitted to the Bank, one original certificate bearing printed No. 1607 dt. 8.10.82 declaring him to have passed the Annual Parveshika Examination of Deoghar Vidyapeeth, in the First Division in the year 1982.
He also submitted one original mark-sheet dt. 21882 to the Bank certifying that he had obtained 500 marks out of 800 total marks at the said examination.
However, it came to the Bank's notice that the said certificate/marks-sheet submitted by Sri Singh to the Bank were bogus and that in fact he passed the examination in third division.
Sri Singh thus cheated the Bank with the clear intention to secure straightway promotion from subordinate cadre to clerical cadre, in terms of clause 92 of the Bank's Promotion Policy Agreement.
His such acts are highly prejudicial to the interest of the Bank and constitute gross misconduct on his part as per clause 195(J) of the Bipartite Settlement, 1966, which attracts punishment under the clause 196 of the said settlement.
The enquiry into the above charges will be conducted by Sri RK Verma, Chief Officer who has been appointed as Enquiry Officer by the undersigned.
The date, time and place of enquiry will be communicated to him by the Enquiry Officer.
At the enquiry, Singh will be permitted to be defended by a representative of the trade union of Bank employees to which he belongs.
He will be allowed to cross-examine the witnesses produced by the management side and to lead evidences in defence of the charge.
He should, therefore, keep ready with his evidence and communicate the name of his representative to the Enquiry Officer immediately.
Sri Singh is further informed that if he fails to attend the enquiry on the dates fixed by the Enquiry Officer, the enquiry will be held ex parte and the findings of the Enquiry Officer will be conclusive and binding on him."
7.
It is pertinent to record here that the first show cause was served on 27583 to which he filed his explanation with the certificate of the Principal certifying that he actually passed in first division and thereafter no action was taken as probably the respondents did not intend to pursue the matter.
He was directed to appear at the qualifying test vide Annexure 4 since he had not been charge-sheeted/punished for any sort of gross misconduct.
The respondents suddenly woke up when the petitioner pressed his claim for promotion after he qualified in the qualifying test.
Thereafter the proceeding commenced and the enquiry officer has submitted his report holding the petitioner guilty of the charge of misconduct.
8.
The disciplinary authority concurred with the findings of the enquiry officer and final order was issued on 251090 (Annexure-8).
The order of the disciplinary authority does not disclose the basis of the evidence on which charge was held to be proved by the enquiry officer.
The order of dismissal was communicated to the petitioner by the Regional Manager, vide Annexure-9.
9.
The petitioner preferred an appeal before the Zonal Manager of the bank in which he highlighted the following substantial points for consideration by the appellate authority:  (a) The petitioner appeared at the Annual Praveshika Pariksha, 1982, of Deoghar Hindi Vidyapeeth from Gulzarbagh centre, an affiliated college of Hindi Vidyapeeth Deoghar.
He was supplied with the marks-sheet showing his result in first division by the college concerned.
He got the original marks-sheet and college leaving certificate of Hindi Vidyapeeth Deoghar supplied by the college wherefrom he appeared.
He claimed his straightway promotion from sub-staff to clerical cadre on 3283 in terms of the Bank Promotion Policy.
After some time he was served with memo dated 27583 alleging therein that the marks-sheet and college leaving certificate submitted by him had been bogus and result has been in their third division.
(b) He made correspondence with the Principal of the College on 4683 narrating all the facts with regard to his result and certificate and requested the Principal to inform about the genuineness of the certificate delivered to him.
He received clarification of the Principal of the college vide letter dated 4683 in which the Principal stated that looking to the records of the college the petitioner had passed 1982 Annual Praveshika Examination in first division.
The Principal had categorically denied the certificate to be bogus.
(c) That thereafter the bank did not allow him straightway promotion and after lapse of three years when the departmental examination for promotion from staff to clerical cadre was going to be held he requested the bank authority on 19386 that if even after receiving the clarification of the Principal the Bank does not consider him to have passed the Praveshika Examination in first division then he should be allowed to appear in the departmental examination for promotion to clerical cadre because he had completed his four years of service as per Promotion Policy Agreement.
On 2486 he was allowed to appear in the promotion test which was held on 27.4.86.
(d) That instead of promotion he received the charge-sheet and appeared before the enquiry officer to prove himself innocent.
In the enquiry proceedings, as per deposition of the representative of Hindi Vidyapith, Deoghar, it is apparent that the original marks-sheet is first given to the college concerned wherefrom the candidates appeared for the examination and in turn the college concerned delivered the mark-sheet to the candidate concerned.
(e) The Principal of the college certified that the certificate and marks- sheet was genuine and not to be a forged document.
The petitioner had no reason to believe the certificate of the Principal in reply to the letter dated 4683 and on the strength of the said certificate he claimed for promotion.
The petitioner prayed that the punishment of dismissal may be revoked.
10.
The appellate authority vide order dated 15491 (Annexure 14) rejected the appeal without considering the evidence against the petitioner and specific grounds taken by him in his memo of appeal.
The appeal was mainly decided on the allegation against the petitioner.
The appellate authority has held that the appellant's plea of ignorance about the bogus nature of the marks-sheet/certificate cannot be accepted, becausee the circumstances brought out in the enquiry conclusively established appellant's involvement in the mischief which he did with the clear intention to invoke the provisions of para 92 of Promotion Policy Agreement in his favour.
The appellate authority held the petitioner guilty of the charge.
In his appellate order the appellate authority has not referred to the evidence at all nor the substantial grounds taken by the petitioner in the memo of appeal.
In the counter-affidavit the respondents have justified the legality of the impugned punishment and the appellate order.
11.
It may be stated here that two other employees, namely, Sardanand Prasad and UP Singh were similarly charge-sheeted and charges against them had been proved and punishment was awarded to them, Sardanand raised Industrial Dispute through the Union.
The Bank came to a settlement and reinstated Sardanand.
The petitioner instead of raising industrial dispute filed the present application.
12.
So far UP Singh is concerned, bank took a lenient view and he was reinstated with minor punishment.
The charge against the petitioner was that the certificate submitted by him to the bank was a forged document.
It appears that the Chief Manager made correspondence in this regard with Hindi Vidyapith, Deoghar.
He received a letter to the effect that the petitioner had passed in third division in 1982 Annual Praveshika Pariksha.
The provisional certificate that the authority who had issued this letter was not examined but one Bhuneshwar Singh, representative of Hindi Vidyapith, Deoghar was examned as M.W.
2 to prove the letter.
The letter was issued by the Registrar, Hindi Vidyapith, Deoghar but the Registrar was not examined nor any register from Hindi Vidyapith was produced.
It is significant to note here that an Assistant Registrar of the Hindi Vidyapith had submitted a note to the Registrar that the certificate was bogus but he was not examined.
Thus the entire finding is based on the letter said to have issued by Hindi Vidyapith to the Chief Manager.
The person who made enquiry was not examined.
13.
It is emphasised that acccording to the petitioenr the Principal of the College had certified that the petitioner had passed in first division but the authority did not choose to examine the Principal who was very material witness.
It is clear that the action of the petitioner was bona fide.
14.
Learned Counsel for the Bank submitted that the departmental proceeding was under contemplation and ultimately charge-sheet was submitted after lapse of five years.
The contention of the learned Counsel is devoid of any merit.
15.
It is evident from Annexure-4 that the petitioner has not been punished for any sort of gross misconduct and as such he was directed to appear in the promotion test in which he appeared and qualified.
Two other persons similarly charge-sheeted were given promotion.
There can be no doubt that the respondents decided to revive the proceeding when the petitioner started pressing hard for promotion after he qualified in the test.
The action of the respondents is absolutely arbitrary and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
The charge against the petitioner was serious in nature which was not pursued after the petitioner submitted show cause along with the certificte of the Principal.
16.
It is, therefore, clear that the respondents had no mind to start a regular proceeding.
Even assuming the petitioner had actuallly passed in third division but had submitted a certificate of first division, he was not given straightway promotion.
He was directed to appear in qualifying test and after he qualified proceeding was commenced.
17.
I have no hestiation to come to the conclusion that the action of the respondents was highly arbitrary and cannot be sustained.
They have not acted bona fide but clerarly mala fide.
18.
In the facts and circumstances of the case, this application must be allowed.
The order of dismissal and the appellate order (Annexures 8, 9 and 14) are hereby quashed by grant of writ of certiorari.
The petitioner is directed to be reinstated with all consequential benefits.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.