Abdul Qadir Parray, J - The petitioner has filed the present petition against the selection made by J&K Public Service Commission for the post of Lecturer in History (10+2) under Socially & Educationally Backward Class Category.
2.
The petitioner claims selection to the post of Lecturer in History (10+2) in response to the notification issued by the Public Service Commission, under Notification No. 45-PSC of 1994 dated 30th December, 1994.
It is further averred that in the column of number of posts in the said advertisement, one post was shown to be reserved for Socially & Educationally Backward Class Category.
The petitioner having craved consideration under the said category and his form for undergoing the process of interview/selection seems to have been provisionally accepted, as he was asked to support his contention by producing requisite certificate on the date of interview which was to be held on 13th October, 1997.
3.
From the perusal of the file, it transpires that on the relevant date i.e. 13th October, 1997 the petitioner was not in possession of the relevant certificate i.e.
Socially & Educationally Backward Category.
He procured the Certificate on 18th October, 1997 when he had made an application to the competent authority for issuance of such certificate under SRO 126 dated 28th June, 1994 on 4th October, 1997.
4.
Now this petitioner has joined the issue that he was asked to produce the Backward Area Certificate, is not the correct appreciation of the matter.
He was supposed to produce the Socially & Educationally Backward Certificate on the date of interview.
Merely by a telegraphical mistake that Backward Area Certificate was sought, is not the correct appreciation, because Backward Area Certificate was not required neither there was any such reservation made for Backward Area.
In fact, reservation was for Socially & Educationally Backward Class/Category.
The application form, as per the conditions of the advertisement notice, was liable to be rejected as per enumerated condition No. 5, which lays down "Candidate claiming to be the persons belonging to any reserved category i.e.
Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe or Socially & Educationally Backward Classes as defined under Reservation Rules, 1994, are advised to furnish alongwith the application, certificate to this effect as issued by the authority competent to do so."
5.
So the issue which has been joined by the petitioner in the present petition is not sustainable as he had not accompanied the certificate of belonging to Socially & Educationally Backward Class/Category at the relevant time of submitting the application.
Even if he was allowed provisionally to submit the application and the same was entertained, but on 13th October, 1997 at 10 AM when his interview was to be held and his original testimonials and documents were required to be shown, said certificate was not in his possession, which is evident from Annexure "D" namely a Certificate issued under SRO 126 dated 28th June, 1994 by the competent authority i.e. Tehsildar concerned and the said Certificate has been issued on 18th October, 1997.
So no case is made out for even issuance of a notice.
The case as such is being dismissed in limine.
Petition dismissed.