ML Singhal, J - These are CWPs No. 11770, 16518, 16359 and 12092 all of 1997 which shall be disposed of through one common judgment as same question of law and fact is involved therein.
2.
In CWP 11770 of 1997, Mukesh Sharma petitioner has challenged the selection and appointment of respondents 4 to 6 to the post of Clerk-cum-Typist in the Guru Jambheshwar University, Hissar effected by respondent 1 to 3.
It has been alleged that petitioner Mukesh Sharma was appointed Clerk-cum-Attendant vide appointment letter dated 2021996 Annexure P1 and is continuing till date.
Respondent-university advertised 49 posts of Clerk-cum-Typists vide advertisement notice Annexure P3.
In response to the advertisement Annexure P3, he applied for the post of Clerk-cum-Typist on 2021996 as he was fulfilling the requisite qualifications set down for the post.
Seven thousand candidates applied.
Out of them 183 candidates qualified in the type test.
In the advertisement 30 Words Per Minute (in short WPM) was prescribed as minimum speed in typing.
He was one of the successful candidates who qualified type tests.
He gave 58 WPM in typing at the time of test.
He was called for interview.
Interview was only a farce inasmuch as only the name of the candidate, his father's name and village were asked.
Interview took hardly 2-3 minutes per candidate.
On 7897, he appeared for interview along with other candidates who had qualified.
For reasons best known to respondent No. 3, the petitioner alone was put to type test over again.
He appeared for the type test though there was swelling and injuries on his right hand and other parts of body due to scooter accident.
His right wrist was bandaged with crepe bandage.
After first aid, the doctor had advised him rest for 3 weeks.
On 8897 at 1130 P.M., 7 candidates were declared selected by the interview board.
Respondent 4 and 5 were selected although they had not cleared the type test and had not figured among 183 candidates.
They had not been called even for interview.
They were selected because of their closeness to respondent No. 2.
Respondent No. 4 belongs to Yamuna Nagar whereas Respondent No. 2 was Principal in Mukand Lal Engineering College, Yamuna Nagar before joining as Vice Chancellor.
Respondent No. 5 was selected because he belongs to Kurukshetra where respondent No. 2 was earlier Pro Vice-Chancellor.
Petitioner was denied appointment because he was put to type test over again though there was no reason to put him to type test over again and further his right hand was lying bandaged due to scooter accident and he was not in a position to undertake type test.
It was arbitrary on the part of Respondents 1 to 3 to include those candidates in the selection list though they had not been called for interview and had not even qualified.
Employer did not have absolute authority to deny appointment to a selected candidate and offer appointment to one who had not even qualified.
Surinder Singh, respondent No. 6 was declared successful and appointed.
He may be put to type test over again along with the petitioner to judge their performance.
Selection was finalised on 8897 at 1130 P.M. and the selected candidates joined the following day.
Petitioner's performance at type test was much better than the performance of respondents 4, 5 and 6.
Still the petitioner was not selected which shows arbitrariness on the part of the members of the selection committee.
It is true that mere selection does not confer any right upon the selected candidate to be appointed on a particular post but at the same time, while making appointments, the appointing authority shall not make such appointments by travelling beyond the selection list.
While making appointments, ranking given in the selection list shall be adhered to.
Result of the interview was not published.
Marks were awarded in the interview according to the whims of the members of the selection committee.
Persons securing less marks and occupying position below have been appointed.
Petitioner has prayed for the quashing of the selection of respondents No. 4, 5 and 6.
In fact he has challenged the entire selection.
3.
Respondent No. 1 contested the writ petition urging that the petitioner was engaged on contract basis for a period of 89 days and he joined on 2021996.
He was relieved on 13.8.97 after the regularly selected candidates had joined.
For recruitment of Clerk-cum-Typists the Vice Chancellor constituted selection committee.
Among other qualifications, candidate was required to have speed of 30 WPM in typing.
Type test was arranged for all the candidates who had applied for the test.
Petitioner appeared in the type test on 5797 and showed speed of 58 WPM.
When the result was out, it was pointed out by many that the petitioner could not pass the type test with a speed of 58 WPM as he had very little knowledge of typing.
Respondent No. 3 put up a note in this regard and suspicion was raised at the petitioner's passing type test.
It was ordered by the Registrar that the petitioner be put to a surprise type test on 7897, when he appears before the selection committee for interview.
He was accordingly put to a type test by the selection committee on 7897.
There were numerous mistakes in the type script and his performance was declared poor.
FIR No. 1228 dated 17.11.97 was registered on the recommendation of the selection committee that it appeared to be a case of impersonation.
Respondent No. 6 had cleared the type test at the speed of 328 WPM.
It was denied that the type speed of respondents 4 and 5 was only 29 WPM.
Their typing speed was 3176 and 30.4 WPM respectively.
Respondents No. 5, 6 and 8 were allowed to appear in the type test in pursuance of the orders of Additional Civil Judge (Senior Division), Hissar.
Signatures of the candidates were taken on the signature chart and on the type scripts.
Signatures of the petitioner did not tally and therefore it was felt that there was impersonation.
It was in these circumstances that he was put to type test over again.
4.
In CWP No. 16518 of 1997, Sansar Singh and others have challenged this very selection and claimed that they are better qualified and experienced and they should have been selected.
It is alleged that they had done very well in the type test and they had been shown successful in the type test.
They had been called for interview.
No criteria was applied for making the selections.
There was no division for type test, experience and interview and there was no serial number printed on the answer sheets supplied to the candidates.
Some candidates were selected though they had not appeared at the type test.
5.
Respondent No. 2 contested the writ petition.
6.
In CWP No. 16359 of 1997, Ramesh Kumar has challenged this very selection.
Respondent-University contested this writ petition.
Selected candidates contested these petitions.
In these petitions, petitioners have prayed for mandamus to respondent-Univeristy directing them to appoint them against the posts vacated by those who were undeservedly selected.
7.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the record.
8.
30 WPM at typing was the speed required vide advertisement.
Out of the candidates who had appeared in the type test, 183 candidates were called for interview.
As a result of the interview, 46 candidates were selected against the 49 posts advertised.
No candidate in the category of ESM/BC`A' had qualified the type test and therefore, the 2 seats remained vacant relating to the category.
Mukesh Sharma was put to type test over again as it appeared that earlier there was impersonation and somebody else had appeared in his place.
His signature on the signature chart and on the type script did not tally.
FIR was registered in regard to the alleged act of impersonation.
When he was put to type test over again, he was not able to make the grade.
We do not see anything wrong if the selection process was completed on 8897 till 1130 P.M.
Interviews were held on 7897 and 8897.
As a result, the candidates shown in Annexure P6 against roll numbers 12, 17 and so on were interviewed on 7897 and 8897 whereas type tests were held from 1797 to 15797 and none of the petitioners was found successful in the type test.
9.
Since none of the petitioners was able to make the grade, therefore no grievance could be made of their non-selection.
There is nothing on the record to suggest that those candidates have been selected who did not figure to have qualified in the type test.
There is nothing on the record to suggest that the petitioners are more meritorious than the candidates selected.
Even otherwise we cannot impute bad faith to the selection committee, which comprised of the Registrar.
Assistant Registrar and Secretary to the Vice Chancellor of the University, in the absence of anything tangible on the record impinging upon their good faith.
In our opinion, there is no infringement of Article 14 or 16 of the Constitution of India so far as the selections are concerned.
There is nothing on the record to suggest that selections were made in a hush-hush manner.
Selection criteria, as reflected in the written statement of respondent No. 1, is quite just and reasonable.
No grievance could be made by any of the candidates with this selection criteria.
10.
For the reasons given above, all these petitions fail and are dismissed.
Petitions dismissed.