HS Bedi, J - The petitioner was appointed as an Auxiliary Nurse Midwife vide letter of appointment dated 22nd of February, 1962.
At the time of her entry into the service, her date of birth was recorded as 31.5.1940 in the service book.
She was thereafter promoted as Lady Health Visitor on 1381985 and in the seniority list up to 3131995, circulated by the Director, Health Services, Punjab, her date of birth was also shown as being 31.5.1940.
The petitioner was accordingly to remain in service up to the age of 58 years ie 31st May, 1998.
The petitioner, however, received a communication dated 23rd December, 1996 Annexure P.1 from the Senior Medical Officer, Health Centre, Manupur where she stood posted, to the effect that her matriculation certificate had been received which indicated that her date of birth was 31.5.1938 and not 31.5.1940 and she was accordingly being relieved with effect from 23.12.1996.
The said communication has been impugned in the present proceedings.
2.
Notice of motion was issued and a reply has been filed by respondent Nos. 1 to 4.
It has been pleaded that from the certificates R.1 and R.2 and the application Annexure R3.
made by the petitioner her date of birth was shown as 31.5.1938 and as such, she was deemed to have superannuated on 3151996.
On merits, it has been pleaded that as a matter of fact, no change in the date of birth of the petitioner had been made and she had merely been retired on attaining the age of superannuation vide Annexure P.1.
A replication has also been filed by the petitioner in which reliance has been placed on clause (1) of Annexure `A' of Rule 2.5 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Vol.
I Part I (hereinafter referred to as `Rules') to contend that order Annexure P.1 which in essence was an order changing date of birth, could not have been passed by the Senior Medical Officer as this was the sole prerogative of the Government and was unsustainable for the additional reason that it had been passed without notice to the petitioner.
3.
Mr. GS Mann, learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that the impugned order, Annexure P.1 made by the Senior Medical Officer (respondent No. 5) was wholly without jurisdiction.
In this respect, he has placed reliance on clause (1) of Annexure `A' of Rule 2.5 of the Rules which is reproduced as under :-  "1.
In regard to the date of birth a declaration of age made at the time of or for the purpose of entry into Government service shall, as against the Government employee in question, be deemed to be conclusive unless he applies for correction of his age as recorded within two years from the date of his entry into Government service.
Government, however, reserves the right to make a correction in the recorded age of a Government employee at any time against the interest of the Government employee when it is satisfied that the age recorded in his service book or in the history of service of a Gazetted Government employee is incorrect and has been incorrectly recorded with the object that the Government employee may derive some unfair advantage therefrom."
It is evident from a mere reading of the aforesaid Rule that it postulates that a Government employee can get his date of birth changed within two years of his employment whereas the Government can make a correction in the recorded age of a Government employee at any time.
"Government" means the Punjab Government in the Administrative Department," as per rule 224.
It is, therefore, apparent that the order, Annexure P.1 which was passed by the Senior Medical Officer was not an order of the Government and could not have been passed changing the date of birth of the petitioner because this is the precise effect of the said order.
The argument advanced by the respondents that the order Annexure P.1 was an order pertaining to the relinquishment of the charge held by the petitioner and not to a change in her date of birth, is, therefore, without substance.
4.
Mr. HS Gill, learned Deputy Advocate-General has further relied on Annexures R.1 to R.3 filed along with the written statement which indicates that the petitioner's date of birth was 31.5.1938.
These documents are, however, in contrast to some of the other documents filed by the petitioner along with the writ petition and cannot be held to be conclusive in these proceedings.
5.
Mr. GS Mann, learned counsel for the petitioner has also urged that there were allegations of mala fides against respondent No. 5-Dr. Brij Bhushan, who had passed the impugned order Annexure P.1 and as this respondent has not filed a reply to the allegations made, a case of mala fides stood proved against him as well.
He has pointed out that allegations of mala fides have been made in paras 5 and 6 of the writ petition and it has been pleaded that respondent No. 5 had also been suspended on account of the complaint made by the petitioner.
The State, in its reply has admitted that the respondent No.5 along with the other staff of the Primary Health Centre, Manupur, had been suspended vide order dated 13.5.1997.
Respondent No. 5 has not even put in appearance despite service to answer the change of mala fides made in the writ petition and supported by various documents on record.
To my mind, therefore, a case of mala fides against respondent No. 5 is also spelt out.
6.
This petition is accordingly allowed and the order Annexure P.1 is set aside, but liberty is given to the respondent-State of Punjab to re-determine the date of birth of the petitioner and to give a decision thereon after giving her a full opportunity of a hearing.
In the meanwhile, all consequential benefits including reinstatement and wages for the period she remained out of service will be given to the petitioner.
No costs.
Petition allowed.