Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The writ petition filed by Mr. Jagdish Kumar Kapoor having been allowed, the State of Punjab and the private respondents have filed these two Letters Patent Appeals.
A few facts as relevant for the decision of these appeals my be briefly noticed.
2.
The writ petitioner now (respondent No. 1) had joined service as a Junior Scale Stenographer in December 1960.
On January 11, 1967, he was promoted as a Personal Assistant.
On November 24, 1980, he was promoted as a Private Secretary on a purely ad hoc basis and subject to approval by the Public Service Commission.
The Government had forwarded the case to the Commission.
However, the Commission took the view that the official was not suitable for promotion as his integrity had been found to be doubtful in the report for the year 1975-76.
The Commission having declined to grant approval, the first respondent was ordered to be reverted as a Personal Assistant vide order dated October 13, 1983.
Thereafter, the respondent was again promoted as a Private Secretary on May 6, 1985.
Having got this promotion, he submitted a representation dated June 19, 1986, a copy of which has been produced on record as Annexure P.5, by which he requested the authorities to give him regular promotion with effect from April 1, 1981.
This was followed by another representation dated March 13, 1990.
A copy of the second representation has been produced as Annexure P.6 on the record.
The Government conveyed its decision vide letter dated August 16, 1990 and rejected the representations.
Thereafter, the first respondent filed the writ petition with the prayer for the issue of a writ of certiorari to quash the order dated August 16, 1990.
He also prayed that a mandamus be issued directing the respondents to grant him seniority as a Private Secretary with effect from October 22, 1981.
3.
The claim as made out in the writ petition was controverted.
It was pointed out that in view of the report for the year 1975-76, the action of the authorities was legal and valid.
4.
The learned Single Judge after hearing counsel for the parties, held as follows :-  The petitioner who had been allowed to cross the Efficiency Bar in 1980 had a right to continue as Private Secretary and his reversion by taking into account the adverse annual confidential report for the year 1975-76 was wholly arbitrary, being violative of Article 16 of the Constitution The mere fact that the order had been passed after consulting the Punjab Public Service Commission could not add any legal force to the order of reversion."
Thus, the writ petition was allowed.
It was held that the writ petitioner would be restored to his position in the rank of Private Secretary on the basis of his continuous appointment by ignoring the effect of the order of reversion.
5.
As already noticed, the State of Punjab as well as the private respondents are aggrieved by the view taken by the learned Single Judge.
It has been contended on behalf of the appellants that the mere fact that the respondent had been permitted to cross the Efficiency Bar in the year 1980 could not mean that the adverse report for the year 1975-76 was obliterated from the record or that it could not be taken into consideration by the Commission for the purpose of examining the official's suitability for appointment to the post of Private Secretary.
Still further, it has been contended that the promotion having been made on a purely ad hoc basis, the respondent had no right to continue on the post.
The claim made on behalf of the appellants has been controverted by Mr. Surya Kant, who has appeared on behalf of the respondent.
Learned counsel has also pointed out that the respondent had actually retired from service on February 28, 1994 and, thus, the exercise is purely academic.
6.
It is not disputed that the first respondent had been communicated the following remarks with regard to his report for the year 1975-76:-  "1.
Industry and conscientiousness No</< TD>  2.
Manners and power of working with others.
Over Clever.
3.
Punctuality & regularity Not satisfactory.
4.
Reputation for honesty Doubtful 5.
Fitness for promotion.
No You are advised to improve the above-said defects at the earliest in your own interest."
The above remarks reflect adversely upon the respondent's integrity.
These are not very complimentary even in respect of the other matters.
Inspite of this report, he was promoted as a Private Secretary vide order dated November 24, 1980.
This was, however, an ad hoc arrangement and was specifically made subject to the approval of the Public Service Commission.
On consideration of the matter, the Public Service Commission had found that the respondent was not suitable.
This advice was accepted by the Government and the order of reversion was issued.
This reversion was not penal.
It was ordered only on account of the fact that the Public Service Commission had found the respondent to be unsuitable for promotion.
The conclusion of the Commission was based on the respondent's record.
In the circumstances, it cannot be said that the action was arbitrary or unfair.
It did not in any way, violate Article 16 of the Constitution The respondent had not been denied equality of opportunity.
His claim had been considered.
It was only because of the adverse report that he was declared to be unsuitable.
It has not been found by the learned Single Judge that other officials with similar adverse reports had been promoted or that the Commission had overlooked any adverse remarks in case of the respondents.
In view of these facts, we cannot sustain the finding that the action was arbitrary or that it was violative of Article 16 of the Constitution  7.
Mr. Surya Kant submits that the respondent had crossed the Efficiency Bar in the year 1980 and thus, the sting had been taken out of the report for the year 1975-76.
We are unable to accept this contention.
While considering a claim for crossing of Efficiency Bar, the authority has to primarily consider and decide as to whether or not the official is entitled to the grant of next increment.
His suitability is to be examined only for the post held by him.
In this context, a report which is three or four years old, may be ignored by the authority.
However, the consideration of claim for promotion to a higher post involves a totally different principle.
At that stage, the competing claims of various eligible persons have to be compared.
In the matter of promotion, the authority is entitled to take the view that a person whose integrity has been suspected, should be left out in preference to a person whose integrity is good.
This is precisely what had happened in the present case.
Thus, the mere fact that the respondent had been permitted to cross the Efficiency Bar in the year 1980 did not give him a right to continue on the post of Private Secretary.
Even the claim that the report for the year 1975-76 had to be ignored for the purpose of considering his suitability for promotion cannot be accepted.
8.
Lastly, it was urged on behalf of the respondent-writ petitioner that persons junior to him had been promoted on various occasions during the period from October 22, 1981 to November 12, 1982.
On those occasions, the claim of the first respondent having not been considered, the order of his reversion was vitiated.
Even this contention cannot be accepted.
Mrs. Tuli has produced the original file.
A perusal thereof shows that on receipt of the representation, the department had recommended the case of the respondent to the Public Service Commission for the grant of retrospective promotion.
However, the Commission had vide letters dated July 19, 1988 and April 3, 1989 expressed a categorical view that the respondent was unsuitable for appointment to the post of Private Secretary with effect from a date prior to May 6, 1985.
In fact, in the letter dated April 3, 1989, the Commission had recommended that the official should be prematurely retired.
Thus, it is clear that even when the claim of the respondent was considered with effect from the dates the persons junior to him had been promoted, the Commission had taken the clear view that he was unsuitable for promotion.
This view was accepted by the Government and, thus, the representations were rejected vide letter dated August 16, 1990.
It was also contended on behalf of the respondent that he has already retired from service.
Learned counsel for the appellants accepts this position.
It is admitted that the respondent had retired on February 28, 1994.
It has also been stated that he had in fact earned a promotion after the year 1985 to the next higher post of Secretary.
This, however, is not relevant so far as the limited controversy in this appeal is concerned.
9.
Before parting with the case, we may also observe that the respondent had been reverted vide order dated October 13, 1983.
In the writ petition, no direct prayer for quashing the order of reversion had been made.
The primary prayer was for setting aside the order by which the representations submitted by the respondent had been rejected.
Thus, the order of reversion was really not in issue and could not have been quashed.
No other point has been raised.
In view of the above, both the appeals are allowed.
As a result, the writ petition is dismissed.
However, in the circumstances, there will be no order as to costs.
Appeals allowed.