TS Doabia, J - The circumstances under which this petition has come to be filed, be noticed.
The petitioner and respondent No. 4 were working as Sub Inspectors in the Excise and Sales Tax Department of the respondents-State.
Their next promotion is to the post of Inspector.
In order to become eligible for the said post, a candidate has to pass some Departmental Examination.
2.
The further fact is that respondent No. 4 was promoted.
The name of the petitioner was not considered.
This was on the ground that the requisite Departmental Examination was not cleared by the petitioner.
3.
It is the case of the respondents that the petitioner cleared the Examination in August, 1990, whereas respondent No. 4 qualified and cleared the Examination in September, 1988.
The further stand taken is that the Departmental Promotion Committee met in the month of May, 1990.
As the petitioner was not qualified at that point of time, he was not promoted and respondent No. 4 came to be promoted.
4.
The learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the very selection which is referred to in the counter filed by the State was subject matter of another writ petition.
This writ petition bears No. 473/1990.
This was decided on 20121990.
Although, in the above mentioned writ petition, the challenge was on a different ground, but the operative portion of the judgment would be relevant for the purposes of this petition also.
For facility of reference, this is being reproduced below:  "4.
In the result, therefore, the promotion of respondent No. 5 to the post of Inspector vide order dated 29590 being bad in law and being in violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India is quashed and set aside.
Respondents 1 to 4 are directed to afresh hold a meeting of the DPC and consider all eligible candidates including the petitioner for promotion to the post of Inspector.
The consideration shall be accorded strictly in accordance with the principles of law and rules applicable on the subject.
The writ petition is disposed of accordingly with the aforesaid directions, alongwith its CMP.
Jammu  20121990  Sd/- Hon'ble/- VK Gupta-J" 5.
A perusal of the judgment given in Writ Petition No. 473/1990 makes it apparent that a fresh Departmental Promotion Committee was to be constituted, and all eligible candidates including the writ petitioner of the above writ petition was to be considered for promotion to the post of Inspector.
Therefore, the learned counsel for the petitioner is right in his submission that after filing of this petition fresh exercise was not undertaken by the respondents.
A Departmental Promotion Committee was constituted.
This was in February 1991.
The petitioner was not promoted on the ground that respondent No. 1 had cleared the Departmental Examination earlier to the petitioner.
6.
It be seen that no Rule has been pointed out which may indicate that a person passing a Departmental Examination prior to his seniors, has to steal a march over them.
It may be possible for a particular employee who has passed the Departmental Examination to steal a march over others, if, at the time of consideration, the other employee is not qualified.
If, however, at the time when the Departmental Promotion Committee is constituted, all candidates are eligible, then merely because one person has passed the Departmental Examination earlier to the other, would not be a ground not to consider that person.
This is more so, when the vacancies come into existence much later.
When the vacancies are not available at the time when Departmental Promotion Committee met, then ad hoc promotions were being made.
7.
In this regard, it will be pertinent to mention that the petitioner in para 2 of the petition has taken a stand that vacancies were not available.
To this the reply is that consideration was made vis-a-vis the posts which were yet to come in existence.
The requisite reply to para 4 in this regard is that a panel was drawn in excess of the vacancies available, in order to avoid the delay.
8.
I am of the opinion, that this course cannot be adopted too.
This operated to the detriment of the petitioner.
In this view of the matter, this petition is allowed.
The respondents would consider the name of the petitioner and give promotion in accordance with law.
He would be entitled to all consequential benefits with effect from the date they have been given to this junior.
Disposed of accordingly.
Petition allowed.