TS Doabia, J - Heard.
Petition admitted.
2.
With the consent of learned counsel for the parties, this petition is taken up for final disposal.
3.
The petitioner was absent.
On account of this, an adverse order came to be passed.
The order was challenged in appeal.
The appeal was accepted.
After that another order came to be passed on 19.3.1992.
The period of 379 days was ordered to be treated as dies-non.
The relevant portion of the order is reproduced as under:-  "In the light of principle "No Work, No Pay" the period of absence of SG.
Constable Mohd.
Latif No. 383 of F-Coy w.e.f.
2190 to 1511991 i.e. 379 days is treated as dies-non as recommended by the enquiry officer.
However, it will not effect upon his future increments".
4.
Against the aforementioned order, the petitioner preferred an appeal.
This is so stated in paragraph 9 of the petition.
The appeal is said to be pending.
5.
The learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the consequences of order by which certain period of service is treated as "dies-non" are serious.
He is referring to Government Notification of dated 3151993.
The term dies-non stands elobrated in the aforementioned order.
This reads as under:-  "Explanation - The import to term `dies non' is that:-  a) it does not qualify for any remuneration (pay and allowances).
b) It does not count for pension.
c) It does not count for increment.
d) It does not cause any interruption for leave earned up to the date preceding that on which the period of `dies non' has commenced unless it is the intention of the competent authority to have such period of leave forfeited in which case mention about it should be made in the order itself.
6.
There are judicial pronouncements to the effect that when a civil servant is absent and thereafter he is re-instated, then he can be deprived of back- wages.
See the following decisions:-  i) State of Punjab v. Om Parkash, (1997) 3 SCT 186 (P&H).
ii) M Annunachalam v. TN Electricity Board, (1997) 3 SCT 565 (Mad.).
iii) Government of Tamil Nadu v. K Rajaram Appaswami, (1997)3 SCT 67 SC.
7.
As indicated above, the order in question is likely to affect some other service benefits also.
It would accordingly be apt, if the appeal preferred by the petitioner is disposed of by passing a speaking order.
If the appeal is not available with the respondent-authorities, then this writ petition be treated as appeal and the point of view put across by the petitioner be dealt with and a speaking order be passed.
Let the appropriate decision be taken within a period of three months.
The period of three months would begin from the date, the copy of this order and writ petition alongwith its annexures are made available to the respondent-authorities by the petitioner.
In case it is not possible for them to do the needful within the aforementioned period, then they would be at liberty to seek extension of time.
In that eventuality each and every day's delay would have to be explained.
The petition is disposed of accordingly.