SN Jha, J - This writ petition has been filed for quashing the office order dated August 10, 1996 posting the petitioner in the Typing Pool.
The order has been issued by the Incharge Administration, Bihar State Pharmaceuticals and Chemical Development Corporation Limited (BSPCDC).
It describes the petitioner as Typist-cum-Clerk in Bihar Drugs & Chemicals Limited (BDCL) "at present posted at BSPCDC."
Copy of the said order has been marked Annexure 1 to the writ petition.
According to the petitioner, it amounts to her repatriation of BDCL.
A formal order of repatriation to the so-called "substantive post in BDCL" was issued later on October 29, 1996.
The validity of the said order, marked Annexure-2, has been assailed in IA No. 31 of 1996.
During hearing of the case yet another order dated February 21, 1997 came in under challenge.
By the said order marked Annexure-18 to the reply-affidavit, the petitioner has been asked to join the "parent department" within ten days failing which `severe' disciplinary action is to be taken against her.
The facts of the case briefly sated are as follows:  2.
An advertisement was published in the local newspaper on November 16, 1983 inviting applications for various posts including Typist-cum-Telex Operator under BSPCDC.
The selection was made by a Consultancy Organisation called Bihar Industrial and Technical Consultancy Organisation Limited (BITCO).
On the recommendation of the Selection Committee the petitioner was appointed to the post of Typist-cum-Clerk on November 23, 1986.
The appointment letter was however issued by the BDCL.
It may be mentioned here that BDCL is a subsidiary company of the BSPCDC.
The petitioner joined the post on November 25, 1986.
Her services were regularised on April 11, 1990 pursuant to the decision of the Establishment Committee of the BSPCDC on the post of Typist- cum-Telex Operator.
On September 21, 1993 an order was issued by the Deputy Personnel Manager of the BSPCDC reverting back the petitioner to the BDCL.
She challenged the order by way of a writ petition in CWJC No. 7987 of 1994.
During pendency of the case, on November 23, 1994 the aforesaid order dated September 21, 1993 was recalled with immediate effect.
The writ petition was disposed of on March 29, 1995 with a direction to pay salary for the period in question.
As salary was not being paid despite the abovesaid order the petitioner filed contempt petition being MJC No. 1594 of 1995.
During pendency of the case the payment was made and the petition was disposed of on August 9, 1996.
The impugned order as contained in Annexure-1 was issued on the very next day, i.e. August 10, 1996 followed by the order dated October 29, 1996 referred to above.
3.
The case of the petitioner is that she is a regular employee of BSPCDC.
However, treating her to be an employee of the BDCL she has been reverted/repatriated to the so-called "Parent department" against the so- called "substantive post" in the BDCL.
In support of the petitioner's case, reliance has been placed on Pramod Kumar Shahi v. State of Bihar, AIR 1994 SC 42 : 1994(2) S.C.T.
576.
The stand of the respondent is that the BSPCDC and BDCL are two different companies having separate legal entity.
The petitioner having been initially appointed in BDCL, as is evident from the letter of appointment, Annexure-5, she cannot claim to be an employee of the BSPCDC.
Her tenure in BSPCDC must be construed as deputation.
She continued to be an employee of BDCL throughout.
Therefore, the impugned orders repatriating her to parent service cannot be said to be illegal.
4.
The only point for consideration is whether the petitioner is an employee of BSPCDC or BDCL.
5.
As stated above, the advertisement was issued by the BSPCDC.
BITCO made selection at the instance of the BSPCDC, on its behalf which is evident from the call letter, sent to the petitioner (Annexure-3), and the recommendation of the Selection Committee (Annexiure-4).
The subject mentioned in the call letter runs as follows:-  "Test and Preliminary interview for the post of Typist-cum-Telex Operator in Bihar State Pharmaceutical and Chemicals Development Corporation Limited."
The recommendation of the Selection Committee also mentioned the same language as hereinbelow:-  "The recommendation of the Selection Committee meetings dated 461986 and 1371986 constituted by BITCO for the purpose of selection of candidates and preparation of merit list for appointment for the post of Typist-cum-Telex Operator for Bihar State Pharmaceuticals and Chemicals Development Corporation, Patna."
6.
It is true that letter of appointment was issued by the BDCL.
That, however, in my opinion, is of little consequence.
The appointment was made pursuant to the aforesaid advertisement issued by the BSPCDC and the selection made by BITCO on behalf of the BSPCDC.
In my view, as stated above, the services of the petitioner were regularised not in the BDCL but in the BSPCDC "in accordance with the decision of the Establishment Committee of the BSPCDC".
It would not be out of place to mention here that as per clause 4 of the appointment letter "the petitioner could be posted, in any other unit/subsidiary of the BSPCDC at the discretion of the management".
It is also relevant to mention here that the pay of the petitioner was fixed by the BSPCDC itself.
It may not also be out of place to mention here that pay was initially fixed by office order dated April 20, 1990 in the scale of Rs. 730-1080 with effect from April 11, 1990, the date of regularistion of petitioner's service.
By subsequent orders dated June 12, 1990 however the scale was granted with effect from November 25, 1986, i.e. the date of initial joining by the petitioner.
Consequential order fixing the pay was issued on June 25, 1990.
All these orders were issued by the BSPCDC.
7.
In the above premises, it is difficult to accept the contention of the respondents that the petitioner is an employee of BDCL.
According to me, the concerned authorities of the two Organisations were apparently under the impression that the BDCL being a subsidiary company of the BSPCDC, the personnel workingin either organisation cannot be transferred and posted in the other organisation.
That is why the aforesaid clause was inserted in the letter of appointment providing for postings "in any other unit/subsidiary of the BSPCDC at the discretion of the management" as noticed above.
I agree with the Counsel for the respondents that the two companies have separate legal entities.
But this argument, far from helping the respondents, rather helps the petitioner.
In the facts of the case, as briefly noted above, there cannot be any doubt that the petitioner was appointed in the BSPCDC.
She was merely `posted' in the BDCL by the aforesaid letter dated November 23, 1996.
The BSPCDC having regularised her services and fixed her pay in the scale of Rs. 730-1080 with effect from November 25, 1986 itself the entire period of service must be held to be under BSPCDC and not under the BDCL.
Loosely described as `posting' it could be termed as deputation.
But we are not really concerned with her status in the BDCL.
The point for consideration is whether she is employee of the BSPCDC or not.
The answer, in my opinion, has to be in the affirmative.
8.
Counsel for the petitioner in course of hearing of the case also highlighted the fact that the orders have been passed mala fide to harass the petitioner.
It was submitted that similar order was issued on September 21, 1993 which the respondents themselves recalled on November 23, 1994 when they realised the mistake, after the petitioner challenged the order in CWJC No. 7987 of 1994.
The impugned order was issued reiterating similar direction on the very next day after disposal of the connected contempt petition.
The submission of the Counsel, prima facie, appears to be well-founded.
However, it is not necessary to go in to the question of mala fide and record any finding, for the reasons stated above, the impugned order repatriating the petitioner to so-called parent service/department cannot be otherwise sustained.
The other order directing the petitioner to join the post failing which severe departmental action is to be taken against her, being a consequential order, also cannot be sustained.
9.
In fairness to the Counsel for the petitioner, before I part with this case I may refer to another submission based on the decision of the State Government in the Industries Department contained in its memo No. 6496 dated August 23, 1996.
It was pointed out that the State Government has decided to lease at the entire management of the BDCL to a private entrepreneur M/s. ATN Agro Products Limited, Patna.
As per the terms of the decision only 50 per cent of the staff of the BDCL are to be retained by the lessee and paid their salary from the date of agreement, making the service conditions of the entire working staff of the BDCL precarious for reasons that the decision does not specify as to who are to be retained by the lessee and paid salary.
In view of my finding that the petitioner is an employee of BSPCDC and not BDCL, I am not required to discuss the effect of the said decision.
But certainly, if the finding has been otherwise, the said decision of the State Government could provide a ground to the petitioner to challenge her so- called revision to the BDCL.
In that view the apprehension of the petitioner would not have been without substance.
10.
In the result, the impugned orders dated August 10, 1996, October 29, 1996 and February 21, 1997 referred to above are quashed and the writ petition is allowed.
Petition allowed.