TS Doabia, J - Counsels heard.
Petition admitted.
2.
With the consent of the learned counsel for the parties, this petition is taken up for final disposal.
3.
Extra Departmental Postal Employees are seeking conferment of temporary status and want to be treated at par with temporary group (D- employees of regular postal department)  4.
The two petitioners were appointed initially as casual workers in the extra departmental jobs.
Later on, they came to be appointed as outsider postmen and are working as such.
According to the petitioners they were given regular appointment also.
The petitioner No. 1 is said to have been given appointment on 3rd of April 1989.
The petitioner No. 2 is said to have been given appointment on 23.3.1989.
They were however, reverted w.e.f.
11111991 and 26101990.
It is in these circumstances, they have preferred this petition.
The petitioners submit that they have worked in the regular postal department for more than two and half years and having worked for more than 240 days in a calendar year they have become entitled to be treated as regular employees and are further entitled to all those benefits which are available to regular group (D-officials).
The petitioners are also claiming Dearness Allowance and other benefits.
5.
The respondents are resisting the claim of the petitioners.
It is submitted that the petitioners were never appointed as casual labourers or casual workers.
According to the respondents, they were appointed as extra departmental employees at Gangyal and Gandhi Nagar Post Offices.
They were employed under the extra departmental (Conduct Service Rules 1964).
These Rules have statutory flavour.
These were notified by the Government of India and clarification to these Rules have been issued from time to time.
6.
It is further stated that the appointment to the job of postman of Packer for short time is made with a view to provide substitute and such substitutes are required to be approved by the competent authority.
It is further stated that as per policy decision dated 7th of December 1972, if an extra departmental candidate is available and is appointed against the departmental post, then he can be considered for appointment in the vacancy of postman (Group-D).
Such a person is to be given preference as compared to an outsider.
Such casual appointments, however, otherwise do not confer any right for regular appointments.
The above is the stand taken by the respondent.
This be recapitulated as under :  (i) that the petitioners were appointed under the extra departmental (Conduct Service Rules 1964).
(ii) that they are eligible for regular appointment, in case some vacancy become available.
(iii) these employees are to be given preference over and above the others.
7.
The further stand taken by the respondent is that the petitioners were never appointed as regular postmen in the department and they were working as outside postmen against stop-gap arrangements.
8.
I am of the opinion that the stand taken by the Union of India that the petitioners were never appointed as casual workers, but were merely appointed in terms of extra departmental (Conduct Service Rules 1964) is a stand which cannot be faulted.
The petitioners are entitled to those benefits which the above Rules confer on them.
As and when vacancies arise, their cases can be considered for appointment to group-D Service.
It is the stand of the respondent that the petitioners have not qualified either on account of competition or on account of the length of service.
As such it cannot be said that there is any breach of any fundamental rights of the petitioners or of any service Rules.
Petitioners are not entitled to any relief.
9.
This petition is found without any merit and is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.