RN Prasad, J - The petitioner has filed this writ application for quashing the order dated 2731997, Annexure 1, issued under the signature of Senior Manager, Personnel and Administrative Department whereby the petitioner has been transferred from Babhaniyawn Branch to Chouri Branch.
2.
In the month of August, 1995 the petitioner was posted as Branch Manager, Babhaniyawn, a branch of Gramin Bank.
While he was posted there an enquiry was initiated with regard to functioning of Parasiya Branch.
Nobody was ready to assist the enquiring officer as highly placed officials of the bank were involved in the matter.
He assisted the inquiry officer in unearthing the fraud and defalcation to the tune of several lakhs which is evident from the enquiry report.
The enquiry report revealed the involvement of highly placed officials of the bank in committing fraud.
The enquiry officer was directed to stop the enquiry and to submit a report on the basis of the enquiry made.
The highly placed officials knowing that the petitioner contributed in the said inquiry got the petitioner transferred to prevent him from doing anything which might embarrass them.
If the enquiry report is called for and perused, the entire thing will come in light.
3.
A counter-affidavit has been filed on behalf of respondents No. 1 to 5 wherein it has been stated that the statement made in the writ petition is not correct.
The inspection/enquiry was made by the duly appointed inspector of respondent No.1 in normal course of the bank business.
The enquiry was made with regard to Parasiya Branch.
The petitioner was posted at Babhaniyawn Branch.
He was in no way connected with the said inquiry of Parasiya Branch.
The enquiry was made at the instance of the respondents.
There is nothing to show that the petitioner was in any manner connected with the enquiry or assisted the enquiry officer.
4.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner contended that the order of transfer, Annexure-1, was passed out of malice.
He pointed out that the petitioner assisted the enquiring officer in unearthing the fraud and defalcation, involving the highly placed officials of the bank which caused annoyance and due to the aforesaid reason he has been transferred just to screen the misdeed committed by the authority concerned.
On the other hand, learned Counsel for the respondents contended that no specific allegation of mala fide has been alleged against any of the authority of the bank in the writ petition nor anything has been brought on the record to show that he assisted the enquiring officer in unearthing the fraud and defalcation.
The allegation of mala fide is without any foundation.
Learned Counsel in support of the submission also produced the enquiry report.
5.
It is manifest that the petitioner was posted in the month of August, 1995 as Branch Manager at Babhaniyawn Branch of the Gramin Bank.
The enquiry was initiated at the instance of the respondents with regard to Parasiya Branch.
The petitioner was not in any way concerned with the Parasiya Rural Bank.
The petitioner claimed that he assisted the enquiring officer in unearthing the fraud and defalcation which has been denied in the counter-affidavit filed on behalf of the respondents.
No specific averment has been made in the writ petition against any of the bank authorities including the authority under whose signature the order, Annexure 1, has been issued.
It is pertinent to mention herein that in case of mala fide it is necessary that specific averment is made against the person concerned but it appears from the averment made in the writ petition that no such specific averment has been made against any of the bank authorities.
It is also pertinent to mention herein that it is easy to allege mala fide but it is difficult to establish it.
Nothing has been brought on the record to show that the order of transfer has been passed out of malice.
I have gone through the enquiry report produced by the learned Counsel for the respondents but I do not find anything to show that the petitioner assisted the inquiring officer in holding the enquiry or the order of transfer has been passed out of malice.
Thus, it is manifest that there is no substance in the submission of the Learned Counsel for the petitioner that the order of transfer has been passed out of malice.
6.
No other point was raised by the Learned Counsel for the petitioner in support of the relief sought for in the writ petition.
7.
Thus, on consideration of the entire facts and circumstances of the case, as indicated above, I do not find any merit in this writ application.
This application is accordingly, dismissed.
Application dismissed.