Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - Can a member of the ministerial establishment in the Electricity Board be confirmed prior to the date of passing the departmental examination as prescribed under the rules ?
This is the basic issue that arises for consideration in these three Letters Patent Appeals.
Counsel for the parties referred to the facts in L.P.A. No. 192 of 1993.
These may be briefly noticed.
2.
The appellant had joined service in the Punjab State Electricity Board as an Upper Division Clerk on December 31, 1965.
He passed the departmental examination on December 18, 1970.
Vide order dated February 8, 1974, the appellant was confirmed as an Upper Division Clerk with effect from May 10, 1970.
However, on the mistake being detected, a show cause notice dated October 18, 1985 was issued to him.
It was pointed out that he could not have been confirmed with effect from a date prior to that on which he had passed the departmental examination.
The appellant submitted his reply.
Ultimately, vide order dated July 10, 1986, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-6 with the writ petition, the appellant's date of confirmation was changed from May 10, 1970 to December 19, 1970.
The inter se seniority of the Upper Division Clerks was also determined on this basis and circulated vide letter dated March 17, 1987.
Since the appellant as well as the private respondents had been promoted as Assistants, the seniority even in the rank of Assistant was determined on that basis.
The appellant represented.
Having failed to get any relief, he filed a writ petition with the prayer that the seniority list circulated vide letter dated March 17, 1987, a copy of which was produced as Annexure P.4 with the writ petition, be quashed and the responders be directed to restore his original position.
3.
The learned Single Judge considered and interpreted the provisions of the rules.
Since the contentions raised on behalf of the writ petitioners - the present appellants - were not accepted, they have filed these three appeals.
4.
We have heard counsel for the parties.
Mr. Patwalia, counsel for the appellants in all the three cases contended that the rule gives a discretion to the authority to extend the period of probation or to confirm the employee.
Once the competent authority exercises the discretion and confirms the employee, the seniority has to be determined on the basis of the date of confirmation.
The power having been exercised by the authority stands exhausted and the order of confirmation cannot be reviewed.
Still further, according to the rules, a person who fails to pass the departmental examination suffers the loss of increments but his period of probation cannot be extended on that ground.
In case of L.P.A. No. 193 of 1993, an additional argument was raised that even on the basis of the judgment of the learned Single Judge, the appellant having been confirmed w.e.f.
May 5, 1970, shall be senior to the persons confirmed later.
5.
The contentions raised on behalf of the appellants were controverted by the learned counsel for the respondents.
Mr. Deepak Sibal who appeared for the Respondent-Board, contended that under the rules, a member of the ministerial establishment cannot be appointed substantively or confirmed on a post unless he qualifies the departmental examination.
The orders confirming the officials from a date prior to the passing of the examination being illegal were rightly reviewed by the competent authority.
The seniority was finally assigned in accordance with the provisions of the statutory rules.
That being so, no ground for interference is made out.
6.
Admittedly, the conditions of service governing the parties are laid down in the Rules called 'The Public Works Department (Electricity Branch) Provincial Service Class III (Subordinate Posts) Rules, 1952'.
These rules were promulgated under Article 309 and were published in the Gazette dated September 27, 1951.
Counsel for the parties referred to the provisions contained in Rules 7 and 9.
The relevant clauses of Rule 7 provide as under :-  "7 (1) The members of service who are appointed against permanent vacancies in the post specified in Appendix `A' shall remain on probation for a period of two years in the case of those recruited by direct appointment, and of one year in the case of those recruited otherwise.
Provided that .......
Provided further that...............  (2) The period of probation may be extended by another three years or lesser period at the discretion of the appointing authority in the case of a member of the service -  i) whose work or conduct has in the opinion of the appointing authorities not been satisfactory, and/or  ii) who has not been able to pass the Departmental Accounts Examination prescribed for clerks in the Department if he was required to pass it in accordance with the rules regulating that examination.
(3) On the completion of the period of probation (original or extended) of any member of the Service, the appointing authority may confirm such person in the post or if his work or conduct has in the opinion of the appointing authority not been satisfactory or he has not been able to pass the Departmental Accounts Examination, the appointing authority may on or before the expiry of the period of probation revert him to his substantive post, if any, or former post if he had been recruited from another Department of Government or dispense with his services if appointed direct.
Note :- Clerks, Store Keepers, Assistant Store Keepers, Cashiers and Meter Clerks are required to pass the Departmental Accounts Examination prescribed by the Department in acourdance with the rules regulating that examination."
Rule 9 provides as under :-  "The seniority of the member of the service for the time being serving in each class or appointment shown in Appendix 'A' shall be determined as follows:- i) Prior to confirmation (i.e. in the case of persons serving on probation or in an officiating capacity) in the order of the dates of their appointment or if such date be the same in respect of two or more persons, in the order of their ages, the older being placed above the younger.
ii) after confirmation, by their respective dates of confirmation, provided that where two or more members are confirmed w.e.f.
the same date they will retain the order to confirmation.
EXCEPTION: If a member of the service is promoted temporarily to a post earlier than his senior, for reasons other than the inefficiency of the senior person they will take rank inter-se according to their relative seniority in the class from which they were promoted and the junior person thus promoted shall not be confirmed from a date earlier than the date of confirmation of his senior except on the score of inefficiency, or the latter: Provided further that if a member is appointed to a higher class later than a person who was junior to him in the lower class for reasons which the appointing authority may certify in writing to be connect with the public interest the person so appointed shall be given the same seniority in the higher class vis-a-vis such junior, as he held in the lower class."
A perusal of the provision contained in Rule 7 shows that a person like the appellant who is appointed directly, remains on probation for a period of two years.
This period can be extended by another three years if the work or conduct is not satisfactory and/or the employee has not been able to pass the departmental examination.
On the completion of the period of probation, the employee can be confirmed if his work and conduct are satisfactory and he has passed the departmental examination.
Otherwise, his services can be terminated.
7.
Under Rule 9, the seniority is determined at two stages.
Prior to confirmation, the seniority is determined in the order of the dates of appointment.
Ultimately, the seniority is determined by the date of confirmation.
8.
Rules have also been framed for the Departmental Accounts Examination.
These are called the "rules for departmental accounts examination of ministerial establishment in the Electricity Branch".
These were enforced with effect from April 1, 1953.
Rule 13(ii) which relates to confirmation provides as under :-  "13(ii).
Confirmation.
- A Senior Clerk if he has been directly recruited as such, will not be appointed in a substantive capacity in his post unless he has passed the examination in Papers I to IV.
If he fails to pass the examination in Papers I to IV within three years of his first appointment in the Branch, his increments falling due after the first two increments from his first appointment, will be withheld until he passes the examination and will not be granted with retrospective effect on his passing the examination.
On passing the examination, he will, with effect from the date following that on which the examination ended, be entitled to the rate of pay which would have been admissible to him, had his increment not been with held for his failure to pass the examination.
The failure of a Senior Clerk to pass the examination in five successive examinations held immediately after the expirty of six months from the date of his first appointment in the Branch may involve the loss of his appointment."
9.
Vide notification dated December 13, 1971, the nomenclature of the posts of Senior Clerks and Junior Clerks was changed to Upper Division Clerks and Lower Division Clerks respectively.
Thereafter, amendment was made in Rule 13(ii) as well.
Besides the designation of the post, even changes with regard to the period after which the increments were to be with-held were made.
The amended provision is in the following terms :-  "An Upper Division Clerk, if he has been directly recruited as such, will not be appointed in a substantive capacity in his post unless he has passed the Examination in Papers I to IV.
If he fails to pass the Examination in Papers I to IV within 5 years of his first appointment in the Board, his increments falling due after the first 4 increments from his first appointment will be withheld until be passes the examination and will not be granted with retrospective effect on his passing the examination.
On passing the examination he will with effect from the date following that on which the examination ended, be entitled to the rate of pay which would have been admissible to him, had his increment not been withheld for his failure to pass the examination.
The failure of an Upper Division Clerk to pass the examination in 10 successive examinations held immediately after the expiry of six months from the date of his first appointment in the Board may involve the loss of his appointment and in case he fails to pass the examination within the probationary period of two years, the probationary period will be deemed to have been extended, till he passes the examination, within the above stipulated changes."
Even a perusal of the provision contained in Rule 13(ii) shows that an Upper Division Clerk cannot be appointed in a substantive capacity unless he has passed the departmental examination.
10.
On a harmonious reading of the provisions of Rules 7 and 13, it is clear that an employee who is directly recruited as an Upper Division Clerk is -  (i) on probation for a period of two years; (ii) this period of probation can be extended by three years on account of his work or conduct being unsatisfactory and/or the failure to pass the examination; (iii) there can be no substantive appointment unless the employee passes the examintion; (iv) on the completion of the period of probation, the services of an employee who has been directly recruited, can be terminated.
In case of a promotee, he can be reverted to his substantive post.
11.
On behalf of the appellants, it was contended that Clause (2) of Rule 7 gives a discretion to the competent authority.
It may extend the period of probation or it may not.
Consequently, an employee can be confirmed from a date prior to his passing the examination.
This contention cannot be accepted.
The provisions contained in Rules 7 and 13 as extracted above, clearly indicate that no member of the ministerial establishment can be substantively appointed to a post unless he has passed the departmental examination.
A harmonious reading of the provisions clearly shows that 'may' in Clause (2) really means `shall'.
12.
It was then contended that failure to pass the examination only entails a temporary loss of increments and nothing more.
This contention is wholly fallacious.
As already noticed, the rule categorically provides that a Senior Clerk (now an Upper Division Clerk) will not be appointed in a substantive capacity unless he has passed the examination.
The language of the rule negatives the suggestion made on behalf of the appellants.
13.
Factually, it is the admitted position that the appellant in LPA No. 192 of 1993 had passed the departmental examination held on December 18, 1970.
He was initially confirmed w.e.f.
May 10, 1970.
Later on, a show cause notice was given to him.
After consideration of the matter, he was confirmed w.e.f.
December 19, 1970.
In view of the provisions of the rules as noticed above, the action of the respondents was absolutely legal and valid.
He was rightly assigned the seniority on that basis.
14.
In LPA No. 193 of 1993, it was contended that the appellant was confirmed as an Upper Division Clerk w.e.f.
May 5, 1970.
He should be assigned seniority on that basis even in the rank of Assistant.
Mr. Setia who appeared for the Board submitted that the appellant had remained under suspension from January 28, 1967 to March 18, 1968 and thereafter from August 14, 1969 to May 27, 1970.
Ultimately, a penalty of stoppage of two increments with cumulative effect was imposed on him.
In view of his record, his promotion as an Assistant was delayed.
Consequently, he cannot claim seniority in the rank of Assistant over the private respondents.
15.
The exception contained in Rule 9 clearly postulates that when a person is superseded on account of inefficiency, he loses his seniority.
This is clearly the position in the present case.
16.
No additional argument was addressed by either side in LPA No. 194 of 1993.
No other point was raised.
In view of the above, we answer the question posed at the outset in the negative.
We hold that a member of the ministerial establishment cannot be confirmed prior to the date of his passing the departmental examination.
This interpretation of the rule excludes discretion and ensures uniform method for determination of the seniority of the employees.
Resultantly, there is no merit in these appeals.
These are, consequently, dismissed.
However, in the circumstances of these cases, we make no order as to costs.
Appeals dismissed.