HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - This petition shall dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 2507 and 3377 of 1983.
2.
The petitioners are all graduates in Engineering in different fields.
They were directly appointed as Senior Technical Officers Class II under Rule 9 of the Punjab Industries Service (State Service Class-II) Rules, 1966 (hereinafter called the 'Rules') on various dates in the years 1977-1978.
Respondent No. 3 Shri Daulat Singh who was a diploma holder in Mechanical Engineering had been promoted from Junior Technical Officer to the post of Senior Technical Officer Class-II on 20th January, 1975.
He was, thereafter, promoted as Senior Technical Officer Class I vide Annexure P2 dated 26th April, 1983 on the basis of a tentative seniority list of Class-II officers in the Department circulated on Ist of October, 1982 in which respondent No. 3 had been shown senior to the petitioners.
The petitioners submitted a representation for quashing the seniority list qua respondent No. 3 on the ground that he was not qualified to hold the post of Senior Technical Officer Class II and that the said post could have been filled up only by way of direct recruitment and not by promotion.
This representation was rejected by the respondents which has had led to the filing of the present petition.
3.
Mr. PS Patwalia, the learned counsel for the petitioners, has pointed out that the method of recruitment to the post of Senior Technical Officer Class-I was governed by rule 9 of the Rules and Rule 9(g) provided that appointment was to be made by direct recruitment only.
He has further argued that Rule 4 of Appendix B to the Rules also stipulated the basis qualification necessary for the appointment in question as being a Degree, preferably in Metallurgy or Electrical/Mechanical Engineering from a recognised University (though a candidate with a Degree in Metallurgy would be given preference) with at lest three years practical experience in a responsible position involving metallurgical control for Heat Treatment etc.
Referring to the Rules, Mr. Patwalia has thus pointed out that the promotion of respondent No. 3 from the post of Senior Technical Officer Class II to Senior Technical Officer Class-I was, therefore, not permissible and as he was only a diploma holder in Mechanical Engineering, he did not have the basic qualification as well.
4.
As against this the learned counsel for the respondents while referring to their respective written statements have pointed out that the Punjab Government had taken a decision on 22nd August, 1969 that the gazetted technical posts of Class I and II services which were governed by the Rules were to be filled in by promotion to the extent of 75 per cent from amongst the officers who fulfilled the requisite qualification and experience for the post and that 25 per cent of these posts were to be filled in by direct recruitment through the Punjab Public Service Commission and respondent No. 3 had been promoted in terms of this policy.
5.
Mr. Balram Gupta, the learned counsel for the private respondent has in addition pointed out that rule 9(g) provided the method of recruitment for a Senior Technical Officer, Government Testing and Finishing Centre and not for other Senior Technical Officers and, as such, respondent No. 3 was entitled to be selected by promotion and that, in any case, respondent No. 3 having been promoted to the Class-I category prior to the promotion of the petitioners, his seniority should not be disturbed.
6.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the relevant Rules and the record.
It will be seen that the rules in question govern the services to which both the petitioners as also respondent No. 3 belong.
Moreover the stand of the State Government clearly is that respondent No. 3 was also eligible for promotion and had, in fact, been promoted on the basis of the decision taken by the Government on 22nd August, 1969 to fill the Class-I posts by promotion and by direct recruitment in the ratio of 75 per cent and 25 per cent.
To my mind, therefore, the stand of respondent No. 3 that he was not governed by the Rules in question does not have merit.
7.
I also find force in the argument of Mr. Patwalia that even assuming for a moment that promotion to the class-II category was visualised on the basis of the decision taken on 22nd August, 1969, yet as he did not have the basic qualification laid down in rule 4 of Appendix 'B' to the Rules his promotion was otherwise bad as this policy clearly provided that promotion could be made to Class-I service provided the basic qualifications were fulfilled by the officer concerned.
As already mentioned above, the basic qualification which respondent No. 3 admittedly did not fulfil was his lack of a degree in Engineering.
It is true that rule 4 of Appendix 'B' itself provides that the basic qualifications can be relaxed in the case of exceptionally qualified/experienced persons but it is nobody's case that any relaxation has been given to respondent No. 3 under this provision.
I am, therefore, of the opinion that the promotion of respondent No. 3 vide Annexure P2 was not in order.
8.
Having held as above the question now arises as to the relief that has to be given to the petitioners without disturbing the promotion of respondent No. 3 after a lapse of fifteen years.
This petition is accordingly allowed and a direction is issued to respondents No. 1 and 2 to re-fix the seniority of the petitioners giving them seniority over respondent No. 3, Shri Daulat Singh, as Senior Technical Officer Grade-I with effect from 26th April, 1983.
It is also directed that the promotion of respondent No. 3 either to Class-II or Class-I would not in any way be disturbed.
9.
In the light of what has been held above, I am of the opinion that the petitioners would not be entitled to any arrears of salary but shall be entitled to all other consequential benefits that flow from the decision in these writ petitions.
No costs.
Petition allowed.