HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioners applied for admission to B.V.Sc.
and AH, Five-Year Degree Course for the academic Sessions 1997-98 in response to an advertisement issued by the Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana.
They appeared in the written test held by the University and were put at Srl.
Nos. 58, 59 and 61 respectively in the merit list.
(A copy of the merit list has been appended as Annexure P-1 to the petition).
The petitioners and the other successful candidates were asked to appear for counselling and interview at the University Campus on 9th July, 1997, but as some of the candidates who were higher in merit did not report on the date, 42 seats out of the total number of 68 seats upto merit No. 52 were filled up and the selected candidates were required to register themselves and to deposit their fees by 22nd July, 1997.
It is the case of the petitioners that two of the general category candidates (i.e. the category of the petitioners) Amrit Pal Kaur and Harshdeep did not turn up and, as such, their seats also became available.
It is further the case of the petitioners that even amongst those candidates who did appear for counselling on 9th July, 1997, and had got admission, some of them such as Amrit Pal Singh, Sartaj Singh, Dheeraj Makkar and Manvi Narang left the course after joining the same, with the result that at the time of filing of the writ petition, 12 seats still remained to be filled.
The respondents accordingly adjusted the students at serial Nos. 53 to 56 of the merit list leaving 8 seats still vacant.
The petitioners accordingly addressed a letter to the vice-Chancellor on 15th September, 1997 (Annexure P-2 to the petition) praying that as the last date for the admission had been extended up to 1st September, 1997, vide Annexure R-3 and the vacancies had occurred long before that date, they too ought to have been granted admission.
This request was not acceded to.
The present petition has, accordingly, been filed.
2.
A reply has been put on record on behalf of the respondents and the stand taken is that Amritpal Kaur and Harshdeep had been allowed migration from the Assam Agricultural University as permitted under the rules of the respondent- University and they had been admitted to the 2nd year of the programme.
While dealing with the case of the other four students mentioned above, it has been pleaded that the first three had attended classes for several days after their admission and, as such, it could not be said with certitude that their seats had fallen vacant as provided in clause 2, 4 of the University Statute, whereas Dheeraj Makkar, the 4th student, did not attend any class and the resultant vacant seat had been filled up by the candidate at Srl.
No. 56, Prabhdeep Singh.
The stand, therefore, is that there were no vacant seats as on the last date of admissions.
3.
A replication has also been filed by the petitioners and it has been pointed out that Annexure P-4 which was the list of students registered for the first semester for the year 1997-98 bore the names of Amritpal Kaur and Harshdeep and that a look at Annexure P-5 indicated that Prabhdeep Singh aforesaid had been adjusted against the seat that had fallen vacant from ICAR quota and not from the general category.
A rejoinder to the replication has also been filed by the University wherein the facts stated in the written statement have been reiterated and it has been pleaded that the documents Annexure P-4 and P-5 insofar as they dealt with the case of the students mentioned above were, in fact, inaccurately complied due to rush of work and inadvertence.
4.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the record.
5.
Sitting on the writ side it would perhaps be difficult for me to give a categoric finding on the conflicting set of facts put up by the petitioners and the respondents.
The respondents have sought to explain the apparent inconsistencies in their pleading and in Annexures P-4 and P-5 by accepting that the latter contained factual errors and I have absolutely no reasons to hold otherwise.
6.
On this, Mr. PK Dutt, the learned counsel for the petitioners, has augured that even assuming that the explanation tendered by the University was to be accepted his case would be on an equally strong footing in the light of the other facts that had come on record.
He has, in this connection, referred to the documents Annexure P-6, P-7 and P-8 which are the declarations signed by Amritpal Singh, Sartaj Singh and Manvi Narang on various dates in July and August, 1997 in which they had sought the return of their original certificates as they had to appear for interview in some other institutions as well and had also declared that if they did not re-submit these documents by the dates mentioned therein, their seats may be cancelled and allotted to the next candidate.
The argument, therefore, is that their seats were thus available.
Faced with this situation, Mr. Riar, the learned counsel for the University, has referred to clause 76 of the Prospectus issued by the University for the year 1997-98 and has, in particular, invited my attention to sub-rule (iii) which read as under :  (iii) If a student of good academic standing leaves the college during the currency of a semester without the permission of the Dean, he can be re- admitted within a period of one year only with prior approval of the Academic Council."
7.
Mr. Riar has accordingly contended that though the three above-named students had left the course, they could, within a period of one year thereafter be re-admitted with the prior approval of the Academic Council and, as such, their seats could not be said to have been rendered vacant.
This argument does not commend itself to me.
A mere reading of the rule clearly shows that no inflexible right has been created in the student who has left the course to seek re-admission and he can only do so with the prior approval of the Academic Council.
The discretion has, therefore, been left with the Academic Council and it may if it so feels decline re-admission to a student.
Moreover, Amritpal Singh, Manvi Narang and Sartaj Singh had in their declaration Annexures P-6 to P-8 unequivocally stated that if they did not return by 1781997, 2271997 and 1881997, respectively, their admissions be cancelled and their seats be given to the next student.
Admittedly, none of these students has rejoined the course thereafter.
There was thus, to my mind, absolutely no justification for the University to keep the filling up of these seats in abeyance.
8.
Mr. Riar has finally argued that even assuming that the petitioners were entitled to admission at this stage, yet it would not be possible for them to complete the course as the other students who had been admitted had by now completed the first semester.
On this, Mr. PK Dutt, the learned counsel for the petitioners, has pointed out that the academic year was divided into various semesters and the University Rules permitted that in case a student had not cleared the examination at the first stage, he could do so subsequently.
9.
The petition is accordingly allowed and a direction is issued to the respondents to admit the petitioners to the course in question forthwith.
Petition allowed.