Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner is working as Inspector Weights and Measures.
Vide order dated January 6, 1998, the petitioner had been placed under suspension with effect from December 12, 1997.
The petitioner prays that the order be quashed.
2.
Mr. Brar, learned counsel for the petitioner contends that the order of suspension cannot operate retrospectively.
3.
A copy of the order has been produced as Annexure P.1 with the writ petition.
A perusal thereof shows that a criminal case has been registered against the petitioner.
It is also clear from the record that the case is under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988.
The petitioner was apprehended on December 12, 1997.
He was ordered to be released on bail on December 18, 1997.
It is not disputed that for the period during which the petitioner was detained, he will be deemed to be under suspension by the operation of the provisions of the Punjab Civil Service Rules.
The challenge is to the order on the ground that the petitioner could not have been retrospectively placed under suspension.
4.
The order is clearly in two parts.
Firstly, the petitioner has been suspended.
Secondly, the order has been enforced with retrospective effect.
The second part of the order cannot be given effect to from the date the petitioner had been released on bail.
However, so far as the prospective operation of the order of suspension is concerned, we find no illegality in the action of the respondents.
5.
Mr. Brar cites the decision of the Division Bench in Ram Chander v. State of Haryana, wherein it was held that under Rule 75, the suspension is automatic during the period of detention.
However, with regard to the subsequent operation of the order of suspension, it was observed by the Bench that the action could not be sustained in law.
This was presumably on the ground that the action was sought to be justified on the basis of Rule 75 of the Punjab Civil Service Rules Volume 1 Part 1.
Similarly in Ram Pal v. State of Haryana (CWP No. 619 of 1994), the official had been placed under suspension under Rule 75.
In the present case, the action has been taken under Rule 4(1)(b) of the Punjab Civil Service (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970.
This rule clearly empowers the competent authority to place a Government servant under suspension "where a case against him in respect of any criminal offence is under investigation, enquiry or trial".
Admittedly, a case is under investigation against the petitioner.
Therefore, the suspension is in strict conformity with the provisions of Rule 4(1)(b).
In view of the above, it is clarified that the order of suspension shall operate prospectively.
The writ petition is otherwise dismissed in limine.
Petition dismissed.