HS Bedi, J - The petitioner, who is said to be a qualified Ayurvedic doctor possessing the BAMS degree with seven years of experience in the teaching line, sought admission to Post Graduate classes to be started by respondent No. 2 on the basis of advertisements Annexures P-1 and P-2 and also appeared in the test as also in the interview of the dates fixed for the purpose.
Before the selections could be finalised, the petitioner filed the present writ petition urging that respondent No. 2 was not adequately staffed for the course in question, the requisite affiliation had not been granted by the Panjab University and that the method of selection actually adopted by the Selection Committee was in violation of the rules on the subject which had been framed by respondent No. 2 itself.
On notice of motion issued to the respondents, a number of replies have been put on record.
Respondent No. 2 has pointed out that it had been granted permission to run the course in question by the Central Council of Indian Medicine and the Chandigarh Administration, as evidenced from Annexure R-2/1 and R-2/2, as the Panjab University did not have a faculty for Ayurveda, the Council for Indian Medicines taking cognizance of this fact had granted provisional permission till such time the faculty was developed by the University.
The other facts as alleged by the petitioner have also been denied by respondent No. 2.
A reply has been put in on behalf of respondent No. 1 as well in which it has been pleaded that the University had not granted any affiliation to respondent No. 2 and as such the admissions made were unauthorised.
Replications have been filed by the petitioner reiterating the facts stated in the writ petition.
2.
Mr. DS Rajput, the learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that respondent No. 2 was wholly unqualified for the purpose of conducting the course of study and the criteria adopted for the selection process itself was in violation of the rules framed by the institution inasmuch as that 50% marks have been retained for interview rather than 10% fixed in the prospectus.
3.
Mr. Khehar, the learned counsel appearing for respondent No. 2 has, however, challenged the locus standi of the petitioner to maintain the petition and has also referred to documents Exhibit R-2/1 and R-2/2 and the pleadings in his written statement to contend that the action of respondent No. 2 was fully justified and in accordance with law.
4.
The first question that arises is the locus standi of the petitioner to maintain the petition.
The petitioner applied in response to advertisements Annexures P-1 and P-2 for the post graduate course in question and took the test and also appeared for the interview.
To my mind it is not open to her to contend that the courses that were proposed to be run by respondent No. 2 were unauthorised and without any permission.
Even otherwise, I am of the opinion that a reading of Annexures R-2/1 and R-2/2 would clearly show that an interim arrangement had been made initially for a period of one year to permit respondent No. 2 to start the post graduate courses primarily for the reason that the Panjab University-respondent No. 1, did not have teaching facilities for study in Ayurveda a proper faculty to which respondent No. 2 could be affiliated.
The Central Council of Indian Medicine was cognizant of this fact and accordingly granted permission vide Annexure R-2/1 which was also endorsed by the Chandigarh Administrative vide Annexure R-2/2.
5.
Mr. Rajput's second argument is equally without merit.
In this connection Mr. Kehar has referred to para 6 of the reply filed by respondent No. 2, in which it has been clearly stated that 50 marks had been retained for the written test and only 5 marks for the interview.
There is another significant factor which creates a serious doubt on the eligibility of the petitioner.
In the advertisement in question it had been specifically mentioned that only such persons would be eligible who had passed the BAMS degree in the first chance.
The petitioner was repeatedly asked by the Admission Committee that she should produce evidence to show that she had in fact qualified that course in the first chance but despite repeated reminders in that behalf, she produced no evidence.
For this reason also the eligibility of the petitioner becomes suspect.
6.
For the reasons mentioned above, I find no merit in the writ petition.
Dismissed.
Petition dismissed.