HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was appointed as a Clerk in Hindi Public School, Tripari, Patiala on 15.1.1974.
This is a privately recognised School, which is getting 95% grant from the State Government.
It is admitted that the petitioner has been working against a sanctioned post.
The petitioner was placed under suspension on 2641989 vide Annexure P-1 to the petition.
Vide Annexure P-3 of even date, he was allowed to rejoin his post.
Basis of petitioner's case that from the date of supension i.e. 2641989 and during the period, under suspension, he was not paid salary through from 6.6.1989 to 30.9.1989, he was not paid salary.
Subsequent thereto right upto the date he has not been paid any salary.
2.
Notice of motion was issued.
The respondent was filed by the respondents.
The stand taken by the State Government is that proper remedy for the petitioner was to approach DPI by filing an appeal and as he had not exhausted remedy available, this writ petition does not lie.
Mr. Chatrath, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has argued that there appears to be mis-management of the School in question and for the reasons the District Education Officer, Patiala, had been appointed correspondence for the purpose of justification salary to staff from the grant-in-aid.
In particular Mr. Chatrath has pointed out the application made by the petitioner on 22nd September, 1990 Annexure P-4 to the petition to the Director Public Instructions (Schools) Punjab, Chandigarh and the correspondence to the District Education Officer, Patiala Annexure P-8 dated 541994 from the Headmaster of the School to the District Education Officer, Patiala requesting the release of the petitioner's salary.
He, accordingly, argued that the petitioner was entitled to receive the admitted salary due to him but also the payment of heavy costs.
3.
As against this, Mr. Gill has argued that documents were required in order to enable the authority to assess the petitioner's case if not been made available with the Respondent-State so as to enable earlier release of the salary.
We have heard the arguments and find that in this petition Mr. Chatrath has made on evident from Annexure P-4 that the petitioner has made a representation directly to the DPI on 22.9.1990 giving full detail with regards to his service.
Vide Annexure P-5 Dated 29111996, the Circle Education Officer forwarded the certain documents/information to the DPI for the settlement of the case.
On 541994, vide Annexure P-8, the details were provided for the petitioner.
4.
We are, therefore, of the view that the petitioner has fully complied with the requirement of sorting the dues in his favour.
We find no justification as to why the salary of the petitioner to be withheld for almost 8 years.
Mr. Gill's arguments that Department was not aware with regard to the details of the petitioner are without merit for the reasons as above.
Moreover, it is clear that from 1991, the management was superseded and the D.E.O.
Patiala was appointed correspondence for the relase of the salary from the grant-in-aid to the employee directly.
The writ petition is accordingly allowed and directions to the respondents 1 to 3 to release the salary due for the period within one month from the grant-in-aid from the date certified copy is supplied to them, along with 12% interest from the date the amount fell due till the date of payment.
We also awarded the costs of the petition as Rs. 5000/-.
Petition allowed.