GS Singhvi, J - The petitioner has prayed for quashing the order dated 681997 issued by the Principal, Government Polytechnic, Ferozepur terminating his service from the post of Gestatner Operator and for grant of consequential benefits.
2.
The facts necessary for deciding this petition are that in pursuance of the advertisement issued by the respondent No. 3, the petitioner and 86 other persons applied for recruitment as Gestatner Operator.
On the basis of the recommendations made by the Selection Committee, the respondent No. 3 appointed the petitioner as Gestatner Operator on 2971997.
Clauses 1 and 7 of the order of appointment Annexure P2 read as under :-  "Extract of appointment letter dated 2971997.
1.
Tenure of Appointment;  There will be probation period of two years.
If your work and conduct is not good, your services can be terminated without any notice.
xx xx xx xx xx xx  7.
Rules applicable.
Your services shall be governed by the Punjab Civil Service Rules and instructions as may be in existence and the orders and instructions which may be issued by the Punjab Govt. or this department from time to time."
3.
The petitioner joined duty on 3071997.
After seven days of his joining duty, the respondent No. 3 issued the impugned order and terminated his service w.e.f.
681997 due to non-availability of the post of Gestatner Operator.
4.
The petitioner has challenged the impugned order on the following grounds :-  (a) the action of the respondent No. 3 is arbitrary and malicious; and  (b) the impugned order is violative of the principles of natural justice.
In their reply, the respondents No. 1 and 2 have admitted that the Principal is the appointing authority for all Class-IV posts including that of Gestatner Operator.
However, they have contested the petitioner's claim that he has acquired a right to hold the post of Gestatner Operator.
In paragraph 2 of the preliminary objections and paragraphs 5 and 7 of the main reply, these respondents have averred that the post of Gestatner Operator stood transferred to Government Polytechnic, Amritsar and the respondent No. 3 had erroneously appointed the petitioner on the non-existing post.
According to them, no right has accrued to the petitioner on the basis of appointment made under a bona fide mistake and as such, the impugned order is neither illegal nor arbitrary.
5.
In his separate written statement, Shri Inderjit Singh, Principal, Government Polytechnic, Ferozepur has averred that the post of Gestatner Operator had been advertised before he joined the post of the Principal.
He has further averred that the petitioner was appointed on the basis of his selection on merit and at no point of time, it was brought to his notice that the post of Gestatner Operator is not vacant.
For the sake of precision, we deem it appropriate to reproduce the averments made in paragraph 2 of the preliminary objections contained in the reply filed by the respondent No. 3 :-  "2.
A post of Gestatner Operator was advertised prior to the joining of Respondent No. 3 by his predecessor as per instructions of the Director, Technical Education and Industrial Training, Punjab Chandigarh to fill up all the Class-IV posts upto 31797 (Annexure R1).
The date of interview i.e. 28.7.97 was already fixed by the predecessor of Respondent No. 3.
The Respondent No. 3 constituted a selection committee as prescribed, which among others included his predecessor who advertised the post.
Interview was held and the selection committee selected Sh. Gurpartap Singh on merit basis for the post of Gestatner Operator.
At no stage, any of the concerned officials or predecessor of Respondent No. 3 brought to the notice that the post of Gestatner Operator is not vacant in Government Polytechnic, Ferozepur.
Rather latest sanction for the post of Gestatner Operator was shown to Respondent No. 3 which resulted in the issue of appointment letter to Sh. Gurpartap Singh for the post of Gestatner Operator.
(Annexure R2).
On 6.8.97 suddenly, the Office Superintendent put a note to the Principal (Copy enclosed as Annexure R3) that a post of Gestatner Operator was sanctioned in Government Polytechnic, Ferozepur against which Miss Jagdeep Kaur was promoted vide Director, Technical Education & Industrial Training, Punjab Order No. 377 dt. 18.9.1991 (Copy enclosed R4).
She was transferred along with the post of Gestatner Operator from Government Polytechnic, Ferozepur to Government Polytechnic, Amritsar vide Director, Technical Education and Industrial Training Punjab, Chandigarh letter No. 205 dated 3051992 (Copy enclosed as Annexure R5).
Her headquarter was shifted from Government Polytechnic, Amriitsar to Government Polytechnic, Ferozepur, vide Director, Technical Punjab Order No. 199 dated 2051993, but these orders were cancelled and she was allowed to continue at Government Polytechnic, Amritsar along with her post vide Director, Technical Education and Industrial Training Punjab Order No. 226 dated 16693 (Copy enclosed an Annexure R6).
He also confirmed that Miss Jagdeep Kaur is still working against the post of Gestatner Operator at Government Polytechnic Amritsar.
As such no post of Gestatner Operator is vacant at Government Polytechnic, Ferozepur.
As two officials cannot draw pay against the same post, he recommended that the service of the newly appointed official be terminated due to non-availability of vacant post, so that no financial problem may arise in future.
Respondent No. 3 approved his recommendations but also ordered that concerned official be asked to explain as to how this post was advertised and later on filled under the circumstances stated in the note of the Office Superintendent.
Accordingly, an enquiry was made from the concerned staff members as well as from the official records and submitted to the Director Technical Education & Industrial Training, Punjab, Chandigarh for further necessary action.
It has revealed that there has been negligence by the official staff who have not consulted the previous record.
There was concealment of the fact that the post of Gestatner Operator was transferred to Government Polytechnic, Amritsar by the Office Superintendent and the predecessor of respondent No. 3 who has advertised the post.
His predecessor cannot deny this fact that as per official records he knew that the post of Gestatner Operator was shifted to Government Polytechnic, Amritsar as he was posted at that time in Government Polytechnic, Ferozepur and signed many documents in this respect which are a part of inquiry report."
6.
In the replication filed by him, the petitioner has alleged that his service has been terminated in order to favour Miss Jagdeep Kaur who got appointment on the post of Gestatner Operator, which was sanctioned for Government Polytechnic, Ferozepur, though she never worked at Ferozepur and has always remained posted at Amritsar.
He has further averred that the work of Gestatner Operator was being performed by Shri Krishan Kant (a peon) and he was being paid special allowance at the rate of 10% of his salary.
7.
We have heard Shri R.D.
Bawa and Shri Rupinder Khosla.
Annexure R3 is the office note prepared by the Superintendent working in Government Polytechnic, Ferozepur.
A bare perusal of this note shows that the post of Gestatner Operator was sanctioned by the Governor of Punjab for Government Polytechnic, Ferozepur and advertisement Annexure P1 was issued keeping in view the sanction granted for the years 1994-95, 1995-96 and 1996-97.
It is also revealed from this note that Miss Jagdeep Kaur was promoted as Gestatner Operator against the post created for Government Polytechnic, Ferozepur, though she never worked at Ferozepur.
Vide order No. 205 dated 3051992 issued by the Director, Technical Education, Punjab (respondent No. 2) the post of Gestatner Operator was transferred from Ferozepur to Amritsar.
The headquarters of Miss Jagdeep Kaur was shifted from Amritsar to Ferozepur vide order No. 199 dated 2051993 passed by the respondent No. 2.
However, just after 26 days, Miss Jagdeep Kaur was again transferred to Amritsar along with the post, though her pay is being drawn from Government Polytechnic, Ferozepur.
Annexure R2 is the sanction conveyed by the Government of Punjab for various posts at Government Polytechnic, Ferozepur.
At item No. 18 is the post of Gestatner Operator.
This shows that the government has been continuously sanctioning the post of Gestatner Operator at Government Polytechnic, Ferozepur and advertisement Annexure P1 issued by the respondent no. 3 was meant for making appointment against this post.
Under what circumstances, the respondent No. 2 transferred the post of Gestatner Operator created for Government Polytechnic, Ferozepur to Government Polytechnic, Amritsar has not been explained by the respondents.
To us, it appears an act of sheer favouritism to accommodate and adjust Miss Jagdeep Kaur at Amritsar.
While doing so, the respondent No. 2 has completely ignored the larger public interest, namely, the requirement of services of Gestatner Operator at Ferozepur.
He also overlooked the fact that Shri Krishan Kant, a peon was being asked to discharge the duties of the Gestatner Operator and he was being paid special pay to the tune of 10% of his salary.
In our opinion, the actions of the respondent No. 3 to advertise the post of Gestatner Operator to constitute the Selection Committee and appoint the petitioner on the recommendations of the Committee were perfectly legitimate and justified and the impugned order passed on 681997 terminating the petitioner's service cannot be upheld being arbitrary and unjust.
8.
We also find merit in Shri Bawa's contention that the respondents should have given notice and opportunity of hearing to the petitioner before his service could be terminated.
The order Annexure P2 by which the petitioner was appointed as Gestatner Operator did create a right in his favour.
Therefore, the basic principles of natural justice should have been complied with before the petitioner could be deprived of his right to hold the post of Gestatner Operator.
Unfortunately the respondents completely overlooked the fact that the petitioner had been appointed on probation for a period of two years and arbitrarily brought an end to his tenure.
9.
In the ordinary circumstances, we would have invalidated all the actions of the respondents, but keeping in view the fact that Miss Jagdeep Kaur is not a respondent in this petition and no order can be passed affecting her right without hearing her and also keeping in view the fact that the post of Gestatner Operator is available at Government Polytechnic, Khuni Majra and the learned Deputy Advocate General has expressed the willingness of the respondents to accommodate the petitioner against that post, we deem it proper to quash the order Annexure P3 with a direction to the respondents to give posting to the petitioner as Gestatner Operator against the post which is available at Government Polytechnic, Khuni Majra.
10.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is allowed.
The order Annexure P3 is quashed.
The respondents are directed to post the petitioner as Gestatner Operator in Government Polytechnic, Khuni Majra.
The petitioner shall get all consequential benefits as a result of quashing of the order Annexure P3.
A copy of the order be given dasti on payment of the prescribed fee.
Petition allowed.