Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The appellant had joined the service as Constable on February 4, 1952.
In the year 1962, he was promoted as Sub Inspector.
He was awarded the President's Police Medal for gallantry in the year 1963.
In the year 1970 the appellant was overlooked for inclusion in promotion list `F' as a departmental enquiry was pending against him.
He was exonerated in 1972.
Thereafter his name was included in list `F' with effect from June 26, 1973.
Almost simultaneously he was promoted as Inspector.
The appellant has since retired from service.
2.
The solitary grievance made by the appellant before the learned Single Judge was that his claim for inclusion in list `F' with effect from the year 1970 was not considered after he had been duly exonerated in the departmental proceedings.
This was so in spite of the fact that the Government had accepted his claim vide order dated January 21, 1980.
He consequently prayed that the respondents be directed to consider his claim.
The learned Single Judge having rejected the appellant's prayer, he has filed the present Letters Patent Appeal.
3.
Learned counsel for the parties have been heard.
4.
It is the admitted position that the claims of various persons including the appellant were considered for admission to list `F' in the year 1970.
It is also not disputed that the appellant's claim was overlooked on the sole ground that a departmental enquiry was pending against him.
It has also not been disputed that the appellant had been finally exonerated in the departmental proceedings in the year 1972.
Thereafter the appellant's name was included in promotion list `F' in the year 1973.
In this situation, it appears to us fair and just that the appellant's claim should have been reconsidered with effect from the date the names of persons junior to him had been included in promotion list `F'.
The solitary ground on which he had been overlooked was the pendency of the enquiry.
There was a cloud on the appellant's career.
The departmental proceedings removed that cloud.
Thereafter the respondents had to consider the claim with effect from June 2, 1970.
If on comparative assessment the appellant was found to be better or at least as good as the persons whose names had been included in the promotion list, he would have been entitled to a retrospective inclusion and thus a retrospective promotion.
This was admittedly not done.
The respondents had not acted legally in failing to consider the appellant's claim for retrospective inclusion in the list after the result of the enquiry was known.
5.
It has been pointed out on behalf of the respondents that the appellant's name had been considered twice in the year 1971 viz. January 15, 1971 and August 16, 1971.
Thereafter the claim of the appellant had also been considered on July 25, 1972.
It undoubtedly appears to be so from a perusal of the judgment of the learned Single Judge.
However, it has not been disputed on behalf of the respondents that till then the clouds were hovering over the appellant's career.
After the removal of the clouds the appellant was not considered.
In view of this admitted position, we think it fair to direct the respondents to consider the appellant's claim for inclusion in list `F' with effect from June 2, 1970.
In case he is found to be suitable for inclusion in list `F', then his claim for retrospective promotion as Inspector etc. shall also be considered.
The consequential benefits that ensue shall be given to the appellant.
The appellant shall also be entitled to a consequential revision of his pension etc. in accordance with the rules.
The respondents shall do the needful within three months from the date of the receipt of the certified copy of this order.
The appeal is allowed in the above terms.
In the circumstances there will be no order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.