Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioners in these two cases are working as conductors in the Punjab Roadways.
They are aggrieved by the show cause notices issued to them.
Learned counsel has referred to the factual position in Civil Writ Petition No. 15650 of 1997.
It may be briefly noticed :  2.
On January 28, 1996 the bus on which the petitioner was posted was checked.
It was found that the petitioner had not issued tickets to 21-1/2 passengers out of a total of 25-1/2 passengers.
He had in fact collected bus fare from these passengers.
He was thus accused of embezzling an amount of Rs. 777/-.
A charge sheet was served on the petitioner.
An enquiry was held.
The petitioner was exonerated.
The General Manager who is the punishing authority, let off the petitioner with a penalty of censure.
The matter came to the notice of the appellate authority viz the Divisional Manager.
On examination of the file he found that Enquiry Officer has not considered the entire evidence and that the punishment awarded to the petitioner was not adequate.
Consequently, he issued a notice dated September 26, 1997 to the petitioner.
By this notice the petitioner was given on opportunity to show cause as to why his service be not terminated.
Alongwith this notice a detailed note running into about 9 pages in which reasons for disagreeing with the Enquiry Officer as well as the punishing authority were recorded was also given to the petitioner.
Aggrieved by this notice, the petitioner has filed the present writ petition.
It is alleged that under rule 21(1)(b) of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970, the appellate authority does not have the jurisdiction to issue a suo-motu notice for enhancement of the penalty.
3.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents by the Divisional Manager.
It is maintained that in accordance with provisions of the rules the Divisional Manager is competent to review the order passed by the General Manager.
4.
Learned counsel for the parties have been heard.
5.
The short question that arise is - Can the Divisional Manger suo-motu review the order passed by the punishing authority ?
6.
It is the admitted position that in accordance with the conditions governing the petitioner, the power to impose penalty (major as well as minor) vests in the General Manager.
It is also not disputed that the Divisional Manager is the appellate authority.
Therefore, all that has to be seen is as to whether or not the Divisional Manager has the power to suo-motu review the order passed by the punishing authority.
7.
The relevant provision is contained in Rule 21.
It inter-alia provides as under :-  "21. Review (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules, - (i) ........ (ii) the appellate authority, within six months of the date of the order proposed to be reviewed; or  (iii) ....... may at any time, either on his or its own motion or otherwise call for the records of any inquiry and review any order made under these rules or under the rules repealed by Rule 25 from which an appeal is allowed, but from which no appeal has been preferred or from which no appeal is allowed, after consultation with the Commission where such consultation is necessary, and may - (a) ....... (b) confirm, reduce, enhance or set aside the penalty imposed by the order, or impose any penalty where no penalty has been imposed; (c) ......." 8.
A perusal of the above provisions would show that notwithstanding any other provision contained in the rules, the appellate authority can confirm, reduce, enhance or set aside the penalty imposed by punishing authority.
It can also impose a penalty in case where none has been imposed.
The appellate authority can also remit the case to the authority which had initially made the order or to any other authority for further enquiry etc.
Thus, it is clear that even in a case where no penalty has been imposed, appellate authority has been vested with a jurisdiction to award any penalty to the delinquent employee.
Of course, the power to enhance the penalty has also been specifically conferred.
9.
In the present case the petitioner was admittedly awarded the penalty of censure.
The appellate authority by virtue of the above mentioned provisions can enhance it.
This is precisely what has been proposed in the present case.
Act of the authority is thus, within the ambit of the provisions contained in rule 21.
10.
It also deserves mention that proviso to this rule specifically postulates that no order imposing or enhancing any penalty shall be made by any reviewing authority unless the Government employee concerned has been given a reasonable opportunity of making a representation against the penalty proposed...................." Thus the rule also requires the grant of an opportunity to employee.
It is in view of this provision as also the principles of natural justice that a show cause notice has been served on the petitioner.
It may also be mentioned that since the competent authority had not agreed with the findings recorded by the Enquiry Officer it has given reasons for taking a different view and conveyed those reasons to the petitioner so as to enable him to effectively represent his case.
11.
In view of the above it is clear that the action of the authority is in complete conformity with the provisions of rule 21.
Lest it should prejudicially affect the petitioners' case, we say nothing on the merits of the controversy at this stage.
12.
No other point has been raised.
13.
In view of the above there is no merit in these two petitions.
Both are consequently ordered to be dismissed.
It is a fit case for the award of costs.
However, since the petitioners are holding junior posts we make no order as to costs.
Petitions dismissed.