NK Sodhi, J - What is challenged in this petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution is the order dated 12.9.1996 passed by the Chairman, Punjab Mandi Board (for short the Board) whereby Sikander Singh respondent has been promoted to the post of Deputy General Manager (Enforcement) against a vacancy reserved for a member of a scheduled caste.
2.
Petitioner and respondent 3 are working as District Mandi Officers with the Board and they were appointed together through direct recruitment in November, 1987 and as per the merit prepared by the Selection Board the petitioner was placed senior to respondent 3.
It is alleged that respondent 3 was recruited as a general category candidate and not as a member of a scheduled caste.
As per the tentative seniority list issued by the Board in May, 1995, the petitioner is shown senior to respondnet 3.
The promotion of this respondent is being challenged primarily on the ground that the cadre of Deputy General Manager (Enforcement) consists of a single post which could not be reserved for a scheduled caste as that would tantamount to 100% reservation and that the petitioner who is senior to respondent 3 should have been considered and promoted to the said post.
The other ground on which the impugned order of promotion is being challenged is that respondent 3 was recruited as a candidate belonging to the general category and could not, therefore, be given promotion against reserved vacancy.
The promotion of respondent 3 has also been challenged on the ground that it has been made without finalising the seniority list of District Mandi Officers.
A prayer has been made for a direction to the respondents to finalise the inter-se seniority of District Mandi Officers.
3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the Board, the stand taken by the petitioner has been controverted and the promotion of respondent 3 justified.
It is pleaded that the cadre of Deputy General Manager consists of two posts, the first was cretated in August, 1985 against which one Darshan Singh Aulakh belonging to the general category was working who is presently under suspension.
Another post is said to have been created by the Board with the previous sanction of the State Government duirng the year 1993-94.
It is also the case of the respondents that since the cadre of Deputy General Manager (previously known as Enforcement Chief) was increased from one to two, respondent 3 was promoted as Deputy General Manager (Enforcement) against a reserve roster point and that he is a member of a scheduled caste.
It is also pleaded that Government instructions applicable to the Board require that in a cadre having less than five posts, the first vacancy on the roster though reserved for members of scheduled castses shall be treated as un-reserved and it is the second vancancy that is to be reserved for them.
The instructions further provide that the reservation must be given effect to.
4.
In view of the plea of the petitioner that respondent 3 was not a member of a scheduled caste and that the cadre of Deputy General Manager consisted of only one post, the Board was directed to produce the original records.
The service book of respondent 3 and the original budget proceedings dated 3101994 whereby the budget for the year 1994-95 had been approved were produced before us and we have perused the same.
The service book of respondent 3 clearly shows that he is a member of a scheduled caste and it is so stated in the bio-data contained in the beginning of the service book.
5.
Mr. HS Mattewal, learned Senior counsel apearing for the petitioner strenuously urged that this respondent at the time of his initial entry into service as a District Mandi Officer did not seek appointment as a candidate belonging to a reserved category and, therefore, he could not be treated as a reserved candidate so as to be given the benefit of promotion against a reserved vacancy.
He has referred to the respondents's order of appointment which is Annexure P-2 with the writ petition.
It is true that in the appointment letter, it is not stated that Sikander Singh respondent was being appointed as a member of a scheduled caste but the fact that he belonged to a reserved category cannot be disputed as the same is clear from his service book and also from the roster register maintained by the Board in which he was shown as belonging to a reserved category.
Moreover, in the tentative seniority list which was circulated a on 3151995, respondent 3 has been shown as a member of a scheduled caste.
We have, thus, no hesitation in holding that this respondent was a member of a scheduled caste and could be promoted against a reserved vacancy as per the Government instructions.
6.
The only other question that survives for our decision is whether the cadre of Deputy General Manager consists of two posts or only one as alleged by the petitioner.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has referred to Appendix-A to the Punjab State Agricultural Marketing Board (Class I) Service Rules, 1988 in which the post of Enforcement Chief (now designated as Deputy General Manager) is shown to be one.
It is true that in the Appendix to the Rules the Cadre consists of one post but this was increased to two in the year 1993-94 when the budget was approved by the Board in its meeting held on 3101994.
It was clearly resolved by the Board in this meeting that 'no new post is proposed for the year 1994-95 except for a new post of Deputy General Manager (Grading/Marketing) which has been created with the approval of Government and two posts of Deputy District Mandi Officers have been reduced.
It may be mentioned that as per order dated 7121993 (Annexure P-17) with the writ petition the State Government sanctioned the creation of one post of Deputy General Manager (Marketing/Grading) in the pay scale of Rs. 3700-5000 after abolishing two posts of Deputy District Mandi Officers.
When the order of the State Government sanctioning the creation of another post of Deputy General Manager is read with the decision taken by the Board in its budget meeting for the year 1994-95, it is clear that a new post had been created after abolishing two posts of Deputy District Mandi Officers.
It is common case of the parties that the post could be created by the Board with the previous sanction of the State Government.
The post was in fact created when the Board resolved in its budget meeting on 3101994 to create the same and the previous sanction of the State Government had already been obtained.
This being so, we cannot but hold that the cadre stood increased from one to two posts.
No doubt, Appendix 'A' to the Rules has not yet been corrected but this would not mean that a new post had not been created.
The procedural formalities for incorporacing the decision in the Rules are of course still in progress but the operation of the decision was not intended to depend on the completion of such formalities.
7.
In the result, it must be held that since the cadre of Deputy General Manager consisted of two posts the second post had to go to a reserved candidate and that respondent 3 who is member of a scheduled caste was rightly promoted against that post.
The petitioner though senior to respondent 3 could not be considered or promoted against the second vacancy reserved for a member of a scheduled caste in view of the Government instructions.
No fault can, thus, be found with the promotion of respondent 3 to the post of Deputy General Manager (Enforcement).
There is no merit in the writ petition and the same stands dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismised.