Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - On April 28, 1995 the Improvement Trust, Ludhiana, appointed the petitioner on a Class-IV post in the rank of Daftri.
The petitioner joined his duties on May 3, 1995.
Vide order dated October 31, 1996 the petitioner's services have been terminated on the ground that he was under-age at the time of recruitment and was, thus, ineligible for appointment.
It has also been observed that the petitioner's name had not been forwarded by the Employment Exchange.
The petitioner complains that this order was passed without the grant of any opportunity whatsoever.
He further complains that he was paid no salary from May 3, 1995 till the termination of his service vide order dated October 31, 1996.
He prays that the order of termination be quashed and that the respondents be directed to pay him the arrears of salary with interest at the rate of 18 per cent per annum from the date of accrual till the date of actual disbursement.
2.
The respondents contest the petitioner's claim.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondents Nos. 1 and 2, it has been inter alia observed that the petitioner was born on June 27, 1977.
He was not eligible for appointment to "any government/semi-government service in April 1995."
It has been further averred that "the then Chairman of the Improvement Trust Shri Surinder Aggarwal had issued the alleged appointment letter illegally without any authority."
A separate written statement has also been filed on behalf of respondent No. 3.
Broadly, the reply is on the same lines.
3.
The petitioner has filed the replication reiterating his claim.
4.
Learned counsel for the parties have been heard.
5.
The short question that arises for consideration is: Have the respondents acted legally in terminating the services of the petitioner ?
6.
Admittedly, the petitioner had been appointed by the competent authority.
It is also not disputed that the petitioner had not made any false statement in his application, copy of which has been produced by him as Annexure P3.
Still further it is not disputed that the order of termination was passed without the grant of any opportunity, whatsoever, to the petitioner.
Still further it is also the admitted position that in the appointment letter issued to the petitioner, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P4 with the writ petition, there was no stipulation that it was subject to the approval of the State Government.
In spite of these facts, the petitioner's services were terminated without granting him any opportunity on the ground that he was not eligible.
Still further, to add insult to the injury, he was not even paid a penny from the date of his appointment till the date of his termination.
Was it fair ?
7.
Mr. Gurcharan Dass, learned counsel for the petitioner, has pointed out that recruitment to Class-IV posts in the State of Punjab is governed by the rules called Punjab State (Class IV) Service Rules, 1963.
These rules were published in the Punjab Government gazette dated May 31, 1963.
Rule 5(b) categorically provides that a person who is "not less than 16 years and not more than 35 years of age on the date of appointment" is eligible for consideration.
The petitioner having been born in June 1977 was certainly more than 16 years of age on the date of his appointment in April 1995.
The learned counsel appears to be right.
Still further, as has been submitted by the learned counsel for the petitioner, it is apparent that if the respondents had given the petitioner an opportunity to explain the factual position, he could have pointed out the provision contained in Rule 5(b) of the abovesaid Rules for the consideration of the appropriate authorities.
By not granting an opportunity to the petitioner, the respondents have deprived him of a valuable chance to establish that the assumption on which the Trust was terminating the petitioner's services was wholly unfounded and untenable.
This resulted in material miscarriage of justice.
The interests of the petitioner were prejudiced.
There was violation of the principles of natural justice.
It vitiates the impugned order.
8.
It has been submitted on behalf of the petitioner that the order of termination had been passed basically on account of the fact that the term for which the original incumbent was working as Chairman had expired and that a new person had taken over.
In the circumstances of the case the allegation does not appear to be totally unfounded.
To add credence to the allegation is the fact that the petitioner had not been paid even a penny by way of salary since the date of appointment in May 1995 till the termination of service on October 31, 1996.
9.
Mr. Punit Jindal has pointed out that the petitioner's appointment had been made without the issuance of any advertisement.
Assuming it was so, it was a fault committed by the respondent itself.
It was for the Trust to advertise if it was under a duty to do so.
If it chose not to advertise, it cannot be permitted to take benefit of its own wrong.
In any case, no action can be taken against the petitioner without affording him a reasonable opportunity.
In these circumstances, the action of the respondents appears to be apparently arbitrary and unfair.
10.
No other point has been raised.
11.
Taking the totality of circumstances, we are unable to uphold the action of the respondents.
Consequently, the impugned order dated October 31, 1996, copy of which has been produced as Annexure P9 with the writ petition, is quashed.
It is held that the termination of the petitioner's services was wholly illegal.
He would be reinstated into service forthwith.
The petitioner shall be entitled to all consequential benefits, including the arrears of salary from May 3, 1995, when he had joined the duty, till the date of actual payment.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to interest on the arrears of salary at the rate of 12 per cent per annum from the date of the accrual of the wages till the actual payment.
He shall also be entitled to costs, which are assessed at Rs. 2,000/-.
The petition is allowed in the above terms.
Petition allowed.