RS Mongia, J - Vide order dated 3151996 respondent No. 3, Smt. Vimal Vyas, Assistant Librarian has been asked to work against the post of Librarian in the Haryana Civil Secretariat Library in her own pay scale.
This order is under challenge in this writ petition.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that though the petitioner may be junior to Smt. Vimal Vyas but Smt. Vimal Vyas does not hold the qualifications for the post of Librarian in the Haryana Civil Secretariat Library.
The case of the respondent, on the other hand, is that the recruitment to the post of Librarian in the Haryana Civil Secretariat is made on basis of the memorandum dated 3151977, copy of which is Annexure R-1, issued by the Chief Secretary to Government of Punjab to the Chief Secretary Government of Haryana, in which it is mentioned that 7 years' experience as Assistant Librarian is necessary for promotion to the post of Librarian.
There are no statutory Service rules governing the promotion to the post of Librarian.
Be that as it may, we are of the view that order Annexure P-2 dated 3151996 does not in terms promote respondent Smt. Vimal Vyas to the post of Librarian in the Haryana Civil Secretariat Library.
It is only that she has been asked to work against the post.
In Ramakant Shripad Sinai Advalpalkar v. Union of India and others, A.I.R. 1991 SC 1145 : 1993(3) SCT.
586, it was held as under :-  "Asking an officer who substantively holds a lower post merely to discharge the duties of a higher post cannot be treated as a promotion.
In such a case he does not get the salary of the higher post, but gets only what in service parlance is called a "charge allowance".
Such situations are contemplated where exigencies of public service necessitate such arrangements and even considerations of seniority do not enter into it.
The person continues to hold his substantive lower post and only discharges the duties of the higher post essentially as a stop-gap arrangement."
In view of what has been observed above, since respondent No. 3 has been asked to only work against the post of librarian in her own pay scale, it is not a promotion.
As and when the post is sought to be filled in by regular method of promotion/direct recruitment or any other method, the cases of eligible persons shall be considered.
Subject to the observations made above, we find no merit in this petition and the same is hereby dismissed.