Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner and respondent No. 4 were working as Deputy General Managers with the Haryana Tourism Corporation.
A Selection Committee considered the claims of both the officers alongwith those of the two other eligible persons for selection and appointment to the post of General Manager.
The fourth respondent was placed at No. 1.
The petitioner was placed at No. 4.
As a result, the fourth respondent was appointed.
Aggrieved by this action, the petitioner has filed the present writ petition.
2.
The petitioner alleges that he was the senior-most Deputy General Manager working in the Corporation.
He was fully eligible.
However, in order to exclude him from promotion, the qualifications were arbitrarily altered without disclosing full facts.
As a result, various other persons including respondent No. 4 were made eligible.
Still further, the order of appointment of fourth respondent was passed by the Managing Director who was not competent under the Articles of Association to do so.
The claim made by the petitioner was controverted by the respondents.
Learned counsel for the parties have been heard.
The questions that arise for consideration are :-  (i) Were the qualifications for the post of General Manager altered illegally without consideration of the relevant facts ?
(ii) Whether the impugned order appointing respondent No. 4 as the General Manager was passed by an authority which was not competent to do so ?
(iii) Was the petitioner arbitrarily rejected ?
Reg: (i)  3.
It is the admitted position that in the year 1991, the following qualifications were prescribed for the post of General Manager :-  (i) Divisional Manager with eight years experience in the Senior Scale; Or (ii) Deputy General Manager with three years of experience.
The above qualifications were altered in the 72nd meeting of the Board of Directors.
It was provided that a person should have five years of minimum experience as Deputy General Manager and must have three years' Diploma in Hotel Management, Catering and Nutrition.
In the year 1994, the matter was again considered.
A copy of the agenda item which was placed before the Board of Directors has been produced as Annexure P.13 with the writ petition.
It has been inter alia mentioned that "the condition of having exclusive three years' diploma in Hotel Management, Catering and Nutrition for the promotion to the post of General Manager will defeat the purpose of creating post of General Manager because most of our experienced officers may not be eligible for this promotion/selection as some of them are having two years' diploma and some of them are non-diploma holders but having only other academic/professional qualifications.
In order to avoid frustration, it is proposed that the earlier decision of the Board regarding selection/promotion to the post of General Manager in the Corporation may be amended..." It was proposed that "five years' minimum experience as Deputy General Manager may be prescribed as the qualification."
This matter was considered by the Board.
It was decided as under :-  This Board discussed the item at length and finally decided as under :-  1.
In supersession of Resolution No. 8 of the meeting of Board of Directors, the qualification of minimum 3 years Diploma in Hotel Management, Catering and Nutrition was withdrawn and henceforth the DGMs would be considered for promotion as GMs irrespective of the qualification.
Similarly, the minimum experience of 5 years as DGM would henceforth be 3 years experience as DGM.
2.
The selection would be made on merit-cum-seniority basis by a committee consisting of the Chairman, Managing Director and Shri Rajinder Kumar.
Out of the two posts of GMs, only one post of General Manager would be filled for the time being."
4.
A perusal of the Agenda note and the decision of the Board indicate that the qualifications were not amended to help any individual but only with the object of widening the field of choice.
In fact, according to the qualifications as initially prescribed, all the Deputy General Managers would have been eligible for consideration.
However, these qualifications were changed in 1992, with the result that only the petitioner was eligible.
It was in order to obviate such a situation that the qualifications were altered.
The Board of Directors which had initially prescribed the qualifications had the jurisdiction to do so.
It did not violate any provision of law or act arbitrarily.
5.
Mr. Patwalia contended that the action of the Board was based on extraneous considerations and was calculated to help the respondent.
On behalf of the respondents, it was pointed out by M/s Rajiv Atma Ram and MM Kumar that it was the petitioner who had succeeded in getting the matter stalled at the instance of the Minister and the Chief Minister.
They referred to the communication dated February 16, 1995, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P17 by the petitioner.
6.
In the circumstances of the case, it is wholly unnecessary to go into this question.
Admittedly, no qualification regarding three years Diploma had been prescribed in the year 1991.
This qualification was introduced for the first time in December 1992.
By its resolution of December, 1994, the Board had virtually restored the position of 1991.
It was persuaded to do so, with the avowed object of enabling the officers of the Corporation to compete for the post of General Manager.
Its action was not illegal.
It was based on consideration of full facts.
There was no infirmity which may call for any interference.
Reg: (ii)  7.
It was contended that respondent No. 4 had been appointed as General Manager vide order dated February 16, 1995.
This order was passed by the Managing Director.
The power to appoint a General Manager vests only in the Board.
Thus, the order was wholly without jurisdiction and cannot be sustained.
Is it so ?
8.
Mr. Rajiv Atma Ram, counsel for the respondent-Corporation produced a copy of the Memorandum and Articles of Association.
It was taken in record as Mark `A'.
He also produced a copy of the Minutes of the meeting of the Board of Directors held on January 16, 1975.
It was taken on record as Mark `B'.
Copies were also supplied to the counsel for the petitioner.
9.
A perusal of the Articles of Association shows that the power to "appoint General Managers or Managers... has been given to the Board under Article 86.
However, it further appears that the Board of Directors has been empowered to appoint committees to delegate functions.
Article 82(a) inter alia provides that "the Board may subject to the provisions of the Act, from time to time, delegate any of its powers to a Committee consisting of such Director or Directors as it thinks fit.... Any Committee so formed shall in the exercise of the powers so delegated conform to any conditions that may, from time to time be imposed upon it by the Board."
Thus, the Board has been given the power to delegate its functions to a committee which may consist of such Director or Directors as it may think fit.
10.
A perusal of the minutes of the meeting of the Board of Directors (Mark `B') shows that one of the matters which had been placed before its consideration was - "to confer power of appointment and termination of services of employees of Corporation in favour of Managing Director and Project Officers."
The Board had accepted this proposal.
It had resolved to classify all posts into four classes as per Haryana Government instructions.
The power of appointment and punishment in respect of posts in Class I, II and III Services had been conferred on the Managing Director.
The post of General Manager belongs to the Class I Service.
The power of appointment would obviously vest in the Managing Director.
11.
It was contended on behalf of the petitioner that the post of General Manager had been created in the year 1991.
Thus, the order of delegation passed in the year 1975 cannot be invoked to support the action in the present case.
12.
This contention cannot be accepted.
There was a general decision to classify all posts in the service into four classes as per Haryana Government instructions.
That being so, any post that may be created by the Board at any time shall fall within one or the other service and the power of appointment or punishment shall be exercised by the authority which has been given that power.
The power had not been conferred in respect of any specific post.
It was in regard to the classes of service.
That being so, the contention raised on behalf of the petitioner cannot be accepted.
13.
On behalf of the respondents, it was pointed out that the order passed by the Managing Director had in any case been ratified by the Board of Directors in the 81st meeting held on March 20, 1995.
It may be so.
In view of the finding that the original order was valid, its ratification by the Board only puts the matter beyond any pale of controversy.
In view of the above, even the second question is answered against the petitioner.
Reg: (iii)  14.
Lastly, it was contended that the selection was arbitrary.
The petitioner was wrongly rejected/superseded.
15.
A copy of the proceedings of the Selection Committee constituted by the Board of Directors for the purpose of making selection to the post of General Manager was produced before us by the learned counsel for the respondent-Corporation.
It was taken on record as Mark `C'.
A copy of these proceedings was given to the counsel for the petitioner as well.
16.
A perusal of the proceedings shows that the Committee had considered the academic and professional qualifications, the confidential reports and the overall record of the officers.
With regard to the record, it had found the respective positions of all the four candidates as under :-  Sr. No. Grading Deepak Amwani HS Bedi PK Kohli 1.
Outstanding Nil 2 5 4 2.
Very Good 2 2 4 5 3.
Good 6 5 Nil Nil 4.
Average 1 Nil Nil Nil A perusal of the above shows that the petitioner had not been graded as `Outstanding' at any time.
Out of the nine reports, two were `Very Good', six `Good' and one `Average'.
As against this, the fourth respondent had earned five `Outstanding' and four `Very Good' reports.
In this situation, it is not surprising that he was found to be the most suitable person.
In fact, it appears that the grading given by the Selection Committee was the same as assessed by the reporting officers at different times.
The fourth respondent who had five `Outstanding' reports was placed at No. 1.
Mr. Gursharan Singh who had four `Outstanding' reports was placed at No. 2.
Mr. HS Bedi who had two `Outstanding' reports was placed at No. 3.
Last of all was the petitioner who had not earned any `Outstanding' report.
The proceedings of the Selection Committee are self-explanatory.
There is no element of arbitrariness.
The criterion was objective.
The assessment was fair.
It calls for no interference.
Resultantly, even the answer to the third question has to be against the petitioner.
No other point was raised.
In view of the above, there is no merit in this writ petition.
It is, consequently, dismissed.
However, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.