Sat Pal, J. - In response to advertisement published in The Daily Tribune dated 1121990 (Annexure P.4), the petitioner applied for the post of Senior Assistant in the scale of Rs. 1800-3200.
Having qualified the written test, the petitioner along with other candidates was called for interview for the said post vide interview letter dated 621991 (Copy Annexure P5).
The petitioner was, however, offered the post of Junior Assistant in the scale of Rs. 1500-2600 vide letter dated 841991 (Copy Annexure R-4/1).
Pursuant to the said letter of appointment, the petitioner joined the respondent institute on 10.4.1991.
It is the case of the petitioner that at the time of his appointment as Junior Assistant, he was given an oral promise that the claim of the petitioner for appointment as Senior Assistant will be considered after observing the performance of the petitioner for six months.
It may be relevant to note here that the post advertised by the respondent institute was of Senior Assistant and as stated earlier, the petitioner had also applied for the post of Senior Assistant.
2.
After the expiry of six months from the date of joining as Junior Assistant, the petitioner approached the Director of the respondent institute to appoint him as Senior Assistant.
The Director, however, informed the petitioner that the Selection Committee was meeting on 6111991 to select five more Senior Assistants and agreed to get the petitioner examined by the Selection Committee along with other candidates.
Thereafter the petitioner along with other candidates was interviewed by the selection committee on 6111991 and the copy of the proceedings of the staff selection committee dated 6111991 is Annexure R-4/3 appended with the written statement filed on behalf of the official respondents.
The relevant portion from these proceedings is reproduced herein below:  ``The institute had earlier advertised the post of Sr. Assistant in the scale of Rs. 1800-3200 and recommended appointment of Sh. KP Singh in the scale of Rs. 1500-2640 and further recommended that his work should be observed during the probation period and thereafter the regular scale of Rs. 1800-3200 be given.
Dy.
Registrar (Accounts) who is Controlling Officer for Sh. KP Singh has intimated that the work and conduct of Sh. KP Singh has been consistently good, which requires his placement as Sr. Assistant in the scale of Rs. 1800-3200.
The Committee interviewed candidates short-listed on the basis of the written test and found that the work of Sh. KP Singh is comparatively better than the performance of the candidates in the present interview.
Since the new candidates are to be appointed in the scale of Rs. 1800-3200, the Selection Committee felt that Sh. KP Singh be placed in the scale of Rs. 1800-3200, so that he is not in the disadvantageous position in comparison to the new appointments being made.''
3.
Thereafter the petitioner was placed as Senior Assistant in the scale of Rs. 1800-3200 with immediate effect vide office order dated 8111991 copy of which is Annexure P.6.
The selection made by the Selection Committee was duly approved by the Board of Governors of the respondent institute in its meeting dated 521992.
The relevant extract from the proceedings of the said meeting of the Board has been appended as Annexure P-7 and reads as under :-  ``The Staff Selection Committees interviewed candidates and recommended appointment of the following persons to various posts in order of merit :- Senior Assistants (Scale 1800-3200).
1.
Sh. KP Singh 2.
Sh. Dal Bahadur 3.
Sh. Rakesh Kumar Verma 4.
Sh. Rajan Sud 5.
Sh. Amarjit Singh Reserved Category Sh. Harmesh Singh.''
4.
The petitioner and the private respondents were selected as Senior Assistant by the Selection Committee on 6111991.
The petitioner was, however, shown junior to the private respondents in the seniority list circulated vide office order dated 1541996 copy of which is Annexure P12.
Aggrieved by this order, the present writ petition has been filed by the petitioner.
5.
Mr. Malik, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner submitted that since the petitioner was placed at Sr. No. 1 in the merit list approved by the Board of Governors vide Annexure P.7, he should have been shown senior to respondents No. 5 to 8 (private respondents) who were selected by the Selection Committee on the same date.
He submitted that Model Service Rules were framed and circulated among all departments vide letter dated 5111973 and in terms of Rule 10 which relates to seniority, the seniority inter- se of the members of the service is to be determined by the length of continuous service on a post in the service and in the case of members recruited by direct appointment, the order of merit determined by the commission, the Board or other recruiting authority, is not to be disturbed in fixing the seniority.
6.
Mr. Patwalia, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the private respondents, however, submitted that in terms of the Model Service Rules, a member recruited by direct appointment was to be senior to a member recruited otherwise.
He submitted that the private respondents were recruited by direct recruitment and the petitioner was appointed by promotion and as such the private respondents have correctly been shown senior to the petitioner in the seniority list Annexure P12.
The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the official respondents reiterated the submissions made by Mr. Patwalia.
7.
We have carefully considered the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties.
Before dealing with the submission made by the learned counsel for the parties, it will be apposite to refer to Rule-10 of the Model Service Rules which relates to seniority.
The relevant portion from Rule-10 is reproduced herein below :-  ``The seniority inter se of members of the service is to be determined by the length of continuous service on a post in the service; Provided that where there are different cadres in a service the seniority shall be determined separately for each cadre; Provided further that in the case of members recruited by direct appointment, the order of merit determined by the Commission, the Board or other recruiting authority, as the case may be, is not to be disturbed in fixing the seniority; Provided further that in the case of two members appointed on the same date, their seniority is to be determined as follows: (a) a member recruited by direct appointment is to be senior to a member recruited otherwise.
xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx'' 8.
From this Rule, it is clear that a member recruited by direct appointment shall be senior to a member recruited otherwise which will include appointment by promotion.
It is further evident from this Rule that in the case of members recruited by direct recruitment in the same selection, the order of merit determined by the Selection Committee is not to be disturbed in fixing the seniority.
9.
In the present case, the post advertised by the respondent institute was of Senior Assistant and the petitioner in fact had applied for the post of Senior Assistant.
It is correct that initially the petitioner was offered the post of Junior Assistant but the respondent institute had agreed that petitioner along with the other candidates (which included private respondents) could appear before the Selection Committee on 6111991 for appointment against the post of Senior Assistant.
The proceedings of the Selection Committee which have been reproduced in the earlier part of the judgment, clearly show that the petitioner was interviewed along with the private respondents and the work of the petitioner was found by the Selection Committee comparatively better than the performance of the private respondents in the interview.
The merit list prepared by the Selection Committee on 6111991 was approved by the Governing body of the respondent institute in its meeting held on 521992 (Annexure P.7) and from the proceedings of the meeting of the Board of Governors, it is clear that the petitioner was placed at Sr. No. 1 in the merit list and the private respondents were placed lower in merit than the petitioner.
Even the order dated 8111991 (copy Annexure P.6) shows that the petitioner was placed as Senior Assistant in the scale of 1800-3200 with immediate effect and this order does not show that the petitioner was promoted as Senior Assistant.
Since the petitioner had applied for the post of Senior Assistant and was allowed by the respondent institute to be interviewed along with the private respondents by the Selection Committee and further the Selection Committee while selecting the petitioner had compared the work of the petitioner qua the performance of the private respondents, we are of the considered opinion that the petitioner was recruited as Senior Assistant by direct appointment and not by promotion.
Since the name of the petitioner was shown at Sr. No. 1 in the merit list and the private respondents were placed lower in rank in the merit list, the petitioner has to be placed senior to the private respondents in the seniority list.
In this connection we may also refer to the letter dated 361991 (Copy Annexure P.22) written by the Director of the respondent institute to the Ministry of Human Resources Development, Government of India which shows that the petitioner was selected as Senior Assistant by the Selection Committee even in the first interview held on 2121991 and this interview was held also for the direct recruitment.
For the reasons recorded herein above we allow the writ petition and quash office order dated 1541996 (Copy Annexure P12).
We further hold that the petitioner shall rank senior to the private respondents in the cadre of Senior Assistant and shall be entitled to consequential benefits.
Petition allowed.