NK Sodhi, J (Oral) - The Ludhiana Central Cooperative Bank Limited, Ludhiana (for short the Bank) invited applications for some posts including the posts of Junior Clerks/Junior Clerk-cum-Typists in the pay scale of Rs. 1,450-2,950 with usual allowances.
The minimum qualifications required for the posts were also mentioned in the advertisement.
This advertisement appeared in the `Indian Express' and also in the `Daily Punjab Bulletin'.
The last date for the receipt of the applications was 861996.
Petitioners along with several others applied for the posts of Junior Clerks/Clerk-cum-Typists.
On receipt of the applications the Board of Directors of the Bank in their meeting held on 491996 constituted a selection committee for filling up the posts.
The committee consisted of Sh. Tejinder Singh, President of the Bank, Sh. Baljit Singh, Managing Director, Sh. Harminder Singh, Director, Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Punjab (Government nominee) and a nominee of Punjab State Cooperative Bank Limited, Chandigarh which is the Apex Bank in the State.
The applicants appeared in the typing test and those who qualified were called for interviews (which) were held from 22.12.1996 to 28121996.
The petitioners cleared the typing test and also appeared for the interview.
Before the result of the selection could be declared general elections in the State of Punjab were announced.
Model Code of Conduct as prescribed by the Election Commission came into force and restrictions were placed on making new appointments, promotions, transfers etc.
The Election Commission appears to have sent a communication to the State of Punjab requiring it to freeze all recruitments and appointments till the elections were over.
The Apex Bank then sent a communication to the Bank dated 911997 informing the latter that all recruitments had been frozen and even in cases where interviews had been completed the result be withheld till Assembly Elections were over.
After the elections were over and the new Government installed, the Bank wrote a letter to the Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Punjab seeking permission to declare the result of the selection so that appointments could be made.
The Registrar in response to the aforesaid communication asked for information from the Bank as to whether the posts had been advertised and the interviews completed.
The Bank informed the Registrar that the posts had been duly advertised in the `Indian Express' as also in the `Daily Punjab Bulletin' and the last date for receipt of the applications was 861996.
The other information asked for was also supplied.
Even after the receipt of this information the Registrar did not grant permission to the Bank to declare the result of the selection.
It was then that the petitioners filed the present petition under Article 226 of the Constitution for a mandamus directing the respondents to declare the result of the selection made in December, 1996 and to make appointments accordingly.
2.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it is stated that the Registrar Cooperative Societies had issued a circular letter to various Cooperative Banks on the subject of recruitment of staff and it was stated therein that the process of recruitment after the completion of Assembly polls should be resumed only with the specific prior permission of his office.
It is further stated that after the elections were over the Chief Secretary addressed a circular letter to all the departments advising them to take orders on all pending matters including those relating to appointments from the new Ministers/Council of Ministers.
It is also pleaded that it was brought to the notice of the Registrar that some Cooperative Banks had not notified the vacancies to the concerned Employment Exchanges for making recruitments against the vacant posts and that some of them had not given sufficient time while calling the candidates for interviews and, therefore, it was decided that in order to make a fair and transparent recruitment in the Cooperative Banks, the Banks should advertise the posts again in the newspapers and make requisition from the Employment Exchanges.
3.
We have heard counsel for the parties at length.
4.
There is no gainsaying the fact that each Cooperative Bank including the Ludhiana Central Cooperative Bank was making its own recruitments by constituting regular selection committees.
May be some of the Banks had not given sufficient publication while inviting applications for the posts or may not have given enough time to the candidates at the time of interview but in the case of the Ludhiana Central Cooperative Bank no such infirmity has been alleged.
It is not the case of the respondents that the Bank did not properly advertise the posts in the press.
It is also not their case that the Bank had made a hurried recruitment because of the impending elections.
As a matter of fact the posts were advertised in May, 1996 and 8696 was the last date for the receipt of applications.
Thereafter, a Selection Committee was duly constituted consisting of the Registrar, Cooperative Societies who was a Government nominee and a nominee of the Apex Bank.
That committee then held typing test and those who qualified the same were called for interviews.
After the interviews were over and before the result of the selection could be announced, Model Code of Conduct as prescribed by the Election Commission came into force on account of the general elections to be held in the State.
All recruitments and appointments were stopped till the elections were over.
Now that the elections are over and the Bank has requested the Registrar to permit it to announce the result of the selection so that appointments could be made in accordance therewith, we see no justification much less reasonable for not permitting the Bank to go ahead with the appointments particularly when no allegation of any irregularity or lack of good faith has been made against it.
No doubt a new Council of Ministers has taken over but that has nothing to do with the appointments that have to be made by the Bank and for which the Bank is the appointing authority.
The working of the Bank must have already suffered when a large number of posts have been lying vacant.
In the case of those banks where the Registrar finds that there were some irregularities one can understand that case for a fresh selection could be made out but where the whole process of selection has already been completed in accordance with the prescribed procedure as in the present case, withholding of the result is highly arbitrary and illegal.
The circular letter of the Chief Secretary requiring all administrative Secretaries to take fresh orders from the new Council of Ministers has thus no relevance in the circumstances of the present case.
In the result, we allow the writ petition and direct the respondents to declare the result of the selection and fill up the vacant posts on the basis of the merit of the candidates within one month from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
There is no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.