Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner prays for the issue of a writ ``of certiorari quashing the selection of respondent No. 3 or any other person on regular basis till his services are regularised.''
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
On October 16, 1992, the Punjab Agricultural University advertised various posts including that of Research Engineer.
The petitioner was selected.
Vide letter dated June 16, 1993, the petitioner was appointed as a Research Engineer ``on ad hoc basis till the joining back of its regular incumbent at the pay to be fixed according to the Rules in the scale of Rs. 3700-125-4950-150-5700.....'' It was further stipulated that ``he is liable to be reverted to his previous post at any time without any notice.''
While the petitioner was continuing to work as a Research Engineer, the University issued another advertisement in the year 1995.
A copy of the extract from this advertisement has been produced as Annexure P.4 with the writ petition.
In this advertisement, besides other posts, a post of Associate Professor of Agricultural Engg.
(Soil and Water Engineering) was advertised.
Qualifications were laid down.
The petitioner and respondent No. 3 competed for this post.
The third respondent was selected.
After her selection, the petitioner filed the present writ petition claiming that the respondent- university should be prohibited from appointing any other person on regular basis till his services are regularised either against the post of Research Engineer or any other post of equivalent rank and status.
3.
The respondents contest the petitioner's claim.
Separate written statements have been filed.
It has been inter alia pointed out that the post of Associate Professor of Agricultural Engineering (Soil and Water Engineering) had been advertised even in the year 1992 when the petitioner had only applied for the post of Research Engineer.
The post against which the petitioner had been appointed was in fact a temporary vacancy which had occurred on account of the fact that the original incumbent had proceeded on deputation.
Therefore, on the petitioner's selection, the appointment was made on purely ad hoc basis.
Still further, the petitioner had competed for recruitment to the post of Associate Professor in the year 1995.
He having not been selected, cannot claim appointment to the post for which respondent No. 3 was found to be suitable by the Selection Committee.
On these premises, the respondents maintain that the claim made by the petitioner cannot be sustained.
4.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
The two-fold submission of Mr. Tiwari is that the action of the University in not regularising the services of the petitioner as a Research Engineer suffers from the vice of discrimination and that the selection and appointment of respondent No. 3 to the Post of Associate Professor is wholly illegal.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioner has been controverted by Mr. Jagdish Singh Khehar who has appeared on behalf of the Respondent-University as well as by Mrs. Abha Rathore, counsel for the third respondent.
The two questions that arise for consideration are :-  (i) Whether the selection and appointment of respondent No. 3 as an Associate Professor of Agricultural Engineering (Soil and Water Engineering) is arbitrary and illegal.
(ii) Whether the action of the respondents in not regularising the services of the petitioner as a Research Engineer is discriminatory and, thus, violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
Reg : (i)  5.
It is the admitted position that the post of Associate Professor of Agricultural Engineering (Soil and Water Engineering) was duly advertised.
The petitioner as well as various other candidates had an opportunity to offer their candidature.
The petitioner had actually applied.
He was duly considered.
He was interviewed by the Selection Committee.
It has not been suggested that the Committee was not properly constituted.
It has not even been argued that any member of the Selection Committee was biased against the petitioner or that anyone was interested in respondent No. 3.
The Committee had selected respondent No. 3.
The selection was approved by the Board of Management.
After it was approved, the third respondent was appointed to the post.
The petitioner's claim having been duly considered and the third respondent having been found to be more meritorious, it cannot be said that the University had acted illegally or arbitrarily in appointing him.
The mere fact that the petitioner was working on ad hoc basis on the post of Research Engineer did not give him a right to claim that respondent No. 3 could not be selected or appointed.
In view of the above, the answer to the first question has to be in the negative.
The selection was not arbitrary or illegal.
Consequently, it calls for no interference.
Reg : (ii)  6.
Mr. Tiwari submits that the University has been consistently regularising the services of persons who have been appointed on ad hoc basis.
In particular, Mr. Tiwari has refered to a document produced alongwith the replication as Annexure P.16.
This is a copy of the order dated March 31, 1992.
The Vice Chancellor of the University had appointed Dr. Daljit Singh Dhillon, Assistant Professor of Extension Education as Associate Professor of Extension Education in the College of Agriculture Non-plan on ad hoc basis.
Mr. Tiwari submits that subsequently, the services of Dr. Dhillon were regularised as Associate Professor vide order dated April 4, 1995.
He submits that there are various other cases in which similar action has been taken.
7.
Assuming that the learned counsel is right in his submission that the University has regularised the services of various persons who had been appointed on ad hoc basis.
It cannot be said that the petitioner has an indefeasible right to be appointed as Research Engineer on regular basis.
In particular, it deserves to be mentioned that the learned counsel has not been able to show that the post of Research Engineer to which he had been appointed on ad hoc basis is substantively vacant.
On behalf of the respondent- University, it has been stated by Mr. Khehar on instructions from Mr. Sunil Kumar, Junior Assistant, who has brought the record from the University that Dr. SK Shakya still holds a lien on the post held by him.
He is at present officiating as a Senior Research Engineer on ad hoc basis.
It is, thus, clear that the post held by the petitioner is not regularly vacant.
That being so, he has no right to claim regularisation on that post.
Mr. Tiwari refers to the documents which have been produced as Annexures P.18 and P19 to submit that equivalent posts are available.
A persual of the communication dated March 12, 1997, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P.18 shows that the post of Research Engineer (Design) provided under a Scheme by the ICAR is available.
The document at Annexure P19 is an undated communication which shows that the post of Associate Professor has fallen vacant w.e.f.
August 2, 1996.
It has been pointed out both the posts are different and in any event, the post of Research Engineer (Design) has already been approved for advertisement.
That being so, the petitioner shall have the right to compete for this post.
Similarly, whenever the post of Associate Professor is advertised, the petitioner may, if so advised, compete therefore.
However, even if it is assumed that the posts are available, a person appointed on ad hoc basis cannot claim an indefeasible right to be appointed on regular basis on such a post.
8.
Senior Faculty positions in a University have to be filled up by selecting the best out of the available persons.
If the University decides to fill up the posts after proper advertisement and selection, it cannot be said to have acted illegally or arbitrarily.
If the University has made an exception in certain cases, its action may be liable to be questioned on the ground that the post was not filled up after proper advertisement.
However, no person can claim that since the University has made an exception in one case, it should be compelled to do so in another case as well.
9.
Lastly, the counsel has also raised a plea that the expert in the field for which the post had been advertised had not been associated with the Selection Committee.
Learned counsel for the respondents point out that no such contention has been raised in the writ petition.
On being repeatedly asked, learned counsel for the petitioner has been unable to refer to any averment in the petition to the effect that an expert in the field of Soil and Water Engineering had not been associated with the Selection Committee.
In the absence of a specific plea in that behalf, the contention cannot be allowed to be raised at this stage.
Even otherwise, the petitioner having competed without raising any protest would now be estopped for challenging the constitution of the Selection Committee.
No other point had been raised.
There is no merit in this writ petition.
It is, consequently, dismissed with costs which are quantified at Rs. 5,000/-