Swatanter Kumar, J - State Council of Education, Research and Training (SCERT), Punjab issued an advertisement dated 281996 for admission to Elementary Teachers Training Course for the academic year 1996-97.
The petitioner being fully eligible for the course applied for admission.
The petitioner was issued Roll.
No. 148302 for appearing in the Entrance Test which was to be held on 2991996.
Since the result was declared on 731997, the petitioner being successful in the test secured 13450 marks.
2.
Certain seats were reserved for different categories.
Amongst others seats were reserved for the children of the teachers as well as in sports category.
In column 9, the candidate was required to specify the category under which he was claiming admission to the course.
This clause 9 in the application form was filled in by the petitioner in the following manner :-  "9.
In which category you have 1.
Teacher's son you want to admission  (attach a copy of concerning 2.
Sports'' of category : The petitioner was considered under "Sports Category" as he annexed to the application form gradation certificae by the authorities concerned.
However, he was denied admission as he could not make merit in sports category.
It is not disputed that no person having lesser merit than the petitioner has been granted admission in sports category.
3.
The petitioner approached the respondents that he ought to have been considered under the teachers' category, which he had stated as his first preference.
The petitioner requested the respondents to give him admission under that category as Mr. Karamjit Singh, respondent No. 4 who has lower in merit than the petitioner, has already been admitted to the Course.
Respondent No. 4 is stated to have secured 111 marks, while the petitioner has secured 13450 marks.
As such, according to the petitioner, the person of lower merit than the petitioner had been given admission in the course under teachers' category.
The respondents declined to entertain the request of the petitioner.
The petitioner filed the present writ petition praying for issuance of appropriate writ, order or direction to the respondents, setting aside and quashing the admission of respondent No. 4 and for granting admission to the petitioner under teachers ward category in two years' course for Elementary Teachers' Training.
4.
Separate written statements were filed on behalf of respondents No. 1 to 3 and respondent No. 4.
According to respondents No. 1 to 3, there are 100 seats; 50 for boys and 50 for girls, out of which 2% seats are reserved for sports category, one for male and one for female, while 2% seats are reserved for wards of the teachers, again one for male and one for female.
These respondents stated that the application of the petitioner was considered and roll number was issued to the petitioner in sports category and the petitioner never objected to the same till declaration of the result on 731997.
It is further averred that under Column No. 2 and instructions publihshed in advertisement, no change in category was permissible at any stage.
It is stated that the petitioner never approached the respondents for grant of admission under teachers' ward category and as such he was not entitled to the admission.
According to respondent No. 4, it is averred that the petitioner had subsequently manipulated the application form and had introduced these two categories in violation to the instructions issued by the respondents.
5.
The allegation with regard to manipulation of the application form is totally ill-founded.
The photostat copy of the application form has been filed by the official-respondents, which does not indicate any manipulation or re- writing in column No. 9.
On the contrary, it is an admitted case before us that the petitioner had filled in two categories opposite to Column No. 9 of the application.
His application was scrutinised, entertained and the petitioner was issued roll number for the entrance test.
No clear instruction either in the admission brochure or in the advertisement has been brought to our notice which could indicate that such applications were liable to be rejected or it was the discretion of the Department to entertain the application under any of stated categories.
Once the petitioner was permitted to take competitive examination, his candidature must be governed by the result of such entrance test if on merit he is entitled to the seat under the category claimed by him.
It will be unfair to deny him such benefit on the basis that till the declaration of the result, the petitioner did not raise any such claim.
6.
In an additional affidavit filed the petitioner has brought on record the instructions issued by the Assistant Registrar Examination on behalf of the Director (SCERT), Punjab.
By these instructions, the copy of which is annexed to the writ petition as P-3, the Director has clarified certain doubts raised by various Principals and issued guidelines for determination of the result of the examination, consideration of the option given by the candidate in order of preference.
Clause 9 of these instructions dated 1871995, which are stated to be in force at the relevant time, reads as under :-  "9.
Some students have written : two or more in categories n the form and proofs have also been attached.
In No. 1 be which category he is to be considered ?
9.
Only the category mentioned at No. 1 be accepted."
7.
Learned counsel for the respondents had prayed that he be granted time to verify whether the instructions dated 1871995 are still in force or not.
Though we had reserved the judgment, but had granted liberty to the learned counsel appearing for the respondents as prayed by him.
The learned counsel for the respondents on 2971997 conceded that the instructions dated 1871995 are in force and had not been superseded by any subsequent instructions.
8.
This being the position regulated by the instructions issued by the Government, the obligation was placed upon the respondents to consider petitioner's case for his first preference for the purpose of admission to the course.
The first preference of the petitioner admittedly was under the Teachers' Category and not the sports category.
If the petitioner was considered in accordance with the instructions of the competent authority, he was entitled to get seat under teachers' category being higher in merit than respondent No. 4.
It is stated that admission to the course would be based on merit of the candidate in the competitive entrance examination subject to reservation except in sports category where inter se merit was to be determined on the basis of gradation certificate in addition to the merit in the entrance test.
Further under Clause 2-A of the eligibility condition for admission, it was stated that candidature of open seats will be determined in accordance with the instructions issued by the State Government.
The instructions dated 1871995 are in furtherance to the original instructions issued by the Government.
Thus, all candidates were expected to be considered for admission on the basis of merit in the entrance test, of course, subject to reservation.
The afore-stated terms in the brochure and the instructions issued by the respondents, to our mind, are of no avail to the respondents while they lent a definite support to the case of the petitioner, specially in view of the admitted facts that first preference of the petitioner was for being considered in the teachers' category, he was higher in merit than the private respondent.
The admission, regulated in accordance with the instructions issued by the respondents, the petitioner would be entitled to admission to the course on his own merits.
9.
The purpose of competitive examination is primarily to enable the candidates of higher merit to get admission to the course in preference to the ones who are lower in merit.
Merit is the rule of the day.
We are unable to see any plausible explanation or reason in the submission of the respondents that the petitioner was at fault for not approaching the Department prior to 731997, the date ot declaration of the result.
The instructions issued by the respondents which were to regulate the admission to the course, placed obligation upon the respondents to consider the first preference of the applicant by itself is a complete answer to the above argument.
Error had cropped up as a result of non-adherance of the instructions issued by the respondents themselves, for which we are unable to find fault with conduct of the petitioner.
If the respondents have a policy to reject forms containing categories more than one in column 9, they ought to have stated so categorically in the advertisement or in the terms and conditions of the brochure and the Government was obliged to put at notice the applicants even prior to the submission of the application forms.
This is not the case of the respondents before us.
For the reasons aforestated, we allow the writ petition and direct the respondents to give admission to the petitioner in the Elementary Teachers Training Course 1996-97 as per his merit under the seat reserved for ward of Teacher Category.
There shall no order as to costs.