Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioners in these three cases are working in the Punjab Pollution Control Board.
The short question that arises in all the three cases is - "Can the provisions of the Punjab Pollution Control Board Employees Services Regulations, 1987 which have not yet been approved by the State Government as required under Section 12(3A) of the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, be invoked to declare the petitioners ineligible for promotion ?"
Learned counsel for the parties have referred to the facts in CWP No. 19638/ 1996.
These may be briefly noticed.
2.
The petitioner is working as an Assistant Scientific Officer.
He had initially joined service as a Chemist.
This post was later on re-designated as Junior Scientific Officer.
In February 1994, the petitioner was appointed as an Assistant Scientific Officer.
He prays for the issue of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to promote him as a Scientific Officer.
3.
The respondents contest the petitioner's claim on the ground that he does not have 8 years experience as an Assistant Scientific Officer in the Board, as required under the provisions of 1987 Regulations (Appendix-C).
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioners have contended that the conditions of service governing the petitioners are laid down in the Punjab State Board for the Prevention and Control of Water Pollution Employees Services Regulations, 1980.
These regulations have been approved by the state Government under the 1974 Act.
Since these regulations are statutory and have been duly approved by the competent authority, the provisions of 1987 regulations, which have not yet been approved, cannot be invoked to determine the eligibility of the petitioners for promotion to the higher posts.
5.
Section 12 of the 1974 Act inter alia provides for the appointment of officers and other employees of the Board.
Clause (3A), which is relevant for the purpose of present case reads as under :-  "(3A).
The method of recruitment and the terms and conditions of service (including the scales of pay) of the officers (other than the member- secretary) and other employees of the Central Board or a State Board shall be such as may be determined by regulations made by the Central Board or, as the case may be, by the State Board :- Provided that no regulation made under this sub-section shall take effect unless :-  (a) in the case of a regulation made by the Central Board, It is approved by the Central Government; and  (b) in the case of a regulation made by a State Board, it is approved by the State Government."
A perusal of the above provisions would show that the method of recruitment, the terms and condition of service can be determined by regulations.
These regulations can be framed by the Central Board and by the State Board.
The regulations framed by the Central Board have to be approved by the Central Government while those framed by the State Board require the prior approval of the State Government.
Still further, the regulations framed by the Central Board would govern the conditions of service of the employees working with that Board while those framed by the State Board shall govern the employees like petitioners etc.  6.
It is the admitted position that in exercise of the powers under Section 12, the Board had framed the regulations which were duly approved by the State Government in the year 1980.
Thereafter, the 1980 regulations were notified.
Factually, the regulations which are alleged to have been framed by the Board in 1987, have not been approved by the State Government till today.
Consequently, it is clearly established on record and has not even been disputed by the learned counsel for the respondents that the 1987 regulations are not legally enforceable.
7.
Mr. Saron, learned counsel for the respondent has, however, contended that the 1987 regulations, though not approved by the State Govt. could be enforced by the Board as guidelines.
This contention is wholly misconceived.
Whatever cannot be done directly, cannot be allowed to done indirectly.
The action of the Board in invoking the 1987 draft amount to altering the 1980 regulations.
It amounts to violation of the statutory regulations.
The Board cannot be permitted to add to the statutory regulations, the qualifications which have not been approved by the competent authority.
In the present case, the Board is adding the qualification of experience to the statutory regulations, even though this provision has not yet been approved by the State Government in accordance with the provisions of Section 12 (3A).
That being so, the contention raised on behalf of the respondent-Board that the regulations provide guidelines which can be enforced, is wholly untenable and cannot be accepted.
It is, consequently, rejected.
8.
Learned counsel for the petitioners have been at pains to point out that the Board has been acting arbitrarily.
On certain occasions, the appointments have been made in strict conformity with the provisions of 1980 regulations while on other occasions the Board had enforced the 1987 regulations and denied promotion to the eligible candidates.
Learned counsel have referred to instances.
On behalf of the respondents it is not disputed that certain persons who did not fulfil the requirement of experience as laid down under the 1987 regulations had been promoted.
It is claimed that the Board had relaxed or not invoked the provisions of 1987 regulations.
In the circumstances of the case, we do not consider it necessary to go into the details.
Suffice it to say that we cannot congratulate the Board on the manner in which it has been promoting certain people and rejecting others.
9.
It seems absolutely clear to us that 1980 regulations are statutory.
These are binding on the Board.
It cannot add any qualifications to the statutory regulations by an executive order.
The so called 1987 regulations are no more than a proposal prepared by the Board.
These cannot even be enforced as guidelines because the Board has no power to amend or add to the statutory regulations which have been duly notified.
Consequently, any reference to the 1987 regulations is wholly illegal and the provisions thereof cannot be invoked for the purpose of deciding the claims of the employees for appointment to the higher posts.
10.
In view of the above, it is directed that the respondent-Board shall consider the claims of the petitioners in these three cases on the basis of their record of service and provisions of the 1980 regulations.
The qualifications, either academic or experience, as prescribed under the 1987 regulations shall not be relevant.
No candidate shall be rejected on the basis thereof.
Even for the purpose of direct recruitment, the Board, shall be entitled to only lay down the qualifications in accordance with the provisions of 1980 regulations.
Any advertisement based on the 1987 regulation shall be illegal.
All the three writ petitios are accordingly disposed of.
In the circumstances of these cases, there will be no orders as to costs.