Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioners who are working as Senior Assistants in the Punjab Financial Corporation have a two-fold grievance.
Firstly, they allege that the promotion policy framed by the Corporation and circulated on February 2, 1990 is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
Secondly, they allege that persons belonging to the cadre of Personal Assistants are being given appointments in excess of the quota of 50% fixed under the promotion policy.
The respondents have controverted the petitioners' claim.
The two questions that arise for consideration are :-  (1) Whether the provision in the promotion policy which inter- alia provides that only such Senior Assistants shall be eligible for promotion to the post of Assistant Manager (Finance) as possess the qualification of B.Com.
is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution ?
(2) Whether the respondent-Croporation has in fact promoted persons from the cadre of Personal Assistants to that of Assistant Manager (Administration) in excess of the prescribed quota ?
2.
The petitioners have produced a copy of the promotion policy as Annexure P-4 with the writ petition.
A perusal of this policy shows that the following qualifications have been inter alia provided for promotion to the post of Junior Manager (Finance) which has since been redesignated as Assistant Manager (Finance) :-  "Commerce graduate Assistants with 10 years' experience as such will be eligible for promotion as Jr.
Manager (F) in the pay scale of Rs. 2000- 3500."
3.
The petitioners allege that all the Senior Assistants form one cadre.
The grant of preferential treatment to persons possessing the qualification of B.Com.
is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
The contention is wholly fallacious.
It cannot be accepted.
It is well settled that the employer can make a valid classification on the basis of educational qualifications.
The only requirement of law is that the prescribed qualifications should have a reasonable nexus with the job requirements.
It cannot be disputed that a commerce graduate is more familiar with financial matters than a person who may have graduated in science.
If the competent authority on consideration of the relevant facts has decided to prescribe a degree of B.Com.
as an essential qualification for promotion to the post of Assistant Manager (Finance), the action cannot be said to be either of discriminatory or violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
The prescribed qualification have a reasonable nexus with the job requirements.
The prescribed qualifications are not arbitrary or unfair.
6.
Mr. Salil Sagar has placed reliance on the decision of their Lordships in N Abdul Basheer and others v. KK Karunakaran and others, AIR 1989 SC 1624.
The factual position in this case was entirely different.
The graduates and non-graduates were eligible for promotion to the higher post yet a quota was prescribed.
The result was that a junior person was able to steal a march over a senior on account of quota.
Such is, however, not the position in the present case.
In the instant case, persons who are not Commerce graduates are not eligible to be considered for promotion to the post of Assistant Manager (Finance).
There is no quota for promotion between the Commerce graduates and the others.
That being so, the decision in N Abdul Basheer's case has no application to the facts of the present case.
In view of the above, there is no merit in the first contention raised by the learned counsel.
5.
Re-2  The petitioners complain that the respondent-Corporation is promoting persons from the cadre of Personal Assistants to that of Assistant Manager (Administration) in excess of the quota of 50% fixed in the promotion policy.
It has been alleged that respondent Nos. 4 and 5 had been invited for an interview which was conducted on August 2, 1996.
On behalf of the respondents it has been pointed out that respondent Nos. 4 and 5 have not yet appointed as Assistant Manager (Administration).
That being so, the petitioners have no cause to allege that the quota rule has been violated.
The claim as made is wholly pre-mature.
No other point has been raised.
In view of the above, we find no merit in this writ petition.
It is consequently dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed