GC Garg, J - Challenge in this writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India is to an order dated 421989, Annexure P.7, vide which the petitioner is deemed to have voluntarily retired from the service of the State Bank of India.
2.
Petitioner who was appointed as a Clerk on 18.5.1974 was transferred to Punjab University Branch of the Bank in 1978 and thereafter to the Medical Institute Branch of the Bank in 1982.
Petitioner remained on leave for period during 1991986 to 7.11.1987 and she ultimately joined duties on 8111987 to work till 3151988.
3.
Petitioner alleges that she applied for leave because of the illness of her son.
The case of the Bank, however, is that she absented from duty and on 1361988 she was telegraphically advised to resume her duties.
Petitioner vide letter, Annexure R4 informed the Bank that she was unable to resume duty because of the illness of her son and requested that she may be granted leave from 161988 to 3181988.
She was again requested on 2161988 to join duty within three days thereof.
The Regional Manager by letter dated 2861988, Annexure R.5/A wrote to the Branch Manager, Medical Institute Branch of the Bank reading as under:  ``We are in receipt of your special letter No. 21/218 dated the 21st June 1988 and note with concern that Smt. Rajinder Madaan, Teller at your branch is again absenting herself in an unauthorised manner since 1st June 1980.
In this connection, please advise us whether the notice sent to Mrs. Madaan has been received by her or has been returned undelivered and whether she has reported for duty or not.
In case, she has not yet reported for duty, you may send her another notice on the appropriate annexure as per specimen given in the HO Circular PER/28 of 1986.
A copy of the notice served upon Mrs. Madaan along with her reply (received if any) and your comments/recommendations in the matter may also be forwarded to us for our perusal and further necessary action.
Also please arrange to submit to us a copy of the application along with its enclosures, if any (viz. Medical Certificate in support of her son's sickness) received from Mrs. Madaan.
However, please note that no salary and allowance should be paid to Mrs. Madaan during the period of her absence from duty.''
4.
It seems that pursuant to the aforesaid letter dated 2861988, a registered letter dated 26.7.1988, Annexure P.1 was sent to the petitioner requiring her to report for duty within 30 days thereof.
She was also informed that in case she failed to report for duty, she would be deemed to have voluntarily retired from service.
The petitioner in reply thereto, by her letter dated 1791988, Annexure P4 intimated the Branch Manager that her circumstances did not permit her to join duty.
She thus requested that she may be granted leave without pay for three months from 191988 to 30111988.
She was, however, by a registered letter dated 1691988 Annexure P.5 informed that she was absenting from duty unauthorisedly since 161988.
She was again requested to report for duty within 30 days of the said letter/notice.
By letter dated 22.10.1988, Annexure P.6, she reiterated the request made by her in letter Annexure P4.
It is thereafter that letter dated 421989, Annexure P.7 was issued to the petitioner clearly intimating her that since she had failed to report for duty by 20.10.1988, so she was deemed to have voluntarily retired from service on 20.10.1988.
5.
Service conditions of the employees of the respondent-bank are governed by the memorandum of Settlement dated 17th September, 1984, between the Managements of 55 `A' Class Banks as represented by the Indian Banks' Association and their workmen as represented by the All India Bank Employees' Association and the National Confederation of Bank Employees, in view of the provisions of Sections 2(p) and 18(1) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 read with Rule 58 of the Industrial Disputes (Central) Rules, 1957.
Clause XVI of the Settlement relating to voluntary cessation of employment reads thus :_  ``XVI.
VOLUNTARY CESSATION OF EMPLOYMENT BY THE EMPLOYERS : In supersession of clause 2 of the Settlement dated 8th September 1983 the following shall apply :-  Where an employee has not submitted any application for leave and absents himself from work for a period 90 or more consecutive days without or beyond any leave to his credit or absents himself for 90 days or more consecutive days beyond the period of leave originally sanctioned or subsequently extended or where there is satisfactory evidence that he has taken up employment in India or the Management is satisfied that he has no present intention of joining duties, the management may at any time thereafter give a notice to the employee's last known address calling upon the employee to report for duty within 30 days of the notice, stating, inter alia, the grounds for the management coming to the conclusion that the employee has no intention of joining duties and furnishing necessary evidence, where available.
Unless the employee reports for duty within 30 days or unless he gives an explanation for his absence satisfying the management that he has not taken up another employment or avocation and that he has no intention of not joining duties, the employee will be deemed to have voluntarily retired from the bank's service on the expiry of the said notice.
In the event of the employee submitting a satisfactory reply, he shall be permitted to report for duty thereafter within 30 days from the date of the expiry of the aforesaid notice without prejudice to the bank's right to take any action under the law or rules of service.
In case of an employee who has gone abroad, and has not submitted any application for leave and absents himself for a period of 150 or more consecutive days without or beyond any leave to his credit or absents himself for 150 or more consecutive days beyond the period of leave originally sanctioned or subsequently extended and where the management has reasons to believe that he has no intention of joining duties, the management may at any time thereafter give a notice to the employee's last known address calling upon the employee to report for duty within 30 days of the notice.
Unless the employee reports for duty within 30 days or unless he gives an explanation for his absence satisfying the management, the employee will be deemed to have voluntarily retired from the Bank's service on the expiry of the same notice.
In the event of the employee submitting a satisfactory reply, he shall be permitted to report for duty thereafter within 30 days from the date of the expiry of the aforesaid notice without prejudice to the bank's right to take any action under the law or rules of service.''
Detailed instructions about unauthorised absence from duty and the effect thereof were duly notified by the Personnel Department of the Bank to all the Offices and the Branches in the Chandigarh Circle in the year 1986, a copy of which is Annexure R.5 to the written statement.
6.
Learned counsel for the petitioner first submitted that the impugned order Annexure P.7 has been passed only by the Branch Manager who is not the competent authority and, therefore, that order is vitiated on this ground alone.
7.
A reference to Memorandum dated 2791988, Annexure R11 goes to show that the concerned Regional Manager/Deputy General Manager is the competent authority to make appointment of clerical staff of the bank.
Obviously, it is the Regional Manager/Deputy General Manager who can pass the order of voluntary retirement.
Petitioner absented from duty w.e.f.
161988.
Notices Annexures P.1 and P.5 were issued by the Branch Manager and served on the petitioner after the Branch Manager had been directed to do so by the Regional Manager vide letters Annexures R.5/A and R.5/B.
The Branch Manager informed the Regional Manager vide letter Annexure R.6 that in response to notice dated 1691988, a letter was received from the petitioner requesting for extension of leave upto 30111988.
On query by the Regional Manager, in December 1988, the Branch Manager again informed him that a letter was received from Mrs. Madaan, the present petitioner wherein she had requested that in continuation of her previous application, her leave may be extended upto 28.2.1989.
It was thereafter that the Regional Manager informed the Branch Manager by letter dated 17.1.1989 that the petitioner had been absenting in an unauthorised manner since 161988 and that the reasons given in the application for her absence from duty were not satisfactory.
The letter further went on to say, ``Accordingly, it has been decided to treat her voluntarily retired from service from the date of expiry of 30 days' notice period served upon her by you on 1691988, in accordance with the instructions contained in HO Cir.
PER/28 of 1986.
Please, therefore, arrange accordingly and also advise Smt. Madaan in the matter.''
It was thereafter that the impugned order Annexure P.7 was issued by the Branch Manager to the petitioner.
8.
The sequence of events noticed above shows that the notice, Annexure P.1 was sent by the Branch Manager at the asking of the Regional Manager vide letter Annexure R5/A Similarly, letter Annexure P.7 was written by the Branch Manager conveying the decision of the Regional Manager regarding the deemed voluntary retirement of the petitioner.
The order thus cannot be said to have been passed by the Branch Manager, which was in fact passed by the Regional Manager and the Branch Manager had only conveyed it by letter Annexure P.7.
In sum and substance, the order of voluntary retirement is Annexure R10 which was passed by the Regional Manager and not Annexure P.7 conveyed to the petitioner by the Branch Manager.
The first contention has thus no merit and is rejected.
9.
It was next contended that the order deeming the petitioner to have voluntarily retired from service has been passed without following or having regard to the procedure prescribed for imposing penalties on an employee for his/her major or minor misconduct.
It was submitted that absence without leave or overstaying sanctioned leave falls within the ambit of ``minor misconduct'' and, therefore, in view of sub-clause (7) of Clause 521 of the Sastry Award, any of the following penalties could only be awarded :  ``(a) be warned or censured; or (b) have an adverse remarks entered against him; or (c) have his increment stopped for a period not longer than six months.''
10.
It may be noticed at this stage that the petitioner remained absent or on leave during the period 1991986 to 8111987 and thereafter joined duty on 9111987 and continued to be on duty till 3151988.
There is no dispute about this period.
She, however, absented from duty w.e.f.
161988 onwards.
There is nothing on record to show that the petitioner proceeded on leave after getting it sanctioned before hand, except a bald assertion in the writ petition.
It is not shown that she in fact applied for leave or ever attached any medical certificate along with her application.
She was served with a notice clearly informing her that she was absent from duty in an unauthorised manner and it was thereafter only that she made a written request that her leave may be extended.
The leave having never been granted the question of extension thereof did not arise.
It may be noticed that in this case, no action has been taken against the petitioner for major or minor misconduct.
The parties to the present petition are governed by the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947.
A binding settlement was arrived at between the parties as mentioned in the earlier part of the judgment.
The Settlement, inter alia, provides for deemed voluntary retirement in the event of an employee neglecting to join duties despite being served with a thirty days' notice sent in that behalf.
It is not shown that at the relevant time either the Award had ceased to have the binding effect or that the terms stood amended or superseded by a subsequent Award or Agreement between the parties.
The petitioner proceeded on leave without getting it sanctioned before hand and she remained absent for a period of about eight months on the date of passing the impugned order.
She was called upon on two occasions to join her duty and even the relevant provisions of the Settlement were also brought to her notice in respect of voluntary retirement.
In spite of this she did not join her duty though she was asked to do so within 30 days of the notice on both the occasions.
She also did not justify her inability to resume duty as no medical certificate was produced/furnished by her either at the first instance or on a subsequent date.
On the service of notice, it was required of the petitioner to either join her duty or to give explanation satisfying the competent authority for her absence.
But the petitioner failed to do either of the two.
The respondent-authorities thus had no option but to pass the impugned order.
Not only this, the petitioner took no steps to file appeal or revision or even a representation to the authorities against the impugned order and straightaway filed this writ petition and that too, after a lapse of about eight months of the passing of the impugned order.
The impugned order having been passed in terms of the Settlement for petitioner's long absence from duty without leave, no procedure for major or minor misconduct was required to be followed as by now it is no longer in dispute that the Settlement arrived at between the parties governed by the Industrial Disputes Act is binding on the parties during the period it is operative.
The petitioner thus cannot be granted any relief on this account.
11.
In the end it was submitted that even if it be taken that the order of deemed voluntary retirement has been passed strictly in view of the provisions of the Settlement, yet it cannot be sustained as the authority passing the order had not recorded a finding that the petitioner had no intention to join her duty.
On a consideration of the matter, I am of the opinion that it was not necessary for the said authority to record in the order of deemed voluntary retirement that the delinquent official had no intention to join her duty.
In the notices sent by the management to the petitioner, which were duly served on her, it was in very clear terms made aware to her that in the eventuality of her failing to join the duty within 30 days thereof, she would be deemed to have voluntarily retired on the ground of absence from duty.
Thereafter, it was for the petitioner to show that the situation was different and that she had a reasonable excuse or a valid reasons for not joining the duty.
But she failed to do so.
12.
For the foregoing discussion, I see no reason to interfere with the impugned order.
The writ petition is consequently dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.