THB Chalapathi, J - The petitioner who is working as a Fitter in the B&R Department, claims revision of his pay scale on the basis of initial revision done vide order of the Government dated August 11, 1971 (copy Annexure 3-B).
Para 2 of the said letter reads as under :-  "The sanction of the President of India is hereby accorded to the revision of pay scales of the work-charged establishment of PWD (B&R) PH and Irrigation Branches as set forth in the enclosed statement.
The revised scales of pay shall take effect from the 16th Feburary, 1970."
The enclosed statement mentioned the revised pay scale of the employees of PWD (B&R), Public Health Branch and Irrigation Branch.
Item 221 of the same pertains to `Pipe Fitters' Class-I whose scale was revised to Rs. 140-300 and this scale was admissible to those who were matriculates with two years technical training in the ITI or in any other recognised institute.
The pay scale of class-II Pipe Fitters was revised to Rs. 100-160 and was admissible to those who were middle pass with one year's trade certificate of ITI or of any other recognised institute.
These pay scales were later on revised from time to time.
2.
Learned counsel for the petitioner argued that there is no difference between a Fitter and a Pipe Fitter and the aforesaid order dated August 11, 1971, applies to all Fitters whether in PWD (B&R) Branch, Public Health Branch or Irrigation Branch.
In support of his contention, he referred to two orders dated Feburary 27, 1986, Annexure P-10 and March 29, 1984, Annexure P-11 which show that the incumbents who were working in the PWD, Public Health Branch as Fitters, their pay scales were being revised.
From this, learned counsel argued, that there is no difference between the Fitter and the Pipe Fitter in the Public Health Department and that is why the incumbents who were working as Fitters in the Public Health Department were given the revision of pay scales as initially given vide order dated August 11, 1971.
Learned counsel, however, stated that there are different trades in the department and therefore there are different pay scales for each category.
Nothing is mentioned in the order revising the pay scales that those pay scales are only for Pipe Fitters and only they were to be given the revised pay scales, nor it is so mentioned in the orders Annexure P-10 and P-11, referred to above.
We are of the view that this is a clear case of discrimination.
For the foregoing reasons, we allow this writ petition and direct the respondents to grant the same pay scale as revised from time to time to the petitioner as was granted to the Pipe Fitters.
The arrears of pay so calculated shall be confined to three years and two months before filing of the writ petition (31.3.1997).
The payment of arrears be made within a period of four months.