Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioners in this bunch of six petitions pray that the selection and appointment made by the Fatehgarh Sahib Central Cooperative Bank Limited, Sirhind to the posts of Junior Clerks and Clerk-cum-Typists be quashed.
Learned counsel for the parties have primarily referred to the facts as averred in CWP No. 9744 of 1996.
These may be briefly noticed.
2.
On March 15, 1996, the Bank published advertisement inviting applications for recruitment to the posts of Junior Clerks/Clerks-cum-Typists and Stenotypists.
All the posts were in the pay scale of Rs. 1450-2950.
The candidates were asked to submit their applications within 10 days from the publication.
Various candidates including the petitioners and respondent Nos. 7 to 63 submitted their applications.
The petitioners were not selected.
They have filed the present writ petition with the grievance that the selection made by the respondent-Bank is illegal.
It has been alleged that the Selection Committee was not constituted in accordance with the instructions issued by the Registrar of the Cooperative Societies vide letter dated February 11, 1985, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P.7 with the writ petition.
The criterion laid down for selection by the Registrar vide his letter dated January 5, 1986 was also not followed.
The Selection Committee did not follow any specific criteria.
No written test was held.
In fact, the interviews were conducted from May 16, 1996 to May 24, 1996.
Immediately thereafter, the letters of appointment were issued on May 25, 1996.
On the same day, respondent Nos. 7 to 63 had joined.
Even the conditions regarding medical examination etc. were not fulfilled.
It is further alleged that persons close to the Managing Director were selected while meritorious candidates like the petitioners were arbitrarily rejected.
On these premises, the petitioners pray that the selection and appointment of respondent Nos. 7 to 63 be set aside.
3.
The claim made by the petitioners has been controverted by the respondents.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the State of Punjab and the Registrar, Cooperative Societies by Mr. J S Puri, Joint Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Patiala.
A separate written statement has been filed by the Managing Director of the respondent-Bank on his own behalf and on behalf of the Bank.
Another written statement has been filed on behalf of some of the selected candidates.
It has been inter alia averred that the Bank had advertised the posts in the Press.
The qualifications, as prescribed in the rules were laid down.
A total of 1130 applications were received.
The candidates were asked to appear in type test and the interview.
Out of the total applicants, only 769 candidates appeared.
Ultimately, a total of 56 candidates were selected.
Out of these, 39 belonged to the general category, three were from amongst the members of the Backward Classes and 14 belonged to the category of Scheduled Castes.
There were two posts of stenotypists.
50 candidates had applied.
25 had appeared for the test and only one could qualify.
He was selected and appointed.
The selected candidate possesses the qualification of MA in English.
Details regarding the academic qualifications of the selected candidates have been furnished in the written statement filed by respondent No. 4 to indicate that those who possessed better qualifications were actually selected and appointed.
It has been further stated that the Selection Committee had been appointed in strict conformity with the instructions issued by the Registrar vide letter dated September 14, 1988.
In view of this letter, the earlier instructions issued vide letter dated February 11, 1985 stood superseded.
The Registrar had also taken care to depute the Joint Registrar, Patiala Division, as a member of the Selection Committee.
The selection was made on merit.
The petitioners who had faired poorly in the written test have no cause for grievance.
The allegations regarding the selection and appointment of the relations have also been controverted.
It has been further pointed out that the selected candidates were called upon to fulfil the requirements regarding medical examination etc. within a period of 10 days.
The needful has already been done.
It has also been averred that the proceedings of the selection Committee and the orders of appointment were ratified by the Board of the respondent-Bank on June 5, 1996.
Consequently, it has been prayed that the Writ Petition be dismissed.
4.
The petitioners have filed a replication reiterating their original averments and controverting the pleas raised on behalf of the respondents.
It has been inter alia averred that the "entire selection has been made under the garb of type test and no preference has been given to the petitioners who are meritorious and better qualified and more suitable as per the norms fixed by the Registrar, Cooperative Societies...."  5.
Learned Counsel for the parties have been heard.
Mr. R S Surjewala, counsel for the petitioners contended that the Selection Committee was not validly constituted.
Thus, the selection and appointment of the candidates cannot be sustained.
Learned counsel further pointed out that various persons who were related to the officers of the Bank were selected and appointed without the approval of the Registrar.
It was also contended that the whole process was vitiated by the mala fides of the Selection Committee and that the posts more than those advertised had been actually filled up.
Mr. D S Brar, learned counsel for the petitioners in CWP No. 15276 of 1996 contended that the Respondent-Bank had erred in not making the reservation for ex-servicemen and political sufferers.
Mr. Harbhajan Singh, learned counsel for the petitioners in CWP No. 10099 of 1996 submitted that petitioner No. 1 who had appeared under Roll No. 684 had not been appointed in spite of the fact that he had qualified the type test and had a good academic record.
On these premises, counsel for the petitioners contended that the selection is wholly unfair and should be quashed.
6.
On behalf of the respondents, it was submitted by Mr. H S Mattewal that the claims of the petitioners had been duly considered by the Selection Committee which had been constituted in accordance with the instructions issued by the Registrar.
All the petitioners had failed to qualify the type test.
Thus, they could not make the grade and were not selected.
Learned counsel further submitted that the allegations regarding the selection and appointment of relations have been falsely made.
None of the selected candidates is related to any member of the Board of Directors.
The Joint Registrar was a member of the Selection Committee.
He had the powers of the Registrar.
It was on the recommendation of the Selection Committee that the appointments were made.
The posts are reserved in accordance with the instructions governing the matter.
The reservation had been made for members of Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes.
The ex-servicemen or the freedom fighters had no right to claim the reservation of posts in the Bank.
It was also submitted that no writ petition is maintainable against the Bank.
Mr. Mattewal also produced the original record.
7.
Admittedly, the posts were advertised.
The following qualifications had been laid down :-  "i.
The candidate should be a Graduate from a recognised University.
ii.
Passed Punjabi upto Matric Standard.
iii.
Minimum speed of 30 words per minute in Punjabi or English type.
It was further provided that preference will be given to the candidates who have passed their graduation with Commerce/Math/Statistics or Economics."
8.
The posts were of Clerk-cum-Typists.
The selected candidates were required to be proficient in typing.
They had to possess a minimum speed of 30 words per minute.
In the very nature of things proficiency in typing was an essential qualification for appointment to the post of Clerk-cum-Typist.
It has been categorically averred in the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents that none of them had qualified the test.
Not only that the original scripts were produced by the learned counsel for the respondents.
He had also handed over photo copies of the typed scripts.
Even the copies of the scripts of the selected candidates were produced.
These papers speak for themselves.
To illustrate: Mohan Singh s/o Ajaib Singh had appeared under Roll No. 799.
He is petitioner No. 6 in CWP No. 9744 of 1996.
The only thing he has written on the paper in his own hand is "I do not no type".
He claims to be a Graduate.
He complains that meritorious candidates have been rejected.
It was vehemently contended by the counsel that the selection was arbitrary.
Yet, the calibre of the petitioners is evident from the answer sheets.
Petitioner-Mohan Singh is a Graduate who does not know the difference between `know' and `no'.
It is not surprising that he was not selected.
Similarly, even the performance of the other candidates is far from satisfactory.
Quite a few of them like Roll No. 339 had even acknowledged that they do not know typing.
One of the petitioners had typed 43 words and committed 26 mistakes.
One of the candidates, Nirmal Singh who appeared under Roll No. 651 wrote in Punjabi that he knows typing but has a speed of less than 30 words.
On a perusal of the answer sheets, we find that except in the case of Mohinder Pal Singh (Roll No. 684), the performance of the other candidates was not satisfactory.
Consequently, it is apparent that they had failed to qualify in the type test.
Furthermore, a definite criterion for allocation of marks had been laid down by the Registrar vide circular dated December 31, 1991.
Marks have been separately allotted for academic qualifications, experience and other related matters.
Further break-up of these marks has also been given.
The candidates have to be allotted marks in accordance with the prescribed criterion.
The members of the Selection Committee have virtually no discretion in the matter.
The sheets were produced before us which indicated that the marks had been duly allotted.
We had done a test check and found that the marks had been allotted in accordance with the academic qualifications of the candidates.
To illustrate: Mr. Surjewala had pointed out that the petitioner No. 10 had passed a Post Graduate degree of MA Yet, he had not been selected.
We found that he had been given credit for the degree of MA, the diploma in Cooperation as well as for his experience, etc.
However, he had failed in the type test and was, thus, rejected.
In this situation, it cannot be said that the selection was either arbitrary or unfair.
9.
It was contended that the Selection Committee had not been properly constituted as the instructions issued by the Registrar vide his letter dated Feb 11, 1995 had not been followed.
10.
Even this contention cannot be accepted.
The Registrar had subsequently issued instructions on September 14, 1988.
It had been decided that the selection be made "by the Executive Committee of the concerned Banks and the committee constituted by the Registrar...subject to the approval of the Board of Directors of the Bank."
It was not even suggested that the Committee did not conform to the requirements of the later circular.
Still further, it was categorically stated on behalf of the respondents that the selection and appointment of the respondents was duly ratified by the Board.
A copy of the resolution dated June 5, 1996 passed by the Board of Directors has been produced as Annexure R.3/5 with the written statement filed on behalf of the Bank.
It shows that the Board had unanimously resolved "to ratify the action of the Selection Committee in selecting the candidates as per service rules, and that of the Managing Director in issuing the appointment letters immediately in pursuance of the Resolution No. 1 dated 641996 of the Board of Directors".
It further appears that even the waiting list prepared by the Selection Committee was ratified and the Managing Director was authorised to issue appointment orders to the candidates in the waiting list as and when a vacancy arose.
In this situation, even the contention that the appointments were unauthorisedly made, cannot be sustained.
11.
Learned counsel were vehement in contending that various persons who were related to the one or the other member of the Board of Directors or the Officers of the Bank had been recruited.
The first instance was that of Kulwinder Singh s/o Mr. Wazir Singh.
It was alleged that Mr. Wazir Singh was working as a Manager.
On behalf of the respondents, it was pointed out that he was actually an employee of the Apex Bank.
He was merely on deputation to respondent No. 3.
Mr. Wazir Singh was only temporarily working with the respondent and no illegality was committed if his son who was found to be suitable, was selected and appointed.
The other persons mentioned by the petitioners were not related to any officer of the Bank.
The position appears to be factually correct.
In any event, the Joint Registrar of the Cooperative Societies was a member of the Selection Committee.
It was not suggested that he had any interest in any of the selected candidates.
His association with the process of selection would indicate that due care must have been taken.
Still further, the comparative merits of the petitioners vis-a-vis the selected candidates are too obvious to cast any doubt.
12.
It is true that under Rule 46 of the Punjab Cooperative Societies Rules, 1963, it has been provided that "no relative of any member of the Committee or of any other officer of a cooperative society shall be appointed to any office in the cooperative Society except with the previous sanction of the Registrar."
Thus, the relatives of the officers of the Bank or members of the committee are not totally debarred from appointment.
The requirement is that the factum of their selection should be conveyed to the Registrar and the appointment should be made with his prior approval.
In the present case, even if it is assumed that the Bank should not have appointed Kulwinder Singh as his father was on deputation with the third respondent, it cannot be said that the entire selection is vitiated.
We cannot lose sight of the fact that the Joint Registrar under the Act exercises the powers of the Registrar.
The factum of his selection by a Committee of which the Joint Registrar was a member carries with it a tacit approval of his selection.
In any event, the Bank may refer the matter for the consideration of the Registrar.
This cannot, however, mean that the entire selection is vitiated.
13.
It was contended that the selections are vitiated by mala fides .
In view of the findings recorded above, the plea of mala fides cannot be sustained.
14.
It was also claimed that the Bank had filled up more than advertised posts.
15.
This claim cannot be sustained.
The advertisement is at Annexure P.1 with the writ petition.
The number of posts has not been specified.
Consequently, it cannot be said that more posts than those which had been advertised were filled up.
Still further, the petitioners can have no grievance in this behalf.
They have been duly considered.
Having miserably failed to make the grade, they can have no cause for complaint, so far as this selection is concerned.
16.
It was also contended that the Bank had illegally failed to make reservation for ex-servicemen and freedom fighters.
The contention raised by the counsel for the petitioners in CWP No. 15276 of 1996 is based on certain instructions issued by the State Government.
Learned Counsel was, however, unable to point out that those instructions had been adopted by the Bank or that the Bank was bound to make reservation for these two categories.
The Bank has a discretion to make reservations.
No binding rule having been cited, it cannot be said that the Bank committed any illegality in not making any reservation for ex-servicemen or political sufferers.
17.
Before parting with the case, it may be mentioned that Mr. Harbhajan Singh, counsel for the petitioners in CWP No. 10099 of 1996 had pointed out that Mohinder Pal Singh-petitioner, Roll No. 684 had qualified the type test and had a good academic record.
Mr. Mattewal, counsel for the respondents accepted this position.
He further stated that it was probably on account of an over-sight that the petitioner was not appointed.
He stated that his claim would be considered against the available vacancy.
18.
The position taken by the counsel for the respondents is very fair.
Accordingly, the Bank shall consider the claim of petitioner-Mohinder Pal Singh, Roll No. 684 without any delay.
The needful shall be done within one month from the date of decision.
No other point was raised.
In view of the above, there is no merit in these petitions which are, consequently, dismissed.
However, in the circumstances of these cases, we make no order as to cost.