Sat Pal, J - This judgment will dispose of CWP Nos. 1988 and 4371 of 1981 as the question of law and facts involved therein are common.
2.
In these writ petitions, the petitioners were working as Surveyors at the relevant time have prayed for quashing the order dated 1481981 (Annexure P.3) by which the private respondents who were working as Agricultural Sub Inspectors at the relevant time were promoted as Sectional Officers in the scale of Rs. 700-1200.
The petitioners have further prayed for a direction to the respondents to consider their claim and the claim of other members of the cadre of Surveyors with effect from the date on which Annexure P.3 was issued by the official respondents.
3.
Briefly stated, the facts of the case are that the petitioners who were working as Surveyors in the office of the Soil Conservation Department, Punjab, were not having any channel of promotion.
Accordingly, a proposal was submitted by the Chief Conservator to Government of Punjab, and pursuant to that proposal, the Government of Punjab vide order dated 7.9.1977 (Annexure P.1) directed that Surveyors who had put in more than 10 years' service in the Soil Conservation Department may be considered for promotion to the post of Sectional Officer in relaxation of the rules.
After the issue of the aforesaid order, 37 Surveyors were promoted to the post of Sectional Officers.
4.
Like Surveyors, there was no channel of promotion for Agricultural Sub Inspectors and a proposal for their promotion was also submitted by the Chief Conservator of Soil, Punjab to the Government of Punjab.
This proposal was also accepted by the Government of Punjab vide orders dated 2021981 (Annexure P2).
By this order the Government of Punjab directed that 20% of the total number of posts sectioned for Agricultural Sub Inspectors/Soil Conservation Inspectors/Sectional Officers will be filled up by promotion from amongst the Surveyors and Agricultural Sub Inspectors on the basis of 10% from each category.
After the issuance of the order, dated 2021981, 12 Agricultural Sub Inspectors who are private respondents in this writ petition were promoted as Sectional Officers vide order dated 1481981 (Annexure P.3).
The aforesaid order dated 1481981 has been challenged in these writ petitions as stated earlier.
5.
Written statement on behalf of the official respondents has been filed.
In para 7 of the written statement, it has been stated as follows :  ``The petitioner has misrepresented the correct position.
His completion of 11 years' service does not entitle him automatically to claim promotion to the post of Sectional Officer.
There was no question of considering his name for promotion to the post of Sectional Officer when the cases of Agricultural Sub Inspectors were considered.
The Government have fixed 10% quota of promotion for Surveyors and 10% for Agricultural Sub Inspectors.
The strength of the posts of Sectional Officers and Agricultural Inspectors/Soil Conservation Inspectors/Sectional Officers is 207, out of which 10% quota of 20 posts, 37 Surveyors have already been given promotion as Sectional Officers on ad hoc basis whereas only 12 Agricultural Sub Inspectors have been given promotion against promotion quota of Agricultural Sub Inspectors.''
Mr. Balram Gupta, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioners, submitted that in the order dated 2021981 (Annexure P2) it has been clearly stated that this order will come into force immediately i.e. with effect from 2021981.
He submitted that the proposal for promotion of the Agricultural Sub Inspectors was accepted vide order dated 2021981 and prior to that date, they were not entitled to be promoted as Sectional Officers.
The Agricultural Sub Inspectors could be promoted against 50% of the posts which became available on or after 2021981 and the remaining 50% of the posts which became available would go to the cadre of Surveyors.
He further submitted that in August, 1981, 12 posts of Sectional Officers became available for promotion from amongst Surveyors and Agricultural Sub Inspectors and on the basis of 10% quota from each category six Agricultural Sub Inspectors could have been promoted and the remaining six posts of Sectional Officers should have been filled up by promotion from Surveyors.
He, therefore, contended that promotion of 12 Agricultural Sub Inspectors vide Annexure P.3 was contrary to the instructions contained in Annexure P2 and out of the 12 posts, only six Agricultural Sub Inspectors could have been promoted and the remaining six posts could have been filled up by promotion from amongst the Surveyors.
6.
Mr. Anil Sharma, learned DAG and Mr. Patwalia learned counsel for the private respondents, however, relied on the submission made in para 7 of the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents No. 1 and 2 which has been reproduced in earlier part of the judgment.
7.
I have given my thoughtful consideration to the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties and have perused the records.
The order, dated 20th February, 1981 (Annexure P2) clearly provides that 20% of the total number of posts sanctioned for Agriculture Inspectors/Soil Conservation Inspectors/Sectional Officers will be filled up by promotion from amongst the Surveyors and Agricultural Sub Inspectors on the basis of 10% from each category.
From this, it is clear that out of 20% of the total number of sanctioned posts, 10% of the posts shall be filled up by promotion from amongst the Agricultural Sub Inspectors.
As stated in para 7 of the written statement, the total number of sanctioned posts of Sectional Officers in 1981 was 207 and thus 10% quota of the Surveyors work out to 20 and similarly 10% quota of Agricultural Sub Inspectors also comes to 20.
As stated in the written statement, when the impugned order dated 14th August, 1981 (Annexure P.3) promoting 12 Agricultural Sub Inspectors as Sectional Officers was issued, 37 Surveyors had already been given promotion as Sectional Officers, which was beyond their quota of 20 posts.
8.
In view of these facts, Surveyors including the petitioners could not have any grievance when the order promoting 12 Agricultural Sub Inspectors (private respondents) to the post of Sectional Officers was issued vide Annexure P-3.
Accordingly, I find no merit in these writ petitions and both the writ petitions are dismissed.
The parties are, however, left to bear their own costs.