Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - On October 16, 1995, Tega Ram, respondent No. 5 was promoted as an Assistant.
Aggrieved by this Order, the petitioner initially submitted a representation.
Thereafter, he filed a civil suit.
After withdrawing the civil suit, he served a notice on the respondents.
In response to the notice, the Deputy Commissioner, Ambala-Respondent No. 2, sent a communication dated January 12, 1996 informing the petitioner that he was not eligible for promotion as an Assistant as he had not completed five years' service in the clerical cadre.
Hence this petition.
The petitioner submits that the view taken by the Deputy Commissioner is wholly illegal and contrary to the rules.
He prays that the order passed by him a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P4, be quashed and that the respondents be directed to consider his claim for promotion to the post of Assistant in accordance with the rules.
2.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of respondents No. 1 and 2 controverting the claim made by the petitioner.
3.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
A perusal of the impugned order shows that the petitioner's claim has been rejected on the ground that "as per Haryana Municipal Rules, 1982, Appendix `B' Category 19, atleast five years' service in the clerical cadre is a must before a person is promoted as an Assistant".
According to the respondents, the petitioner did not fulfil this requirement.
Is it so ?
4.
It is the admitted position that the conditions of service governing the parties are laid down in the Haryana Municipal Services (Integration, Recruitment and Conditions of Service) Rules, 1982.
The method of recruitment is laid down in Rule 10.
It has been inter alia provided that the posts shall be filled up in accordance with the criterion prescribed in Appendix `B'.
In Appendix `B', the following entries are relevant.
Sr. No. Name of Post Class of MC Qualifications and Experience for direct recruitment Qualifications and experience for promotion 19.
Assistants (including Asstt.
Octroi Superintendents, Assistants, Asstt.
Accountants, Senior Accounts Clerks, Head Cashiers, Water Rate Assistants and Public Health Assistants) should be Matriculate with at least five years service in the clerical cadre of A, B or C Class Committees.
35.
Clerk (including Accounts Clerk, Assistant Cashiers, Water Meter Readers, Tax/House Tax Clerks, Rent Collectors, Fee Collectors, Octroi Rent Clerk-cum-Sub-Inspectors, Tax Collectors, General Clerks, Record Keepers-cum-Typists, Store-keepers, Audit Clerks, Tax Clerks, Compost Keepers Octroi Moharrirs, Cattle Pound Moharrirs/Clerks, Library Moharrirs, Perokars) A, B and C Such qualification as may be prescribed by the State Government for appointment by promotion to the post of Clerk in the office of the Directors, Local Bodies, Haryana.
A perusal of the above entries shows that Octroi Moharrirs are a part of the cadre of clerks mentioned at Sr. No. 35.
Still further, even the posts of Assistant Octroi Superintendents etc. are a part of the cadre of Assistants.
It, thus, appears that persons who are working as Octroi Moharrirs are entitled to be considered for promotion to the Posts of Assistants including the Assistant Octroi Superintendents if they fulfil the qualification of Matriculation with at least five years' service in the clerical cadre.
The petitioner had admittedly joined service as a clerk (Octroi Moharrir) on September 17, 1973.
Till the year 1995, he had worked for 22 long years.
Still the respondents have taken the view that he was not eligible for promotion as he had not worked for five years in the clerical cadre.
This was apparently wrong, arbitrary and contrary to the plain language of the rule.
The post of Octroi Moharrir is a part of the clerical cadre.
The respondents had erred in taking the view that the petitioner had not worked for five years as a clerk.
Consequently, their action in not considering the petitioner for promotion as an Assistant was wholly illegal.
It is, consequently, vitiated.
5.
Resultantly, the order by which respondent No. 5 was promoted as an Assistant and the order by which the petitioner's representation was rejected, are set aside.
The respondents are directed to re-consider and decide the matter afresh in accordance with the rules.
The needful shall be done by passing a speaking order within two months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
The competent authority shall give the petitioner as well as the fifth respondent an opportunity to appear personally and express their respective view-points.
In the circumstances, there will be no order as to costs.