Sat Pal, J. - In this writ petition, the petitioner, who was working as Senior Sanitary Inspector has prayed for quashing the seniority list as on 1st January, 1979 (Annexure P.7).
The petitioner has also challenged the order dated 2nd June, 1980 (Annexure P.9) by which respondents Sarvshri Sukhminder Singh And Inderjeet Singh, Assistant Unit Officers were promoted to the post of Assistant Malaria Officers in the pay scale of Rs. 350-800.
The petitioner has also prayed that his case for promotion as Assistant Unit Officer should be considered with effect from the date his juniors were promoted.
2.
For the reasons recorded in C.W.P.
No. 3152 of 1980, the prayer of the petitioner for setting aside the seniority list of 1979 (Annexure P.7) and for quashing the order dated 2nd June, 1980 (Annexure P.9) by which respondents Sarvshir Sukhminder Singh and Inderjeet Singh were promoted as Assistant Malaria Officers, is rejected.
3.
As regards the prayer of the petitioner for a direction to the respondent to consider his case for promotion to the post of Assistant Unit Officer with effect from the date his juniors were promoted, the learned counsel for the petitioner has drawn my attention to the preliminary objections made in the written statement filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2.
In the preliminary objection of the written statement, it has been stated that the petitioner could not be posted as Assistant Unit Officer because of the adverse remarks as recorded in the ACR of the year 1975-76.
It has further been stated that the case regarding the expunction about the aforesaid remarks of the petitioner was under the consideration of the Department and the case of the petitioner for promotion would be considered after the final decision of the Department.
4.
Mr. Chopra, learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the said adverse remarks recorded in the ACR of the year 1975-76 were expunged vide order dated 20th October, 1983 (copy of which has been annexed as Annexure P12 with the replication filed on behalf of the petitioner).
5.
The learned Deputy Advocate General has not controverted the fact that the adverse remarks recorded in the ACR to the petitioner for the year 1975-76 have been expunged.
Since the adverse remarks for the period 1975-76 were expunged in the year 1983 the case of the petitioner for promotion to the post of Assistant Unit Officer was required to be considered by the official respondents.
In view of the above discussion, the writ petition is allowed and the official respondents are directed to consider the case of the petitioner for promotion to the post of Assistant Unit Officer retrospectively in accordance with law.
The parties are, however, left to bear their own costs.