Sat Pal, J. - In this writ petition, the petitioners have challenged gradation list as it stood on 1st January, 1979 (Annexure P-8).
The petitioners have also challenged the orders dated 261980 (Annexure P-10 and P-10A) by which Sarvshri Sukhminder Singh and Inderjeet Singh, Assistant Unit Officers and Shri Sant Lal Sharma, Assistant Entomologist Officer were promoted to the post of Assistant Malaria Officer in the scale of Rs. 350-800.
2.
In the writ petition, it has been stated that in 1976 the gradation list was prepared by the Health Department which was circulated in January, 1977 in which the petitioners were shown senior to respondents Nos. 3 to 18 (private respondents).
It has further been stated that the petitioners were shown at Serial Nos. 4, 11, 15 and 17 in the category of Assistant Unit Officers/Senior Laboratory Technicians whereas respondents Nos. 3 and 5 to 18 were shown much junior to the petitioners, and the name of respondent No. 4 did not appear in the said list.
It may be relevant to point out here that the copy of the seniority list has not been annexed along with the writ petition but only an extract of the gradation list of 1976 has been annexed as Annexure P-4.
It has further been stated in the writ petition that the Director, Health Services, Haryana promoted 8 persons to the rank of Assistant Malaria Officers against 10 newly created posts and out of these 8 persons, Shri Sukhminder Singh who was junior to the petitioners and Shri Inderjeet Singh whose name did not exist in the gradation list of 1976, were promoted.
It has further been stated that in order to justify the aforesaid illegal promotions, the official respondents prepared revised seniority list in the year 1977 which was circulated on 13th June, 1977 but thereafter on the advice of the Legal Remembrancer, the revised seniority list was scrapped and the abovementioned persons who were junior to the petitioners were reverted.
It is further stated that thereafter the official respondents issued another gradation list on 1st January, 1979 in which the petitioners have been shown juniors to the private respondents and on the basis of the said revised list, Sukhminder Singh, Inderjeet Singh and Sant Lal Sharma were promoted to the post of Assistant Malaria Officers.
3.
Written statement on behalf of the respondents Nos. 1 and 2 has been filed.
In the written statement, it has been stated that the posts of Sanitary Inspectors/Health Inspectors/Malaria Inspectors/Smallpox Supervisors/Surveillance Inspectors/Health Education Assistants are filled up by direct recruitment whereas the posts of Senior Sanitary Inspectors/Senior Malaria Inspectors are filled by promotion from amongst the persons holding abovementioned posts.
It has further been stated that some posts of Assistant Unit Officers/Senior Laboratory Technicians/Health Supervisors/Investigators are filled by promotion amongst Senior Sanitary Inspectors/Senior Malaria Inspectors on the basis of seniority-cum-merit while other posts are filled up by direct recruitment.
The posts of Assistant Malaria Officers are filled by promotion from amongst Assistant Unit Officers/Senior Laboratory Technicians/Health Supervisors/Investigators on the basis of seniority-cum- merit.
4.
It has also been stated in the written statement that Sarvshri Sukhminder Singh, Inderjeet Singh (respondents Nos. 3 and 4) and a few others were appointed as Assistant Unit Officers in the year 1961 by direct recruitment and similarly respondents Nos. 5 and 6, Sant Lal Sharma and Sant Lal Sethi were selected as Senior Laboratory Technicians while they were working as Laboratory Technicians although they were juniors to the petitioners in the cadre of Senior Sanitary Inspectors/Senior Malaria Inspectors.
5.
It has further been stated in the written statement that all the petitioners were promoted as Assistant Unit Officers on seniority-cum-merit basis but they refused to accept the promotion on one ground or the other and it was only in the year 1973 that the State Government issued an order on 28th May, 1973 that if any employee refuses promotion he would be allowed to continue on the same post for ever and the petitioners Nos. 1 and 4 accepted the promotion as Assistant Unit Officers when the next vacancy occurred in the year 1974.
6.
In para 5 of the written statement, it has also been clarified that the gradation list which was prepared in 1976 was actually in respect of cadre/post of qualified Sanitary Inspectors/Health Inspectors/Surveillance Inspectors/Smallpox Supervisors/Health Education Assistants/Non-Medical Assistants, though by error its title page was wrongly printed showing this gradation list also in respect of Senior Malaria Inspectors/Senior Sanitary Inspectors-Assistant Unit Officers/Senior Laboratory Technicians/Health Supervisors/Investigators.
7.
Mr. Chopra, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioners submitted that in the year 1976, a joint seniority list was prepared by the Department in respect of the cadre/post which included the post of Sanitary Inspectors/Malaria Inspectors/Senior Sanitary Inspectors and Senior Laboratory Assistants/Senior Laboratory Technicians.
He further submitted that the promotion to the post of Assistant Malaria Officer was to be made on the basis of the seniority-cum-merit.
He contended that since all the petitioners were senior to the private respondents as per said senior list, they should have been promoted to the post of Assistant Malaria Officer in place of the private respondents, namely Sukhminder Singh, Inderjeet Singh and Sant Lal Sharma.
8.
The learned counsel further submitted that the gradation list of 1976 became final as the same was not challenged by the private respondents.
He therefore, contended that the seniority list issued in the year 1979 was invalid and was liable to be set aside.
The learned counsel also submitted that the petitioners had refused promotion to the post of Assistant Unit Officers on account of personal ground and not on the ground that they were having the powers of Food Inspectors.
9.
Lastly, the learned counsel contended that as shown in Annexure P-2, a person holding the post of Sanitary Inspector/Malaria Inspector could be promoted directly to the post of Assistant Unit Officer even though he was not promoted directly to the post of Senior Malaria Officer.
The learned counsel for the petitioner, however, submitted that the seniority list of 1979 later on was rectified in the year 1990 and this fact has been stated in the replication filed by the petitioners.
10.
Mr. Sharma, learned Deputy Advocate General reiterated the submissions made in the written statement.
11.
I have given my thoughtful consideration to the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties and have perused the records.
It was not disputed by the learned counsel for the petitioners that the basic cadre in the Department consisted of Sanitary Inspectors/Health Inspectors/Surveillance Inspectors and promotion for the post of Senior Malaria Inspector/Senior Sanitary Inspector was made from amongst the persons holding posts of Malaria Inspector/Sanitary Inspector/Surveillance Inspector etc.
It is also not disputed that the promotion to the post of Assistant Unit Officer/Senior Laboratory Technicians could be made from amongst persons holding the post of Senior Sanitary Inspectors/Senior Malaria Inspectors and promotion to the post of Assistant Malaria Officer could be made from amongst the persons holding the posts of Assistant Unit Officers/Senior Laboratory Technicians/Health Supervisors/Investigators.
It is also not disputed by the learned counsel for the parties that there were no statutory rules for these promotions at the relevant time.
12.
As regards the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners that the joint seniority list prepared in the year 1976 (which was circulated in 1977) was actually in respect of the cadre/post of Sanitary Inspectors/Health Inspectors/Surveillance Inspectors/Smallpox Supervisors/Senior Malaria Inspectors/Senior Sanitary Inspectors/Senior Laboratory Technicians, I do not find any merit in this contention.
In Para 5 of the written statement, it has been clearly stated that on the title page it was wrongly printed that the said list was also in respect of Senior Malaria Inspector/Senior Sanitary Inspectors, Assistant Unit Officers/Senior Laboratory Technicians/Health Supervisor/Investigators.
In view of this clear averment made in the written statement filed by the State, the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners cannot be accepted.
Even otherwise, as stated earlier, the learned counsel for the petitioners himself had admitted that the basic cadre consisted of posts of Malaria Inspectors/Sanitary Inspectors/Surveillance Inspectors and the promotion of Senior Malaria Inspector/Senior Sanitary Inspector was made from amongst the persons holding the post of Malaria Inspectors/Sanitary Inspectors and further promotion to the post of Assistant Unit Officer/Senior Laboratory Technicians was made from the persons holding posts of Senior Malaria Inspectors/Senior Sanitary Inspectors.
Though the learned counsel for the petitioners drew my attention to Annexure P-2 contending that the officials whose names have been mentioned at Serial Nos. 9 to 14 were promoted directly to the post of Assistant Unit Officer/Senior Laboratory Assistant but in view of the position explained in the written statement, this contention is also without any merit.
In the written statement, it has clearly been explained that Sarvshri Sukhminder Singh, Inderjeet Singh (respondents Nos. 3 and 4) and a few others were appointed as Assistant Unit Officers in the year 1961 by direct recruitment through the Subordinate Services Selection Board and similarly respondents Nos. 5 and 6 Sarvshri Sant Lal Sharma and Sant Lal Sethi were selected as Senior Laboratory Technicians while they were working as Malaria Laboratory Technicians although they were junior to the petitioners in the cadre of Senior Sanitary Inspectors/Senior Malaria Inspectors.
From this, it becomes clear that the aforesaid respondents Nos. 3 to 6 were appointed by direct recruitment and not by promotion.
13.
From the written statement, it is further clear that all the petitioners were promoted as Assistant Unit Officers on the seniority-cum- merit basis in their own turn but they refused to accept the promotion on one ground or the other.
Though the learned counsel for the petitioners tried to make out a case that the petitioners had not rejected the offer of promotion on the ground that they were exercising the powers of Food Inspectors at the relevant time but the fact remains that they had refused to accept the promotion on one ground or the other and as such they became junior to the respondents in the post of Assistant Unit Officers/Senior Laboratory Technicians.
14.
As stated earlier, in the written statement filed on behalf of the official respondents, it has been stated that the gradation list of 1976 was actually in respect of cadre/post of Sanitary Inspectors/Health Inspectors/Surveillance Inspectors/Smallpox Supervisors/Health Education Assistants/Non Medical Assistants and not in respect of the cadre/post of Senior Malaria Inspector/Senior Sanitary Inspectors, Assistant Unit Officer/Senior Laboratory Technicians.
I do not find any merit in the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners that the promotion to the post of Assistant Malaria Officer ought to have been made on the basis of seniority of the petitioners and of the private respondents as shown in the said list.
The prayer for quashing the seniority list of 1976 has become infructuous inasmuch as in the replication filed on behalf of the petitioners, it has been stated that during the pendency of the writ petition, correct seniority list had been issued by the Department in the year 1990.
For the reasons recorded herein above, I do not find any merit in this writ petition and the same is dismissed with no order as to costs.