C.V.N.
Sastri, J - The sole petitioner in this case died during the pendency of the writ petition and his Legal Representatives are brought on record.
2.
The deceased was an Accountant in the Krishna District Co-operative Marketing Society.
He filed this writ petition for declaration that the order dated 2991994 passed by the second respondent i.e., the Co-operative Sub- Registrar/Liquidator of the said society is arbitrary, illegal and without jurisdiction and to quash the same by granting all consequential benefits like salary, emoluments and other service benefits etc., to him.
3.
The facts leading to this writ petition may briefly be stated as follows : The petitioner joined the service of the said society in 1963 as a clerk and he was promoted as Accountant in the year 1965.
In the year 1988 he was put incharge as business manager and he discharged the additional duties of the business manager till 1991.
During the said period while he was acting as business manager, the petitioner was placed under suspension pending enquiry into certain allegations made against him on 13121990 initially for a period of three months which was extended from time to time.
A charge memo dated 1061991 was issued framing two charges against him i.e. (1) that he sold chemical fertilizers to private parties other than co-operative society's members during the years 1988-89, 1989-90 and 1990-91 violating the bye-laws of the Krishna District Co-operative Marketing Society, Vijayawada and (2) that he being a responsible business manager of the Krishna District Co- operative Marketing Society, he sold away the stocks to private individuals for his personal gain which effected the members of the society.
An enquiry officer was appointed to hold enquiry into the said charges.
The enquiry officer submitted a report holding the charges to be proved.
The committee of persons incharge of the society after examining the enquiry officer's report provisionally came to the conclusion that the petitioner should be dismissed from service and accordingly resolved on 1381991.
The second respondent who was appointed as Liquidator of the Society issued show-cause notice to the petitioner on 29121992 to which the petitioner submitted a reply on 1641994.
After considering his reply to the show-casue notice, the second respondent passed the impugned order dated 2991994 dismissing the period of suspension from 20121990 the period of suspension from 20121990 should be treated as not on duty.
Questioning the said order, the petitioner has filed the present writ petition.
4.
The order is challenged on the following grounds:  (1) The charges are vague and absurd and they do not amount to any misconduct under the bye-laws of the society.
(2) Suspension beyond three months is illegal and there is no provision for its extension.
(3) The suspension is also illegal as no subsistence allowance was paid to the petitioner at all.
(4) As per bye-law 12(b) the competent authority to take the disciplinary action is the executive committee.
Neither the persons incharge committee nor the Liquidator was competent to take disciplinary action against the petitioner.
(5) Liquidator has no jurisdiction to pass the order of termination.
(6) Copy of the enquiry report under Section 51 of the Andhra Pradesh Co- operative Societies Act was not furnished to the petitioner, since no irregularity was found against the petitioner under Section 51 holding of parallel disciplinary enquiry is bad.
5.
In support of the said contentions, the learned Counsel for the petitioner has placed reliance on the decisions reported in G Chandrakanth v. Guntur Dist.
Milk Producers Union Limited, 1994(2) ALT 253 : 1997(1) S.C.T.
790 and Mohan Rao VR v. State Inspector of Police, Madenapalli Circle, 1992(2) ALT 29 (NRC).
6.
Second respondent alone filed a counter-affidavit stating inter alia that the main object of the society as specified in bye-law No. 2 of the bye- laws is to do business in various fields for the benefit of its members and nowhere it was stated that business with non-members of the society can be done and hence the action of the petitioner in selling fertilizers to private individuals other than the members is contrary to the provisions relating to the objects in the bye-laws and therefore, it can be logically inferred that the writ petitioner has indulged in trading of fertilizer for making personal gain by flouting all the bye-laws and the purposes of the society.
It is also stated that the Liquidator appointed under Section 64 of the Act will have to discharge the functions of the committee as there will be no committee during the period of winding up of the society under Section 64 of the Act.
The Liquidator therefore is competent to pass the impugned order under Section 66 of the Act.
7.
It can be seen from the two charges framed against the petitioner that the misconduct alleged against him is that he sold chemical fertilizers to private parties other than co-operative Society members for his personal gain which affected the interests of the members of the society.
The objects of the society are set out in bye-law No. 2.
The relevant clauses of the said bye- law are Clauses (i), (iii), (iv) and (x) which read as follows:  (i) to arrange for the marketing and sale of agricultural and other produce belonging to its affiliated societies and their members to best advantage with the Indian Union and outside;  (iii) to act as agent for distribution to its members of goods which the cultivators need as producers such as fertilizers, iron and steel agricultural implements etc.;  (iv) to act as agent for distribution to its members of certain basic and standard requirements which the cultivators need as consumers such as sugar, kerosene etc.;  (x) to undertake the distribution of chemical fertilizers or, any other activity in pursuance of state policy.
8.
It is nowhere mentioned in the bye-laws that the fertilizers cannot be sold to private parties other than Co-operative Societies or that such sale amounts to misconduct.
In AL Kalra v. P & E Corporation of India, AIR 1984 SC 1361, it is held that where misconduct when proved entails penal consequences, it is obligatory on the employer to satisfy and if necessary to define it with precision and accuracy so that any ex post facto interpretation of some incident may not be camouflaged as misconduct.
It is further held that when the alleged misconduct does not fall under any of the misconduct specifically enumerated in the rules removal from service is not proper.
9.
In G Chandra Kanth v. Guntur Milk Producers Union Limited (supra) it has been laid down that charges should not be vague and that specific charges with full particulars should be framed.
It is also held that where the charge framed does not constitute misconduct within the meaning of the bye-laws, enquiry on such charge memo and punishment imposed are invalid and illegal.
As I have already stated earlier the two charges framed against the petitioner do not amount to misconduct within the meaning of the bye-laws of the society.
Further the charges are also vague as no particulars are mentioned regarding the persons to whom the petitioner has sold the fertilizers, the price for which they were sold, the loss, if any caused to the society etc.
The impugned order also does not show the material on which the charges were held to be proved.
The order does not contain any reasons or discussion.
I am therefore satisfied that the impugned order is unsustainable.
In view of this conclusion it is not necessary to go into the other contentions raised by the learned Counsel for the petitioner.
10.
For the aforesaid reasons, the writ petition is allowed and the impugned order is quashed.
As the petitioner died during the pendency of the writ petition, the pecuniary benefits to which the petitioner was entitled shall be settled and paid to the Legal Representatives of the petitioner within 2 months from the date of receipt of this order.
No order as to the costs.
Petition allowed.