THB Chalapathi, J - The petitioner was commissioned as a Short Service Regular Commissioned Officer on 30th April, 1972 and he was granted Regular Commission in the Army with effect from 18.10.1973 in the rank of 2ndLieutenant among the 1973 Batch of Regular Officers.
While serving in the Army, he also acquired academic qualifications and attended some training courses in the Army.
He served as an Intelligence Officer to the Brigade Commander from October, 1977 to November, 1980.
According to the petitioner, he was graded `above average' throughout in his confidential reports.
Further according to him, an adverse remark for the year 1985-86 was conveyed to him which says "he needs to make (take ?)
more interest in the management of his troops".
He further averred that by 1990 he became senior Major and Officers of the seniority of the 1973 Batch were then coming up for consideration for promotion to the next rank i.e. Lt.
Colonel before the Selection Board.
Fearing that the adverse remarks conveyed to him for the year 1985-86 would come in his way of promotion, he made a representation to the General Officer Commanding in Chief for expunction of the remarks in ACR.
The Selection Board did not approve the petitioner's name for the rank of Lt.
Colonel.
Then he addressed a statutory complaint on 1341991 and the adverse remarks were expunged by an order dated 711992.
He sent another statutory complaint to the Central Government on 26.5.1992 for considering his case for promotion as his juniors of 1973 Batch superseded him, but that complaint was rejected by the Central Board on 28th September, 1993.
In the meanwhile the Selection Board approved the name of the petitioner in May, 1992 and he was promoted as acting Lt. Col. with effect from 23.9.1992 and by then he had been superseded by about 65 of his batch-mates.
Therefore, he filed this writ petition seeking restoration of his seniority in the rank of Lt.
Colonel and to direct the respondents to consider him for further promotion to the rank of Colonel.
2.
The respondents filed the written statement contending inter alia that the petitioner cannot claim promotion as a matter of right and his complaint was rightly rejected by the Central Government and the case of the petitioner was considered later and he was, accordingly promoted to the rank of Lt.
Colonel.
It was also averred that his case for further promotion to the rank of Colonel was considered on 15.7.1994 and he was found unfit on the basis of his overall profile.
It was also averred that the selection is to be based on the overall profile of the officer with special stress on the performance in the criteria command appointment and due consideration was given to the Officers who showed consistency in overall performance and they are given preference while making promotion and credit has been given to those officers who have earned positive recommendations for promotion in their very first report in Command.
The confidential report alone is not the criteria for promotion and other basic factors viz. decisiveness, dependability, integrity and loyalty including overall competency are to be considered for promoting an officer to the next higher rank and the Selection Board was constituted and in the year 1991 the petitioner was found unfit for promotion as Lt.
Colonel and in the review meeting held in 1992 the case of the petitioner was considered and he was, accordingly, promoted to the rank of Lt.
Colonel.
It is further stated that the case of the petitioner for further promotion to the rank of Colonel was considered by No. 3 Selection Board, but he was found unfit on the basis of his overall profile.
Therefore, the respondents contended that the writ petition is liable to be dismissed.
3.
I have heard the arguments of the learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
4.
The petitioner is claiming promotion to the rank of Lt.
Colonel alongwith his batch-mates of 1973 and also further promotion to the rank of Colonel.
It is no doubt true that the adverse remark which was communicated to him that `he needs to take more interest in the management of his troops', was expunged by an order of the GOC-in-C Western Command on the non-statutory complaint submitted by the petitioner.
The adverse remark which has been expunged related to the period for the year 1985-86.
It is no doubt true that the petitioner was earning "above average reports."
Admittedly, a Selection Board had been constituted for consideration of the officers for promotion as Lt. Colonels.
The selection is to be made on the basis of overall assessment of all the candidates in the lower rank.
No one can claim promotion as a matter of right.
It has to be made on an objective assessment of the entire record of the officer to decide whether he is entitled to be promoted.
It is to be borne in mind in this case that no mala fides have been attributed to the members of the Selection Board by the petitioner.
There was no reason or cause for the members of the Selection Board to ignore the claim of the petitioner if he was really fit for promotion.
In the year 1991 the Selection Board considered the Officers of 1973 Batch for promotion to the rank of Lt.
Colonel.
The petitioner was found unfit for promotion on a comparable basis with other officers of his Batch.
No one can find fault with the decision of the Selection Board unless it has been shown that the assessment of the Selection Board is based on extraneous consideration or mala fide one.
5.
It is useful, in this context, to refer to the decision in Union Public Service Commission v. Hiranyalal Dev and others, 1988(2) SLR 148 wherein it has been held that it is not necessary to record the reasons for not selecting a person who is in the arena.
6.
It is not the case of the petitioner that any one of his juniors who have been promoted, is less suitable than him and they do not deserve promotion.
Promotion to higher rank is on the basis of selection on merit, but not on the basis of seniority alone.
Therefore, the petitioner cannot complain against the decision of the Selection Board.
When his case was reviewed in the year 1992, the Selection Board found him fit for promotion to the rank of Lt.
Colonel and, accordingly, promoted him.
Therefore, no mala fides can be attributed to Selection Board.
Therefore, the first prayer of the petitioner that he should be promoted alongwith his batch-mates of 1973 cannot be granted to him.
7.
The next prayer of the petitioner in this petition is that the respondents should be directed to consider his case for further promotion to the rank of Colonel.
In fact, the case of the petitioner was considered for promotion as Colonel in the year 1985, but he was found unfit by No. 3 Selection Board.
The petitioner has not challenged that order/decision of No. 3 Selection Board.
Therefore, the second relief, as prayed for in this writ petition, also cannot be granted to the petitioner.
Therefore, I am of the opinion that the writ petition is devoid of any merit and is liable to be dismissed.
8.
The result is, the writ petition fails and is, accordingly, dismissed, but without any order as to costs.