K Sreedharan, CJ.
- Petitioner got himself registered as a private candidate with the Guru Nanak Dev University for BA He appeared in BA I examination in July 1985.
He came out successful in that examination.
Annexure P2 is the mark list issued to him by the University.
Thereafter, he took BA II examination in July 1988.
He passed that examination as is evidenced by Annexure P.3 result-cum-detailed marks card issued by the University.
Thereupon, he applied for taking the BA III examination held by the University in April/May, 1991.
He was issued Roll No. 38731.
He took the examination on the basis of that roll number.
The result of the examination was not declared in spite of his repeated requests to the University.
Hence, this writ petition Inter alia praying for the issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the University to declare the result of BA III examination taken by him in April/May, 1991.
2.
On behalf of the university, a detailed written statement has been filed.
It is admitted therein that petitioner was issued roll Number 38731 for taking BA III examination (old system) in April 1991.
While publishing the result in the Gazette, it was noted that his result has been cancelled.
It is further the case of the university that no admit card was issued to the petitioner.
Unless an admit card is issued, a candidate cannot be considered as genuine candidate.
Petitioner having not obtained admit card, is not entitled to have the result declared.
3.
Taking note of the contentions raised by the University, we think it worthwhile to read paragraph 13 of the written statement.
``- - - - - - - - - it is submitted that the petitioner appeared in the examination as a private candidate under the rules and he was entitled to sit in the examination only after obtaining the Admit Card (Roll Number Slip) from the University's Office.
Petitioner appeared in the examination in an unauthorised manner, hence, he is not entitled to get any relief.''
A candidate who wants to take the examination should get a roll number issued from the University.
The roll number slip issued by the University is known as Admit Card.
This fact is conceded by the University in the written statement.
``Admit Card'' was used as synonymous for ``roll number slip''.
The University while declaring the result of BA III examination showed the petitioner as having been issued roll number 38731.
Thus, it is conceded by the University that Roll No. 38731 was issued to the petitioner.
When such a roll number was issued to the petitioner, there was no need for him to have another admit card.
With the roll number slip, he took the examination.
That fact is also established by the Gazette Notification issued by the University.
Even if, the application form answer sheets have been destroyed after the expiry of three years, the marks secured by the petitioner in the various answer scripts should have been entered in the mark list Register maintained by the University.
That register is a permanent document.
4.
The University has no case that the candidate with Roll Number 38731 failed in the examination on the basis of the marks obtained by him in and answer books.
Their case is that the result has been cancelled.
For what reason the result has been cancelled, is not stated in the written statement.
We are of the opinion that for no justifiable reason, the University has cancelled the result of the petitioner in BA III examination taken by him with Roll Number 38731.
5.
In the circumstances detailed above, we direct the University to declare the result of the petitioner, of BA III examination taken by him in April/May, 1991 with Roll No. 38731 on the basis of the marks entered in the Register maintained by the University, as expeditiously as possible at any rate within one month from the receipt of the copy of this judgment.
We allow the writ petition in the manner indicated above.
No costs.