Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner is an Ex-serviceman.
He was re-employed as Secretary District Soldier Sailor and Airmen Board in the State of Punjab.
During the year 1985 the petitioner was posted at Amritsar.
2.
The petitioner had applied for allotment of government accommodation but it was not available.
Consequently, the petitioner had requested the Deputy Commissioner to allow him to stay in the Sainik Rest House, Amritsar.
Requisite permission having been granted, the petitioner had started staying in the Rest House.
He was paying Re.
1/- per day.
He, however, claimed house rent allowance amounting to Rs. 4,335/- for the period from June 1, 1977 to July 30, 1980.
3.
On April 11, 1986 a charge-sheet was issued to the petitioner in which it was alleged that he had not paid rent at the prescribed rate for his stay in the Rest House.
In spite of that the had drawn house rent allowance of Rs. 4,335/- at the rate at which it is admissible to an Officer who had not been allotted official accommodation.
It was also alleged that he had drawn that amount without producing the requisite certificate.
He had obtained permission from the Deputy Commissioner, Amritsar to stay in the Sainik Rest House on payment at the rate applicable to the Civilians, but had subsequently manipulated the records and obtained ex-post facto permission at the rates at which the Ex-army Officers have to pay.
4.
The petitioner alleges that on his representation the Government had dropped three out of the five charges.
It was only with regard to the remaining charges that an enquiry was held.
However, reasonable opportunity was not granted.
Yet the Disciplinary Authority pased an order dated April 3, 1992 by which the penalty of stoppage of two increments with cumulative effect and recovery of Rs. 4,335/- was imposed.
The petitioner alleges that copy of the enquiry report was not supplied to him.
He was not given an opportunity to represent against the penalty.
This action was violative of principles of natural justice and cannot be sustained.
Consequently, the petitioner prays that the order dated April 3, 1992, a copy of which had been produced at Annexure P10 with the writ petition, be quashed.
He also prays that the order dated July 28, 1992 by which instructions have been issued to the District Sainik Welfare Officer, Gurdaspur to make the recovery be also quashed.
5.
The respondents contest the petitioner's claim.
A detailed written statement has been filed.
However, the allegation that a copy of the enquiry report was not supplied to the petitioner and that no opportunity had been granted to show cause against the proposed penalty has not been controverted.
It has only been said that the Enquiry Officer had to supply the copy and not the Appointing Authority.
6.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
On behalf of the petitioner it has been contended that the order is violative of principle of natural justice inasmuch as no opportunity had been granted to the petitioner to controvert the findings as recorded by the Enquiry Officer and to represent against the penalty that the department wanted to impose.
7.
On behalf of the respondents it has been submitted that the failure to issue a show cause notice or to furnish a copy of the enquiry report has not caused any prejudice to the petitioner.
Is it so ?
8.
It is the admitted position that initially, in the charge-sheet as issued to the petitioner, five charges have been levelled against him.
It is also not disputed that after the petitioner had submitted his reply to the charge-sheet the State Government had passed an order dated July 9, 1987 by which three of the five charges levelled against him had been specifically dropped.
A copy of this order is on record as Annexure P.5 with the writ petition.
In spite of that the Punishing Authority while passing the impugned order referred to four charges against the petitioner.
It does not even notice the fact that three charges had been dropped.
It is, thus, obvious that if an opportunity had been granted to the petitioner to show cause, he could have clearly pointed out that the Enquiry Officer had only examined the case with regard to the two charges and that the remaining charges had been dropped.
He was unable to do so as no opportunity had been afforded to him.
9.
In this situation, the order passed by the respondents was clearly violative of principles of natural justice as enunciated in the case of Union of India v. Mohammad Ramzan Khan, 1991(1) SLR 159 : 1991(1) SCT 111 (SC).
The order cannot be sustained.
10.
In view of the above the writ petition is allowed and the order dated April 3, 1992, a copy of which is on record as Annexure P10, is quashed.
Since the petitioner had not paid the rent at the rate as claimed by him, he shall not be entitled to recover the amount of Rs. 4,335/- that may have been refunded by him to the respondents.
This is, of course, not by way of any penalty.
In the circumstances there will be no order as to costs.