THB Chalapathi, J - This writ petition is filed to quash the order of promotion of the 3rd respondent dated 25.8.1982 as Superintendent in the Office of the Deputy Commissioner, Patiala and issue a direction to the 2nd respondent to consider and promote the 1st petitioner to the said post.
2.
According to the 1st petitioner he was seniormost Superintendent Grade IV in the Deputy Commissioner's Offices in the Patiala Commissioner Division consisting of Patiala, Ropar, Sangrur and Ludhiana.
Further according to him he was entitled to be promoted as Superintendent Grade-II being the senior- most Superintendent Grade-IV in place of the third respondent.
The case of the petitioner was that he was appointed as Clerk on 1.9.1956 and he was later promoted as Assistant Superintendent on 1.4.1958.
Subsequently, he was made Superintendent in the Office of Deputy Commissioner on 17.1.1975.
According to him the 3rd respondent was junior to him in the cadre of Superintendent Grade VI and, therefore, the order dated 25.8.1982 promoting the 3rd respondent as Superintendent Grade-II is illegal.
3.
Further according to the petitioners the Superintendents working in the office of Commissioner are designated as Superintendent Grade-I and Superintendent Grade III while those working in the Deputy Commissioners' offices were designated as Superintendents Grade-II and IV and as per the Punjab District Service Rules, 1976, a Superintendent Grade-II shall be promoted from amongst the superintendent Grade IV in the Deputy Commissioner's Office while for promotion as Superintendent in the Commissioner's office i.e. to the post of Superintendent Grade-I, it shall be made from amongst the Superintendents of the Deputy Commissioner Offices i.e. from the cadre of Superintendents Grade-II.
Thus, according to the petitioner, a Superintendent Grade-IV working in the Deputy Commissioner's office can be promoted as Superintendent Grade-II while the Superintendent Grade-II can be promoted to Superintendent Grade-I in the Commissioner's office, and the 3rd respondent became Superintendent Grade-III in the office of Commissioner and, therefore, he was not eligible to be considered for promotion to Superintendent Grade-I as 3rd respondent never worked as Superintendent Grade-II in the office of Deputy Commissioner.
According to the 1st petitioner, the vacancy of Superintendent Grade-II had arisen in the office of Deputy Commissioner on 23121981 as one Jaswant Singh Walia, who was working as Superintendent Grade-III and was posted as Superintendent Grade-II in the Deputy Commissioner Office, did not join that post.
Therefore, according to the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners, the 1st petitioner, who was the senior- most in the category of Superintendents Grade IV was to be promoted as Superintendent Grade-II in the office of Deputy Commissioner in accordance with the rules and the 3rd respondent, who was working as Superintendent Grade-III in the office of Commissioner, was not eligible to be posted as Superintendent Grade-II in the office of Deputy Commissioner.
The order dated 25.8.1982 shows that the 3rd respondent was working as Superintendent Grade- III with effect from 3151975 in the office of Commissioner, Patiala Division and by the impugned order the Commissioner gave a presumptive promotion to the 3rd respondent with effect from 1671975 under rule 5 of the Punjab District Subordinate Service Rules, 1942.
The order dated 25.8.1982 also indicates that the Commissioner found the work of the 3rd respondent satisfactory and, therefore, posted him as Superintendent in Deputy Commissioner's office, Patiala against a vacant post.
4.
On a consideration of rules 7 and 9 of the Punjab District Service (Class-III) Rules, 1976 I am of the opinion that the Superintendents Grade- III, who are working in the Commissioner's office can also be considered for promotion as Superintendents in the Offices of the Deputy Commissioners.
Rule 9 of the said rules reads as follows:-  ``9.
Appointment to the posts in the service shall be made in the manner indicated below.
(a) In case of Superintendent: By promotion from amongst the Assistant Superintendents of the Districts of the concerned Division.''
Thus, according to the said rules, the Assistant Superintendents working in offices of Commissioner and the Deputy Commissioners of the concerned Division can be promoted as Superintendents.
It was only later the Assistant Superintendent working in the Deputy Commissioners' offices were designated as Superintendent Grade IV and the Assistant Superintendents working in the Commissioner's office were designated as Superintendents Grade-III.
Simply because the Assistant Superintendents were re-designated, it cannot be said the Assistant Superintendents working only in the offices of the Deputy Commissioners can be considered for promotion as Superintendent Grade-II in the offices of the Deputy Commissioners.
5.
On a careful consideration of the relevant rules, I am of the opinion that all the Superintendents working eithter in the office of Commissioner or in the office of Deputy Commissioners have to be taken as one class and Superintendent Grade-III who has been working as Superintendent in the office of Commissioner can be promoted as Superintendent Grade-II in the office of Deputy Commissioner and further for promotion as Superintendent Grade-I in the office of Commissioner, all the Superintendents Grade-II can be considered.
If the interpretation put forward by the petitioner is accepted, the promotional avenues for those Superintendents Grade-III working in the office of the Commissioner will be blocked as the Superintendents working in the offices of Deputy Commissioners cannot be promoted to the category of Superintendents Grade-I Such an interpretation is not in the interest of service and efficient working of the Administration.
I am, therefore, of the opinion that it cannot be said that the Superintendents Grade-III working in the Commissioner's office are ineligible for being appointed as Superintendents Grade-II in the offices of the Deputy Commissioners.
In this view of the matter, I am of the opinion that the writ petition is liable to be dismissed.
6.
Apart from it, I am also of the view that the writ petition is liable to be dismissed on the ground that it has become infructuous since both the 1st petitioner and the 3rd respondent retired from service long back.
The 1st petitioner retired from service on 3091983.
It was also brought to my notice by the learned Counsel for the State that the 3rd respondent also retired from service long back.
In this view of the matter, I am of the opinion that the writ petition has also become infructuous.
For the reasons stated above, I am of the opinion that the writ petition is liable to be dismissed and is, accordingly, dismissed, but without costs.