THB Chalapathi, J.- This writ petition is filed by the petitioners seeking admission into Siksha Shastri (Oriental Training Course) in the college of Education run by the UT Administration, Chandigarh.
2.
According to the petitioners, they acquired Uttar Madhayama of Maharishi Dayanand University and Shastri 3-Year degree course from Maharishi Dayanand, University Rohtak, and therefore, they are eligible for admission into the said course.
The Govt. College of Education invited application for Shiksha Shastri (OT) course on 13101995.
In the merit list the names of the petitioners namely Sunita, Vijay, Rajveer and Deepender found places at Sr Nos. 2, 4, 10 and 12 according to their merit out of 37 candidates selected.
In the note appended to the selection list the selection of these four candidates was made subject to the condition of their production of their 10th class certificates.
According to the petitioners as they have passed Uttar Madhayama, which is declared equivalent to Prak Shastri of Punjab University they are deemed to have passed Matriculation examination and, therefore, they are eligible for admission to Siksha Shastri (OT) they are eligible for admission to Siksha Shastri (OT) Course.
3.
The contention of 3rd respondent-College is that the petitioners admittedly did not possess matriculation certificate and therefore, they are not entitled to admission into the course of Shiksha Shastri (Oriental Training Course).
The only controversy in this writ petition is whether the Uttar Madhayama which is declared equivalent to Prak Shastri by the Punjab University can be taken as an equivalent qualification of matric and that the Shastri examination which is conducted by Maharishi Dayanand University and which is declared as equivalent to Shastri Examination of Punjab University can be taken as a degree course and thereby the petitioners could be said to have fulfilled the qualifications for admission.
4.
Admittedly, the petitioners passed Purva Madhyama, Uttar Madhyama and Shastri Course conducted by Maharashi Dayanand University, Rohtak under Gurukul Scheme.
Under the Punjab University Regulations, a person who passed one of the following examinations shall be eligible to join Prak Shastri :-  21 (i) Matriculation, Higher Secondary Part-I examination of the Punjab University,  (ii) Matriculation, Higher Secondary Part I of Board of School Education, Punjab, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh or of Central Board of Secondary Education, Delhi.
(iii) An examination of another University recognised as equivalent to (i) and (ii) above.
22 A person who has passed Prak Shastri Part I examination shall be eligible to join Prak Shastri Part II class.
5.
By a letter dated 11.121995, Registrar of the Panjab University has informed the Registrar of Maharishi Dayanand University, Rohtak that Uttar Madhayama (2-year course of Maharishi Dayanand University) is equivalent to Prak Shastri (2-year course of Punjab University and Shastri 3 year course of Maharishi Dayanand University, Rohtak as equivalent to Shastri 3 years course of Punjab University.
Thus the Uttar Madhayama is made equivalent to Prak Shastri.
As seen above in the regulation of Punjab University 21 and 22 for studying Prak Shastri one should be a matriculate and Uttar Madhayama is made equivalent to Prak Shastri of Punjab University.
Therefore, a person who possesses Uttar Madhayama is deemed to have possessed Prak Shastri for which matriculation is a necessary qualification.
Therefore, by necessary implication or legal fiction it can be said that a person who possesses Uttar Madhayama must have fulfilled of the qualifications which are required for Prak Shastri.
Further, the petitioners also passed the Shastri Degree awarded by Maharishi Dayanand University, Rohtak and as per Annexure P.5 Shastri of Maharishi Dayanand University, Rohtak is made equivalent to Shastri of Punjab University.
Therefore, it must be taken that the petitioners possess the qualification Shastri of Punjab University.
6.
For admission to Siksha Shastri (OT), the qualifications are :-  (a) Shastri from Punjab University or from any other recognised University or any other examination equivalent to Shastri Punjab University.
(b) Matriculation or an examination recognised by Punjab University or equivalent to Matriculation.
As already stated above, the petitioners passed Shastri from Maharishi Dayanand University, Rohtak and as per `Annexure P.5' the Shastri of Maharishi Dayanand University is made equivalent to Shastri of Punjab University.
Therefore, the petitioners fulfilled the qualification of Shastri qualification mentioned at (a).
The only controversy, therefore, is whether the petitioners possess the qualification (b) namely matriculation or an examination recognised as equivalent by Punjab University.
7.
Admittedly, the petitioners do not possess matriculation.
But according to the petitioners, they passed Purva Madhayama, which is declared equivalent to matriculation from Maharishi Dayanand University and after completion of Purva Madhyama, they passed the examination in Uttar Madhayama 2-year course which is again declared equivalent to Prak Shastri by Punjab University.
Therefore, according to the petitioners, they passed the equivalent examination of matriculation.
Annexure P2 is the certificate issued by the Maharishi Dayanand University, Rohtak on 27.7.1995.
It shows that Purva Madhayama (2 year course) by Maharishi Dayanand University is equivalent to matriculation i.e. 9th and 10th class and Uttar Madhayama (2 year course) is equivalent to 10 + 2 course, and Shastri is equivalent to BA Hon's 3-year Course.
As already seen under Annexure P.5, the Punjab University recognised the Uttar Madhayama as equivalent to Prak Shastri and for passing Uttar Madhayama one has to necessarily pass Purva Madhyama.
Purva Madhyama was made equivalent to matriculation and for Prak Shastri of Punjab University matriculation is a necessary qualification to get admission.
Therefore, by legal fiction Uttar Madhayama made equivalent to matriculation of Maharishi Dayanand University.
Therefore, when Uttar Madhayama is made equivalent to Prak Shastri and for studying Uttar Madhayama one has to pass Purva Madhyama it must necessarily be taken that the candidate passed matriculation examination as Purva Madhyama was made equivalent to matriculation by Maharishi Dayanand University.
Therefore, by this legal fiction, it must be held that all the candidates passed matriculation examination which is a qualification prescribed for admission into Siksha Shastri (OT) Thus in my opinion, all the four petitioners fulfil the necessary qualifications for admission.
Admittedly, they are above the merit list at Sr. Nos. 2, 4, 10 and 12 out of 37 candidates selected.
When they possessed higher merit, they cannot be denied admission into the Shiksha Shastri (OT) as against those who have got less merit had been admitted.
I, therefore, direct respondents No. 1 to 3 to admit the petitioners into the Shiksha Shastri (OT Course) in the college of Education, Sector 20-D, Chandigarh administered by the UT Administration.
The petition is accordingly allowed.
There is no order as to costs.
Order may be given dasti.
Order accordingly.