NC Jain, J. (Oral) - The petitioner by way of this petition has challenged the appointment of respondent No. 3 Dr. Rajeshwar Singh as Registrar of the Council of Homoepathic System of Medicine, Union Territory, Chandigarh, primarily on the ground that the Chandigarh Administration could not appoint respondent No. 3 as the Registrar of the Council of Homoepathic System of Medicine.
With reference to Section 14 of the Punjab Homoepathic Practitioners Act, 1965 (hereinafter to be referred to as the `Act') it has been vehementally argued that only Council with the previous approval of the State Government can appoint the Registrar and that such a power to appoint the Registrar does not vest with the Administrator of the Union Territory, Chandigarh.
2.
Before examining the argument in depth, it is necessary to have a look at the Scheme of the Act and Section 14 of the Act.
Under the Act, the State Government has been empowered to establish by notification the Council of Homoepathic System of Medicines for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of the Act.
The Registrar is to be appointed under Section 14 of the Act who has been defined in Section 2(11) of the Act.
The Registrar in the aforementioned provision means the Registrar appointed under Section 14 of the Act.
Section 14 of the Act reads as under :  "14.
Registrar - (1) The Council shall, with the previous approval of the State Government, appoint a Registrar who shall receive such salary and allowances and be subject to such conditions of service as may be prescribed.
(2) The Chairman may, from time to time, grant leave to the Registrar and the Council may appoint a person to act in his place.
(3) Any person duly appointed to act as a Registrar shall be deemed to the Registrar for all the purposes of this Act.
(4) Any order of the Council appointing, punishing or removing the Registrar from office shall not be passed without the previous approval of the State Government.
(5) The Council may appoint such other officers and servants as may be necessary for carrying out the purposes of this Act : Provided that the number and designation of such officers and servants and their salaries and allowances shall be subject to the previous approval of the State Government.
(6) The Registrar and any other officer or servant appointed under this Section shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of Section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
(7) The Registrar shall be the Secretary of the Council and shall act as Executive Officer of the Council."
3.
The argument of the counsel for the petitioner is well merited.
Section 14(1) of the Act as has been reproduced above clearly envisages that the Registrar can be appointed by the Council with the prior approval of the State Government.
The use of the word `shall' after the two words `The Council' does not leave any manner of doubt that it is the Council which enjoys power to make appointment of Registrar and the only rider is that previous approval of the State Government has to be obtained before making such a appointment.
In other words, the mandate of the Section is that the Council would appoint the Registrar after obtaining prior approval of the State Government.
It can be spelt from the reading of the provisions of Section 14 of the Act that the Administrator, Union Territory, Chandigarh cannot appoint Registrar of the Council.
For the reasons recorded above, the order of appointment of respondent No. 3 as Registrar vide Annexure P-1 is hereby quashed.
Consequently, the writ petition is allowed with no order as to costs.