Ashok Bhan, J - Petitioner and respondent No. 3 were selected as Lady Circle Supervisors by direct recruitment through Punjab Public Service Commission (hereinafter referred to as the Commission) in September 1989.
Respondent No. 3 was placed at No. 1 and petitioner at No. 2 in order of merit by the Commission.
Both of them were ordered to be appointed in the department of Rural Development and Panchayats vide order Annexure P1.
They were placed on probation for a period of two years from the date of joining of the post.
Rule 13 of the Punjab Development and Panchayat (Class II) Service Rules, 1974, which governs the service conditions of the petitioner reads as under :-  "13.
The seniority inter-se of members of the service shall be determined by the length of continuous service on a post in each cadre of the service :  Provided that in the case of members recruited by direct appointment, the order of merit determined by the Commission shall not be disturbed in fixing the seniority.
xx xx xx xx  Note : 1.
This rule shall not apply to members appointed on purely provisional basis.
Note : 2.
In the case of members whose period of probation is extended under rule 12, the date of appointment for the purpose of this rule shall be deemed to have been deferred to the extent the period of probation is extended."
2.
Petitioner cleared her probation satisfactorily on 1191991 whereas probation period of respondent No. 3 was extended from time to time and ultimately respondent No. 3 cleared her probation period on 2221995 (Annexure P4).
On a representation filed by respondent No. 3, order Annexure P5 has been passed amending order Annexure P4.
By order Annexure P5, it was ordered that respondent No. 3 be treated to have completed her probation period satisfactorily on 1391991.
3.
Rule 13 ibid provides that in the case of members recruited by direct recruitment, the order of merit determined by the Commission shall not be disturbed in fixing the seniority; it further provides under Note No. 2 that in case period of probation is extended under rule 12, the date of appointment shall be deemed to have been deferred in case the period of probation is extended.
Counsel for the petitioner contends that as the probation period of respondent No. 3 was extended under Note 2 of Rule 13, she became junior to the petitioner although she had been put senior to the petitioner in order of merit by the Commission; that order Annexure P5 modifying the earlier order was bad in law.
4.
We do not find any substance in this submission.
It is true that initially the period of probation of respondent No. 3 was extended but the extension in period of probation was put at naught by the order Annexure P5 vide which it was ordered that respondent No. 3 be treated to have completed the period satisfactorily with effect from 1391991, that is, within the probationary period.
Note 2 to rule 13 shall not come into operation as the period of probation of respondent No. 3 would be deemed not to have been extended.
In other words, respondent No. 3 completed her probation within the period of two years as required under Annexure P1 from the date of joining the post.
Initially the probation period was extended but on a representation filed by respondent No. 3, the earlier order was modified and she was treated to have satisfactorily completed her probation period on 1391991.
5.
We do not agree with the plea raised by the counsel for the petitioner that order Annexure P5 could not be passed.
6.
Counsel appearing for the petitioner then contended that probation period of respondent No. 3 could not be extended beyond three years for which reliance has been placed on rule 7(3)(b)(ii).
Neither order Annexure P4 declaring that petitioner had completed her probationary period successfully on 2221995 nor the order/orders extending the probationary period beyond three years has been challenged in this petition.
There is no prayer that order Annexure P4 be quashed being against the rules.
In the absence of the same, the plea taken by the petitioner cannot be entertained.
In any case, order Annexure P4 stands modified by the subsequent order Annexure P5.
In view of the above, we find no merit in the petition and dismiss the same.