Y Bhaskar Rao, J - The petitioner is the appellant.
He filed the writ appeal assailing the Judgment of the learned single Judge dismissing the writ petition.
2.
The facts of the case are that the appellant was appointed as the Managing Director of Anakapalle Co-operative Sugars Limited, Tummapala, Visakhapatnam District for a period of one year from 1.3.1979 on ad hoc basis by the State Government in GO Rt.
No. 164 dated 16.2.1979.
At the time of appointment the appellant was working as Secretary, Andhra Pradesh State Construction Corporation Limited.
The terms and conditions of his appointment were specified in the memo issued by the Government and they are not in dispute.
After expiry of one year, the term of the petitioner was extended from time to time by issuing G.Os.
and like that the petitioner was continued upto 5101987.
The last G.O.
issued by the Government is GO Rt.
No. 1202 dated 21111985.
Thereafter, no extension was given to the petitioner and he handed over the charge on 6101987.
The petitioner, therefore, filed the writ petition contending that he was appointed as the Managing Director by the State Government in exercise of the executive power of the State which is evident from the G.Os.
issued by the Government, that the termination of his service must be according to the relevant provisions applicable to a Government servant, but not as per the bye-laws concerning the Co-operative Sugar Factories and the action of the respondents in not extending the term of the petitioner is arbitrary and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
The respondents filed a counter denying the allegations of the petitioner.
It is pleaded that the appointment of the petitioner was under bye-law 24(d) of the bye-laws concerning the Co-operative Sugar Factories and not in exercise of the executive powers of the State Government under Articles 162 and 166 of the Constitution.
As the appointment of the petitioner is made in pursuance of the bye-laws, he is not a Government servant as such the procedure laid down for terminating the services of a Government employee need not be followed.
When the society does not require the services of the petitioner, particularly when he was appointed on ad hoc basis, the action of the respondents in not extending the services of the petitioner cannot be said to be arbitrary.
3.
After considering the entire material on record and hearing the arguments and also considering the decisions cited by both sides, the single Judge dismissed the writ petition holding that the petitioner's appointment was purely under bye-law 24(d) of the bye-laws framed under the Act governing the Co-operative Sugar Factories and the appointment is not an appointment made by the Government, therefore, there is no requirement to follow the procedure to terminate the services of the petitioner and the termination of the petitioner is not arbitrary.
Accordingly, the learned single Judge dismissed the writ petition.
Against that order, the present writ appeal is filed.
4.
The learned Counsel for the appellant Sri Y Suryanarayana, contended that when the petitioner is appointed by the G.Os.
issued by the Government, it is deemed that the petitioner is appointed by the Government by virtue of the executive powers under Articles 162 and 166 of the Constitution and therefore the appointment is deemed to as per rules and regulations framed under Article 309 of the Constitution and any termination or discontinuance must be in accordance with the rules and regulations framed or the procedure laid down under Article 311 of the Constitution.
On the other hand, it is contended by the learned Counsel for the respondents that the appointment of the appellant is purely temporary under bye-law 24(d) of the bye-laws concerning the Co-operative Sugar Factories and not by executive power of the Government under Articles 162 and 166 of the Constitution, and, therefore, there is no requirement to follow the procedure under Article 311 of the Constitution.
There are no merits in the appeal and the same is liable to be dismissed.
5.
In view of the above contentions, the main question of law that arises for consideration is:  "Whether the appointment of the Managing Director of Co-operative Sugar Factory by the State Government can be traced to the powers conferred on it under the bye-laws, or whether it is in exercise of the executive power of the State under Articles 162 and 166 of the Constitution of India ?"
6.
The facts of the case reveal that the petitioner was appointed on ad hoc basis, first time for one year under GO Rt.
No. 164 dated 16.2.1979 and thereafter his services were extended from time to time under the G.Os.
are issued by the Government.
It is a fact that the G.Os.
are issued by the Government under the name of the Governor of the State, but it is to be noticed that as per bye-law 24(d), the Government is the authority to appoint the Managing Director.
It is relevant to extract bye-law 24(d) which is as follows:  "24(d).
Managing Director - The Board shall appoint one of the Directors as the Managing Director on such terms and conditions as may be decided by the Board provided, however, that till the share capital contributed by Government is completely redeemed or/and the loans borrowed on Government guarantee are fully repaid, the Managing Director shall be appointed by Government on such terms and conditions as they may consider necessary.
Till the Managing Director is appointed by the Government, the General Manager appointed by the Registrar shall discharge the functions of the Managing Director subject to the general power of the Board and the President of the Society."
7.
By reading the above bye-law, it is evident that the Government have to appoint the Managing Director.
The bye-law confers the power on the Government for making the appointment of the Managing Directors for Sugar Factories which are established under the Co-operative Societies Act.
There is an executive power to the Government to appointment employees by virtue of the provisions under Articles 162 and 166 of the Constitution of India.
But the question is whether the Government have exercised executive power in appointing the appellant.
The legislations are made for purpose of creation of Co-operative Societies or for purpose of function of the Corporations or other statutory bodies, and the relevant statutes confer power on the Government to make appointments.
Therefore, it has to be seen whether the Government have in exercise of the statutory power conferred on it, appointed the appellant as the Managing Director.
In the present case bye-law 24(d) of the Bye-laws concerning the Cooperative Sugar Factories confers power on the Government to appoint the Managing Director.
By exercising that power alone the Government have appointed the appellant as the Managing Director.
Therefore, merely because the G.Os.
are issued by the Government under the name of the Governor, it does not mean that the Government have exercised its executive power under Articles 162 and 166 of the Constitution of India.
There is a distinction as stated supra between the exercise of executive power by the Government as conferred under Articles 162 and 166 of the Constitution of India and the power conferred on the Government by a particular statute.
This distinction has to be noticed to consider the question.
When we examine the facts of the case it is evident that the appointment of the appellant was made by the Government by virtue of bye-law 24(d) and, therefore, there is no requirement to follow the provisions under Articles 309 and 311 of the Constitution of India as the same are not applicable as the appointment is not made by virtue of the executive power of the State as contained in Article 162 of the Constitution of India.
We also see no arbitrariness in the action of the respondents in not extending the service of the petitioner as the appointment is made on ad hoc basis and extended from time to time; so there is no violation of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
8.
For the above reasons, we see no merit in the appeal and the same is accordingly dismissed.
No costs.
Appeal dismissed.