GC Garg, J - Challenge in this writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India is to the order dated 10.5.1988, Annexure P-10, passed by the Secretary to Government Punjab, Department of Rural Development and Panchayat whereby the petitioner has been ordered to be reverted to the post of Mukhya Sewika with immediate effect.
2.
Facts necessary to understand the controversy raised herein are that the petitioner was appointed as Lady Social Education Organiser on 181957 in the respondent-department.
The post of Lady Social Education Organiser was later re-designated as Mukhya Sewika.
Thus a seniority list of all Mukhya Sewikas was notified wherein the petitioner was shown at serial No. 6.
In all there were 138 posts of Mukhya Sewikas besides 12 posts of Lady Circle Supervisors.
Some vacancies of Lady Circle Supervisors became available.
The petitioner was posted as Lady Circle Supervisor (Current Duty Charge) in the pay scale of Mukhya Sewika, by order dated 30.3.1984, Annexure P-2.
Respondent-l by order dated Annexure P-3 promoted the petitioner and one other, as Lady Circle Supervisors.
The petitioner was promoted with effect from 1941984 i.e. the date on which she took over the Current Duty Charge of Lady Circle Supervisor.
It was provided in her promotion order that in the first instance, the promotion to the post of Lady Circle Supervisor was for a period of six months and if they were allowed to continue beyond the period of six months, their promotion will be subject to the approval of the Punjab Public Service Commission and that their promotion was against the quota meant for the direct recruits and they will have to make room for the direct recruits as and when recommended by the Commission.
Respondent-l thereafter by its order dated 18.2.1988, in modification of the earlier promotion order dated 1101984 (Annexure P-3) promoted the petitioner as Lady Circle Supervisor against the post meant for promotion quota.
Since the petitioner failed to pass the Departmental Examination as required under Rule 10 of the Punjab Development and Panchayat (Class-II) Service Rules, 1974 within one year from the date of her promotion i.e. upto 1841985 or within the extended period of two years ie upto 1841987, she was reverted to the post of Mukhya Sewika, by order Annexure P-10 and it is this order that has been challenged herein.
3.
Broad facts as set out in the writ petition have not been disputed in the written statement filed by the respondents.
Case set up by the respondents is that services of the petitioner are governed by the Punjab Development and Panchayat (Class-II) Service Rules, 1974 and in terms of Rule 10 of the Rules ibid, the petitioner was liable to pass the Departmental Examination within three years from her promotion, and that she having failed to do so, has been rightly reverted to the post below, vide Annexure P-10.
4.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and having regard to the facts and circumstances of this case, I am of the opinion that this writ petition deserves to succeed.
It may first be noticed that operation of reversion order of the petitioner, Annexure P-10 was stayed by the Motion Bench on 26.5.1988 when the writ petition was admitted to regular hearing.
It is also worth mentioning at this stage that the petitioner has already retired from service on 30111988.
From the facts as noticed above, it would be seen that the petitioner was promoted as Lady Circle Supervisor on three occasions.
It is evident from the promotion orders that on the first two occasions the promotion of the petitioner was not on regular basis.
In the first instance, the petitioner was promoted as such pursuant to order dated 30.3.1984, Annexure P-2 and by virtue of this order, she was simply given Current Duty Charge of the post of Lady Circle Supervisor and that too, in her own pay scale that she was getting as Mukhya Sewika.
Thus the petitioner having been given only Current Duty Charge could not be required to pass the Departmental Examination.
For the second time, the petitioner came to be promoted by order dated 1101984, Annexure P-3, but again this promotion also was not on regular basis, for, she had been promoted not against the post meant for promotion quota and rather she had been promoted against the post meant for direct recruits and there was a clear stipulation in her promotion order, Annexure P-3 that in the first instance her promotion was only for a period of six months and if she was allowed to continue beyond that period, her promotion will be subject to the approval of the Punjab Public Service Commission and that she will have to make room for the direct recruit as and when recommended by the said Commission.
Thus the promotion of the petitioner by way of Annexure P-3 as well cannot be said to be a promotion against a regular post falling in the quota meant for promotees, to which the petitioner belonged.
The third and the last promotion of the petitioner was made by order dated 18.2.1988, Annexure P-4 through by modifying her earlier promotion order dated 1101984, Annexure P-3 and it is only in pursuance of this order dated 18.2.1988, the petitioner came to be promoted as Lady Circle Supervisor on regular basis and against the post meant for her quota.
No doubt, by way of promotion order Annexure P-4 the promotion of the petitioner came to be regularised with effect from the date she was earlier promoted vide order Annexure P-3 issued on 1101984 and this way she was considered to have been promoted on regular basis from the year 1984, but all this having been done by order dated 18.2.1988, the petitioner could at the most be required to pass the Departmental Examination within one year or the extended period only from 18.2.1988.
But as noticed above, the petitioner retired from service on 30111988 i.e. even before the expiry of one year of the order dated 18.2.1988 promoting her on regular basis, she could apparently not be expected to pass the Departmental Examination, even if it was otherwise required to be done under the Rules ibid.
It also deserves to be noticed here that even the order Annexure P-4 was also withdrawn later on by order dated 551988, Annexure P-9 and earlier order dated 1101984, Annexure P-3 was restored.
This also shows that the petitioner was never promoted on regular basis as Lady Circle Supervisor before 551988.
By order dated 10.5.1988, Annexure P- 10 the petitioner was reverted to the post of Mukhya Sewika from the post of Lady Circle Supervisor only on the ground that she had in the opinion of the Department, failed to pass the Departmental Examination within three years from the date of promotion.
As demonstrated above, the petitioner was never promoted against a regular vacancy the question of her passing the Departmental Examination did not arise.
The word "appointment" appearing in Rule 10 of the Rules ibid clearly goes to show that the incumbent is required to pass the Departmental Examination within two years of his appointment", and the word "appointment" used in the said Rules means "Regular Appointment".
Thus the petitioner is not shown to have been appointed as Lady Circle Supervisor on regular basis at any point of time prior to 551988, she was not at all required to pass the Departmental Examination, for she was to retire from service within the next six months and she did retire on 30111988 i.e. only within seven months of her having been appointed as such on regular basis.
In the circumstances.
order dated 10.5.1988, Annexure P-10 cannot be sustained.
Writ Petition is consequently allowed and order Annexure P-10 is quashed.
No costs.
Petition allowed.