Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - On March 22, 1994 the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana advertised 283 posts of Multi Purpose Health Workers (Female) for the Health Department.
Out of these posts 87 posts were reserved for the category of Scheduled Castes, 42 posts for Ex-Servicemen and 25 posts for Backward Classes of Haryana, Resultantly, 129 posts had to be filled up on the basis of open merit.
2.
In response to this advertisement various persons including the present petitioners, submitted their applications.
The Board prepared a merit list.
The petitioners were placed at Sr. No. 111, 136, 271 and 261 respectively, Inspite of the fact that all the four petitioners were within the total number of 283 posts which had been advertised, they were not appointed.
Consequently, they filed the present writ petition with a prayer that a writ a mandamus be issued directing the respondents to consider the claim of the petitioners for appointment as Multi purpose Health Workers (Female).
3.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2 only.
The persons who were allegedly below the petitioners in order of merit and have been impleaded as respondent Nos. 4 to 13 have not filed any reply.
Even the Subordinate Service Selection Board (respondent No. 3) has not filed any reply.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondents 1 and 2 it has been inter alia stated that the appointments have been made on the merit fixed by the Board for the various categories.
It has been further stated that :  "Petitioner No. 1 was selected at Sr. No. 111 of merit fixed by respondent No. 3 in Backward Classes Category, Petitioner No. 2 was selected at Sr. No. 136 and petitioner No. 3 was also selected at Sr. No. 271 in Backward Classes Category whereas the appointments to Backward Classes candidates have been issued upto the merit of 105 and not beyond that."
On this basis the respondents maintain that the petitioners have no cause of action which may be remediable through the present proceedings.
4.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
5.
The learned counsel for the petitioners has pointed out that the Board had prepared a combined merit list.
A copy of this list has been produced as Annexure P-2 of the writ petition.
In this list the names of various persons have been arranged in order of their merit.
Resultantly, the candidates belonging to the category of Backward Classes have been shown even at Sr. Nos. 3, 5, 10, 12, 13 etc. in the merit list.
The name of petitioner No. 1 appears at Sr. No. 111 and it has been indicated that she belongs to the Backward Classes.
Still further the petitioners have made a specific averment in para 4 of the writ petition that :  "The Board recommended 289 candidates in order of merit.
A true copy of the merit list is annexed herewith as Annexure P2."
In the reply it has only been averred that this para  "relates to respondent No. 3...".
The contents have been denied.
6.
A perusal of the written statement further shows that details regarding the merit fixed for various categories have been separately given.
To illustrate it has been indicated that the persons belonging to the General Category have been placed at merit Nos. 1, 2, 4, 6 ...
Apparently, the names at Sr. No. 3 and 5 in the merit list at which two candidates belonging to the Backward Class had been placed have been omitted.
It is, thus, clear that the respondents have proceeded to make appointments on the assumption that 129 posts are reserved for the persons belonging to the General Category and that even if a candidate belonging to the Backward Classes or Scheduled Castes etc. has been placed in the merit list from Sr. No. 1 to 129, his/her name has to be excluded.
This assumption was obviously untenable.
If a member of the Backward Classes or Scheduled Castes finds a place amongst the first 129 candidates, she cannot be denied appointment.
Better merit cannot be a disqualification for being considered for appointment against the reserved or other posts.
The result of the procedure adopted by the respondents is that petitioner No. 1 who was placed at Sr. No. 111 in the combined merit list has been excluded from appointment whereas a person even at Sr. No. 175 has been appointed.
Similarly, a person who was at Sr. No. 130 but belongs to the category of Ex-servicemen has been appointed while the said petitioner who was higher stood excluded.
7.
It is undoubtedly correct that Article 16 guarantees equality of opportunity.
However, Clause (4) permits the State to make special provision for the benefit of the educationally and socially Backward Classes which are not adequately represented in the services of the State.
The provision is for the benefit of the persons belonging to these Classes.
It does not, however, mean that if they attain a higher position in the merit list, they have to be excluded from consideration or that they are not eligible to be considered against the posts which have to be filled up purely on the basis of merit without any reservation.
8.
In the present case the respondents have acted illegally in denying appointment to the petitioner No. 1 to the posts of Multi Purpose Health Worker (Female).
Their action was violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
9.
In view of the above, it is held that the first 129 posts are to be filled up on the basis of merit.
The class or category to which a person belongs was irrelevant.
If the name of the petitioner No. 1 appeared amongst the candidates upto Sr. No. 129, she was to considered for appointment on the basis of her position in the merit list.
Still further, the number of candidates belonging to the Backward classes or Scheduled Castes etc. who come within the first 129 posts had to be excluded from the posts filled up on the basis of reservation.
It is further clarified that in case the posts are available, the claim of the petitioners shall be considered against those posts.
In case no vacancies are available then the appointment of any of the private respondents, as impleaded in this case, may have to be terminated.
10.
Resultantly, the writ petition is allowed.
The respondent are directed to consider the claim of the petitioners immediately.
The needful shall be done within two weeks from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
Since the respondents have wrongly denied appointment to the petitioners, it is further directed that their claim for seniority on the basis of their position in the merit list shall also be considered.
The petitioners shall also be entitled to the costs.