AN Gupta, J - Kunwar Arun Kumar who is respondent No 1 to this petition (hereinafter referred to as `the respondent') was appointed in the pay scale of Rs. 550-1100 at a starting salary of Rs. 610/- pm by UP Hill Electronics Corporation Ltd, a UP Government Public sector undertaking, which is the petitioner No. 1 to the petition, as Personnel and Administrative Officer vide letter of appointment dated 1511990 at its New (Tehri) Factory in pursuance of which he joined the post on 121990.
According to Paragraph (2) of the letter of appointment the respondent was placed on probation for a period of 12 months from the date of joining which period could be extended from time to time at the discretion of the management.
It was further provided that during the period of probation services of the respondent could be terminated without assigning any reason therefor.
The respondent was directly subordinate to Deputy Works Manager and his job was to control and look after the labour force.
According to the petitioner, the respondent right from the very beginning had quarrelled with the workers and admittedly, he lodged an FIR against some of them but the matter was somehow pacified by the Deputy Works Manager.
It is not disputed that the respondent left the factory and his post without obtaining prior permission of Deputy Works Manager on 9.4.1990 and rejoined on 16.4.1990.
The Deputy Works Manager called for the explanation of the respondent as to under what circumstances he had deserted his post and left the factory without permission.
The respondent vide his unusually long reply dated 1841990 questioned the authority of Deputy Works Manager and stated whether he was at all required to seek permission for leaving the station indicating his insolvent behaviour.
The respondent avoided working on one pretext or the other and on 16.4.1990 i.e. when he had rejoined he again left his post on the ground that he was having pain in his abdomen and sought leave till 2341990.
He rejoined on 24.4.1990 and after working for 3 days again left on 2741990 again on the ground of abdominal pain.
On 2741990 he applied for one week's leave on the ground of abdominal pain.
Thereafter, he applied for leave from 551990 for three weeks on the ground that the respondent was suffering from amoebic hepatitis and thereafter, he applied for further leave on the ground that he was having fever and weakness.
He again applied for leave up to 20111990 on the ground that he was suffering from asthma.
The petitioner asked the respondent to produce the medical certificate of Chief Medical Officer, Lucknow for which the petitioner undertook to pay the charges but the respondent could not obtain any medical certificate from the Chief Medical Officer.
Under these circumstances, the petitioner terminated the services of the respondent by an order dated 1611991 during the period of probation.
In the letter of termination dated 1641991 it was mentioned that ``during the period of probation your work, performance was found unsatisfactory.
Therefore, your services are hereby terminated with effect from 16th January, 1991 as per Clause (2) of your appointment letter.''
2.
This order of termination was challenged by the respondent by filing a claim petition before UP Public Services Tribunal being Claim Petition No. 65/F/III/91 which was allowed by the Tribunal by means of its judgment dated 4th September, 1992 against which the petitioner has filed this petition.
The Tribunal allowed the claim of the respondent on the ground that the order terminating services of the respondent during the period of probation was stigmatic in nature.
3.
Now, the only question for consideration in this writ petition is as to whether the order dated 1611991 terminating services of the respondent during the period of probation on the ground that during the period of probation his work performance was unsatisfactory, is stigmatic in nature or not.
As mentioned above, the letter of appointment which is a contract between the parties in Paragraph (2) provided that during period of probation the services of the respondent could be terminated without assigning any reason.
However, the reason has been assigned in the order terminating services of the respondent.
The period of probation is meant to judge the suitability of an officer to the post and the management has a right to terminate the services of its employee in case his work and conduct are found unsatisfactory.
During the entire period of service extending about eleven and a half months, the respondent actually worked for over two months only .
His job as personnel and Administrative Officer was to control the Labour which he failed to do and he even lodged an FIR against some of the labourers.
He questioned the authority of Deputy Works Manager under whom he was working and asked him as to under what rules was he required to seek permission before leaving the Station.
He left the station without permission.
In spite of repeated requests he did not submit any medical certificate from the Chief Medical Officer but instead submitted certificates from Ayurvedic Doctor and a Private Practitioner.
He seems to be a sickly person suffering from Asthma and Amoebic Hepatitis and several other diseases.
He applied for medical leave on the pretext of abdominal pain, a pretext usually employed by low-paid employees which is a conduct totally unbecoming of an officer.
He could not work in the Hill areas for which he was appointed and sought his posting at Lucknow which was refused.
In these circumstances, without going into the question whether the order terminating services of the respondent during the period of probation was stigmatic or not, the petition is being allowed because under the circumstances of the case, the Management i.e. the petitioner has lost confidence in the respondent who is totally unsuitable for the job for which he was employed.
He could not perform at all in the employment.
In view of this, an amount of compensation would meet the ends of justice.
4.
The result is that this writ petition is allowed.
Judgment dated 4.9.1992 passed by UP Public Services Tribunal is hereby quashed.
It is not appropriate and is also not in the interest of justice to interfere with the order dated 1611991 passed by the petitioner terminating services of the respondent during the period of probation.
However, the respondent shall be entitled to get an amount of Rs. 5,000/- from the petitioners which shall be paid to him within a month from today.
Petition allowed.