GC Garg, J - Challenge in this writ petition is to an order dated 3111982, Annexure P-7 whereby seniority of the petitioner, apparently seems to have been brought down from serial number 79 to 113 in the cadre of the Assistant Food and Supplies Officer (for short `the AFSO') and as a consequence thereof, he was reverted from the post of the District Food and Supplies Officer (for short `D.F.S.O.')
to the post of AFSO  2.
Petitioner joined the Department of Food and Supplies Punjab in July 1959 as a Sub Inspector.
His services were, however, terminated by order dated 31.1.1963 but the order of termination was later on cancelled in May 1963 and he re-joined the same post on May 23, 1963.
The gap period was treated as leave of the kind due.
A tentative seniority list of Sub Inspectors was circulated in the year 1976 wherein the petitioner was shown at Senior No. 22 and the private respondents at Senior Nos. 39 and 40 respectively.
In the final seniority list, the petitioner continues to be shown as senior than the private respondents.
The petitioner was promoted as Inspector in due course of time and so were the private respondents.
The petitioner was further promoted as AFSO on 511974 and a tentative seniority list of A.F.S.Os.
was circulated in the year 1976.
In the said seniority list, the petitioner was shown lower in position than respondent-3.
He consequently made a representation which was accepted by order dated 21111997, Annexure P-5.
The petitioner was accordingly placed at Sl.
No. 90 and respondent-3 at Sl.
No. 123 in the seniority list.
3.
Petitioner was further promoted to the post of D.F.S.O.
in May 1980.
Seniority list of A.F.S.Os.
was issued in June 1982 in which the petitioner was placed at Sl.
No. 79 and respondent-3 at Sl.
No. 113 whereas respondent-4 was shown at Sl.
No. 87.
Further allegation of the petitioner in this case is that on the basis of some representation filed by respondent- 3, he has been reverted from the post of D.F.S.O.
to the post of AFSO without affording him an opportunity of being heard.
Thus the petitioner has challenged the order of reversion primarily on the ground that he was not afforded any opportunity of being heard before passing the order and that the order for his reversion was against the principle of natural justice.
4.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondents 1 and 2 it has been stated that the petitioner was promoted as Inspector on 17.5.1965 when no seniority list was in existence and the private respondents were promoted to the post of Inspectors in November and December, 1963 i.e. before the promotion of the petitioner as Inspector.
In the situation it was brought out that respondents 3 and 4 were senior to the petitioner in the cadre of Inspector as well as in the cadre of AFSO as the seniority was fixed in the cadre on the basis of continuous appointment on the post under the 1968 Rules and as respondents 3 and 4 were promoted to the post of AFSO w.e.f.
12.4.1973 whereas the petitioner was promoted as such w.e.f.
3041974.
In para 12 of the written statement, it has been stated that the matter regarding assignment of seniority to respondents 3 and 4 and the petitioner in the cadre of Inspector/AFSO was again considered on the basis of representation submitted by respondent-3 and it was found that seniority of respondents 3 and 4 was not correct as they had been promoted as Inspector/A.F.S.Os.
much earlier on the basis of their good record/merit than the petitioner though they were junior to the petitioner in the rank of the Sub Inspector.
It is how, order Annexure P-7 was issued fixing seniority of respondents 3 and 4 as also of the petitioner, afresh whereby the petitioner was reverted to the post of AFSO as some other officials senior to the petitioner were still working as A.F.S.Os.
It is again reiterated in the written statement that order of reversion has been passed only on the basis of revised seniority list of A.F.S.Os.
and there was no necessity to provide any opportunity of hearing to the petitioner as the reversion order was passed on the ground that the petitioner was much junior in the revised seniority list of A.F.S.Os.
5.
At the time of motion hearing, it was contended that the petitioner was not afforded any opportunity of being heard either in the matter of lowering down his position in the seniority list or before passing the order of his reversion.
On 16121982, this petition was adjourned so as to enable learned Additional Advocate General, Punjab to seek instructions if the authorities concerned were agreeable to decide the question of seniority of the petitioner afresh after giving him an opportunity of being heard.
As no specific stand was taken on behalf of respondents 1 and 2, writ petition was admitted and interim order staying petitioner's reversion was ordered to continue.
Learned counsel for the petitioner reiterated the contentions raised at the time of admission, namely, the seniority of the petitioner has been changed to his detriment at the instance of respondent-3 without affording an opportunity of being heard to him and as a consequence thereof, the respondent-authorities passed the order of reversion of the petitioner from the post of D.F.S.O.
to the post of AFSO In the situation, it was contended that the impugned order is contrary to the principle of natural justice and deserves to be quashed.
6.
Mr. Mann, learned Assistant Advocate General, Punjab has not been able to refer to any material on record or otherwise which may show that the petitioner was afforded an opportunity of being heard before passing the impugned order.
Annexure P-7.
7.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and going through the record, I am of the opinion that this writ petition deserves to succeed.
A definite stand was taken in the written statement as also at the time of motion hearing that no opportunity of being heard was afforded to the petitioner while changing his position in the seniority list from serial No. 79 to 113 in the cadre of A.F.S.Os.
Nothing could be inferred from the written statement filed on behalf of respondents 1 and 2 that the petitioner was afforded an opportunity of being heard while effecting change in the seniority list.
A perusal of order Annexure P-5 rather goes to show that representation of the petitioner against the tentative seniority list in the cadre of A.F.S.Os.
was accepted and he was assigned the position at serial number 90 in the seniority list.
Once the representation of the petitioner against the tentative seniority list had been accepted and he had been assigned seniority at Sl.
No. 90, it was all the more necessary to afford to the petitioner an opportunity of being heard before effecting the change in the seniority list.
This having not been done, the order effecting change in the seniority list is vitiated and the order impugned in the writ petition reverting the petitioner from the post of D.F.S.O.
to the post of AFSO being solely based on the revised seniority list also deserves to be quashed.
It is also worth noticing that the interim order staying operation of the order, Annexure P-7 still continues to be operative though passed more than 14 years back.
In that view of the matter, the writ petition is allowed and order Annexure P-7 is quashed but with no order as to costs.
However, it will be open to the respondent-authorities to frame a seniority list afresh in accordance with law after affording to the petitioner and other concerned officers an opportunity of being heard in due course of time.
No costs.
Petition allowed.