NK Sodhi, J - Petitioner is a Chemical Engineer having obtained his degree from the Regional Engineering College, Srinagar.
Respondent 3 is an Aeronautical Engineer whereas respondent 4 is a Civil Engineer.
Petitioner was appointed Inspector of Factories in the Labour Department, Haryana on ad hoc basis for six months on 551972.
This temporary appointment was extended from time to time till he was appointed on regular basis.
Haryana Public Service Commission (for short the Commission) advertised three temporary posts of Inspectors of Factories Class-II in the Labour Department, Haryana.
It was stated in the advertisement that one of the posts was to be filled up by a graduate possessing a degree in Chemical Engineering and another post by a Graduate with a degree in Civil Engineering.
The requirement for the third post was that the candidate should possess either a degree in Mechanical or Aeronautical Engineering.
One of the three posts was reserved for Scheduled Castes of Haryana only.
Recruitment to the post of Inspector of Factories is governed by statutory rules called the Punjab Labour Service (Class I & II) Rules, 1956 (hereinafter called the Rules).
In terms of Rule 4 the minimum educational qualification required for the aforesaid post is a degree of a recognised University in Mechanical or Electrical or Chemical Engineering.
Degree of Aeronautical Engineering is not mentioned in Rule 4.
Therefore, a graduate possessing a degree in Aeronautical Engineering was not eligible for appointment as Inspector of Factories.
Rule 4 of the Rules was, however, amended on 30.10.1979 and the degree of Aeronautical Engineering was also included therein making Aeronautical Engineers eligible for the post.
2.
In response to the aforesaid advertisement the petitioner and respondents 3 and 4 along with several others applied for the three posts.
The Commission after interviewing the candidates recommenced the names of the petitioner and respondents 3 and 4 in the following order of merit for appointment:  (i) Kulbir Singh Sheoran (Civil) (Respondent 4)  (ii) Hari Saran Gupta (Aeronautics) (Respondent 3)  (iii) Jamit Singh (SC of Haryana) (Chemical) (Petitioner)  A common appointment letter addressed to the three selected candidates was issued on 961976.
According to clause 4 of this letter the appointment of the petitioner and respondents 3 and 4 was on probation for a period of two years from the date they join the post and during probation their services could be terminated without notice if the post was abolished or if their work and conduct was found unsatisfactory.
It was further mentioned that after completion of the probationary period satisfactorily the appointment would be treated as temporary till they were confirmed against substantive post.
It is common case of the parties that the petitioner joined the post soon after he was given the letter of appointment whereas respondents 3 and 4 joined on 3091976 and 12111976 respectively.
In January, 1977 the State Government sanctioned the benefit of previous temporary service which the petitioner had rendered in the Labour Department prior to his regular appointment and ordered that the same would count in full towards increments and leave.
It was also stated in the letter that his seniority would be determined w.e.f.
20.5.1976 the date of recommendation of the Commission.
Respondents 3 and 4 were, however, declared senior to the petitioner in accordance with the merit determined by the Commission.
Thereafter by a letter dated 2071981 the State Government confirmed the petitioner and respondents 3 and 4 as substantive permanent Inspectors w.e.f.
12111978.
Petitioner then claimed that he should be given seniority over and above respondents 3 and 4 as he was entitled to be confirmed w.e.f.
2051978 when he completed his probationary period satisfactorily whereas respondents 3 and 4 had completed the said period long after the petitioner.
When this claim of his was not accepted by respondents 1 and 2 he filed the present petition under Article 226 of the Constitution for a mandamus directing the respondents to confirm him w.e.f.
2051978 and thus declare him senior to respondents 3 and 4.
3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondents 1 and 2, it is pleaded that the petitioner cannot claim seniority over respondents 3 and 4 merely because he joined the post on regular basis earlier to them.
A reference has been made to the State Government instructions whereby seniority in such cases has to be determined on the basis of the merit determined by the Commission.
It is also stated that since respondents 3 and 4 where higher in merit at the time of selection by the Commission they would rank senior to the petitioner.
4.
The dispute thus in the writ petition is in regard to inter se seniority between the petitioner on the one hand and respondents 3 and 4 on the other.
5.
I have heard counsel for the parties and it is their common case that seniority in the service is determined by Rule 9 of the Rules.
According to this Rule seniority of the members of service belonging to the same class is determined by the dates of their confirmation in the service.
However, if two or more members are confirmed on the same date their seniority shall be determined as under:-  (a) a member recruited by promotion shall be senior to a member appointed by direct recruitment.
(b) In case of members who are appointed by promotion seniority shall be determined according to their seniority in the service from which they have been promoted.
(c) in all other cases the Government shall decide their seniority.
It is not in dispute that the petitioner and respondents 3 and 4 were confirmed w.e.f.
12111978 and all the three were appointed by direct recruitment.
Their seniority is, therefore, to be determined by the State Government in terms of the aforesaid clause (c).
It is again not in dispute that the State Government determined their inter se seniority as per the order of merit in which they were recommended by the Commission for appointment.
Since the petitioner was recommended at No. 3 he has been shown junior to respondents 3 and 4.
This determination cannot by any standards be described as unreasonable or arbitrary.
As a matter of fact rules governing different services very often provide that seniority in such cases shall be determined by the order of merit determined by the Commission.
No fault can, therefore, be found in this regard with the action of the respondents in declaring respondents 3 and 4 senior to the petitioner.
The argument that the petitioner was entitled to be confirmed immediately on completing his probationary period on 2051978 again cannot be accepted as there is no rule or instructions of the State Government warranting such a course to be adopted.
The date of confirmation and the date of completion of probationary period are two distinct dates and it is for the competent authority to decide as to when an official who has completed his probationary period should be confirmed.
It was strenuously urged by Dr. Balram Gupta, counsel for the petitioner that the respondent acted arbitrarily in not confirming the petitions w.e.f.
the date when he completed his probationary period whereas respondent 4 was confirmed immediately on completing his probationary period.
The argument is that the respondents have adopted different yardsticks in the case of the petitioner and respondent 4 in this regard.
I do not find any merit in this contention.
As already observed the date of confirmation and the date of completion of the probationary period are distinct dates and the rules entitle the competent authority to fix any date of confirmation of the officials with effect from which their seniority shall count.
No meaningful argument was advanced to show that the date of confirmation as fixed in the case of the petitioner and respondents 3 and 4 was in any way arbitrary.
The petitioner cannot, therefore, claim seniority over respondent 4.
6.
It was lastly contended by the learned counsel for the petitioner that respondent 3 could not be confirmed w.e.f.
12111978 since he was not eligible to hold the post on the said date.
According to the learned counsel this respondent became eligible only w.e.f.
30.10.1979 when Rule 4 of the Rules was amended and degree of Aeronautical Engineering which he possesses was also included in the said Rule so as to make Aeronautical Engineers eligible for the post.
Mr. Gupta submitted that admittedly respondent 3 is an Aeronautical Engineer and according to Rule 4 as it stood in the year 1976 when this respondent was appointed, an Aeronautical Engineer was not eligible for appointment to the post of Inspector of Factories.
It is true that the advertisement issued by the Commission stated that an Aeronautical Engineer could also apply for appointment but that advertisement was contrary to the statutory rules and could not override the Rules.
Since no one challenged that appointment of this respondent he continued to remain in service.
He completed his probationary period on 3091978 and was confirmed with the petitioner on 12111978.
On this date as well was not eligible and Rule 4 was amended only on 30.10.1979 so as to make Aeronautical Engineers eligible for the post.
This respondent could at the most be confirmed with effect from the date he becomes eligibile and not from any date prior to that.
In this view of the matter, respondent 3 cannot rank senior to the petitioner.
In the result, the writ petition is partly allowed and a mandamus issued to the respondent to declare the petitioner senior to respondent 3.
There is, however, no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.