GC Garg, J - In this petition under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioners have challenged the orders dated 26.7.1993, Annexure P-9 and 11111993, Annexure P-11, passed by respondents 3 and 2 respectively.
2.
Petitioners are working as Nursery Teachers in Shivalik Model School, Naya Nangal.
The affairs of the school are managed by a Managing Committee headed by its Chairman who is the Sub Divisional Magistrate, Anandpur Sahib.
The school is further controlled and financed by the Notified Area Committee (for short `the Committee').
In pursuance of an advertisement appearing in the newspaper in the year 1987, inviting applications for two posts of Nursery Teachers from the candidates who are Graduates and possess diploma in Nursery Training, the petitioners applied for the said posts.
In the column of qualifications appearing in the advertisement, Annexure P-1, it was further mentioned that the candidates possessing the qualification of BEd.
will be preferred.
The petitioners were selected and accordingly appointed as Nursery Teachers vide appointment letters dated 3181987.
They were initially paid a consolidated salary of Rs. 900/- per month as per the terms and conditions contained in their appointment letters.
After completion of one year service, the petitioners were appointed on regular basis as Nursery Teachers by the Committee in the pay scale of Rs. 620-1200 w.e.f.
191988.
After completion of probation period, the petitioners were confirmed by the School Managing Committee in the year 1991, w.e.f.
191990 as such in the above pay scale which was later on revised from Rs. 620-1200 to Rs. 1640-2925 from the date of their initial appointment as Nursery Teachers.
However, during the course of audit, the Audit Department of the State Government raised an objection qua petitioner-2 to the effect that she was only a Matriculate with JBT and was thus not entitled to the pay scale of Rs. 1640- 2925.
The Audit Department further raised an objection that petitioner-1 was also not entitled to the pay scale of Rs. 1640-2925 as she did not possess the qualification of Punjabi upto Matric standard.
The objections raised by the Audit Department came to be considered by Managing Committee of the School and ultimately the School Managing Committee did not agree to the objections and passed a resolution that no revision or deduction was called for in the pay scale of the petitioners.
The petitioners apprehending that their pay scale may not be reduced made a joint representation, Annexure P-8 on which the Director, Local Government, Punjab Chandigarh without getting any explanation from the petitioners and without affording any opportunity of being heard to them conveyed its decision to the Committee and the Committee implemented the said decision by order dated 26.7.1993, Annexure P-9 whereby the pay scale of the petitioners was reduced from Rs. 1640-2925 to Rs. 1200- 2100.
The petitioners still made another representation, this time, against the order Annexure P-9 and the said representation was also declined by respondent-2 by its order dated 11111993, Annexure P-11.
This is how the petitioners have impugned the orders Annexures P-9 and P-11.
3.
Respondents 1 and 2 did not file any written statement.
However, respondents 3 to 5 filed a joint written statement.
A preliminary objection was raised in the written statement that the writ petition on behalf of the petitioners was not maintainable especially when it raises disputed questions of fact.
A further preliminary objection was taken that Shivalik Model School was being run by the Notified Area Committee which was subject to the control of the Director, Local Government Department, Punjab in accordance with the provisions of the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911 and it has been giving pay scales to the teachers of the School on the Punjab pattern and both the petitioners at the time of their recruitment were only Matriculates with one year course in Nursery Training.
On merits, it is submitted that the pay scale of Rs. 620-1200 was wrongly given to the petitioners and that the School Managing Committee wrongly insisted for giving revised scale of Rs. 1640-2925 whereas the petitioners were only entitled to the pay scale of Rs. 1200-2100.
It is further averred that even the acquisition of BEd.
qualification after the appointment did not alter the situation unless and until the petitioners were selected and posted against the posts of Mistresses.
4.
Petitioners filed rejoinder to the written statement and brought out that they were graduates at the time of their initial appointment and had also done one year diploma course in Nursery training and, therefore, they were rightly given the pay scale of Rs. 620-1200 which later on was revised to Rs. 1640-2925.
The petitioners also placed on record certain documents in support of their stand that they were graduates at the time of their initial appointment and they possessed the requisite qualification of Punjabi upto Matric standard.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioners vehemently submitted that the petitioners were appointed on the terms and conditions as notified in the advertisement as far back as in the year 1988 and since then they had been getting the pay scale of Rs. 620-1200, later on revised to Rs. 1640-2925 and that the service conditions of the petitioners cannot be changed arbitrarily to their detriment without affording on opportunity of showing cause and further that the impugned orders Annexures P-9 and P-11 have adversely affected the civil rights of the petitioners.
Learned counsel further submitted that the objections raised by the Audit Department that the petitioners were not graduates at the time of their initial appointment and they did not possess the requisite qualification of Punjabi upto Matric standard were considered by the Managing Committee of the School and found to be incorrect.
6.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, I am of the opinion that this petition deserves to succeed.
As regards qualifications, Annexure P-15 clearly goes to show that petitioner-2 was a graduate at the time of her appointment and she had also passed Punjabi as additional subject in BA Similarly, Annexure P-12 also shows that petitioner-1 was a graduate at the time of initial appointment and it is clear from the perusal of Annexure P-14 that petitioner-1 passed the subject of Punjabi as an additional subject.
The allegation that she passed Graduation with Punjabi as one of the elective subjects has not been denied anywhere in the written statement nor was it disputed during the course of hearing.
Thus it has to be concluded that both the petitioners were graduates at the time of their initial appointments and they possessed the knowledge of Punjabi upto matric standard.
From Annexure P-13 it is clear that petitioner-1 passed her BEd.
examination in May 1993 whereas petitioner-2 passed BEd.
examination April 1992.
The qualifications of the petitioner, have been highlighted only with a view to show that the stand taken by respondents 3 to 5 in the written statement that the petitioners at the time of their recruitment were only Matriculates with one year diploma course in Nursery Training is at the face of it false and so is the audit objection raised in that behalf.
7.
Undisputedly, the order Annexure P-9 has been passed by the Executive Officer of the Committee at the back of the petitioners and that too, without affording any opportunity of being heard to them.
This was in fact done at the direction of the Director, Local Department.
Representation filed by the petitioners was summarily rejected by the Deputy Controller (F & A) by only observing that ``it is to inform you that your request has been again considered in detail and rejected''.
It could not be shown during the course of hearing that the impugned orders Annexures P-9 and P-11 were passed after affording the petitioners an opportunity of being heard.
Admittedly, by the impugned orders the salary of the petitioners has been reduced as they have then put in the pay scale of Rs. 1200-2100 instead of pay scale of Rs. 1640- 2925 granted earlier and this has certainly affected their civil rights.
In this view of the matter, it cannot be said that the petitioners do not have any cause of action to challenge the impugned orders or that the writ petition raises a disputed question of fact.
The impugned orders have been passed without hearing the petitioners and without any show cause notice requiring them to explain as to why their pay scale be not reduced.
In the circumstances, the impugned orders cannot be sustained being violative of principles of natural justice.
8.
For what has been observed above, the writ petition is allowed and the impugned orders Annexures P-9 and P-11 are quashed leaving it open to the authorities to consider the matter afresh in accordance with law after affording the petitioners an opportunity to show cause against the proposed action and after affording them a personal hearing if asked for.
The authorities in the eventuality of passing of fresh order shall have regard to the fact that the petitioners have now acquired the qualification of BEd.
and also the latest law on the subject.
There will, however, be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.