NK Sodhi, J - Petitioner hails from village Akroura, Tehsil and District Bahraich in the State of Uttar Pradesh and ordinarily resides there.
He belongs to Dhobi Caste which is one of the Scheduled Castes as per the certificate issued by the District Magistrate, Bahraich.
He passed the 10+2 examination of Haryana State Education Board from Yamunanagar in the year 1992 and was eligible for admission to the Ist year Degree Course of Engineering in any of the State colleges.
On the basis of his merit in the Common Entrance Test he was given admission to the engineering course in the discipline of Mechanical Engineering in Chhotu Ram State College of Engineering, Murthal (Sonepat) (for short, `the college').
It may be mentioned that the petitioner was admitted to the Regional Engineering College, Kurukshetra as well but he preferred to join the college where he got the branch of his choice.
He had been selected against a seat reserved for scheduled castes on the basis of the certificate issued to him by the District Magistrate, Bahraich.
At the time of admission, he was told to produce a scheduled caste certificate from a Revenue Authority from Haryana by 891992 failing which his admission would be cancelled.
The petitioner had produced the certificate which was issued to him by the District Magistrate, Bahraich.
Since he did not produce a scheduled caste certificate from any revenue authority in Haryana, his admission was sought to be cancelled.
He then filed the present petition under Article 226 of the Constitution alleging that as per the prospectus issued by the College for admission to B.E./B.Arch, Degree Courses 1992-93, a candidate belonging to a scheduled caste was required to mention in his/her application that he/she was a scheduled caste candidate and was also required to submit a certificate in the prescribed form in Annexure-I to the prospectus which he did and that there was no requirement of producing a certificate from any revenue authority from Haryana.
Since candidates lower in merit than the petitioner had been admitted, the Motion Bench directed the respondents to grant provisional admission to the petitioner at his own risk and responsibility and subject to the final decision in the writ petition.
2.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it is admitted that the petitioner appeared in the Common Entrance Test held for all the colleges in the State and that he had produced a scheduled caste certificate issued by the District Magistrate, Bahraich (U.P.).
It is further stated that the caste of the petitioner is Dhobi which has not been declared a scheduled caste by the Haryana Government and, therefore, the petitioner was required to produce a certificate from a revenue authority from Haryana.
Since the petitioner failed to produce such a certificate he was not eligible for the course.
3.
I have heard counsel for the parties.
Before I deal with the rival contentions of the parties, it would be worthwhile to notice the relevant provisions contained in the prospectus for admission to the academic year 1992-93 and they are as under :-  "RESERVED SEATS For consideration against any of the reserved seats under various categories, candidate shall have to submit a certificate in the prescribed form satisfying various requirements and furnish details as given below : (a) For scheduled caste/Scheduled Tribe candidates : A candidate for this category shall have to specifically mention the same in his/her application form and submit a certificate in the form prescribed in Annexure- I.
(b) xxx xxx xxx (c) xxx xxx xxx (d) xxx xxx xxx (e) xxx xxx xxx (f) xxx xxx xxx (g) xxx xxx xxx" Annexure-I which contains the form in which the scheduled caste certificate was to be submitted is as under :- "ANNEXURE-I FORM OF CERTIFICATE TO BE PRODUCED BY A CANDIDATE BELONGING TO A SCHEDULED CASTE OR SCHEDULED TRIBE.
Form of Caste Certificate This is to certify that Sh./Kumari.... son/daughter of...... of village/ town...... in Distt./Divn..... of the State/UT belongs to the caste/ tribe ... which is recognised as a Scheduled caste/tribe as per the Constitution of India and relevant notification of Government.
Note :- The Certificate is required to be given by the DC or S.D.O.
(Civil) or General Assistant to DC to the District in which the candidate ordinarily resides."
4.
A perusal of these provisions will show that a scheduled caste candidate seeking admission to any of the courses was required to mention only the fact that he/she was a scheduled caste and was also to submit a certificate in the form as prescribed in Annexure-I According to the prescribed form, it was only the DC or S.D.O.
(Civil) or General Assistant to DC of the District in which the candidate ordinarily resided who was to certify that the candidate belonged to a particular caste which is recognised as a scheduled caste as per the Constitution of India and relevant notification of Government.
There is no requirement that a scheduled caste certificate is to be obtained from a revenue authority from Haryana.
The requirement of Annexure-I had thus been complied with by the petitioner when he produced the certificate from District Magistrate, Bahraich where he ordinarily resided.
The respondents were, therefore, not justified in requiring the petitioner to produce yet another certificate from a revenue authority from Haryana.
5.
In para 8 of the writ petition, it has been averred that one Krishan Kumar s/o Shri Ram Briksh of Bihar State was admitted in the Department of Mechanical Engineering in the Regional Engineering College, Kurukshetra on the basis of a scheduled caste certificate issued to him by the State of Bihar.
He too belongs to the caste of Dhobi.
Even though no reply has been filed by the Principal, Regional Engineering College, Kurukshetra who has been arrayed as respondent 4 in the writ petition, yet the learned counsel appearing on behalf of this respondent conceded at the time of arguments that Shri Krishan Kumar has been admitted on the basis of a certificate issued to him by the authorities in the State of Bihar.
It may be mentioned that the Common Entrance Test that was held on 2451992 was for admission to all the colleges in the State including the Regional Engineering College, Kurukshetra and the petitioner on the basis of his merit got admission in the Regional Engineering College, Kurukshetra as well.
He could well have joined that college and it would not have been necessary for him to produce any further certificate from a revenue authority from Haryana.
He, however, chose not to join that college as he was not getting the discipline of his choice.
Having joined the college and complied with the requirements of the prospectus, his admission cannot be cancelled merely because of his failure to produce a certificate from the authorities in the State of Haryana as subsequently demanded by the College.
6.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed, the letter dated 1881992 issued by the Chairman of the Admission Committee requiring the petitioner to produce a scheduled caste certificate from any revenue authority from Haryana is quashed.
The respondents are directed to declare the result of the petitioner of different semesters, if not already declared.
No costs.
Petition allowed.