GC Garg, J - Petitioner was inducted into the service of the respondent- bank against the post of an officer vide order dated January 1, 1986.
He continued to serve the bank till February 18, 1991 when he was transferred and posted at the Head Office, Jalandhar Road, Kapurthala.
While posted in the Head Office, he was served with a charge-sheet and after enquiry he was served with a show cause notice as to why a penalty of removal from service of the bank not imposed upon him.
He replied to the show cause notice and the disciplinary authority thereafter by order dated June 13, 1992 passed an order of removal of the petitioner from the service of the bank in terms of Regulations, 30(1) of the Model Staff Services Regulations, 1983 (for short `the Regulations').
The petitioner without availing the remedy of appeal available to him under Regulation 31 of the regulations, filed the present writ petition challenging the order dated June 13, 1992, Annexure P11, of his removal from service and seeking a direction to the respondents to reinstate him with all consequential benefits and for the grant of other prayers.
2.
In the writ petition, allegations of mala fide have been levelled against Siya Ram Syan, the then Chairman of the respondent-bank.
It has also been alleged that the inquiry is vitiated as the petitioner was not afforded due opportunity during the cause of inquiry to produce his defence and that the inquiry proceedings are bad on the grounds as set out in detail in the petition.
3.
Respondents 1 to 3 filed a joint written statement.
They took a preliminary objection that the writ petition be not entertained, the petitioner having an alternative remedy of appeal under the Regulations.
It was also brought out that writ petition raises disputed questions of fact which cannot be gone into in exercise of jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India and that the petitioner was afforded full opportunity to defend himself in the regular departmental inquiry and he was supplied with a copy of the inquiry report before inflicting the punishment of removal from service.
Various other pleas have also been taken in the written statement.
However, it is not considered necessary to notice the pleadings of the parties in detail.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the petitioner did not file appeal at that time as the punishing authority himself was a member of the Board of Directors, the appellate authority.
It, however, could not be disputed that the punishing authority is no longer the member of the Board who is to hear the appeal.
As the petition raises disputed question of fact which cannot be gone into in writ proceedings, it is considered desirable to relegate the petitioner to the remedy of appeal available under the regulations, against the impugned orders of his removal from service.
It is so ordered.
The petitioner may now file appeal against the orders of his removal from service within three weeks before the competent authority and if such an appeal is filed the competent authority under the regulations shall consider and dispose it of on its own merits according to law expeditiously but not later than six months.
It is specifically made clear that the respondent-bank or the competent appellate authority shall not raise the question of limitation in the matter of filing the appeal.
5.
With the above observations and directions, writ petition stands disposed of.
No costs.