Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner, a member of the Punjab Education Service Class I has a two fold grievance.
Firstly, he complains that his seniority in the Punjab Education Service Class II was wrongly changed vide memo.
dated November 3, 1982, and respondents 3 and 4 were declared senior to him.
He represented.
While this representation was still pending, the Government issued a letter dated March 5, 1984, by which he was ordered to be reverted from the post of Principal to that of a Lecturer in Punjab Education Service Class II.
The petitioner consequently prays that the seniority list, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P.4 with the writ petition, and the order of reversion, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P.6 with the writ petition, be quashed.
A few facts which are relevant for the decision of the case may briefly be noticed.
2.
The petitioner was recruited as a Lecturer in Botany.
This post was in the Punjab Education Service Class III in the grade of Rs. 300-600.
On October 15, 1973, the petitioner was directly recruited to the post of Lecturer in Punjab Education Service Class II which was in the scale of Rs. 400-800.
While working as a Lecturer in Class II, the petitioner was promoted to the post of Principal in Punjab Education Service Class I with effect from July 27, 1979.
3.
Respondents 3 and 4 were also members of the Punjab Education Class III.
They were promoted as Lecturers in Punjab Education Service Class II on July 25, 1974.
The petitioner alleges that they have not been confirmed in Class II.
A seniority list of the members of Class II service was circulated.
It reflected the position as on April 1 1975.
The petitioner claims that he was shown senior to these respondents.
However, in the year 1982, a fresh list was circulated which depicted the position as on July 1, 1982.
In this list, the petitioner was placed at serial number 378.
Respondents who had hitherto been shown junior to him, were placed at serial numbers 364 and 370.
As this was not in conformity with the rules, the petitioner represented.
However, without deciding his representation, the respondents ordered his reversion from Class I to class II vide order dated March 5, 1984.
A copy of this order has been produced as Annexure P.6 with the writ petition.
The petitioner impugns the order by which his seniority was changed to this disadvantage.
He also challenges the validity of the order of his reversion.
He consequently prays that the impugned orders be quashed and he should be deemed to have continued to work as Principal with effect from the date of his initial appointment.
4.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of respondents 1 and 2 only.
It has been admitted that the petitioner was directly recruited to the Punjab Education Service Class II on October 15, 1973.
Respondents 3 and 4 were promoted to Class II Service on July 25, 1974.
However, the respondents maintain that the petitioner was confirmed in Class II with effect from April 5, 1975, while the third and fourth respondents were confirmed with effect from April 4, 1975.
Since respondents 3 and 4 had been confirmed earlier than the petitioner, they were senior to him.
As a result, the seniority list was corrected and the petitioner was ordered to be reverted.
Counsel for the parties have been heared.
5.
Admittedly, the conditions of service of the members of Punjab Education Service Class II are laid down in the rules called the Punjab Education Service (Class II) Rules, 1934.
Rule 10 of these rules lays down the method of determination of seniority.
It inter alia provides that ``the seniority of members of the service shall be determined by the dates of confirmation, which for the purpose of this rule shall mean by the day succeeding the expiry of the period of probation''.
It is the admitted position that the petitioner was appointed to the Punjab Education Service Class II on October 15, 1973.
Consequently, in view of the provisions of Rule 10, he shall be deemed to have been confirmed on October 15, 1974.
As against this, respondents 3 and 4 were actually promoted on July 25, 1974.
They have been confirmed by the Department with effect from April 4, 1975.
Thus, the petitioner was to be deemed to have been confirmed about 6 months prior to the respondents.
Accordingly, in view of the provisions of Rule 10, he has to rank senior to them.
6.
Learned counsel for the respondents has not been able to show as to how the petitioner could be treated as junior to the third and fourth respondents.
In fact, even the action of the Department in ordering him to be confirmed as member of Class II with effect from April 5, 1975, appears to be based on no rational criteria.
It is in fact contrary to the provisions of Rule 10.
7.
In view of the above, the action of the respondents in treating the petitioner as junior to respondents 3 and 4 cannot be sustained.
It is accordingly quashed.
Resultantly, even the order of reversion which was based solely on the change in the seniority cannot be sustained.
8.
The writ petition is accordingly allowed.
It is declared that the petitioner is senior to respondents 3 and 4.
The order of his reversion is quashed.
As a result, the petitioner shall be entitled to such consequential benefits as may be available to him.
In the circumstances, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.