K A Swami, CJ.
- This appeal is preferred against the order dated 22nd June, 1994 passed by the learned single Judge in W.P. 14824 of 1991.
2.
In the writ petition, apart from seeking quashing of the order dated 2181987 bearing Act.
No. 187 S.O.
passed by the 1st respondent and also the consequential order dated 211991 passed by the 3rd respondent, confirming the promotion to the post of Secretary and reverting the petitioner as an Assistant and the consequential order dated 211991 and also the order dated 2791991 passed by the 2nd respondent in his proceedings Na.Ka 776/1991 Ki.vi.Ti he also sought for a declaration that the first proviso to Clause (a) of Sub-Rule (2) of Rule 149 of the Tamil Nadu Co-operative Societies Rules, 1988 (hereinafter referred to as the Rules) is null and void.
However, while arguing the writ petition, the validity of the aforesaid proviso had not been put forth.
Learned counsel appearing for the appellant tried to argue before us that Clause (a) of Sub-Rule (2) of Rule 149 of the Rules is invalid, because it is beyond the rule making power and it is inconsistent with the main rule.
3.
At the outset, we may dispose of this contention.
It is not in dispute that the rule making authority, viz., the State Government had the power to prescribe the qualifications and eligibility conditions for the post.
The power to prescribe also includes the power to relax or provide for lesser qualification and also subject to certain conditions.
That is what has been done by the first proviso to Clause (a) of sub-Rule (2) to Rule 149 of the Rules, which provides that,  ``Provided that the educational qualification prescribed in Column (3) of the table shall not apply to an employee of a society holding a post other than a post in Class VII for appointment to higher posts in the society by promotion subject to the provisions contained in Clause (3) of this sub- Rule''.
We need not go into the explanations to the proviso.
That being so, it is not possible to hold that the rule making authority acted beyond its power in providing the aforesaid proviso, inasmuch as such a power is included in the power to prescribe the qualifications, which is not disputed by learned counsel for the appellant.
4.
As far as the validity of the orders passed by respondents 1 and 2 is concerned, learned single Judge has considered the same in great detail.
One of the reasons given by the learned single Judge is that the 3rd respondent was appointed as long as in the year 1978, whereas the petitioner/appellant came to be appointed only on 221981, that too temporarily and as such, the 3rd respondent was senior to the petitioner/appellant.
In addition to this, learned single Judge has also given the reasons in paragraph No. 2 of the order, which clearly go to show that the petitioner/appellant cannot be compared with the 3rd respondent.
In the light of the proviso referred to above, it was not necessary for the 3rd respondent to possess the degree qualification for the promotional post.
As far as the training was concerned, the petitioner/appellant and the 3rd respondent had undergone similar training and that it was so, was not disputed before us.
5.
In the interest of the petitioner, we do not propose to go into the other reasons given by the learned single Judge, which go to the very root of the validity of the appointment of the 3rd respondent as a clerk.
Hence, having regard to the reasons given by the learned single Judge and those given by the Registrar of Co-operative Societies, we do not see any justification to interfere with the order of the learned single Judge.
For the reasons stated above, the appeal is rejected.
Appeal dismissed.