Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner, an Assistant Sub Inspector of Police, is aggrieved by the order dated June 23, 1983 by which he was compulsorily retired from service.
He prays that the order, a copy of which has been produced Annexure P.3 with the writ petition, be quashed.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner was recruited as Constable on January 24, 1949.
Ultimately, on May 18, 1974, the petitioner was promoted to the rank of Assistant Sub Inspector.
On March 2, 1979, his name was brought on promotion list `E'.
On March 5, 1979, the Government permitted the petitioner to cross the efficiency bar in the rank of Assistant Sub Inspector w.e.f.
the due date viz. September 1, 1978.
On September 6, 1979, the petitioner was ordered to be promoted as Sub Inspector.
A copy of this order is on record as Annexure P.6.
3.
Curiously, the order dated September 6, 1979 by which the petitioner had been promoted, was not implemented.
On January 11, 1982, the petitioner was given a notice under rule 918(2) by which he was informed that it was proposed to compulsorily retire him from service in public interest.
The grounds/material on the basis of which this action was sought to be taken were furnished to the petitioner alongwith this notice.
The petitioner has produced a copy of the notice as Annexure P.1 with the writ petition.
However, the grounds on which the action was proposed to be taken against him have not been appended to the notice.
Counsel for the petitioner has placed on record a photo copy of these grounds.
It is taken on record as mark `A'.
The petitioner submitted his reply to this notice on February 1, 1982.
Vide order dated June 23, 1983, the petitioner was informed that he is ``hereby retired compulsorily from service w.e.f.
23.6.1963 under Police Rule 918(2) in public interest as intimated by the Director General of Police, Haryana vide his memo No.. dated 1361983....'' Accordingly, the petitioner was relieved of his duties on June 23, 1983.
The petitioner alleges that this order is violative of the rules and cannot be sustained.
He prays that it be quashed with all consequential reliefs.
4.
The respondents contest the petitioner's claim.
It has been inter alia averred that the approval of the Haryana Government in terms of rule 918 had been obtained vide letter dated December 2, 1981, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure RI It has also been admitted that the petitioner had been permitted to cross the Efficiency Bar as a Head Constable w.e.f.
October 1, 1970 and as Assistant Sub Inspector w.e.f.
September 1, 1978.
The respondents also admit that the petitioner had been ordered to be promoted by ``the DIG Hissar Range on 6.9.1979 when he was on deputation to the Union Territory, Chandigarh.
However, due to clerical error, the orders of promotion remained unimplemented.''
It has, however, been averred that the petitioner had earned adverse reports for the years 1975 to 1979.
In view thereof, the action of the respondents in ordering his retirement was legal and valid.
5.
The petitioner filed a replication to controvert the stand taken by the respondents.
While admitting that adverse reports for the years 1975 and 1976 had been conveyed to him, the petitioner pointed out that the adverse entry for the period from November 2, 1978 to March 31, 1979 related to a different person viz. ASI Raj Kumar No. 859/Gurgaon.
In the reply filed by the respondents to the replication, the factual position in this behalf has been admitted.
6.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
7.
Mr. Panwar, learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that the action of the respondents in retiring the petitioner cannot be sustained as it is violative of the provisions of rule 918.
According to the learned counsel, the competent authority had to obtain the approval of the State Government before ordering the premature retirement.
In this case, the approval had been obtained even before the issue of the show cause notice.
Secondly, it has been submitted that even on facts, the action of the respondents in retiring the petitioner cannot be sustained, as there was nothing on the petitioner's record which may warrant his compulsory retirement.
Consequently, the counsel has submitted that the action is arbitrary and unfair.
8.
On the other hand, Mr. Gurinder Singh, learned counsel for the respondents has produced the petitioner's personal file and pointed out that he had earned consistently adverse reports.
Even his integrity had been doubted.
Consequently, he does not deserve to be granted any relief in the exercise of jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution.
9.
The two questions that arise for consideration are :-  (i) Is the action in conformity with the provisions of rule 918(2) ?
(ii) Is there material to justify the petitioner's retirement ?
Reg.
(i) :  For a proper consideration of the issue, it is essential to notice the provision contained in the rule :-  ``918(2) The Inspector-General of Police may, with the previous approval of the State Government, compulsorily retire any Police Officer, other than an officer belonging to Indian Police Service or Haryana State Police Service who has completed twenty-five years' qualifying service, without giving any reasons.
An officer who is so compulsorily retired will not be entitled to claim any special compensation for his retirement.
NOTE :- The right to retire compulsorily shall not be exercised except when it is in the public interest to dispense with the further services of an officer on grounds such as inefficiency, dishonesty, corruption or infamous conduct.
Thus the rule is intended for use -  (i) against an officer whose efficiency is impaired but against whom it is not desirable to make formal charges of inefficiency or who has ceased to be fully efficient i.e. when an officer's value is clearly incommensurate with the pay which he draws but not to such a degree as to warrant his retirement on a compassionate allowance.
It is not the intention to use the provisions of this rule as a financial weapon that is to say the provisions should be used in only the case of an officer who is considered unfit for retention on personal as opposed to financial grounds.
(ii) in cases where reputation for corruption, dishonesty or infamous conduct is clearly established even though no specific instance is likely to be proved.
NOTE 2 :- The officer shall be given an adequate opportunity of making any representation that he may desire to make against the proposed action and such representation shall be taken into consideration before his compulsory retirement is ordered.
In all cases of compulsory retirement of enrolled police officers, the Inspector-General of Police shall effect such retirement only with the previous approval of the State Government in accordance with the instructions, if any, issued by the Government on the subject from time to time.
NOTE 3 :- The officer whose duty it would be to fill the post if vacant, shall record his orders on the application to retire, which, if in vernacular, should be accompanied by a translation in English.
If the officer who applies for pension is permitted to retire, the application shall be forwarded with the pension papers.''
10.
A perusal of the above provision shows that the Inspector General of Police can order the compulsory retirement of any Police Officer with the previous approval of the State Government.
The power under the rule has to be exercised in public interest and officers who are found to be inefficient, dishonest, corrupt or whose conduct appears to be wanting can be compulsorily retired.
Unlike various other provisions relating to premature retirement, the rule provides for the grant of adequate opportunity of making a representation against the proposed action to the officer concerned.
The normal procedure that needs to be followed is that a notice has to be given to the employee along with the material on the basis of which he is proposed to be compulsorily retired.
Thereafter, the department has to consider as to whether or not it is in public interest to retire him.
If it comes to the conclusion that the officer has to be retired, the case has to be forwarded to the Government for approval.
If the State Government approves the proposal, then the officer can be retired.
11.
What is the position in the present case ?
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been categorically averred that approval regarding the petitioner's compulsory retirement had been given by the State Government vide letter dated December 2, 1981, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure R-1.
This was even prior to the issue of the notice under rule 918(2) to the petitioner.
The State Government could not have granted approval without knowing as to what was the petitioner's version with regard to the grounds on which he was sought to be compulsorily retired.
It is also the admitted position that after the receipt of the petitioner's reply vide letter dated February 1, 1982, the case was never sent to the State Government.
Thus, approval for the petitioner's retirement had been procured prior to even the issue of a notice to him.
This was clearly violative of the provision in the rule.
The final order of compulsory retirement cannot, consequently, be sustained.
Reg: (ii):  It is true that there are a number of adverse reports on the petitioner's record.
He has been described as `clever and cunning', `lazy and lethargic', `ease loving'; his integrity has been described as `doubtful' and various other adverse comments have been made.
However, he has surprisingly been getting his promotions regularly.
On October 1, 1970, he was allowed to cross the Efficiency Bar as a Head Constable in spite of the fact that adverse remarks had been recorded against him on various occasions from April 1, 1963 to March 31, 1969.
He had even been awarded various punishments.
Thereafter, on May 18, 1974, he was promoted to the rank of Assistant Sub Inspector.
In that rank, the petitioner earned adverse remarks for the period from April 1, 1975 to March 31, 1976 and April 1, 1976 to September 5, 1976 when it was alleged that he lacked courage to expose the misdeeds of his subordinates.
However, in spite of that, he was allowed to cross the Efficiency Bar w.e.f.
September 1, 1978.
Not only that he was even promoted to the rank of Sub Inspector vide order dated September 6, 1979.
In this situation, it is apparent that the adverse remarks lost their real sting.
Admittedly, after September 6, 1979, there was no adverse remark against the petitioner which may reflect adversely upon his efficiency, ability and integrity.
If the petitioner was suitable for promotion on September 6, 1979, it cannot be said that it would be in public interest to compulsorily retire him in June, 1983.
This is all the more so in view of the fact that there was nothing adverse from September 1979 to June, 1983 against the petitioner.
12.
In view of the above, even the second question has to be decided in favour of the petitioner.
It is, accordingly, held that in the circumstances of the case, it was not just and fair to retire the petitioner under rule 918(2).
13.
As a result, the writ petition is allowed.
The order dated June 23, 1983 is quashed.
However, in the circumstances of the case, it was not just and fair to retire the petitioner under rule 918(2).
14.
As a result, the writ petition is allowed.
The order dated June 23, 1983 is quashed.
However, in the circumstances, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.