Jawahar Lal Gupta, J (Oral) - Is the petitioner who was recruited as a Sub Inspector in the Department of Consolidation on July 16, 1953 and was absorbed in the Revenue Department as a Clerk on October 1, 1973 entitled to the benefit of the service rendered by him for a period of about 20 years in the Department of Consolidation ?
This is the short question that arises for consideration in this writ petition.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
On July 16, 1953, the petitioner was recruited as a Sub Inspector in the Department of Consolidation.
On December 11, 1972 the Government asked the Deputy Commissioner, Bhatinda to absorb the petitioner as a clerk.
On September 21, 1973, the Deputy Commissioner issued an order by which it was decided to absorb the five ``retrenched employees'' of the Consolidation Department in the Revenue Department.
In pursuance of this order, the petitioner joined as a clerk in the Revenue Department on October 1, 1973.
About 3 years later a tentative list was issued on September 3, 1976 in which the petitioner was assigned his position on the basis of his joining service on October 1, 1973.
He represented.
On January 1, 1980, the representation was rejected and the tentative seniority list was declared final.
On March 21, 1980, the petitioner submitted representation to the Commissioner.
It was followed by a reminder.
On April 16, 1981, the Commissioner passed an order directing that ``official should be given seniority w.e.f.
16.7.1953 instead of 1.10.1973 in accordance with the instructions circulated vide letter No.75-CHI-77/11137 dated 21st July, 1978.
Seniority list may be revised accordingly under intimation to the undersigned''.
This decision of the Commissioner was not implemented in spite of the fact that the petitioner submitted various representations.
In fact, the petitioner alleges that various persons junior to him were promoted.
Still further, when the cadre of clerks was re-organised into senior and junior clerks, the petitioner's name was placed amongst the junior clerks.
On these facts the petitioner claims that he is entitled to fixation of his seniority on the basis of his original date of appointment as Sub Inspector on July 16, 1953 and that he is entitled to promotion w.e.f.
the date of persons junior to him were promoted.
He prays for the issue of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to determine his seniority ``from 16.7.1953 the date of joining in the Consolidation Department .......''.
He also prays for the issue of a writ of certiorari or a direction ``to quash the promotions made by the respondents by-passing the seniority of the petitioner''.
3.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents.
It has been stated by way of a preliminary objections that the petitioner has deliberately suppressed the letter of appointment in which it had been categorically stipulated that the ``seniority shall count from the date of joining in this office''.
A copy of the letter has been produced as Annexure R-1 with the written statement.
It has been further pointed out that on passing of the order dated April 16, 1981 by the Commissioner, a copy of which has been attached as Annexure with the writ petition, the various persons who were likely to be affected had submitted representations to the Financial Commissioner.
In view of this position a reference was made to the Financial Commissioner, Punjab as well as to the Commissioner, Ferozepur Division, Ferozepur, requesting that the orders of the Commissioner conveyed vide his memo dated April 16, 1981 ``be kept in abeyance till the decision of the representations filed by the affected officials''.
It has also been pointed out that the petitioner was working as Sub Inspector in the Consolidation Department which is different from the post of a clerk.
Consequently, he cannot claim benefit of service rendered by him as a Sub Inspector in the cadre of clerks.
On these premises, the respondents pray that the writ petition be dismissed with costs.
4.
The petitioner has filed the replication reiterating the stand taken by him in the writ petition.
The averment that the petitioner has failed to produce the order dated September 21, 1983, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure R-1, has been controverted.
It has been stated that the petitioner had never received this order.
5.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
Mr. RL Gupta, learned counsel for the petitioner had submitted that the order dated April 16, 1981 having been passed by the Commissioner, the Deputy Commissioner is bound to implement it and determine the petitioner's seniority on the hypothesis that he had joined the Revenue Department on July 16, 1953.
He has also placed reliance on the decision of the Full Bench in Kartar Singh v. State of Punjab, 1989(4) SLR 340 to contend that on absorption the petitioner's seniority had to be determined on the basis of his initial date of appointment.
On the other hand, Mr. DS Dhillon, learned counsel for the respondents has submitted that the petitioner has not impleaded the persons who are likely to be adversely effected by the decision as parties.
In their absence the petitioner cannot claim any relief regarding seniority.
He has further submitted that various persons had submitted representations to the Financial Commissioner against the order passed by the Commissioner.
In view of this fact, the Deputy Commissioner, Bhatinda, respondent No. 2, had requested that the order dated April 16, 1981 be kept in abeyance.
Since the decision passed by the Financial Commissioner is not known, it cannot be said as to whether or not the claim made by the affected persons has been accepted.
However, counsel submits, that a clear stipulation having been made in the order dated September 21, 1973 passed by the Deputy Commissioner that the seniority shall count from the date of joining in the Revenue Department, the petitioner has no right to claim seniority w.e.f.
the date of his appointment as a Sub Inspector.
6.
It is admitted by the counsel for the parties that the petitioner having joined service in the year 1953 must have retired quite some time back.
In this situation, the grant of any relief would have only monetary implications.
Still further, it is not disputed that in case the Financial Commissioner has already rejected the representations that were submitted by the affected persons, the order dated April 16, 1981 passed by the Commissioner regarding the grant of seniority to the petitioner will have to be implemented.
In case the representations have been accepted, the petitioner would have his remedy against that order which may have been passed by the Financial Commissioner.
Learned counsel are further agreed that in case the Financial Commissioner has not decided the representations, the needful should be done expeditiously.
7.
In view of the stand taken by the learned counsel, it appears to be fair to direct that in case the Financial Commissioner has not decided the representations which may have been submitted by the affected persons, he would do so within a period of three months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
The affected parties would have their remedy against the order in accordance with law.
Otherwise, if the necessary orders have already been passed, then further action in accordance with those orders shall be taken by the authorities.
8.
In so far as merits of this case are concerned, it is undoubtedly correct that the petitioner was appointed as Sub Inspector in the Consolidation Department on July 16, 1953.
He had worked there for more than 20 years when he was retrenched and absorbed in the Revenue Department.
The Full Bench in Kartar Singh's case (supra) has already taken the view that the benefit of service rendered by the employee in the Consolidation Department cannot be denied to him on absorption in the Revenue Department.
By a separate order MM Punchhi, J as His Lordship was then, had been pleased to observe that absorption has ``the effect of sucking and imbibing into what is originally existing.
On absorption thus an employee becomes part and parcel of the Department absorbing him and partakes the same colour and character of the existing employees of the Department, classified as promotees, direct appointees or transferees on the loss of his identity.''
9.
The respondents shall decide the petitioner's claims in accordance with the ratio of the decision in Kartar Singh's case (supra).
However, the persons who are likely to be affected having not been impleaded as parties in this case, would be entitled to be heard before any decision which would adversely affect their rights is taken.
10.
The writ petition is disposed of in the above terms.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.