Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The dispute is between the petitioner and respondent No. 3.
Each claims to be senior to the other.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as a Tracer in the Punjab Public Works Department (B & R Branch) on August 3, 1964.
This appointment was made after obtaining names from the employment exchange.
Similarly, respondent No. 3 was appointed as a Tracer in the Public Health Branch of the Public Works Department on December 7, 1963.
While both of them were working as such, the Subordinate Services Selection Board advertised the posts of Tracers for being filled up on regular basis.
The petitioner as well as respondent No. 3 along with various other candidates competed for recruitment to the post.
Both were selected.
It appears that the name of respondent No. 3 was recommended by the Board to the Capital Project Authorities at Chandigarh vide letter dated March 19, 1965.
Three days later the petitioner's name was recommended by the Board to the Public Health Branch of the Public Works Department vide letter dated March 22, 1965.
The petitioner claims that in spite of his name having been recommended to the Public Health Branch, he was allowed to continue working in the Building & Roads Branch.
Respondent No. 3 had joined the Capital Project on April 2, 1965.
On October 15, 1965, the Government ordered the merger of the Capital Project, Chandigarh, with the Public Works Department (Building & Roads Branch), a copy of the order has been produced as Annexure P/4 with the writ petition.
In this order it was inter alia provided that the seniority inter-se grade shall be determined according to the date of appointment in that grade.
Respondent No. 3 was promoted as Assistant Draftsman on November 1, 1968.
Petitioner was similarly promoted as Assistant Draftsman on August 1, 1970.
Thereafter respondent No. 3 was promoted as Divisional Head Draftsman with effect from July 1, 1975.
It is thus clear that the Department was treating the respondent No. 3 as senior to the petitioner.
3.
It appears that the petitioner had submitted a representation to the Government to claim that he was senior to respondent No. 3.
This representation was accepted by the Government vide Order dated July 13, 1976.
It was directed that the petitioner be treated as senior to respondent No. 3.
As a consequence, the petitioner was also promoted as a Divisional Head Draftsman vide order dated October 14, 1976.
Simultaneously, respondent No. 3 was ordered to be reverted from the post of Divisional Head Draftsman to that of Assistant Draftsman.
Respondent No. 3 felt aggrieved.
He had filed civil writ petition No. 7812 of 1976 to challenge the orders dated July 13, 1976 and October 14, 1976.
This writ petition was allowed vide order dated August 1, 1983.
It was held that the seniority could not have been disturbed without affording an opportunity to the person who was likely to be affected by the order.
As a result, the impugned order was set aside.
Respondents were directed to decide the matter afresh.
Thereafter, the Government re-decided the matter vide its order dated November 14, 1986 by which respondent No. 3 was declared senior to the petitioner on the basis of the date of the recommendations of their names by the Punjab Subordinate Services Selection Board.
Hence, this petition.
The petitioner prays that the order dated November 14, 1986, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P/9 with the writ petition, be quashed.
4.
The respondents contest the petitioner's claim inter-alia on the ground that respondent No. 3 had started working as a Tracer on December 7, 1963 whereas the petitioner had joined service on August 3, 1964.
It is further pointed out that the name of respondent No. 3 had been recommended by the Board on March 19, 1965 while that of the petitioner had been so recommended on March 22, 1965.
Relying on the instructions issued by the State Government vide letter dated March 15, 1962, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure R-3/2 with the writ petition, it is stated that the seniority has been rightly determined.
Consequently, it is prayed that the writ petition be dismissed.
5.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
Mr. Jagdish Singh, learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that he is senior to respondent No. 3 as he has been continuously working as a Tracer in the Building & Roads Branch since August 3, 1964.
According to the learned counsel, respondent No. 3 had joined the Building & Roads Branch on April 2, 1965.
As such, he cannot be senior to the petitioner.
Still further, in accordance with the criterion laid down by the Government in the letter dated October 15, 1965, the inter-se seniority has to be determined on the basis of the date of continuous appointment.
Since the petitioner has been continuously working in the Building & Roads Branch from an earlier date he is entitled to be declared senior and the impugned order should be quashed.
On the other hand, counsel for the respondent has submitted that the total service put in by respondent No. 3 as a Tracer is longer than that of the petitioner.
Still further, his name was recommended by the Board earlier than that of the petitioner.
That being so, he has been rightly declared senior by the respondents.
6.
It is in the background of these contentions that the dispute has to be resolved.
7.
It is the admitted position that respondent No. 3 had joined as a Tracer in the Public Health Branch of the Public Works Department on December 7, 1963.
Furthermore, it was also not disputed that the name of respondent No. 3 had been recommended by the Subordinate Services Selection Board to the Capital Project, Chandigarh on March 19, 1965.
As against this the petitioner had started working as a Tracer on August 3, 1964 and his name was recommended by the Board to the Public Health Branch on March 22, 1965.
It is, thus, clear that the total service put in by the petitioner as a Tracer is less than the service put in by the respondent No. 3.
Still further, it is also clear that the name of respondent No. 3 had been recommended by the Board to the Department earlier than that of the petitioner.
Mr. Khehar, learned counsel for the petitioner submits that he was higher in the merit list prepared by the Board than respondent No. 3.
Learned counsel refers to the averments made in paragraph 10 of the writ petition to point out that the petitioner had been placed at Sl.
No. 85 while the respondent No. 3 had been placed at Sl.
No. 150.
Learned counsel for the respondents have controverted this claim.
They have pointed out that these are the roll numbers assigned to the two candidates by the Board.
They further point out that a perusal of the letter dated May 13, 1965, which has been attached as Annexure P/2 with the written statement on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2, shows that the petitioner had been allotted roll No. 85.
Similarly, a perusal of the letter dated R-3/1 attached with the written statement of respondent No. 3, by which the Board had recommended the name of respondent No. 3 to the Superintending Engineer, Construction Circle, Chandigarh, shows that his roll No. was 150.
Even otherwise, the averments made in paragraph 4 of the writ petition have been denied.
In this situation, it cannot be said that the petitioner was higher than respondent No. 3 in the merit list.
Still further, it is undisputed that the name of respondent No. 3 had been recommended by the Board to the prospective employer vide letter dated March 19, 1965.
This was about three days before the name of the petitioner had been recommended.
8.
The method of determination of inter-se seniority had been laid down in the instructions issued by the State Government vide letter dated March 15, 1962.
In this letter, it was inter alia provided that ``a temporary appointment made without the recommendation of the Subordinate Services Selection Board is just a make-shift arrangement and, therefore, may not count for seniority....'' Consequently, in view of these instructions, neither the petitioner not the respondent No. 3 can claim the benefit of the service rendered by them on temporary basis prior to the recommendation of the Board.
Still further, these instructions provide that the seniority shall be determined ``with reference to the date of issue of the Board's letter and not from the receipt of their recommendation as in the later case the letters are liable to be delayed in transit or mis-sent and diarised very late at destination thereby causing undue hardship to the candidates concerned.''
The rationale clearly appears to be that the Board shall recommend names in the order of merit and candidates whose names were recommended earlier shall rank senior to those whose names were recommended later.
The rule laid down in these instructions is just and fair.
In the absence of any statutory rules, this criterion furnishes reasonable method for determination of inter-se seniority.
Consequently, at the time the petitioner and respondent No. 3 joined service in pursuance of the recommendations of the Board, their seniority had to be determined in accordance with the criterion laid down in the instructions issued by the Government vide letter dated March 15, 1962.
Admittedly, the name of the petitioner had been recommended after that of the third respondent.
Their seniority had to be determined in that order.
This is precisely what the Department has done.
It was on this basis that respondent No. 3 was treated as senior and promoted to the post of Assistant Draftsman with effect from November 1, 1968 while the petitioner was similarly promoted on August 1, 1970.
Even to the post of Divisional Head Draftsman, respondent No. 3 had been promoted on July 1, 1973.
This was a clear indication to the fact that the Department was treating the petitioner as junior to respondent No. 3.
9.
The competing claims of employees for seniority have to be normally determined in accordance with the statutory rules.
In this case, neither side has referred to any such rules.
The case of the parties is based on the dates of initial appointment.
Admittedly, if the date of continuous appointment is taken into consideration, the third respondent has been working as Tracer since December 7, 1963, and the petitioner had joined as such on Aug 3, 1964.
If the date of recommendation as provided in the instructions is the criterion, the name of the third respondent was recommended earlier.
By every measure, respondent No. 3 should rank senior to the petitioner.
This is what the Department has done.
The order does not suffer from any error.
It does not cause any unfair loss to the petitioner.
It, consequently, calls for no interference in the exercise of discretionary jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution.
10.
Accordingly, the writ petition is dismissed.
However, in the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.