Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioners in these two writ petitions are working on different posts in different departments under different authorities at different places in the districts of Bhatinda and Kapurthala, respectively.
They pray for the issue of a writ directing the respondents "to release compensatory allowance - with effect from 131977 - ".
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
On March 25, 1977, the Commissioner for Finance, Government of Punjab, issued a letter informing the various Heads of Departments that "it has been decided that compensatory allowance may be granted to Punjab Government employees serving in the villages "mentioned in the list at Annexure `A' in the Sub-mountaeous/Kandi/Bet/Border area of District Hoshiarpur, Roopnagar, Gurdaspur and Patiala at the rate ----."
This order was made effective from March 1, 1977.
The petitioners claim that the criteria for determination of Bet area was laid down by the Government in its letter dated February 25, 1974.
It has been provided that "all the areas lying within Bet of 5 KM on either side from the centre of the bed of river should be treated as Bet areas".
The petitioners allege that the places where they were working satisfied this criteria and as such they were entitled to the grant of compensatory allowance in accordance with the letter dated March 25, 1977.
They submitted a representation through the Secretary of their Federation which was returned vide letter dated September 7, 1977.
A copy of this letter is on record as Annexure P-3.
After answering the query, a representation was submitted on September 14, 1977.
Ultimately, when the Department failed to take any action, they served a notice dated January 16, 1980.
Even this notice did not elicit any response.
Then the present petitions were filed.
The petitioners maintain that all the employees who are working in `Bet' areas have to be granted compensatory allowance.
3.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents.
It has been inter alia averred that "the matter regarding the grant of compensatory allowance to the Punjab Government employees working in the eligible Bet area of the State has since been decided by Government vide order ------- dated 17121980."
A copy of this letter has been produced as Annexure R-1 with the written statement.
It has been further stated that if the petitioners have any grievance, they can approach the Government which shall decide the matter after proper examination.
4.
The petitioners have filed an additional affidavit in which it has been inter alia stated that "the respondents have nowhere stated why the Bet allowance is being granted with effect from 17121980 and not from 131977.
It is also imaginary how the respondents have fixed the date as 17121980.
It is without any reasons and basis."
5.
These are the pleadings.
6.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
7.
The solitary contention raised by Mr. GS Gandhi, learned counsel for the petitioners in both petitions, it that the action of the respondents in granting the benefit of the compensatory allowance with effect from December 17, 1980, and not from March 1, 1977, suffers from the vice of discrimination.
The respondents having not disclosed any reason for their failure to grant the benefit with effect from March, 1, 1977, the action deserves to be struck down.
On the other hand, Mr. DS Dhillon, learned counsel for the respondents, has submitted that the petitioners have not impugned the order dated December 17, 1980, by which the benefit has been granted.
Its validity has not been challenged by amending the petition or otherwise.
No prayer for the quashing or modification of this order has been made.
Accordingly, the petitioners are not entitled to make a grievance that the order suffers from the vice of discrimination.
8.
The entire claim of the petitioners is based on the letter dated March 25, 1977.
By this letter, the Government had conveyed its decision to grant compensatory allowance to the employees serving in the Sub- mountaneous/Kandi/Bet/Border area of the four districts viz. Hoshiarpur, Roopnagar, Gurdaspur and Patiala.
Admittedly, the petitioners are not working in any of these districts.
As to whether any of the villages in the districts of Bhatinda and Kaspourthala can be called as Bet area and as to whether or not it is necessary to grant them any compensatory allowance was the issue which was examined by the Government.
On examination, it was found that some of villages in each of these districts satisfied the test prescribed for determination of `Bet' areas.
Accordingly, 28 villages in Tehsil Mansa of District Bhatinda and 116 villages in Tehsil Sultanpur of District Kapurthala were notified as fulfilling the criteria vide letter dated December 17, 1980.
That having happened, the persons serving in those areas have been granted the requisite relief.
9.
Mr. Gandhi submits that once the villages were found to be in `Bet' area, the employees were entitled to the grant of compensatory allowance with effect from the same date viz. March 1, 1977, when persons working in the districts of Roopnagar, etc, were granted the allowance.
It it so ?
10.
The compensatory allowance is defined in rule 213 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume I, Part I, which reads as under:  "Compensatory allowance means an allowance granted to meet personal expenditure necessitated by the special circumstances in which duty is performed.
It includes travelling allowance, dearness allowance but does not include a sumptuary allowance nor the grant of a free passage by sea to or from any place outside India."
A perusal of the above provisions shows that the compensatory allowance is granted to an employee to enable him to meet "the personal expenditure necessitate by the special circumstances in which duty is performed".
In the present case, nothing has been placed on record by the petitioners to show that they had to incur any personal expenditure for the performance of their duty.
There is not even an allegation that the petitioners have to travel any distance or that there are no roads or means of transport.
Not even a mention of any personal expenditure which may have been incurred by any of the petitioners has been made.
In this situation, it is not understood as to how the claim for compensatory allowance is really admissible.
Be that as it may, the State Government on examination of the matter had chosen to grant the benefit to the petitioners vide its order dated December 17, 1980.
A copy of this order had been produced as an annexure with the written statement.
Despite the availability of the order, its validity has not been challenged.
Mr. Gandhi points out that in the additional affidavit, it has been specifically mentioned that the Government has not disclosed any reason for granting the benefit with effect from December 17, 1980 and not from March 1, 1977.
This is not enough.
It was incumbent of the petitioners to show that they were at par with others who had been granted benefit with effect from March 1, 1977, and that the conditions of service in the districts of Bhatinda and Kapurthala were as onerous as those in the districts of Ropar, Patiala, Hoshiarpur and Gurdaspur in the year 1977.
There is not even an averment to that effect.
Even otherwise, the presumption is in favour of constitutionality.
The burden of proving discrimination is on the person who alleges it, charge of discrimination cannot be sustained unless adequate material is placed on record.
In the present case, the petitioners have placed no material whatsoever on the record to show that they have been treated in a discriminatory manner.
Accordingly, their plea cannot be sustained.
11.
No other point has been raised.
12.
In view of the above, no ground for interference is made out.
Accordingly, the writ petitions are dismissed.
However, in the circumstances of these cases, there will be no order as to costs.