RS Mongia, J - Respondent-Haryana Financial Corporation (hereinafter referred to as `the Corporation') issued an advertisement in `Hindustan Times' and `Careers' in July, 1995, inviting applications from MBAs.
and Chartered Accountants for appointment to the posts of Managers in the Corporation.
Thereafter second advertisement was issued by the Corporation in The Tribune dated November 27, 1995.
Relevant portion of the advertisement may be reproduced here :  ``BE A PART OF EXCITEMENT AT HFC  MANAGERS FOR LEADING FINANCIAL INSTITUTION.
Haryana Financial Corporation (HFC) a Premier State Financial Institution is growing at an incredible pace.
The changing economic scenario has opened tremendous opportunities for the financial services sector, HFC's activities involve Project Finance, Leasing, Trade Finance, Forex Services and a range of Merchant Banking Activities.
It is a category-I Merchant Banker also member of OTCEI.
We invite young (preferably below 30 years) MBA and Chartered Accountants preferably with two years working experience in Financial Institutions/Banks/Merchant Banking to join the excitement of dynamic growing organisation.
The remuneration package is about Rs. 6000/- pm in the pay scale of Rs. 2000-60-2300-75-2900-EB-100-3500.
Pay Commission report is awaited.''
Petitioners, four of whom are MBAs and one Chartered Accountant, applied in response to the aforesaid advertisement.
They were already working in different organisations for quite some period and were getting more than Rs. 5500/- per month plus other perks.
They were informed by the Corporation to appear for a written test on January 4, 1996, and if they qualified the same, then C.As.
were to appear for interview on January 5, 1996 and MBAs.
on January 6, 1996.
On January 4, 1996, about 100 candidates including the petitioner appeared for the written test which was of the duration of three hours.
The result of the same was declared the same evening.
13 candidates including the petitioners were declared pass in the written test.
Petitioner No. 5 who is Chartered Accountant appeared for the interview on January 5, 1996, and rest of the petitioners (MBAs.)
appeared on January 6, 1996.
Eleven candidates were declared selected.
Petitioner Nos. 1, 2, 3 and 5 were amongst the first eleven persons and petitioner No. 4 was the first person on the waiting list.
Petitioners No. 1, 2, 3 and 5 were issued similar appointment letters on January 10, 1996, copy of letter issued to petitioner No. 5 has been attached as Annexure P-5.
Relevant terms of the appointment letter may be reproduced below :  ``Subject: Appointment for the post of Manager.
With reference to your interview on 511996, we hereby appoint you for the post of Manager in the service of the Corporation on the following terms and conditions : (i) Basic pay Rs. 2000/- in the scale of Rs. 2000-60-2300-75-2900-EB-100-3500.
In addition you will be paid such Allowances i.e.
D.A., CCA, Medical Allowance, Conveyance allowance, Interim Relief, H.R.A./Leased Accommodation, Pensionary benefits, gratuity, LTC and Good performance Reward etc. as permissible from time to time as per rules of the Corporation.
(ii) You will be on probation for one year from the date of appointment which period may be extended further upto four years at the discretion of the Corporation.''
(iii) ... ... ... ... (iv) ... ... ... ...  (v) You will be required to abide by Staff Regulations and amendments made therein.
(vi) You will have to furnish a Bond to serve the Corporation for at least two years from the date of joining on non-judicial stamp papers worth Rs. 3/- duly attested by the Magistrate Class I and per specimen enclosed.''
(vii) to ix) ... ... ... ...
If the above terms of appointment are acceptable, you may send your acceptance and join at the Head Office of the Corporation i.e. Nos. 17, 18 and 19 Sector 17-A, Near Jagat Cinema, Chandigarh, before 2911996.
You will be well acquinted with all Divisions at Head Office regarding their work and activities for a period of one week, which may be extended, but later on your place of posting will be decided.''
Out of the eleven persons selected by the Corporation for appointment to the post of Manager, two persons did not join and, therefore, petitioner No. 4, who was first candidate on the waiting list, was sent appointment letter by the Corporation on February 12, 1996, and was asked to join before March 1, 1996.
The petitioners joined the Corporation within the period stipulated by the appointment letter or within the extended period for joining as allowed by the Corporation.
The dates of joining of the petitioners are as follows :  No.  Name Date of joining 1.
Mrs. Bipasha Thukral 2911996 2.
J.P.S.
Talwar 2911996 3.
Paresh Aggarwal 2511996 4.
Sanjeev Tinjan 23.2.1996 5.
Mrs. Richa Garg 2731996.''
As noticed in the appointment letter, the service conditions of the petitioners were to be governed by the statutory regulations called the Haryana Financial Corporation Staff Regulations, 1967.
As per Regulation 15, an officer directly recruited to the Corporation's service is to be on probation for a period which would not be less than one year and more than three years as may be fixed at the time of appointment.
Regulation 16 deals with the discharge of an employee during the period of probation which is in the following terms :  ``16.
(1) During the first month of his probationary period, an employee shall be liable to discharge at one day's notice or by payment of one day's pay and thereafter at one month's notice or by payment of pay for one month in lieu thereof.
(2) The power to discharge an officer during probation will be exercised by the Managing Director subject to the prior approval of the Board.''
Regulation 22 deals with the seniority.
The relevant portion thereof is reproduced as under :  ``22.
(1) An employee confirmed in the Corporation's service shall rank for seniority in his grade according to his date of confirmation in the grade, and an employee on probation according to the length of his probationary service; provided that a person who in view of his qualifications and previous experience is granted initial increments in a grade at the time of his appointment, may at the discretion of the Managing Director, be granted seniority for a period upto one year for every two increments granted to him in the grade to which he is appointed.''
2.
The petitioners executed bonds for serving the Corporation for a period of two years as was required by the terms of the appointment letter.
On appointment, the petitioners were posted as under :  Mrs. Bipasha Thukral: Manager, Small Loans and Trade Finance, posted at Head Office.
J.P.S.
Talwar Manager Leasing, posted at Head Office.
Paresh Aggarwal Manager, Branch Office Sanjeev Tinjan Manager Branch Office, Gurgaon.
Richa Garg Manager, Branch Office, Hisar.''
Vide identifical (Identical) order dated August 5, 1996, the services of the petitioners were terminated.
The termination orders have been attached collectively as Annexure P-1.
The order of termination reads as under :  ``Smt. Bipasha Thukral, Manager, is informed that her services are hereby dispensed with immediate effect in terms of Staff Regulation No. 16.
Cheque No. QWR 377774 dated 5.8.96 for Rs. 2000/- (Rupees two thousand only) drawn on Punjab National Bank, Chandigarh, in her favour being one month's pay in lieu of notice period is enclosed..'' The petitioners have challenged their termination by way of the present writ petition.
3.
It is the case of the petitioners that the work and conduct of all the petitioners have been satisfactory and there was nothing wrong with their working in the organisation.
As an illustration a certificate issued by the Corporation to petitioner Richa Garg has been attached to show that her work and conduct was satisfactory.
In the reply filed by the Corporation, the stand taken is that five posts of the Manager was abolished and, therefore, the petitioners being junior most probationers, their services were dispensed with under Regulation 16 of the Staff Regulations.
In the preliminary objections, it has been averred by the respondent-Corporation as under :  ``(1) That as a result of liberalisation of the economic scenario in the country, respondent No. 1 has diversified its activities and entered into many new areas and introduced several new schemes such as equipment leasing, public issue management, under-writing, equity participation and several other Merchant Banking and Investment Banking activities.
To provide all the new facilities of Merchant Banking and Investment Banking, respondent No. 1, in 1995, also became a member of OTCEI (Over the Counter Exchange of India) to provide integrated solutions to more industrial units in the State of Haryana.
Respondent No. 1 expected its workload to increase manifold due to the offering of new service by it.
As such, a Board of Directors Meeting was held on 951995 whereby it was resolved that six posts of Managers be created to handle the workload relating to OTCEI operations.
The qualification prescribed was MBA/C.A.
A copy of the said Board Resolution No. 224 of 951995 is attached herewith as Annexure R-1/1.
Thereafter, respondent No. 1 approached the Haryana Bureau of Public Enterprises to approve the creation of the said six posts of Managers.
A copy of the Agenda for the Standing Committee Meeting of the Haryana Bureau of Public Enterprises, which was sent by respondent No. 1, is attached herewith as Annexure R-1/2.
The Haryana Bureau of Public Enterprises approved the creation of the said six posts of the Managers on 21.8.1995.''
(ii) ... ... ...
It may be mentioned here that although 11 persons, including the petitioners, were selected as Manager by respondent No. 1, only 6 of the selected persons were actually recruited for handling OTCEI and related operations.
The 6 so selected for the OTCEI and related operations were for the 6 new posts created in 1995 as has been detailed above.
(iii) That thereafter the petitioners and other selected persons were all assigned duties as Managers by respondent No. 1 in its Head Office as well as its branch offices in the State of Haryana.
It may be mentioned here that though the petitioners had been recruited for handling OTCEI and related operations, they in fact were not assigned the related duties since respondent No. 1 did not have sufficient work in the field of Merchant Banking and Investment Banking.
Though the petitioners continued to work as Managers, they could not be assigned any work in OTCEI and related operations and they continued to do the work of non-OTCEI operations which in normal course was to be handled by the other Managers of respondent No. 1.
(iv) That since the petitioners could not be assigned any work for which they were recruited by respondent No. 1 i.e. OTCEI and related operations, their services clearly became surplus for respondent No. 1.
On 281996 the Assistant General Manager (Merchant Banking) of respondent No. 1 reported that no activities relating to OTCEI operations had been carried out.
As such, it was decided by respondent No. 1 that since the services of the petitioners selected for OTCEI operations could not be utilised for the specific purpose for which they were recruited, their services may be dispensed with.
It may be mentioned here that all the 6 Managers who were recruited for OTCEI operations were the junior most officers.
On 281996 the Board of Directors of respondent No. 1 passed a resolution recording the dispensing with the services of the 6 Managers who had been recruited for OTCEI operations.
... ... ...'' 4.
During the course of arguments, the Corporations was asked if the petitioners could be adjusted against some other posts.
The petitioners filed an affidavit on October 16, 1996, in which it was indicated that certain posts of Managers had already fallen vacant or were likely to fall vacant very soon, the vacancies which had arisen or were likely to arise are as under:  ``1.
Mr. Ramesh Augra - retired as Manager (Finance Division) on 31.7.96.
2.
Mr. Aashish Goyal, Manager (Merchant Banking) H.F.C.
resigned on 2781996.
3.
Mr. Rajesh Handa, Manager (Merchant Banking) H.F.C.
resigned on 991996.
Vacancies about to arise : 1.
Mr. Parmeshwari Dass, Manager, H.F.C.
to retire on 31101996.
2.
Mr. Kamal, Senior Manager (General Section) to retire on 30111996.
In the affidavit filed on behalf of the Corporation on November 8, 1996, it was admitted that the vacancies as indicated above had arisen or were likely to arise.
(Though it was mentioned that resignation of Rajesh Handa had not been accepted, but on the date the case was argued, it was admitted that resignation stood accepted.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioners argued that even if the posts were abolished, the petitioners were not the junior most as according to the merit list prepared at the time of selection, the petitioners ranked higher than many others.
In any case, it was submitted that the petitioners having resigned from their earlier jobs and having been given to understand that the activities of the H.F.C.
were fast growing, as is clear from the advertisement to which reference has already been made above, the petitioners had given up their jobs with different institutions/organisations where also they were getting quite handsome salary, the petitioners could be adjusted against the other posts which have now fallen vacant.
It will be too harsh on the petitioners if they are left in such a situation from where they cannot go back to the Institutions from where they have resigned.
They had filled in bonds to work with the Corporation for a minimum period of two years.
Moreover, according to the learned counsel, the petitioners were not put on OTCEI activities and the posts abolished belong to the OTCEI and, therefore, the petitioners can easily be adjusted on the posts now which have fallen vacant.
6.
Learned counsel for the respondent on the basis of affidavit dated December 4, 1996, filed on behalf of the respondent argued that when the selection was made to the posts of Manager, two separate lists were prepared in the order of merit.
The first list was of Chartered Accountants and the second lists was MBAs.
There was no inter se merit list of all the candidates who had been selected.
On the abolition of the posts the services of junior most Managers were dispensed with.
The seniority of the Probationer is determined under Regulation 22 quoted above and not on the basis of merit.
Learned counsel argued that there is no challenge to the vires of this Regulation.
It may be observed that learned counsel for the petitioners had argued that if the candidate joins within the specified period as provided by the appointment letter or the extended period, the seniority should be determined on the basis of merit and not on the length of service as a probationer.
7.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, we are of the view that it will be in the interest of justice, equity and fair play if the petitioners are allowed to continue as Managers on the posts which have become vacant as has already been observed above.
It would be seen from the preliminary objection (iii) quoted above that though the petitioners had been recruited for handling OTCEI and related operations, they in fact were not assigned the related duties.
It has already been noticed in the earlier paragraphs of the judgment that the petitioners were posted at different places not related with OTCEI.
If from day one the petitioners were not posted for handling OTCEI operations for which they were ostensibly recruited and they were doing other jobs, it is all the more reason that they be adjusted against the posts which have fallen vacant now.
It may be observed here that though the services of the petitioners were terminated on August 5, 1996, yet the abolition of the posts was approved by the Board of Directors on November 1, 1996.
By that time, five posts of Managers had become vacant.
The five posts of Managers which have become vacant have not been abolished.
Learned counsel for the petitioners brought on record a letter from the Branch Manager to the Executive Director of the Haryana Financial Corporation dated August 8, 1996, copy Annexure P-12, to show that in fact there is need of Managers.
In the said letter, it had been mentioned that services of two Managers had been dispensed with by the Corporation.
One of the Assistant Managers had met with an accident.
They were facing acute problem to manage the work of the branch.
They have only five people to look after the loan accounts which are more than 700 at present.
Request was made to send three experienced staff members.
Learned counsel for the petitioners also referred to a press release issued by the Public Relations, Haryana, on August 28, 1996, which reads as under:  ``PUBLIC RELATIONS HARYANA  Chandigarh August 28 :- The Haryana Financial Corporation has fixed target for sanctioning term loans for small scale and medium industries leasing and Merchant Banking amounting to Rs. 252 crore during 1996-97.
This was disclosed by Seth Shri Krishan Dass, Finance Minister, Haryana today.
He said that the Corporation plans to disburse term loans, leasing and Merchant Banking upto Rs. 212 crore against Rs. 184 crore last year.
Recoveries of terms loans, working capital leasing and Merchant Banking are likely to touch Rs. 200 crore against Rs. 135 crore last year, he added.
He said that the Corporation had resources worth Rs. 212 crore which included share capital, refinance from IDBI, SIDBI, SLR Bonds, Term loans from banks and bonds, short term loans new debt instruments and internal plough back.''
Learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that from the above, it is evident that the stand of the respondent that leasing activities are at a stand-still or that no fresh business is being transacted by the Haryana Financial Corporation is wholly baseless.
8.
Under the aforesaid circumstances, we are of the view that it will be wholly unjustified and inequitous to terminate the services of the petitioners as posts of Managers are vacant which have not been abolished and there was nothing wrong with the petitioner's work and conduct and they having resigned from their previous jobs, it will be too harsh to leave them in lurch.
9.
Consequently, we allow this writ petition, quash the orders of termination of the petitioners all dated August 5, 1996, copies Annexure P-1, and direct the respondent to take them back forthwith as Managers against the posts which have fallen vacant.
However, under the circumstances of the case, the petitioners would not be entitled to any salary/wages from the date of the termination of their service till date, from which date they will be deemed to be bank in services as Managers.
We make no order as to costs.