DK Trivedi, J :- By means of this writ petition the petitioner prays for mandamus commanding the opposite parties to appoint the petitioner in accordance with the recommendation of the selection committee on one of the two vacant posts of the Subject Matter Specialist (Agriculture Engineering) in the Narendra Deo University of Agriculture and Technology, Kumarganj, Faizabad.
2.
It is not disputed that a selection took place against the three vacant posts and thereafter a panel of five persons was selected by the Selection Committee.
The petitioner was placed at serial No. 5.
The same was not approved by the Management Board but the decision of the Management Board was challenged in several writ petitions in which following orders have been passed:  ``In view of the discussion held above, we allow the writ petitions and quash the decision of the Board of Management as contained in Annexure No. 4 to the writ petition by which the selection held earlier had been upset and further a decision was taken to hold fresh selection.
The Board of Management shall consider the recommendations of the Selection Committee afresh on merits and take a decision in accordance with law expeditiously.
There would however be no order as to costs.''
3.
After the decision of the said writ petitions, the Board again prepared a selection list and the same is Annexure-2.
The list is dated 13th March, 1992.
In this list also the petitioner was placed at serial No. 5 against the three vacant posts.
It is not disputed that appointment letters have been issued to three of the persons placed at serial Nos. 1 to 3 and out of them only one person, viz, Sri Raj Mani joined the post.
It is also not disputed that persons shown at serial No. 2 Sri Dev Vrat Singh and at serial No. 3 Sri Ramendra Prabhakar Singh did not joint the post and finally the Vice- Chancellor vide orders dated 411993 and 511993 cancelled the appointment letters issued to persons placed at serial Nos. 2 and 3.
Since the appointments have been cancelled against the two posts, it is the duty of the authority concerned to issue appointment letters to other two persons, viz, Akhil Kumar Jain and Vinod Kumar Singh on the ground that they have been placed at serial Nos. 4 and 5.
The Vice-Chancellor did not issue the said letters and finally the present writ petition was filed by the petitioner claiming that he is entitled to be appointed against one of the two vacant posts on the basis of selection.
It appears that on 30th January, 1993 Government had issued a notification directing the authorities not to appoint any person without the prior approval of the Government.
It is alleged by the opposite parties that due to this order the opposite parties Nos. 4 and 5 were not appointed and finally the term of the list expired on 1231993.
It is also brought to our notice that the Government specifically cancelled the effect of the earlier notification dated 30.1.1993 on 17.4.1993 and also issued a fresh notification on the same date contained in Annexure-1 directing the authorities to appoint the persons who have been selected against advertisement No. 2-88.
It may be pointed out here that the petitioner has been selected against the advertisement No. 2/1988.
There is no explanation on behalf of the other side as to why after this notification the appointment letters have not been issued to the persons placed at serial Nos. 4 and 5 of the select list.
The facts mentioned above are not disputed.
The objection raised by the opposite parties is that due to Government notification dated 30.1.1993 the opposite parties 4 and 5 were not appointed, and during the continuance of the said notification the term of the list expired.
We are unable to accept this contention of the opposite parties.
The petitioner is admittedly selected and placed at serial No. 5 of the select list.
Since the persons placed at serial Nos. 2 and 3 failed to join the post, therefore, it was the duty of the Vice-Chancellor to issue the letter of appointment to other two selected candidates.
The Vice-Chancellor cannot refuse to issue an appointment letter to a person who was duly selected and approved by the Board.
As pointed out above, the petitioners were duly selected and thereafter duly approved by the Board after the decision of several writ petitions.
Therefore they are entitled to be appointed on the said post.
The notification dated 30.1.1993 issued by the Government shows that the Government has only directed the authorities not to appoint any person without the prior approval of the Government.
This means that the persons can be appointed with the prior approval of the Government.
It appears that the matter was again brought to the notice of the Government and the State clarified this matter by issuing notification dated 1241993 directing the authorities to appoint the persons who were selected in compliance of the advertisement No. 2/1988.
After this specific notification and direction it was the duty of the Vice-Chancellor to comply and to appoint the petitioner against one of the two vacant posts.
The counsel for the opposite parties further stated that nobody has a right to be appointed but, in our opinion, the position is different if the person is duly selected by the Selection Committee and approved by the Board.
If we accept the contention of the opposite parties, then it would mean that even after selection, the persons cannot be appointed and authorities can deny them appointment arbitrarily.
In the instant case selection has already taken place and in accordance with the select list, appointment orders had already been issued to some of the selected candidates.
It is not disputed that out of the said three persons, two of the persons did not join the post.
Therefore, petitioner is entitled to be appointed in accordance with the select list.
In these circumstances, in our opinion, petitioner has a right to claim an appointment on the basis of the select list.
It is also not disputed that the vacancies are still continuing and therefore, in these circumstances, the writ petition is allowed.
A writ of mandamus is issued directing the opposite parties to issue an appointment letter to the petitioner on the post of Subject Matter Specialist (Agriculture Engineering) at the Narendra Deo University of Agriculture and Technology, Kumarganj, Faizabad.
It is expected that the order will be complied with within two weeks from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
4.
Let a copy of this order be issued to the petitioner's counsel within three weeks on payment of usual charges.
Petition allowed.