Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioners who are working as Technical Assistants in the Department of Agriculture complain of discrimination on the ground that they have been arbitrarily denied the benefit of grant of Rs. 75/- per month as special pay which has been sanctioned for the persons working as Circle Agriculture Officer.
The petitioners consequently pray for the issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to treat them at par with the Circle Agriculture Officers and to give them the special pay.
2.
The respondents contest the petitioners' claim primarily on the ground that the benefit of special pay has been given to the Circle Agriculture Officers because ``their duties are of supervisory and arduous nature''.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents 3 and 4, it has been inter alia pointed out that ``the Circle Agriculture Officers are required to perform their duties in the field as distinguished from the Technical Assistants whose job is to do ministerial work within the premises of offices whether at the headquarter or in divisional or local offices.''
On this basis, the respondents maintain that the action does not suffer from the vice of discrimination.
It has been consequently prayed that the writ petition be dismissed.
3.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
Mr. Malik, learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that two categories of posts were initially in the scale of Rs. 300-25-600.
With effect from April 1, 1979, pay scales were revised from Rs. 320-750 to 700-1250.
No special pay was granted to anyone.
Subsequently, Government issued order dated December 21, 1980 by which special pay of Rs. 75/- was granted to Circle Agriculture Officers.
The claim of the Technical Assistants was duly recommended by different offices.
However, the Government has rejected the recommendation arbitrarily.
According to the learned counsel for the petitioners, action is violative of the Constitution of India.
On the other hand, Mr. Gurinder Singh, learned counsel for the respondents has submitted that no employee has any right to claim special pay if the Government on consideration of the matter has decided to give it only to the Circle Agriculture Officers.
The action does not suffer from the vice of discrimination.
Consequently, no interference is called for.
Rule 2.52 of the Punjab Civil Services, Volume I, Chapter II defines `special pay' to mean inter alia '' an addition, of the nature of pay, to the emoluments of a post or of a Government employee, granted in consideration of -  (a) the specially arduous nature of the duties; or (b) a specific addition to the work or responsibility''.
As the plain language of the rule suggests that special pay is granted to compensate an employee for the specially arduous nature of duty performed by him or for specific addition to his work or responsibility.
It is the admitted position that the Circle Agriculture Officer and the Technical Assistant are working in the same scale of pay.
However, it has been categorically pointed out on behalf of the respondents that the nature of duties being performed by the Circle Agriculture Officers are `supervisory'.
They have to work in the fields.
As against this, the technical assistants perform ministerial functions within their offices.
If on consideration of these matters, the State Government has come to the conclusion that the duties being performed by the Circle Agriculture Officers are comparatively more difficult than those of the Technical Assistants and thus decided to grant special pay of Rs. 75/- per month to the Circle Agriculture Officers only, it cannot be said that action is either unfair or arbitrary.
It does not suffer from the vice of discrimination.
4.
Mr. RK Malik submits that the case of the petitioners has been duly recommended by different officers at different intervals of times.
It is true that vide letter dated October 18, 1983, the Director of Agriculture had recommended the petitioners' case to the Government of Haryana.
However, the matter was considered by the Government.
The reply was sent to the Director on August 21, 1984.
It was observed that the proposal sent by him could not be accepted.
Resultantly, the recommendation was rejected.
In this situation, it cannot be said that the respondents have acted arbitrarily or unfairly.
Still further, even the departmental file produced by Mr. Gurinder Singh relating to this case has been perused.
In the comments submitted by the Finance Department, it has been inter alia observed as under :-  ``Though the pay scales of the Circle Agriculture Officers and Technical Assistants of the Agriculture Department were the same prior to the revision of pay scale and they have been granted parity in the pay scales even after revision of pay scales with effect from April 1, 1979, yet the duties of Technical Assistants cannot be compared with those of the Circle Agriculture Officers.
While the Circle Agriculture Officers are directly responsible to give a programme for Agriculture Extension and their duties are supervisory and of arduous nature, the Technical Assistants are required to collect and compile data etc.
Hence the Finance Department do not see any justification for the grant of parity to the Technical Assistants with the Circle Agriculture Officers for the purpose of special pay.''
This is precisely the position as pleaded by the respondents in the written statement.
The petitioners have not controverted it by filing a replication.
In view of the above it cannot be said that the action of the respondents in declining the petitioners' prayer for the grant of special pay is either arbitrary or unfair.
Resultantly, no ground for interference is made out.
Accordingly, writ petition is dismissed.
However, in the circumstances there will be no order as to costs.