B Rai, J - Through this writ petition, Devi Rani petitioner prays that respondents be directed to give employment to her son on compassionate grounds in accordance with the policy decision of the State Government and they be prohibited from making any appointment to Class III posts in any Department of the State of Punjab till cases of all the applicants entitled for employment on compassionate grounds are disposed of by them, and grant of any other appropriate relief in the facts and circumstances of the case.
2.
Facts, briefly, are that Dev Raj Gupta husband of the petitioner was working as an Assistant in Punjab Roadways, Amritsar, about twenty years before his death.
He left behind his widow, three minor sons and one minor daughter.
The elder son of the petitioner was aged about 17 years and seven months.
The Government took a policy decision, Annexure P-1, providing that a member of the family of the deceased Government employee who dies in harness is entitled to recruitment in State service on priority basis and that if the post is not available in the same Department where his parent was serving at the time of death, Head of the Department shall circulate the particulars of such a person to other Departments to accommodate him.
It is further stated that the policy for providing compassionate employment to the dependent members of the families of deceased Government employees has been made more liberal by the State Government vide policy decision, dated November 11, 1993, Annexure P-2.
It has been reiterated therein that where it is not possible to accommodate the prospective beneficiary under the prority scheme in the Department/office in which deceased Government employee was serving at the time of death, the particulars of such person are to be circulated to all the Heads of Departments in the State, so that the prospective beneficiary may get appointment under the priority scheme against available vacant post of direct recruitment quota according to his entitlement and professional/education qualifications.
The petitioner made an application, dated May 6, 1987 in the form of an affidavit, Annexure P-3, for providing employment in Class III service to Rajesh Kumar Gupta, elder son of the deceased.
That claim remained pending and that his name was at Serial Number 46 in the priority list prepared by the Department.
The assertion of the petitioner is that she made a number of representations for providing employment to her son to mitigate the hardship of the family.
In December, 1991, she was informed that her eldest son might not be entitled to employment in Class III service as he had passed Matriculation Examination with Third Division.
Then, the petitioner made an application for employment to her second son, Rakesh Gupta along with his certificates and affidavits of all other members of the family that they had no objection if the employment was granted to Rakesh Gupta.
This application was forwarded by respondent No. 4 to respondent No. 3.
The name of Rakesh Kumar was substituted for employment on compassionate grounds in place of Rajesh Kumar.
According to the petitioner, a period of more than eight years has expired but a member of her family is yet to be provided employment on compassionate grounds.
It is also her case that a number of persons who applied subsequent to the application made by the petitioner have been granted employment on ad hoc and temporary basis and their services have been regularised but the claim of the petitioner for providing employment to her son on compassionate ground is not being considered, though the same is pending for the last many years.
3.
On the other hand the case of the respondents is that the younger son of the petitioner applied for job vide his application, dated January 17, 1992 and his name was entered at Serial Number 161 of the register maintained by the Department for providing job to the legal heirs of the deceased Government employees.
As per policy/instructions, the person is assigned seniority from the date of application.
The Department has decided the cases of 101 applicants and in that way the name of younger son of the petitioner has shifted to Serial Number 60.
The respondents have clarified that the name of younger son of the petitioner was inadvertently entered at Serial Number 45 which had been rectified vide letter No. SE3(2)/14982-15082, dated May 17, 1996, Annexure R-II, the transaliction of which is Annexure T-II.
It was decided to offer him a Class IV job and he was asked to give his consent vide letter dated July 16, 1992 of the General Manager, Punjab Roadways, Amritsar-1.
As no consent for Class IV job was received from the younger son of the petitioner, no action for considering his name for Class IV job could be taken by the Department.
It is further pleaded that the respondents have already circulated the name of the son of the petitioner to all the Head of the Departments for giving him job on priority basis vide letter, dated March 20, 1996.
Annexure R-IV, translation of which is Annexure T-III, and as per information received from the Transport Commissioner, Punjab, the younger son of the petitioner was called for Punjabi Type Test which is mandatory for entry into Government service vide Punjab Government circular letter No. 4/17/79-IPP/9977, dated August 24, 1983 addressed to all the Heads of Department, but he could not clear the Punjabi Type Test held on January 6, 1996.
Therefore, he was not offered appointment by the Transport Commissioner, Punjab.
4.
After having heard learned counsel for the parties and considering the rival contentions, we are of the view that the writ petition deserves to be partly allowed.
Keeping in view the fact that the earlier instructions were issued long ago and many changes had taken place since then, the Government considered the matter in respect of the absorption in State severely of various categories of persons placed in difficult/unfortunate circumstances, such as, surplus employees, disabled ex-servicemen, members of the families of deceased Government employees, Defence services personnel killed or severely disabled in service, physically handicapped persons, members of a family killed as a result of a terrorist action in the State and members of a family who lost their bread winner in riots in Delhi and other places in India between October 31 to November 7, 1984 as it became necessary to outline the up-to-date position in connection therewith.
Being considerate to the need for providing relief to such persons and also for giving higher priority in respect of the families where the bread winner had been killed as result of terrorist action or due to riots in Delhi and other places in India and with a view to expediting the process of rehabilitation of such families, Government considered the matter in the light of broad policy followed by the Government of India in this regard and had decided that the priority list be adopted for recruitment to the State Services of Class III and IV.
That policy decision contained in Annexure P-1 was circulated by the Department of Personnel and Administrative Reforms to all the Heads of Departments.
After categorising different classes of claimants, it was stipulated that while making appointments to State Services out of the priority list, the basic qualifications and conditions of experience prescribed for respective posts shall have to be fulfilled, the age limit in the case of widows seeking employment under items 1 or 4 of the priority list may be relaxed up to 45 years to cover real cases of hardship; in case of category 2 relaxation of age shall invariably be admissible up to the extent the employee had rendered continuous Government service on regular basis; in case of category No. 4, concerning Government employee who is retired from service on medical grounds the concession should not be extended to cases where the Government servant had retired on or after attaining the age of 55 years; and that the suitability of the persons may be adjudged by the appointing authority and it shall not be necessary to get the approval of the Subordinate Services Selection Board or the Departmental Selection Committee, as the case may be, nor would the registration at the Employment Exchange be required for making appointments on the basis of the above priority list against Class III and Class IV service posts.
It was also made clear that where it was not possible to accommodate a prospective beneficiary under priority No. 4 in the Department/Office in which his/her parent was serving at the time of death, the particulars of such a person are to be circulated to all the Heads of Departments/Offices in the State and the matter pursued to its logical conclusion by the authority concerned where he/she was serving before the death.
5.
It was argued by the learned counsel for the respondents that elder son of the petitioner applied for a job on compassionate grounds on May 6, 1987 and, as such, as per policy/instructions of the Government, seniority is assigned from the date of application.
Hence, the name of the elder son of the petitioner was entered at Serial Number 45.
On the application of the petitioner, name of her elder son was deleted and in his place name of the younger son of the petitioner was substituted.
The younger son made an application for a job on January 17, 1992.
According to the learned counsel, seniority No. 45 was assigned to the younger son inadvertently but later on that mistake was rectified vide letter, dated May 17, 1996 and his name was entered at Serial Number 161.
As many as 101 applicants have already been provided jobs, and, as such, now his name stood at Serial No. 60.
It was further argued that Class IV job was offered to the younger son of the petitioner and for that his consent was sought, but no consent to that effect was given by him.
As such, he was not considered for Class IV job.
It was also argued that out of 120,000 employees of the Department, about 8,000 performed operational duty and it was not possible for the Department to create equal number of supernumerary posts to adjust the legal heirs of all the deceased Government employees.
Not only this, as per norms fixed by the Planning Commission, Government of India, the fleet strength of Punjab Roadways stood frozen at the level of 1982-83 and, as such, the additional posts could not be created under normal circumstances.
According to the learned counsel, the name of the son of the petitioner had already been circularted to other Departments with a request to appoint him on Class III post on priority basis.
6.
The learned counsel for the petitioner could not bring to our notice any policy decision/instructions that defendant of the deceased Government employee can also be appointed against Class I and Class II posts on compassionate grounds.
7.
After having considered the rival pleadings and arguments advanced before us, we are of the view that it will be appropriate to direct the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner's son for employment as per his position in the priority list.
Accordingly we partly allow the writ petition with a direction to the respondents to consider the petitioner's son for compassionate appointment on a suitable post as per his placement in the priority list maintained for employment of the dependents of deceased employees.
If no suitable post is available then his case shall be considered for employment in other departments.
Appropriate order on the basis of such consideration shall be issued within four months of the submission of the certified copy of this order.