Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - Civil Writ Petition Nos. 2128 and 3230 of 1982 are in the nature of cross petitions.
Learned counsel for the parties have referred to the facts as averred in CWP No. 2128 of 1982.
These may be briefly noticed.
2.
On November 25, 1960, the Superintending Engineer, Public Health Circle (North) offered a temporary post of Sectional Officer in the scale of Rs. 100-300 plus allowances to the petitioner.
It was inter alia stipulated that he ``will be on training for first three months during which period'' he ``will be paid only Rs. 45/- PM plus usual allowances admissible under the rules.''
The petitioner joined the training.
On successful completion of the training in February, 1961, he was posted as Sectional Officer.
Initially his seniority was fixed on the hypothesis that he had been appointed a Sectional Officer on November 25, 1960.
On November 29, 1979, the Chief Engineer issued an order, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-5 with the writ petition by which it was declared that the petitioner's ``apprenticeship period is not countable towards .......... seniority ......'' Resultantly, he was given seniority on the basis that he had joined service as Sectional Officer on February 26, 1996.
As a result, the petitioner was even reverted from the post of Sub Divisional Engineer to that of a Sectional Officer.
3.
Mr. Sharma submits that the order dated November 29, 1979 is vitiated as it was passed without the grant of any opportunity to the petitioner.
He submits that as a result the Order dated September 26, 1980 by which the petitioner's seniority was refixed as also the order dated April 23, 1982, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-8 with the writ petition, by which he was reverted from the post of Sub Divisional Engineer to that of Sectional Officer, are vitiated.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioner has been controverted by the learned counsel for the respondents  4.
The short question is - could the period of apprenticeship be counted towards service qualifying for determination of seniority ?
5.
Mr. Sharma concedes that an apprentice is not a member of any service.
He also admits that the petitioner was not given the regular pay scale of the post of Sectional Officer w.e.f.
November 25, 1960.
He was only granted a stipend of Rs. 45/- per month during the period of training.
It is also not disputed that the petitioner was placed in the regular pay scale of Rs. 100- 300 wef.
February 26, 1961.
Still further, learned counsel is unable to refer to any rule or instructions issued by the competent authority whereunder the period of training may be counted towards the period of service as a Sectional Officer.
In view of this admitted position, the view taken by the respondents that the period of training shall not count towards seniority cannot be said to be wrong or unfair.
6.
Accordingly, the question as posed above has to be answered in the negative.
Resultantly, it is held that the period during which the petitioner had remained under training could not count for seniority.
That being so, the action of the respondents in determining the petitioner's seniority on the basis that he had been appointed as Sectional Officer an February 26, 1961 cannot be said to be wrong or unfair.
As a result, even his reversion from the post of Sub Divisional Engineer to which he had been appointed on purely ad hoc basis cannot be said to be illegal.
7.
In view of the above, there is no merit in CWP No. 2128 of 1982.
It is, consequently, dismissed.
No costs.
8.
Mr. Gur Rattan Pal Singh, counsel for the petitioner in CWP No. 3230 of 1982 states that the primary prayer of the petitioner in this case was that the benefit of period of training towards seniority should not be granted to the private-respondents.
Since the view taken by the Government in its order dated November 29, 1979 has been up held, the petitioner would be entitled to the re-fixation of his seniority.
As a result, even orders promoting persons junior to the petitioner would be rendered illegal.
Counsel for the respondents accept this position.
9.
Accordingly, this writ petition is disposed of with the direction that the department shall consider the petitioner's claim for further promotion etc. on the basis that the period of training does not count for determination of seniority of a Sectional Officer.
In the circumstances, there shall be no order as to costs.