Ashok Bhan, J - This petition has been filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for quashing the order dated 2371996 Annexure P-2 vide which the petitioners have been ordered to be reverted from the post of Assistant Employment Officers to that of Statistical Assistants and for issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to allow the petitioners to continue to work as Assistant Employment Officer in the pay scale of Rs. 2000-3200 till the candidates recommended by the Haryana Public Service Commission (hereinafter referred to as the Commission) for the post of Assistant Employment Officers join.
2.
Petitioners are working as Statistical Assistants in the Employment Department of the State of Haryana.
Next promotional post is that of Assistant Employment Officer.
There are 92 posts of Assistant Employment Officers out of which 73 posts are of Assistant Employment Officers and the remaining 19 posts are of Assistant Employment Officers (Vocational Guidance).
Posts of Assistant Employment Officers are Class II posts and are governed by the rules called the Haryana Employment Department (Group`B') Service Rules, 1991 (hereinafter referred to as the Rules).
Rule 9 of these rules provides the method of recruitment.
It is provided therein that in case of Assistant Employment Officer (General), 25% posts shall be filled by promotion from amongst the Head Assistants and Statistical Assistants/Technical Assistants in the ratio of 60:40 and the remaining 75% posts shall be filled by direct recruitment.
36 posts of Assistant Employment Officers are lying vacant.
Petitioners were promoted as Assistant Employment Officers (General) on ad hoc basis in the pay scale of Rs. 2000-3200 against the direct quota posts for six months or till the regularly selected candidates from the Commission join.
Copy of this order has been attached as Annexure P1.
Vide order dated 2371996, Annexure P2 petitioners who had been promoted against the posts meant for direct quota on ad hoc basis were ordered to be reverted to their original posts in the pay scale of Statistical Assistants after the expiry of six months of their joining.
3.
Grievance of the petitioners is that without waiting for the recommendation of the candidates for the posts of Assistant Employment Officers by the Commission, petitioners have been reverted to their original posts of Statistical Assistants which could not be done.
Another grievance of the petitioners is that orders reverting them to the posts of Statistical Assistants was passed on 2371996 and on the next day vide order dated 2471996 Annexure P3 have been again been asked to look after the work of Assistant Employment Officers at that very stations where the petitioners were posted as Assistant Employment Officers after their promotion and they have also been told to preform the duties of Assistant Employment Officers in addition to their normal duties of Statistical Assistant till further orders.
The precise grievance of the petitioners is that although they continue to discharge the duties of Assistant Employment Officers, but they have been ordered to be reverted to the posts of Statistical Assistants to deprive them of the higher pay scale which is admissible to the Assistant Employment Officers; that petitioners are entitled to the pay scale of Rs. 2000-3200 meant for Assistant Employment Officers as they are discharging the duties of Assistant Employment Officers.
4.
Notice of motion was issued in response to which written statement has been filed.
Stand taken by the respondents in the written statement is that 18 vacancies of Assistant Employment Officers have been notified to the Commission by the Government on 8111995 out of which a good number of vacancies existed in the Employment Exchanges located in the rural areas which are banned by the Assistant Employment Officers and one Clerk.
As the problem of unemployment is assuming large proportions in the State and a good number of unemployed persons daily visit the Employment Exchanges in connection with seeking employment assistance, vocational guidance and other related matters, the Employment Exchanges being public offices could not be left unattended.
It was, therefore, decided by the Government of Haryana to promote the senior-most Statistical Assistants working in the Department of Employment Haryana in the scale of Rs. 1600-2660 to the post of Assistant Employment Officer in the scale of Rs. 2000-3200 on ad hoc basis against direct quota vacancies as stop-gap arrangement for a period of six months or till the receipt of recommendations of the Commission, whichever is earlier, with a clear stipulation that this promotion shall not confer any right on them to seniority/experience etc; that the Commission has initiated the process of recruitment of the vacancies which have been advertised in the news-papers in June 1996 and the recommendees from the Commission are expected soon.
5.
The Government decided to discontinue with the ad hoc promotion of Statistical Assistants as Assistant Employment Officers against the posts meant for direct recruits after completion of period of six months; that the main duties attached to the post of Assistant Employment Officers are to register the names of unemployed and sponsor them against vacancies notified by the employers to the Employment Exchange and also act as Drawing and Disbursing Officer to ensure proper utilisation of Government funds.
The Additional work attached to the post of Assistant Employment Officer as a consequence of reversion of the petitioners has been equitably distributed amongst the existing staff.
Work relating to Drawing and Disbursing Officer has been withdrawn from the petitioners and entrusted to other officers working on regular basis in the department vide order dated 1981996 Annexure R1.
As regards work relating to sponsorship of the names of applicants, there are already standing instructions issued by the Department of Employment, Haryana vide Procedural Circular No. 28/88/9.1 (Annexure R2).
Relevant portion of this circular reads as under:-  ``The scheme of selection against vacancies should be made by the Employment Officer and that this work should not be entrusted to the Non- Gazetted staff.''
Petitioners being non-gazetted officers could not be entrusted with this work; that petitioners are not discharging all the duties assignable to the Assistant Employment Officers and they are just looking after the work of Assistant Employment Officers only thrice a week mainly to dispose of work of routine clerical nature which constitutes a very small fraction of the major work; that petitioners cannot claim as a matter of right to function as Assistant Employment Officers against the posts meant for direct recruits and they are also not entitled to claim the pay drawn by the Assistant Employment Officers.
6.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
7.
From the perusal of the facts enumerated above and after going through the pleadings of the parties and hearing the counsel for the parties, it is evident that under rule 9 of the Rules, 25% of the posts of Assistant Employment Officers are to be filled by way of promotion and the remaining 75% posts by direct recruitment.
Promotions given to the petitioners were not in accordance with the service rules applicable but were made only as a stop-gap arrangement for a period of six months against the direct quota vacancies pending receipt of regular recommendees from the Commission.
Petitioners have not been granted existing beyond six months keeping in view the guidelines relating to economy drive of the State Government and also the equitable distribution of work amongst the existng staff.
The process of filling up the vacancies meant for direct recruits has already been put into motion and the government is awaiting the recommendations of the Commission for appointing the direct recruits to the posts meant for them.
Petitioners have not been entrust with all the duties and responsibilities attached to the post of Assistant Employment Officer.
Only a small fraction of routine clerical work has been given to them in public interest.
There is no infringement of any legal right nor infraction of any statutory rules governing the service condition of the petitioners.
Plea of the petitioners that they have been reverted after the expiry of six months and entrusted additional work without payment of any remuneration is, therefore, not tenable.
Petition being devoid of merit is dismissed.
No costs.