Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner who had joined service as an Inspector of Factories on October 3, 1958, filed the instant petition in the year 1980 with the grievance that his claim for promotion to the post of Senior Inspector of Factories was being illegally ingored on the ground that he did not fulfil the qualification of a degree in Mechanical Engineering.
In the year 1983, the petitioner even amended the petition.
With the amended petition, the petitioner produced the copy of the note on the file indicating the consideration of the claim of various persons for promotion to the post of Senior Inspector of Factories.
In the amended petition, the claim as made out is primarily to the effect that he was not being considered for promotion on the ground that he did not possess the qualification of a degree in Mechanical Engineering.
It is alleged that a degree in Mechanical Engineering has no relevance or nexus to be achieved to carry out the functions or statutory duties as enshrined in the Factories Act.
The petitioner further alleges that the qualifications had been relaxed at the time of his appointment as Inspector of Factories and, therefore, the respondents could not have insisted upon his possessing a degree for purpose of promotion to the post of Senior Inspectors of Factories.
The petitioner having been selected and appointed as an Inspector of Factories and the department having confirmed him on that post, they had to consider his claim for promotion to the post of Senior Inspector of Factories on the basis that he was eligible for promotion.
Consequently, he prays for the issue of a writ a mandamus ``commanding upon the respondents to consider .......... the petitioner for promotion for promotion to the post of Senior Inspector of Factories.''
2.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, the claim made by the petitioner has been controverted.
However, it is not necessary to notice the averments in the written statement in detail in view of the fact that the note produced by the petitioner as Annexure P-3 with the petition contains the relevant information.
3.
The solitary contention raised by Mr. RL Sharma, learned counsel for the petitioner is that he was ignored for purpose of promotion to the post of Senior Inspector or Factories only on the ground that he did not possess the qualification of a degree in mechanical engineering.
Is it so ?
4.
The petitioner has, it appears, got a complete copy of the note as existing on the official file.
One wonders as to how the petitioner got the complete note.
Be that as it may, the note itself indicates the reasons on account of which the petitioner was ignored for promotion.
A perusal of the office note indicates (Page 40-A of the Writ Paper Book) that the petitioner had earned nine reports during the years 1971-72 to 1979-80.
In three reports, the petitioner was assessed as `Very Good' and the remaining six reports were `Good'.
It is further indicated in the note that the Annual Confidential Reports for the period from the year 1965-66, to 1970-71 had not been recorded as the petitioner had been dismissed from service.
In the reprot for the year 1965-65, the petitioner's integrity was described as `doubtful'.
It had also been observed that he was unfit for promotion.
He had been graded as `below average'.
Even the Haryana Public Service Commission had made certain comments in this behalf in the letter dated June 18, 1980.
After consideration of these facts, the office had inter alia reported as under :-  ``In the department, Shri KK Khorana, Factory Inspector is the only officer who does not possess the prescribed qualification for the FI The qualifications of a factory inspector should be a Degree or Diploma equivalent to a Degree.
Shri Khorana has not been able to get the pay scale of Factory Inspector.
He is placed in the pay scale of Rs. 350-900.
For this reason it is doubtful that Shri KK Khorana cannot be promoted as Senior Inspector of Factories.
The above comments of the HPSC can only be turned down by the Council of Ministers.''
The matter was then placed before the Joint Secretary, Department of Labour.
In his note of July 14, 1980, he had inter alia observed as under:-  ``Appointment against the post of Senior Inspector.
- This post is also not included in the existing rules and this should also filled in accordance with the position explained above on ad hoc and purely on temporary basis.
Keeping in view the stab system I see no reason that Shri Khorana be ignored in the first slab.
Record of last 10 years is to be seen and not 10 reports.
In the record of Shri Khorana during the last 10 years, 9 reports are available.
He is entitled to promotion on the basis of these.
As regards the advice of the public Service Commission is concerned which is mentioned at page 101 ante, there can be difference of opinion between the department and Public Service Commission.
Even otherwise, the comments of the Public Commission are applicable to the new rules and not the existing rules.
There are no rules in existence in this respect.
Recommendation is like this that in the first slab Shri Khorana and from the second slab Shri Madan be promoted and these promotions would be on ad hoc and purely on temporary basis till further orders.''
The Secretary had agreed with the Joint Secretary.
It appears that the Minister was on tour and the file was placed before the Chief Minister who had observed as under :-  ``The Chief Minister has seen.
He has ordered that Shri Gulati be promoted on temporary basis on the post of Deputy Chief Inspector of Factories without prejudice to the department action to be taken against him.
2.
As regards the case of promotion of Shri KK Khorana as Senior Factory Inspector is concerned, in the light of position indicated in annual reports from 1961-62 to 1964-65, the Chief Minister has ordered that this officer should not be promoted.
3.
Besides this, the Chief Minister has ordered that Sarvshri SM Madan and SK Gupta be promoted on temporary basis on the post of Senior Inspector of Factories.
The case pertaining to their regular appointment/promotion be referred to the Haryana Public Service Commission.
Sd/- OSD/CM 24.7.1980 IPM Sd/- 29.7.80 DLM on tour SLP IPM-80-746/29.7.80.''
5.
A perusal of the above extracts from the record shows that the petitioner's claim for promotion to the post of Senior Inspector of Factories had been duly considered.
On the basis of the annual confidential reports, particularly for the period from 1961-62 to 1964-65, it was found that the petitioner was not suitable for promotion.
Accordingly, persons junior to him were ordered to be promoted.
6.
A civil servant has only a right to be considered for promotion.
The guarantee under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution is only to the ensure equality of opportunity.
This opportunity was clearly afforded.
The petitioner's claim was duly considered.
He having not been found to be suitable for promotion, the Government had directed that persons junior to him to be promoted.
In this situation, the petitioner cannot have any legitimate grievance which may be remediable through the present proceedings.
7.
Mr. RL Sharma states that the adverse report for the year 1964-65 had not been communicated to the petitioner.
Firstly, there is no such averment in the petition.
If such an averment had been made, then the respondents could have brought on record the requisite information.
Still further, Mr. Sharma points out that even the office note indicates that this report had not been conveyed.
The report may not have been communicated upto the time the office note was recorded.
However, the petitioner had the note with him.
He knew as to what had been taken into consideration against him.
He made no grievance in the writ petition that the report had not been conveyed.
Even if it is assumed that the report was not conveyed, it cannot be said that the consideration is vitiated.
Having come to know of the report, the petitioner could have represented.
The note was produced by the petitioner in the year 1983.
He was aware of the report on that date.
Yet, he has not made any challenge either to the report or made any allegation that it had not been communicated to him.
Furthermore, even today, it has not been alleged that the petitioner had submitted any representation against that report or that it had been accepted.
If the petitioner in spite of being aware of the report had made no grievance about it is too late for him to urge today that the report was illegally taken into consideration.
8.
Another fact which deserves note here is that the petitioner has already retired from service.
It would be unfair to unsettle the entire position after the lapse of so many years.
9.
No other point has been urged.
10.
In view of the above, there is no merit in this writ petition.
It is consequently, dismissed.
However, in the circumstances there will be no order as to costs.