Sat Pal, J. (Oral) - In this writ petition, the petitioners have challenged the seniority list copy of which is Annexure P-7 and the order dated 3181981 by which respondent No. 3 was promoted as Superintendent from the post of Clerk.
2.
Briefly stated facts of the case are that the petitioners were employed as Clerks in Panchayat Samiti, Ferozepur.
They had been appointed during the period 1966 to 1968.
Sh. Mohinder Singh, who is respondent No. 3 in the writ petition was appointed initially in Panchayat Samiti Guru Har Sahai which was part of the Ferozepur on 491965.
However, later on in the year 1973 Faridkot district was carved out from certain territories of district Ferozepur and since respondent No. 3 happened to be posted at Moga, which became part of Faridkot District, he was allocated Faridkot district at that time.
It is an admitted case of the parties that vide order Annexure P-1, the district cadre for the Panchayat Samiti employees was constituted and every employee employed in a district of Samiti could claim seniority in his own district cadre.
3.
From the writ petition, it appears that the respondent No. 3 was not satisfied to remain in the district cadre of Faridkot and had been making representations to the authorities concerned to post him in a panchayat samiti of Ferozepur district.
It was pursuant to his representation that he was transferred to district Ferozepur cadre vide order dated 781980 copy of which is Annexure P-2.
Annexure P-3 is the tentative seniority list of Clerks of Panchayat Samiti district Ferozepur and in this tentative seniority list, respondent No. 3 was assigned his seniority as per his initial date of appointment i.e. 491965.
Final seniority list is Annexure P-7 and vide this seniority list also, date of appointment of respondent No. 3 has been shown as 491965 and accordingly he has been shown senior to all the petitioners, who were appointed during the period 1966 to 1968.
4.
Mrs. Bindra, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioners submitted that respondent No. 3 was transferred in the year 1980 from district Faridkot cadre to district Ferozepur cadre at his own request as is evident from Annexure P-2 and as such he should have been assigned seniority in the Ferozepur district from the year 1980 when he was transferred to District Ferozepur cadre at his own request.
In this connection she referred to para 4 and 6 of the writ petition.
5.
Mr. Bhullar, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent No. 1 also drew my attention to para 4 and 6 of the reply filed on behalf of the respondent No. 1 and submitted that respondent No. 3 was initially appointed in Panchayat Samiti Guru Har Sahai on 491965 and Panchayat Samiti Guru Har Sahai was a part of district Ferozepur at the relevant time.
He further submitted that when district Faridkot was carved out, respondent No. 3 happened to be posted at Moga which became a part of new district Faridkot and he remained posted at Moga thereafter.
He, however, submitted that no option of the employees was sought before allocating the district and respondent No. 3 continuously had been making representation that since he belonged to district Ferozepur, he should be allocated district Ferozepur, and it was pursuant to his representation that the order Annexure P-2 was passed by the authority concerned.
6.
I have given my thoughtful consideration to the submission made by the learned counsel for the parties and have perused the records.
7.
From the record, it is clear that respondent No. 3 was initially appointed as Clerk in Panchayat Samiti Guru Har Sahai, which was a part of Ferozepur district and even after Faridkot district was carved out, Guru Har Sahai Panchayat Samiti remained part of District Ferozepur.
In any case from the affidavit filed on behalf of the respondents, it is clear that no option was called for from the employees before allocating the district and this is also clear from the affidavit that respondent No. 3 had been submitting representation from time to time that he should be transferred to the district cadre Ferozepur.
It was pursuant to his representation that he was transferred to Ferozepur cadre vide Annexure P-2.
In these circumstances, the respondent will have to be given seniority from his original date of appointment i.e. 491965.
8.
For the reasons recorded above, I do not find any merit in this writ petition and the same is dismissed with no orders as to costs.