Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - Does the roster maintained by the Haryana State Electricity Board for recruitment of members of Scheduled Castes etc. also reflect the seniority of the members of the service ?
This is the short question that arises for consideration in these four writ petitions.
Counsel for the parties have referred to the facts as averred in CWP No. 9428 of 1993.
These may be briefly noticed.
2.
The petitioners are Graduates in Engineering.
In the year 1986, the Respondent-Board had issued an advertisement inviting applications for 100 posts of Graduate Technical Apprentices for appointment in the Thermal Projects.
20% posts were reserved for members of Scheduled Castes, 10% for members of Backward Classes and 5% for ex-servicemen.
The petitioners had submitted their applications.
Petitioner Nos. 1 and 3 belong to the category of Backward Classes.
Petitioner No. 2 is an ex-servicemen.
The three petitioners where selected and appointed against the posts reserved for the respective classes.
On successful completion of the period of apprenticeship, they were absorbed as Assistant Engineers.
3.
On May 4, 1992, the Board issued a seniority list of Assistant Engineers.
This list reflected the position as it existed on September 30, 1990.
The petitioners were placed at Sr. Nos. 832, 838 and 732 respectively.
Later on, a slight modification was made.
Petitioner No. 2 was placed at Sr. No. 830 and petitioner No. 1 at Sr. No. 831.
4.
The petitioners claim that in accordance with the instructions issued by the State Government, which were duly adopted by the Board vide memorandums dated August 6, 1979 and May 8, 1981 respectively, the seniority of the members of the service has to be fixed in the order of reservation of vacancies in the 100 point roster.
As the respondent-Board did not follow these instructions, the petitioners submitted representations.
The Board took no action.
Hence, this petition.
The petitioners allege that in various cases, the seniority of the members of the service has been determined in accordance with their position on the roster.
However, the Board has arbitrarily treated the petitioners differently.
Its action is discriminatory.
The petitioners pray that their seniority be fixed in accordance with the roster and consequential reliefs in the matter of promotion etc. be granted to them.
5.
The claim made by the petitioners has been controverted by the respondent.
According to the respondent, the seniority has to be determined in accordance with the provisions of Regulation 15 of the Punjab State Electricity Board Service of Engineers (Electrical) Recruitment Regulations, 1965.
It has been accordingly assigned.
The ``vacancies assigned to Scheduled Caste/Backward Classes under the block system are so assigned for the purpose of reservation only and are not intended for fixing inter se seniority of the candidates.....'' The seniority of the candidates appointed directly has to be regulated in accordance with the instructions issued vide letter dated March 25, 1996.
A copy of these instructions has been produced as Annexure R.1 with the written statement.
With regard to the charge of discrimination as levelled by the petitioners, it has been stated that the corrections in the seniority assigned to various employees have been or are being made.
6.
Arguments on behalf of the petitioners have been addressed by M/s. KL Arora and CM Chopra, Advocates.
Learned counsel have made a two-fold submission.
Firstly, they have contended that the Board is bound to fix the inter se seniority of the members of the service on the basis of the points reserved for various categories in the 100 point roster.
Secondly, it has been submitted that in case of certain employees, the Board has actually fixed seniority on the basis of the position on the roster.
The action of the Board in treating the petitioners differently suffers from the vice of discrimination.
No one has appeared on behalf of the respondent.
7.
It is in the light of the pleadings and the submissions made at the hearing that the question posed at the outset arises for consideration.
8.
The instructions relied upon by the learned counsel for the petitioners have been produced as Annexures P.3 and P.4 with the writ petition.
These instructions do not at all provide that the inter se seniority of the persons appointed against the reserved vacancies shall be fixed in accordance with their position on the 100 point roster.
The instructions appear to have been issued only with the object of providing for appointments and not for determining inter se seniority.
These are calculated to ensure that the members of the various classes for whom reservation has been made are adequately represented in the service of the Board.
The Board is not required to fix their seniority in that order.
Still further, the point has been settled by the issue of instructions dated April 27, 1972 by which it has been specially provided that the purpose of the roster is only to provide for reservation.
It has been specifically stated in these instructions in para 2 that these are ``not intended for fixing inter se seniority of the candidates contrary to their order in the combined merit list.....'' The validity of these instructions has not been questioned.
Consequently, the contention raised by the learned counsel cannot be accepted.
9.
It also deserves mention that even though the petitioners have claimed seniority higher than that actually assigned to them, yet except in CWP No. 6092 of 1994, the persons who are likely to be affected, have not even been impleaded as parties.
Consequently, even the necessary parties have not been impleaded in the remaining three cases.
In the absence of these persons, the relief claimed in the three petitions is liable to be declined.
10.
It was next contended that the action of the respondent suffers from the vice of discrimination.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondent, it has been categorically stated that the position is being rectified.
In view of this statement, the charge of discrimination cannot be sustained.
In any event, two wrongs would never make a right.
Since none of the instructions referred to by the petitioners provide for determination of seniority on the basis of the roster, the petitioners cannot be granted any relief.
Accordingly, no ground for interference is made.
The petitions are dismissed.
No costs.