THB Chalapathi, J - This writ petition is filed for issurance of writ of certiorari to quash the order of termination of the services of the petitioner dated 16121994 vide Annexure P-2.
2.
The petitioner was selected as Clerk-cum-Steno Typist (Punjabi) and she was appointed as such vide letter of appointment Annexure P-1 and allotted to the District Consumer Redressal Forum, Gurdaspur.
Accordingly, she joined the service on 13.9.1994.
According to the letter of her appointment, the period of probation was two years.
While so, the services of the petitioner were terminated on 16121994.
The petitioner in this writ petition is challenging the order of termination of her services dated 16121994 vide Annexure P-2.
Annexure P-1 is the order of appointment of the petitioner as Clerk-cum-Steno Typist.
In this order of appointment, it is clearly mentioned in that the appointment is against a regular post which is likely to be abolished at any time and this has no guarantee for regular service.
Annexure P-2 is the order of termination of services of the petitioner wherein it is mentioned as follows:-  ``You are hereby informed that your services are on longer required by the Punjab Government.
Therefore, in terms of your appointment, you are hereby given one months's notice for termination of services from the date issue of this letter.
On the expiry of the notice, your services shall stand automatically terminated.''
3.
In the written statement filed by respondent Nos. 1 to 3, it is stated that the post was filled up in the District Consumer Disputes Redressal Forum, Gurdaspur and the work of the District Consumer Forum is of quasi judicial nature and the petitioner was required to know Stenography in English, but the petitioner does not know Stenography in English.
Therefore, the services of the petitioner were not required in the District Consumer Disputes Redressal Forum and her services were rightly terminated.
When the services of the petitioner were no longer required as she did not possess the requisite qualifications namely Typing and Stenography in English, I do not find any thing wrong in terminating the services of the petitioner.
It is clear from the letter of appointment that the services of the petitioner are not regular and she has not been regularly appointed and it is also mentioned therein that her services can be terminated at any time on abolition of the post.
The order of termination clearly shows that services of the petitioner are no longer required in the District Consumer Disputes Redressal Forum, Gurdaspur.
There is no illegality in the impugned order of the termination,  4.
The petitioner worked only for a period of three months.
If confers no right to claim regularisation.
Therefore, the decision relied upon by the petitioner in Ranjit Singh v. Presiding Officer, College Tribunal, Punjab, Chandigarh, (1989)2 Recent Services Judgments 417 has no application to the present case.
In that case the petitioner worked for more than two years and completed the period of probation.
It has been held therein that after the expiry of the maximum period of probation, the petitioner would be deemed to be confirmed.
It has been held in Mahipal Singh v. State of Punjab, 1991(2) RSJ 124 that a probationer can be discharged in the manner provided for in the letter of appointment and also the statutory rules.
The termination of employment does not carry with it any civil consequences.
The order of discharge does not cast any stigma.
In the case on hand also the order of termination of the services of the petitioner does not cast any stigma on the petitioner.
It is purely an order of termination simpliciter in terms of the letter of appointment.
Therefore, it do not find any ground warranting interference with the impugned order of termination of the services of the petitioner.
The petition, therefore, fails and is, accordingly dismissed.
There will be no order as to costs.