Ashok Bhan, J - This is a petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the State of Punjab to grant promotion to the petitioner as Master with effect from the date his junior respondent No. 3 was promoted.
2.
Petitioner is M.A.B.Ed.
and belongs to scheduled caste category.
He was initially appointed as Punjabi Teacher in Government Middle School, Rakra Daba in District Hoshiarpur, on ad hoc basis on 11121975.
He was given regular appointment on 141977 and posted in Government Middle School, Nanowal Bet.
3.
In the Seniority list circulated on 20.10.1992 of C & V Teachers, petitioner was shown at Serial No. 317.
Vide letter dated 1851990 Director of Public Instructions (Schools), Punjab respondent No. 2 asked for names for eligible C & V Teachers to be promoted as Masters.
Name of the petitioner was duly recommended by the Principal of the School where the petitioner was working, vide letter Annexure P3.
4.
On January 10, 1992, certain Teachers including respondent No. 3 who were junior to the petitioner were promoted.
Names of these Teachers find mentioned at serial Nos. 408 to 421 of the seniority list whereas the name of the petitioner was at Serial No. 317.
Petitioner filed representation immediately thereafter with a request to the respondents to promote him immediately with effect from the date juniors to him were promoted.
No action was taken and ultimately petitioner was promoted vide Office Order Annexure P-10 with effect from 24.6.1994.
Petitioner again made a representation to the respondents that he should be promoted as Master with effect from 10.1.1992 and as Lecturer with effect from 30.9.1993 that is the date with effect from which his juniors were promoted on these posts.
No action was taken by the respondents and ultimately present writ petition has been filed seeking a direction to the respondents to promote the petitioner as Master as well as Lecturer with effect from the date Teachers junior to him were promoted to these posts.
Prayer has also been made for benefit of the difference in the arrears of salary along with interest.
5.
A short affidavit has been filed on behalf of respondent No. 2 stating therein that the claim of the petitioner was considered and he has been promoted as Master with effect from 10.1.1992 and as Lecturer with effect from 17111993 that is the dates on which Teachers junior to the petitioner were promoted to those posts.
Copies of orders have been attached as Annexure R1 to R2.
It has been prayed that this petition is rendered infructuous and be dismissed as such.
6.
Counsel appearing for the petitioner argued that only part relief has been given to him whereas he is entitled to the whole of the relief prayed for in the writ petition.
Petitioner has been given the benefit of seniority and pay fixation but has been denied the benefit of the difference in arrears of salary.
Counsel for the respondents contended that petitioner is not entitled to the difference in the arrears of salary as the petitioner did not perform his durites as a Master and as Lecturer during this period.
7.
Respondents have not given any reasons for withholding the promotion of the petitioner as Master and as Lecturer.
Petitioner was denied the benefit of promotion whereas persons junior to him were promoted earlier to him.
While granting the benefit of seniority and pay fixation, no mention has been made regarding the arrears of salary.
No reasons have been denied to the petitioner.
Case of the petitioner was recommended for promotion as Master by the Head of the Institution where has was working on 13.9.1990 vide Annexure P3.
Persons junior to him were promoted denying the benefit to him without any reason.
On the representation filed by the petitioner, no action was taken.
There was no justification to deny the benefit of promotion to the petitioner and the these circumstances, he cannot be deprived of the benefit of arrears of salary.
Accordingly, this writ petition is allowed.
Petitioner has already been ordered to be promoted as Master and Lecturer with effect from the date juniors to him were promoted.
In addition to the relief already granted to the petitioner, we direct the respondents to pay the difference in arrears of salary to the petitioner.
Petitioner shall not be entitled to any interest on the arrears.
No costs.