Ashok Bhan, J - Petitioner was appointed as Anganwari Worker on 1141985.
Next promotion from the post of Anganwari Worker is that of Supervisor.
Respondents invited applications for promotion to the post of Supervisor from amongst the Anganwari Workers for which a written test was prescribed.
Petitioner fulfilled the requirements/qualifications for the post of Supervisor and accordingly applied for the post of Supervisor.
Petitioner was allotted Roll No. 1829 vide Memo No. A-4(SB)-96 by the department copy of which has been attached as Annexure P1.
The date mentioned for holding of written test is 2881996 whereas actually the examination took place on 2581996.
The date for holding the written test was wrongly mentioned in letter Annexure P1 and as such petitioner could not appear in the written test.
2.
Present petition has been filed with a prayer that a writ of mandamus be issued to the respondents directing them to take the written test of the petitioner for the post of Supervisor and on qualifying the written test interview her for the post of Supervisor.
Interviews in pursuance to the test held on 2581996 are being held currently and shall conclude by the end of December 1996.
3.
Notice of motion was issued in response to which written statement has been filed.
Introductory facts that petitioner is an Anganwari Worker and fulfils the qualifications for the post of Supervisor are admitted; it has further been admitted that the test was actually held on 2581995 whereas the date mentioned in Annexure P1 is 2881996.
By way of explanation it has been stated that as many officials were engaged in sorting out the applications, an inadvertent mistake was committed in mentioning the date as 2881996 in Annexure P1 issued to the petitioner.
A press note was also issued that the test was to be held on 2581996.
The same was published in three news papers The Tribune (English), Ajit (Punjabi), Punjabi Tribune, on 17.8.1996.
About 2500 Anganwari Workers in the State were issued roll numbers and no other complaint of such an error was received.
Many Anganwari Workers from Batala Block to which the petitioner belongs appeared in the test.
By way of inference it has been concluded in the written statement that it was improbable that petitioner did not come to know about the date of test.
4.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
It is a case of peculiar facts.
Admittedly petitioner has been deprived of her right to appear in the test as wrong date was conveyed to her for holding the test.
Petitioner cannot be made to suffer for no fault on her part.
Prayer made by the petitioner that another test be held for her cannot be accepted as the test was not a qualifying test; it was a competitive test and the merit in the written test is to be determined on the basis of comparative merit of the candidates who appeared in that test.
5.
About 2500 Anganwari Workers appeared in the test held on 2581996.
Respondent-department had issued an advertisement on 17.8.1996 in three newspapers i.e.
The Tribune (English), Ajit (Punjabi) and Punjabi Tribune which have wide circulation in the State of Punjab informing the candidates that test would be held on 2581996.
As per written statement petitioner's is the solitary case in which a mistake has been committed.
Keeping in view the peculiar facts of this case and in order to do complete justice between the parties, we direct that petitioner be deemed to have qualified the test with minimum marks prescribed for qualifying the test and be interviewed along with others.
Her merit be determined by adding the marks obtained by her in the interview plus the minimum qualifying marks obtainable in the written test.
We have applied this rule of thumb because we cannot let either the petitioner suffer for no fault of her or the department to suffer for a bona fide inadvertent mistake committed by it.
It is possible that petitioner may have obtained more marks in the written test than the minimum pass marks but she as well could have failed in the written test.
This petition is allowed in the above terms.
Respondents are directed to interview the petitioner along with other candidates which we understand is still in progress.
No costs.