THB Chalapathi, J - This writ petition is filed for issuance of writ of certiorari to quash the order dated 15121994 vide Annexure P-5.
2.
The petitioner registered his name with the Employment Exchange.
On 2921994 he was called for an interview for the post of Clerk-cum-Steno Typist (Punjabi) with District Food Supplies Controller, Bathinda, but he was not selected at the interview held on 431994.
Again he was called for interview by the 4th respondent i.e. District Food & Supplies Controller, Bathinda and interview was held on 21.3.1994.
The petitioner was given an appointment letter on 19.4.1994 and accordingly he joined his duty on 451994.
The petitioner was allotted to the District Consumer Forum, Bathinda.
Thereafter on 1711995 he was served with a letter to termination dated 15121994.
The petitioner in this writ petition is challenging the order of termination of his services dated 15121994.
Annexure P-3 is the order of appointment of the petitioner as Clerk-cum-Steno Typist.
In this order of appointment, it is clearly mentioned that the appointment is against a regular post, but it can be terminated at any moment and there is no promise of regular service.
Annexure P-5 is the order of termination wherein it is mentioned as follows:-  ``You are hereby informed that your services are no longer required as ordered by the Punjab Government.
Therefore, according to your conditions of appointment, you are hereby given one month's notice for the termination of your service and after that your services will automatically stand terminated.''
3.
In the written statement filed by respondent Nos. 1, 2 and 4, it is clearly stated that the post was filled up in the office of District Consumer Forum, Bathinda, and the work of the District Consumer Forum is of quasi judicial nature and the petitioner was required to know Stenography in English, but the petitioner does not know Stenography in English.
Therefore, the services of the petitioner were not required in the District Consumer Forum and therefore his services were rightly terminated.
It is also mentioned in the written statement that another person who has got the requisite qualifications namely Stenography in English has been recommended by the President, District Consumer Forum, Bathinda and therefore, he was appointed in the District Consumer Forum.
When the services of the petitioner were no longer required as he did not possess the necessary qualifications namely Typing and Stenography in English, I do not find any thing wrong in terminating the services of the petitioner.
It is clear from the letter of appointment, that the services of the petitioner are not regular and he has not been regularly appointed and it is also mentioned therein that his services can be terminated at any time.
The order of termination clearly shows that the services of the petitioner are no longer required in the District Consumer Forum, Bathinda.
There is no illegality in the impugned order of termination.
4.
The petitioner worked only for a period of about 8 months.
It has conferred no right to claim regularisation.
Therefore, the decision relied upon by the learned Counsel for the petitioner in Ranjit Singh v. Presiding Officer, College Tribunal, Punjab, Chandigarh, 1989 (2) Recent Services Judgment 417 has no application to the present case.
In that case the petitioner worked for more than two years and completed the period of probation.
It has been held in that decision that after expiry of the maximum period of probation, the petitioner, would be deemed to be confirmed.
It has been held in Mahipal Singh v. State of Punjab and others, 1991(2) RSJ 124, that a probationer can be discharged in the manner provided for in the letter of appointment and also the statutory rules.
The termination of employment does not carry with it any civil consequences.
The order of discharge does not cast any stigma.
In the case on hand also, the order of termination of the services of the petitioner does not cast any stigma on the petitioner.
It is purely an order of termination simpliciter in terms of the letter of appointment.
Therefore, I do not find any ground warranting interference with the impugned order of termination of the petitioner.
The petition, therefore, fails and is accordingly dismissed.
There will be no order as to costs.