Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - On August 15, 1993, the State Government, issued an order by which 6 officers including the petitioner were posted as Divisional Soil Conservation Officers.
The petitioner on the date of the issue of the issue of this order was working as Assistant Soil Conservation Officer, Patti.
He was ordered to be posted as Divisional Soil Conservation Officer, Amritsar ``against a vacant post''.
The petitioner claims that ``the new post involves the assumption of duties and responsibilities of greater importance.''
As such, in view of the provisions of Rule 44 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Vol-I, Part-I, he is entitled to draw ``as initial pay the stage of the time-scale next above the substantive pay in respect of the old post.''
According to the petitioner, he was drawing a basic pay of Rs. 4125/- on the old post.
He, accordingly, claims that after grant of an increment, a basic pay of Rs. 4250/- should be given to him with effect from August 16, 1993.
2.
The respondent contests the petitioner's claim.
It has been stated that vide notification dated June 30, 1993, the State Govt. had reorganised the whole Department.
The pay scales of Rs. 2200-4000, Rs. 3000-4500 and Rs. 3700-5300 were prescribed.
On completion of 8 years of service, a person who had joined the service in the scale of Rs. 2200-4000 was entitled to be placed in the scale of Rs. 3000-4500.
On completion of 18 yeas of service an officer becomes entitled to be placed in the scale of Rs. 3700-5300.
The petitioner had, on his own, decided to remain in the old scale of pay.
As a result, he continued to work in the scale of Rs. 2200-4900 as an Assistant Soil Conservation Officer.
The old scale of the post of Divisional Soil Conservation Officer was Rs. 2400-4000.
The petitioner cannot claim benefit of higher responsibilities in the ``three pattern scales of pay'' as prescribed with effect from January 1, 1991.
It has also been pointed out that the petitioner's pay had been fixed by Conservator of Soils, Jalandhar vide his letter No. 4349 dated September 6, 1993.
A copy of this order has been produced as Annexure R-4 with the written statement.
The ``word `promotion' in the pay fixation order'' is not in conformity with the order dated August 15, 1993.
An increment is admissible when a person is appointed to a higher post.
In the present case, the petitioner was not appointed to higher post.
He was merely ``posted on another cadre post''.
On this basis, the respondent claims that the petitioner is not entitled to the benefit claimed by him.
3.
The petitioner has filed the petition unaided by any counsel.
He has presented his case in person.
The solitary contention raised by him is that on his appointment or on being posted as a Divisional Soil Conservation Officer, he was entitled to the grant of an increment whereby his basic pay would have risen from Rs. 4125/- to Rs. 4250/-.
On the other hand, Ms. Thakur appearing for the respondent has submitted that the petitioner having not been promoted to the post of Divisional Soil Conservation Officer, he was not entitled to the grant of the an additional increment.
4.
The short question that arises for consideration is - Is the petitioner entitled to the grant of an increment on his being posted as a Divisional Soil Conservation Officer ?
5.
It is the admitted position that in the department, the post of Inspector is at the lowest level.
A person holding this post is promoted to the post of Assistant Soil Conservation Officer and then, as Divisional Soil Conservation Officer.
It is also not disputed that according to the scales of pay as these existed prior to the order dated June 30, 1993, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure R-1 with the written statement, the post of Soil Conservation Inspector was in the scale of Rs. 2000-3500.
The next higher post of Assistant Soil Conservation Officer was in the scale of Rs. 2200-4000 while that of the Divisional Soil Conservation Officer was in the scale of Rs. 2400-4000.
On the issue of the order dated June 30, 1993, the lowest pay scale was raised to Rs. 2200-4000.
On completion of 8 years of service a person became entitled to be placed in the scale of Rs. 3000-4500 and after 18 years of service, the officer had to be placed in the scale of Rs. 3700-5300.
It is clear that the post of Divisional Soil Conservation Officer carried the higher pay scale under the rules as these originally existed.
The position continues to be the same even after the issue of the order dated June 30, 1993.
It is also not disputed that the post of Divisional Soil Conservation Officer is filled up by promotion from amongst the Assistant Soil Conservation Officers.
In this situation, it is clear that the post of Divisional Soil Conservation Officer is higher in rank and status than that of the Assistant Soil Conservation Officer.
When a person is appointed from a lower post to a higher post, whether by promotion or by transfer, it has to be assumed that he is discharging duties and responsibilities of greater importance.
6.
Rule 44 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Vol.
I, Part I as it relates to the present case provides as under :-  ``(i) When appointment to the new post involves the assumption of duties or responsibilities of greater importance (as interpreted for the purposes of rule 413) than these attaching to such permanent post, he will draw as initial pay the stage of the time-scale next above his substantive pay in respect of the old post.''
A perusal of the above provision shows that a person becomes entitled to draw his pay at the next higher state above the substantive pay when the appointment to the new post involves the assumption of duties or responsibilities of greater importance.
Prior to the issue of the order dated August 15, 1993, the petitioner was admittedly working as an Assistant Soil Conservation Officer.
With the issue of this order, the petitioner was posted as a Divisional Soil Conservation Officer.
Even if it is assumed that the petitioner was not promoted, he had certainly been posted or appointed as a Divisional Soil Conservation Officer.
This post is certainly higher than that of an Assistant Soil Conservation Officer on which he was working.
It has not been disputed that the post of Divisional Soil Conservation Officer carries duties and responsibilities of greater importance than those attached to the post of an Assistant Soil Conservation Officer.
In this situation, the petitioner's claim that he was entitled to draw an initial pay at the stage next above the pay that he was drawing as an Assistant Soil Conservation Officer has to be sustained.
7.
Ms. Thakur submits that the petitioner was never promoted to the post of Divisional Soil Conservation Officer.
It may be so.
However, the fact remains that while working as an Assistant Soil Conservation Officer, the petitioner was posted as a Divisional Soil Conservation Officer.
It has also not been disputed that after August 15, 1993, the petitioner has been actually discharging the duties of the post of Divisional Soil Conservation Officer.
Whether a person is in the old or the new scale, the statutory provision in Rule 44 is not obliterated.
It is admitted that the petitioner continues to draw his pay in the old scale.
The respondent has passed no order fixing his pay in the revised scale.
In this situation, the provision of Rule 44 is attracted.
8.
Ms. Thakur has also pointed out that the petition submitted by the petitioner being cryptic it is really not known as to how the petitioner claims the basic pay of Rs. 4250/-.
She, accordingly, submits that his claim for the grant of a basic pay of Rs. 4250/- with effect from August 16, 1993, cannot be sustained.
9.
So far as his aspect of the matter is concerned, it appears to be appropriate that the respondent is directed to consider the petitioner's claim for the fixation of pay on the basis that on his posting as a Divisional Soil Conservation Officer he was performing duties which were of greater importance than those attached to the post of Assistant Soil Conservation Officer.
If there is any error in the pay as already fixed by the Conservator of Soils vide order dated September 6, 1993, the Government shall make the necessary correction after affording an opportunity of hearing to the petitioner.
Otherwise, the benefit as admissible under rule 44 shall be given to the petitioner.
Since the petitioner is retiring from service on January 31, 1997, it is directed that the Government shall do the needful within two months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
If it is found that the petitioner is entitled to a higher basic pay, the consequential benefits that accrue shall be released immediately.
The writ petition is, accordingly, disposed of.
In the circumstances, there will be no order as to costs.