BK Sodhi, J - Where the recommendations made by a Selection Committee for the appointment of Head of a Department are not unanimous and more than one name are recommended, can be Vice-Chancellor withhold those names and not put them upto the Board of Management for decision and whether he can constitute another Selection Committee for making a fresh selection are the meaningful questions involved in this writ petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution challenging the appointment of respondent 3 as Head, Horticulture Department in the Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana (hereinafter called the University).
2.
Post of Head of the Department of Horticulture fell vacant in the University and the same was to be filled up in accordance with the provisions of the Haryana and Punjab Agricultural Universities Act, 1970 and the statutes framed thereunder (for short the Act and the status respectively).
Section 14 of the Act vests the power in the Board of Management to appoint officers, teachers and others employee of the University in the prescribed manner.
Teachers include Professors-cum-Head of Department.
Clause 4(2) of Chapter IV of the statutes relating to the classification, manner of appointment and powers and duties of teachers of the University deals with the procedure for the appointment of Head of Department.
The relevant sub-clauses are reproduced hereunder for facility of reference:-  (i) ``A Head of Department shall be selected out of the Professors of that Department.
(ii) In the Departments in which one or more Professors are available in addition to the Head of the Department shall be a tenure post.
In a Department in which there is only one Professor, that Professor shall act as Head of Department.
(iii) In a Department in which post of the Head of the Department is a tenure post as per provisions of sub-clause (ii) above, the term of appointment of Head of Department shall be four years.
A Professor will not be eligible for appointment as Head of Department for more than two terms.
In case the Head of Department proceeds on leave/deputation for one year or more, he shall stand reverted to his original post of Professor and new Head of Department shall be appointed as per procedure prescribed in these Statutes.
Further, the appointment of Head of Department can also be terminated by the Board on the recommendations of the Vice-Chancellor even before completion of his tenure on account of unsatisfactory performance and new Head of Department appointed as per prescribed procedure.
(iv) The Selection Committee for selection of the Head of Department in Departments covered in sub-clause (iii) above shall consist of the following:- (a) The Dean of the College in which the vacancy exists;  (b) The Director of Research; (c) The Director of Extension Education; (d) The Dean, Postgraduate Studies; and (e) Three other persons nominated by the Vice-Chancellor including at least two outside experts, one of which will be a representative of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research.
(v) The Selection Committee shall examine the research and educational contribution, academic capability and administrative ability of Professors in the Department including the existing/previous Head of Department eligible on the date proceeding six months of expiry of the tenure of the present Head of Department or the date on which the position falls vacant and recommend the name of the most suitable person for appointment as Head of Department.
The selection will be made on merit.
(vi) The Selection Committee shall make its recommendation to the Vice-Chancellor, who shall put it up to the Board of Management with his comments, if any, for decision.
(vii) xx xx xx xx (viii) xx xx xx xx (ix) xx xx xx xx In the present case the Vice-Chancellor appointed a Selection Committee, consisting of seven members, three of which were outside experts and four internal members for the selection a suitable candidate for the post of Head, Department of Horticulture.
The committee after deliberations and critically examining the research and educational contributions including research and other papers, academic capabilities and administrative abilities of the Professors in the Department was divided in its opinion as regards the most suitable person for appointment as Head of Department.
The three outside experts recommended the name of the petitioner who is working as a Professor in the Department of Horticulture whereas three of the four internal members recommended the name of Dr. AS Datt (respondent 3) for the post while the 4th internal members recommended the name of one Dr. AS Bindra.
As is clear from sub-clause (vi) of clause 4(2) of Chapter IV of the Statutes quoted above, the Selection Committee was to make its recommendations to the Vice- Chancellor ``who shall put it up to the Board of Management with his comments, if any, for decision.''
On receipt of the recommendations from the Selection Committee, the Vice-Chancellor instead of putting up the recommendations to the Board constituted ad hoc Selection Committee consisting of five members for making a fresh selection.
This ad hoc Selection Committee met on 1761995 and unanimously recommended the name of respondent 3 for the post and the Board of Management in its 157th meeting held on 14.7.1995 approved the appointment of this respondent for a term of four years.
It is this appointment that is now under challenge before us.
3.
The argument of Mr. PS Patwalia, Advocate for the petitioner is that in view of the procedure prescribed by the Statutes for the appointment of Heads of Department, the Vice-Chancellor was required to submit the recommendations of the Selection Committee with his comments, if any, even if the recommendations were not unanimous, to the Board of Management leaving it to the latter to decide as to who should be appointed Head of Department.
The stand of the respondents, on the other hand, is that as per sub-clause (v) of clause 4(2) of the Statutes, the Selection Committee was required to recommended the name of the ``the most suitable person for appointment as Head of Department'' and since the recommendation was not unanimous and three different names had been recommended for appointment, it was not possible for the Vice-Chancellor to accept the recommendations and in the circumstances, he was left no other alternative except to appoint another Selection Committee which he did.
4.
Having given our thoughtful consideration to the rival contentions of the parties, we are of the opinion that the stand of the respondents is not tenable.
It is true that in terms of sub-clause (v), the Selection Committee after examining the research and educational contributions, academic capabilities and administrative abilities of the Professors in the Department is to recommend the name of the `most suitable person' for appointment as Head of Department.
The selection has to be made on merit and since there are seven members of the Selection Committee, it is possible that they may differ in the matter of making their recommendations was for appointment.
The mandate of sub-clause (vi) is that the recommendations of the Selection Committee whether unanimous or even where more than one names are recommended have to be put up by the Vice-Chancellor to the Board of Management with his comments, if any, for the Board to take a decision thereon.
The use of the word `shall' in sub- clause (vi) leaves no room for doubt that it was obligatory on the part of the Vice-Chancellor to place the recommendations before the Board and he had no option in the matter.
The Appointing Authority is the Board of Management and it is this Board that has to decide as to which of the persons recommended should be appointed Head of the Department.
The statutes do not envisages that in the event of a difference of opinion amongst the members of Selection Committee, the Vice-Chancellor could at its own constitute another Selection Committee for a fresh selection.
Thus, in view of the procedure prescribed by the Statutes, the Vice-Chancellor had no power to withhold the names recommended by the Selection Committee merely because the said committee was not unanimous in making its recommendations.
Of course, the Board of Management may choose to appoint any one of the recommendees or may direct that a fresh selection be made.
Since the Vice-Chancellor failed to put up the recommendations of the Selection Committee before the Board of Management for its decision, his action was ultra vires of the statutes and cannot be sustained.
Consequently, it follows that the constitution of the ad hoc Selection Committee which recommended that name of respondent 3 was also contrary to the Statutes and in this view of the matter, the recommendations made by it have no legitimacy in law.
In the result, the answer to the question posed in the earlier part of the judgment has to be in the negative and it must be held that the appointment of respondent 3 as Head, Department of Horticulture cannot be sustained.
5.
For the reasons recorded above, the writ petition is allowed and the appointment of respondent 3 as Head of the Department of Horticulture set aside.
The Vice-Chancellor is directed to place the recommendations of the Selection Committee as they are before the Board of Management for its decision and he can of course give his comments, if any, which will be taken into consideration by the Board.
The petitioner shall have his costs which are assessed at Rs. 1,000/-.
Petition allowed.