SP Kurdukar, CJ.
(Oral) - After hearing learned counsel for the parties and on perusal of the relevant record before us, we are of the opinion that the impugned judgment dated March 19, 1991 passed by the learned Single Judge in Civil Writ Petition No. 453 of 1985 does not suffer from any material irregularity or illegality save and except a small clarification is needed.
We accordingly give this clarification.
2.
The writ petitioner-Ist respondent joined as J.B.T.
teacher and as per the seniority list issued in the year 1964, he was placed in seniority list at No. 126-A.
It is the claim of the writ petitioner first respondent that selection grade was given to the JBT teachers who were in seniority list up to No. 125 with effect from October 1, 1962.
It is the grievance of the writ petitioner- respondent No. 1 that the selection grade was again released in the year 1980, but he was denied the same.
It is common premise that the writ petitioner- Ist respondent was promoted to the rank of Master on August 5, 1969 with is higher in grade than the selection grade of JBT teachers.
The clarification that needs to be given is that if any of the JBT teachers who stands in the seniority list after the petitioner, that is, after Serial Number 126-A and has been given the selection grade of JBT teacher prior to August 5, 1969, then the petitioner would be entitled to said selection grade from the date his junior JBT teacher was given.
3.
Subject to the above clarification, there is no merit in the Appeal filed by the State and we confirm the judgment accordingly.
Appeal to stand disposed of as stated above.
4.
Since the writ petitioner-respondent No. 1 has already retired long time back, the appellants and, in particular, the District Education Officer-the third appellant are directed to dispose of the writ-petitioner's claim in accordance with the judgment of the learned Single Judge, dated March 19, 1991 and the clarification given above, as expeditiously as possible and preferably before May 31, 1996.
5.
The first respondent agrees to produce the certified copy of this order before the third respondent District Education Officer, Faridkot within two weeks.
Certified copy be furnished to the writ petition-respondent No. 1 on payment of urgent costs within two weeks.
6.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Ordered accordingly.