Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner who has since retired from service, is aggrieved by the order dated January 17, 1985.
A copy of this order has been produced as Annexure P-3 with the writ petition.
By this order, it was directed that the petitioner may be given starting/initial pay of the pay scale of this post till he becomes eligible for next increment after completing the requisite experience.
It was further directed that "on the post of Functional Manager, he will be given the pay scale of lower post."
This was subject to the condition that he may be given the pay of the higher post after he acquires the requisite experience.
A few facts as relevant for the decision of this case may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner joined service in the year 1949.
He was promoted as a Head Assistant.
Vide order dated August 23, 1974, the petitioner was granted ad hoc promotion as a Development Officer.
By order dated September 30, 1974, he was transferred as an Assistant District Industries Officer.
On May 3, 1976, the petitioner was promoted as an Assistant District Industries Officer on regular basis.
Thereafter, on June 2, 1980, the petitioner was promoted as Assistant Director/District Industries Officer and was placed on probation for a period of one year.
It was further observed that since the petitioner "has not completed five years' experience in the cadre of Assistant District Industries Officer/Development Officer/Industrial Promotion Officer as required under rule (c) of the Haryana Industries Service Class II Rules, 1966, his premature promotion will be subject to the instructions contained in Chief Secretary to Government, Haryana, circular letter No. 4044-2GS-1-71/23800 dated 1781971".
The petitioner was actually adjusted as a Functional Manager, District Industries Centre, Faridabad.
Thereafter, vide order dated January 12, 1983, the petitioner was promoted to officiate as Functional Manager and granted the scale of Rs. 1200-1800 attached to the post.
3.
In the background of the above-noted factual position, the respondents had granted the pay of the post of Assistant Director to the petitioner with effect from May 1981.
This date was worked out on the hypothesis that he had been regularly promoted as Assistant District Industries Officer on May 3, 1976 and had, thus, completed the requisite five years' experience on May 2, 1981.
The petitioner's claim is that he having been promoted as an Assistant District Industries Officer on August 22, 1974, and having actually discharged the duties of that post, he was fully eligible for promotion to the post of Assistant Director on June 2, 1980 when he was actually promoted.
Accordingly, he submits that the pay scale of the post of Assistant Director is admissible to him from the date of his promotion on June 2, 1980 and it can't be postponed till May 2, 1981.
4.
This is the admitted position.
The short question that arises for consideration is - can the period of service rendered by the petitioner from August 22, 1974 to May 2, 1976 be excluded from consideration while counting his experience ?
5.
The conditions of service governing the petitioner are laid down in the rules called 'The Haryana Industries Service (State Service, Class II) Rules, 1966; rule 9 deals with the method of recruitment and provides that the appointment for the post of Assistant Director etc. shall inter alia be made "by promotion from amongst the Assistant District Industries Officers, Development Officers.....having at least five years experience as such."
The only requirement of the rule is that a person should have an experience of five years on the post of Assistant District Industries Officer or Development Officer etc. before he becomes eligible for promotion to the post of Assistant Director.
The period of ad hoc service may not count for seniority as provided for by the Government vide its instructions dated November 16, 1973.
All the same, it cannot be said that it is not experience.
In fact, it is the admitted position that the period of ad hoc service is taken into consideration for the purposes of fixation of pay.
Even if a person has worked for one month, the period of service is taken into account for determining the date of next increment.
Faced with this situation, learned counsel for the respondents submits that according to these instructions, "the service rendered on ad hoc basis cannot be counted towards experience for promotion."
This contention is totally contrary to the stipulation in the rules.
The rules only require that a person should have an experience of working on the post of Assistant District Industries 3 Officer/Development officer.
Once he has worked on that post, the nature of appointment is of no consequence.
That being so, the action of the respondents in denying the benefit of the pay scale of the post of Assistant Director to the petitioner with effect from June 2, 1980 when he had been actually promoted, was illegal.
6.
There is another aspect of the matter.
A perusal of the order dated June 2, 1980, which has been produced as Annexure R-2 with the written statement shows that the promotion was only subject to the instructions contained in the letter dated August 17, 1971.
The petitioner has produced a copy of these instructions as Annexure P-1 with the writ petition.
According to these instructions, if an officer promoted to a higher post "does not fulfil the condition regarding the minimum number of years of service in the lower rank when he should be allowed the minimum of the grade of the higher posts less the amount of the increments he would have earned in the lower grade if he had completed the minimum period prescribed for promotion."
These instructions do not postulate that the period of ad hoc service has to be excluded.
In fact, even according to these instructions, the officer has a right to be placed in the pay scale of the post to which he has been promoted.
However, his initial pay has to be reduced by the increments for the period by which his experience falls short.
In the present case, the petitioner had been admittedly promoted as Assistant District Industries Officer on August 22, 1974.
He had continued to hold this post till his regular promotion vide order dated May 3, 1976.
He had, thus, completed the requisite period of five years of service as an Assistant District Industries Officer or Development Officer by August 22, 1979.
On June 2, 1980, he was fully eligible and was entitled to the pay scale of the post of Assistant Director.
7.
In view of the above, the writ petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to re-fix the petitioner's pay as an Assistant Director w.e.f.
June 2, 1980 on the hypothesis that he was eligible for promotion to the said post and had completed the requisite experience before that date.
His pay on the post to which he had been subsequently promoted, shall also be re- fixed.
Thereafter the amount of money due to him towards arrears of salary, pension and gratuity shall be re-determined.
The needful in this behalf shall be done within three months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
Whatever amount of money is found due to the petitioner shall be paid to him within the aforesaid period.
In case the payment is not made within the period of three months, the petitioner shall be entitled to the entire amount of arrears with interest at the rate of 12% from the date of accrual till the date of actual payment.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.