Ashok Bhan, J - Prayer made in this petition is for quashing the order dated 18101995, Annexure P-8, passed by respondent No. 1 and to promote the petitioner to the post of Foreman Instructor with consequential benefits of pay and service from the date juniors to the petitioner were promoted as Foreman Instructors.
2.
Petitioner was appointed as Workshop Instructor in the trade of "Painting and Sheet Metal", vide order, Annexure P-1, which post he joined on 1.7.1965.
Rules governing the service of the petitioner are Technical Education Department Service Rules, 1986 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Rules').
Next higher post for promotion is Foreman Instructor.
3.
Post of Foreman Instructor exists in various trades, i.e. Fitting, Machine Shop, Carpenter, Smith, Foundry, Welding, Electrical, Painting and Plumbing, etc., in the Polytechnics and other institutions in Haryana.
Relevant Rule for promotion to the post of Foreman Instructor is as under :-  "S. No.
Designation of post.
Academic Qualifications and experience, if any, for direct recruitment Academic qualification and experience, if any, for appointment other than by direct recruitment.
17 Foreman (i) Matric with (i) Matric with Instructor Industrial Training Institute Certificate with atleast 55% maks.
Industrial Training Institute Certificate (ii) One year's Central Training Institute Certificate or one year's practical training in a public limited company.
(ii) One year's Central Training Institute Certificate or one year's practical training in a public limited company in case Central Training Institute facilities are not available in a particular trade.
OR (I) Three years diploma in Electrical/Mechanical/Production/Electronics Engineering/Surgical Instruments Technology, Sonepat.
(ii) Two years Professional Practical Experience in a Govt. Recognised Institute/Public limited company.
(iii) Knowledge of Hindi upto Matric Standard."
4.
One Bhagwant Singh, who was at serial No. 27 in the seniority list, was promoted as Foreman Instructor vide order dated 2311987, Annexure P-2.
Petitioner was ignored for promotion as he did not possess the requisite qualification of one year's Central Training Institute (hereinafter referred to as 'the CTI') Certificate in the trade of Painting or one year's practical training in a public limited company, in case, CTI facilities were not available in the trade of painting.
Petitioner kept on filing representations with a request that he be sent for the training but he was not sent for the training as there was no facility of training in Painting Course available in any institution in the country.
Petitioner also requested that he be sent for one year's practical training in a public limited company as provided under the Rules.
He was not sent for one year's practical training in a public limited company although certain persons, who were similarly situated, were sent to public limited companies to obtain one year's practical training.
Petitioner filed Civil Writ Petition 6417 of 1995, which was disposed of on 251995 and a direction was issued to the respondents to decide the representations filed by the petitioner before 3171995.
Representation filed by the petitioner has been rejected vide order dated 18101995, Annexure P-8, which has been impugned in this writ petition.
5.
In the written statement filed, respondents have taken the stand that the petitioner cannot be promoted to the post of Foreman Instructor as he does not have the requisite qualification of CTI Certificate and, in the alternative, one year's practical training in a public limited company.
6.
We have perused the record and heard the counsel for the parties.
7.
On perusal of the record, as are satisfied that the petitioner has been making representations from time to time to depute him to the training course pertaining to the trade of Painting to get the CTI Certificate, but he was not sent for the training as there was no facility of training in Painting course available in any institution in the country.
His request that he been sent for one year's practical training in a public limited company has also not been acceded to although certain similarly situated employees were sent for the practical training to public limited companies.
8.
Training facilities in the trade of Painting for obtaining the CTI certificate are not available in any of the institution in the country.
Petitioner, in the alternative, should have been sent to a public limited company to obtain one year's practical training.
Denial of this opportunity to the petitioner and extending the same to certain other similarly situated employees is certainly discriminatory.
Bhagwant Singh, who was junior to the petitioner, was promoted in the year 1987.
Petitioner has been making representations from time to time to depute him to the training course without any success.
Petitioner cannot be made to suffer for no fault of his.
9.
Accordingly, we direct the respondents to send the petitioner for one year's practical training to a public limited company within three months from the date of receipt of a certified copy of this order, for acquiring the requisite qualifications, failing which respondents are directed to promote the petitioner as Foreman Instructor by relaxing the condition of possession of one year's CIT Certificate or one year's practical training from a public limited company.
The writ petition stands disposed of with no order as to costs.