Ashok Bhan, J - This petition has been filed under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India, praying for an appropriate writ, order or direction directing the respondents to consider the petitioner for admission to B.Sc.
Engineering Course either in the Guru Nanak Dev Engineering College, Ludhiana or at Baba Banda Singh Engineering College, Fatehgarh Sahib, in accordance with her merit in the category of those candidates who are of Punjabi origin and settled in other states, she being at No. 1 in the merit for the seats reserved for that category.
2.
In the petition it has been stated that the petitioner's father belongs to Punjab and has his domicile in Punjab.
Till 1986, her father was living at Malout, District Mukatsar, Punjab.
He shifted his business to Chandigarh in the year 1986 due to terrorist activities in Punjab.
He set up the business of surgical instruments at House No. 1, Sector 16-A, Chandigarh.
He holds a Ration Card since 1988 and is also a registered voter at Chandigarh.
Petitioner herself took admission in the Government Model Senior Secondary School, Sector 16-A, Chandigarh, in the year 1988 where she studied continuously for seven years and passed her 10+2 examination under Roll No. 2221345 in May, 1995.
3.
State Government entrusted Thapar Institute of Engineering and Technology, Patiala, to conduct Common Entrance Test for admission to the Engineering Courses in the Colleges in the State of Punjab.
Petitioner appeared in the Common Entrance Test, 1996, under Roll No. 32439, the result of which was declared in June, 1996.
Petitioner was placed in the merit Rank at No. 1889.
4.
As per the Admission Brochure-cum-Application Form released by the Co- ordinator, Common Entrance Test, 1996, the last date for receipt of application forms at Patiala was 2861996.
Petitioner applied for admission on 2461996 under three categories; namely, category of candidates of Punjab Domicile, category of students of other states and the category of students of Punjab origin settled in other States/Abroad.
The grievance in this petition is with regard to denial of admission to the petitioner in the category of students of Punjab origin settled in other States/abroad.
5.
The date of interview/counselling for the third category of candidates i.e. for those candidates who had applied for the group of Punjabi settled in other States/abroad, was 15.7.1996.
Petitioner along with her father appeared in the counselling on the said day.
It has been averred that the petitioner was not given admission on 15.7.1996 as she had not attached residence certificate issued by the Tehsildar, UT Chandigarh although she had produced her matriculation certificate and the voters Identity Card issued by the Election Commission of India to her father, showing him as a voter at Chandigarh; that respondents 2 and 3 insisted upon the residence certificate of the petitioner of UT Chandigarh and refused to give admission to the petitioner in the absence of the same.
Petitioner, inspite of request, was also not given provisional admission subject to her producing the residence certificate for Chandigarh at a later date.
Petitioner obtained the residence certificate issued by the Sub Divisional Magistrate, UT Chandigarh on 1971996 and produced the same before respondents 2 and 3, who again refused to give admission to the petitioner on the ground that she was not eligible to seek admission in the category of Punjabi settled in other States/abroad, aggrieved against which, the present writ petition has been filed.
6.
Separate written statements have been filed on behalf of respondents 1 and 3.
7.
The stand taken by both the respondents is that the petitioner cannot seek admission simultaneously under two categories, which mutually exclude each other i.e. being a resident and domicile of Punjab and another as Punjabi settled in other States/abroad.
In order to claim a seat in the first category, being a domicile of Punjab, petitioner submitted two certificates; one issued by the Tehsildar, Malout and the other by the Sub Divisional Officer (Civil), Malout, showing the petitioner to be a resident of Village Malout having domicile of Punjab.
Having claimed herself to be a resident and domicile of Punjab petitioner is estopped to seek admission under the category of Punjabi settled in other states-abroad.
8.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
As per the Admission Brochure-cum-Application Form, to be eligible to seek admission in the general category, a candidate should have a Punjab domicile certificate.
Since, most of the seats were reserved for the candidates who were bona fide residents of Punjab and had passed their 10+2 examination from the schools and colleges situated in the State of Punjab, it was decided to reserve a total of 10 seats for those candidates who were not domicile of Punjab or who did not satisfy the requirement of being bona fide residents of Punjab to be eligible for admission against these ten seats.
Accordingly, five seats were kept reserved for the candidates belonging to the State other than Punjab, one of which was further kept reserved for the candidates coming from the State of Jammu and Kashmir.
Five seats were reserved for the candidates whose parents were Punjabi settled in other States/abroad.
Relevant provisions of the prospectus, regarding reservation and distribution of seats, read as under :-  "6.2.3 Reservation/Distribution of seats : - All the seats (except seats offered to other state candidates) are for bona fide residents of Punjab who have passed their 10+2 examination from schools and colleges situated in the State of Punjab.
They should produce a Punjab Domicile Certificate.
Branch and category-wise distribution along with reservation of seats is shown in Table 21 (a) xx xx xx xx xx xx (b) Other States and Punjabi settled in other states/abroad.
"Not more than one candidate from one state shall be admitted in both categories taken together.
Distribution of seats is as under : 5 seats 1) 5 seats shall be offered to candidates from states other than Punjab and not covered by the Government of India nominations and (b)(ii).
However, one out of the five seats above shall be offered to candidate hailing from J&K.
5 seats ii) 5 seats shall be offered to candidates whose parents are Punjabi settled in other states/abroad.
However, one out of these 5 seats shall be offered to the candidates belonging to Andaman Nicobar.
Further provided he/she must have studied upto Middle/Matric in that state.
To be eligible in this category the candidate must have qualified additional paper of Matric Standard to be conducted by CET-1996 authorities, the subject of translation from English to Punjabi (in Gurmukhi script).
The eligibility pass %age in this paper shall be the same as in the main CET-1996 for general (open) category.
(c) Six seats over and above the sanctioned strength for the candidates on behalf of Govt. of India, nominated by the State/UTs lacking facilities of Engineering Education and they should have qualified CET-1996 of Punjab State.
The following additional certificates/attested copies (if applicable) should be submitted along with the Application Form by candidates who wish to seek admission in Guru Nanak Dev Engg.
College, Ludhiana and Baba Banda Singh Engg.
College, Fatehgarh Sahib.
The format of these certificates are given in appendix.
i) Particulars of Education.
ii) Undertaking by candidate Belonging to Rural Area.
iii) Certificate of Rural Education.
iv) Certificate of Residence (required from candidates of other states/Punjabi origin settled in other states)" 9.
Petitioner had submitted two certificates, copies of which are attached as Annexures P-5 and P-6 (equivalent to Annexures R-1 R-1/2) In both these certificates, she has been shown to be a bona fide resident of Village Malout, District Muktsar, and a domicile of the State of Punjab.
A person who is a resident and domicile of Punjab is not entitled to claim admission against the seats reserved for Punjabi settled in other States/abroad.
It would be a contradiction in terms while on the one hand the petitioner is a resident and domicile of Punjab and on the other hand she belongs to Punjabi settled in other States/abroad, so as to be eligible for admission in the third category.
The claim of the petitioner for admission against the seats reserved for the candidates whose parents are Punjabi settled in other States/abroad is contradictory since, the petitioner has produced Punjab Domicile Certificate and, therefore, cannot claim eligibility against the seats kept reserved for candidates other than those from Punjab.
Categories, as a resident and domicile of Punjab and Punjabi settled in other States/abroad, mutually exclude each other and a candidate cannot put a claim to both these categories simultaneously/alternatively.
10.
This apart, she is not entitled to admission under the reserved category of candidates whose parents are Punjabi settled in other States/abroad, as she neither attached a valid certificate showing her to be a resident of Chandigarh with her application form nor produced the same on the date of interview/counselling.
As per Rule 3.4 of the Admission Brochure-cum- Application Form, attested copies of the certificates in support of the claims made by the candidate were to be attached with the application form.
Original certificates were required to be produced at the time of interview/counselling.
As the petitioner failed to submit her residence certificate on the date of interview/counseling, she was not considered in the category of candidates who were of Punjabi origin and settled in other States.
Mr. PS Patwalia, appearing for the Co-ordinator, Common Entrance Test 1996, has stated, after taking instructions, that the seats meant for the candidates whose parents are Punjabi settled in other States/abroad were filled up on the first day of counselling and no seats are available for the said category.
For the reasons stated above, we find no merit in this petition and dismiss the same with no order as to costs.