RS Mongia, J - Four posts of Carpenter Instructors for Industrial Training Department were advertised by the Subordinate Service Selection Board, Haryana.
The last date for receipt of the applications was fixed as August 7, 1981.
Copy of the advertisement has been annexed as Annexure P-1 with this writ petition.
Out of the four posts advertised, one was reserved for Scheduled Caste and one for the Ex-Servicemen.
It is evident from the advertisement and it is admitted case of the parties that no post was reserved for the backward class.
The petitioner applied in response to the above mentioned advertisement for the post in question.
According to the petitioner, there was a column in the application to indicate if he (petitioner) belonged to the category of Scheduled caste or backward class.
Since the petitioner belongs to a backward class category, he had mentioned in the application that he belonged to the backward class category.
The Subordinate Services Selection Board took its own time to select the persons in response to the above mentioned advertisement and it was on January 15, 1986, vide Annexure P-2, that the Subordinate Services Selection Board informed the petitioner that he had been selected for the post.
The letter addressed to the petitioner reads as under :  "Reference your application for the post mentioned in the subject.
2.
The Board have recommended your name to the Director, Industrial Training and Vocational Education, Haryana, Chandigarh, for appointment as Carpenter Instructor.
Your name appears at serial No. 2 of the merit list."
It may be observed here that vide letter dated January 6, 1996, the Secretary of the Subordinate Services Board had sent the merit list to the Director, Industrial Training Department, Haryana, which has been appended as Annexure R-1 with written-Statement.
The relevant portion of the same reads as under :  "I am directed to refer to your demand vide letter No. TE/133/25- III/18878, dated 2691985 on the subject noted above and to say that the Board recommends the following qualified candidates, in order of merit, for appointment to the post mentioned in the subject : S.No.
Merits No.
Roll No. Category, Name and address 1.
10 General Kailash Chand s/o Bhaashmber Dayal c/o Sh. Shiv Narain, Social Welfare Deptt.
No. 68, 70, Sector 17-A, Chandigarh 2.
25 BC Satpal s/o Sh. Babu Ram, Village Marupur, PO Jathlana, Teh.
Thanesar, Distt.
Kurukshetra.
3.
16 BC Prem Parkash Singh s/o Ram Singh Village Rampur, PO Kundal, Distt.
Sonepat.
4.
21 BC Satya Pal s/o Ram Swarup V & PO Makrauli Kalan, Teh.
and Distt.
Rohtak.
The petitioner was not given appointment, as according to the respondent- State, there was no reservation for the candidates belonging to backward class category and since the petitioner's name had been recommended against a backward class category, he could not be appointed.
This led the petitioner to file the present writ petition.
2.
Somehow the writ petition could not be heard at an early date.
The contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that two posts were meant for general category and one for Scheduled Caste and the fourth one for the Ex-Serviceman (in short ESM).
The petitioner, though belonging to backward class category, could compete against the general category post and it is evident from letter (Annexure P-2) and letter (Annexure R-1) (relevant extract already reproduced above) that no candidate belonging to Scheduled Caste category or an ESM was found suitable and the petitioner and two other candidates though belonging to the backward class category were recommended as general category candidates in order of merit.
There was no reservation for backward class category and, therefore, there was no question of recommending candidates in that category by treating any post reserved for them.
In fact it is the case of the petitioner that he was treated as a general category candidate and he was placed at No. 2 in the merit list and against the post reserved for Scheduled Caste and Ex-Servicemen, for which none was found suitable belonging to those categories, two other candidates were recommended who were to be treated as general category candidates though they belong to backward class category.
According to the learned counsel, a candidate even belonging to any reserved category (though in the present case backward class category was not reserved), can also compete against a post meant for general category candidate.
The letter (Annexure R-1) clearly indicates that the recommendations were being made in order of merit.
The petitioner being at No. 2 in the merit list, he was entitled to be appointed as a Carpenter Instructor.
3.
On the other hand, the case of the respondents is that the recommendations at serial Nos. 2, 3 and 4 were made against the backward class category and since there was no reservation in the said category, the petitioner and persons at Nos. 3 and 4 could not be appointed and that is why the Subordinate Services Selection Board was asked to readvertise three posts which it did.
4.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties I am of the view that vide letter of the Subordinate Services Selection Board (Annexure R-1), to which reference has already been made above, the recommendation had been made in order of merit.
Nos. 3 and 4 could be said to have come in by virtue of their merit as no Scheduled Caste/Ex-Serviceman candidate was being selected but the petitioner was at No. 2 in the merit list and he would be treated as a general category candidate though factually he may be belonging to a backward class category.
The respondents could not deny appointment on the ground indicated above.
5.
Now the question arises as to what relief the petitioner is entitled under the circumstances as the selection took place way back in 1986.
I am of the view that the interest of justice would be met if the respondents are directed to appoint the petitioner to any available post of Carpenter Instructor or that may become immediately available hereinafter w.e.f.
the date immediately after the person at Sr. No. 1 was appointed.
However, he would not be entitled to any arrears of pay on that account but that date would be reckoned for all purposes, i.e. seniority, fixation of pay etc.  6.
The writ petition is allowed in the above terms.
I make no order as to costs.