GC Garg, J - Petitioner OP Wadha has filed this writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India seeking quashment of letter dated 241993 and communication dated 361993, Annexure P-10 and P-11 respectively, with a further prayer that the respondents be directed by issuing a writ of mandamus to appoint examiners to evaluate his PhD thesis.
2.
The petitioner was enrolled as a Research Scholar for the PhD Course on August 25, 1989 under registration No. 89-UD, Ph.
D.-25, Annexure P-1.
Dr. Mrs. Sarla Malik, the then Professor and Head, Department of Public Administration, Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra was appointed as his Supervisor.
Topic assigned to the petitioner for his PhD Course was "University Administration in India : A case Study of Universities in Haryana.
According to the petitioner, he submitted his half-yearly reports to the Supervisor which as per his information were found to be satisfactory.
The last report was submitted by the petitioner in March, 1991.
He thereafter made a request to the authorities vide letter Annexure P-6, dated June 24, 1992 for appointment of examiners for evaluation of his thesis.
His request was duly recommended by the Supervisor.
However, examiners to evaluate the thesis of the petitioner were not appointed as in the intervening period, some dispute arose between the petitioner and respondent No. 3 who had in the meantime taken over as Head and Chairman, Department of Public Administration in February 1991 after Dr. Mrs. Sarla Malik went on long leave and joined as Professor in Maharshi Dayanand University, Rohtak.
During this period, the petitioner remained under an impression and perhaps rightly that his candidature for Ph.
D. Course had been cancelled.
It was in this situation that he filed the present writ petition seeking quashment of Annexures P-10 and P-11 as noticed above with a further prayer that his thesis for the PhD Course be got evaluated by appointing the examiners.
3.
Two separate written statements have been filed, one by respondents 1 and 2 jointly and the other by respondent No. 3.
Allegations of mala fide levelled by the petitioner against the respondents have been denied in the written statements.
However, it is not necessary to go into this aspect of the matter as the petitioner after having sound advice from his counsel has fairly and, in my view, rightly withdrawn those allegations.
As regards the respondent-University, it has taken a stand that first three half-yearly reports have not been received and thus according to the University the petitioner has not yet completed his research work on his thesis.
It is appropriate to notice at this stage that some correspondence placed on record of this petition by the University as also respondent No. 3 goes to show that at one point of time candidature of the petitioner for the Ph.
D. Course had been cancelled but during the course of arguments, learned counsel appearing for the respondents took a candid stand, especially after going through the correspondence, that registration of the petitioner had not been cancelled and Dr. Mrs. Sarla Malik was allowed to continue as his Supervisor.
Letter Annexure P-7/A dated 681992 from the Deputy Registrar (R&S) addressed to the Chairman, Department of Public Administration of the University is a clear pointer in that behalf.
According to learned counsel for the respondents, registration of the petitioner has not been cancelled even till today.
It is thus not necessary to examine the averments made by the petitioner in the writ petition that his registration for the Ph.
D. Course had been cancelled.
4.
Faced with the above situation, the only point that remains for consideration is as to whether the thesis submitted by the petitioner, duly approved by his Supervisor on August 23, 1993, is required to be evaluated or not.
5.
Ordinances 7, 11, 14 and 20 of the Kurukshetra University relating to `Doctorate in Philosophy' which are relevant for the disposal of this writ petition read thus:  "7(a).
Every candidate, enrolled for a research course, leading to the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy, shall be required to prosecute his Research Work for at least 6 terms either at Kurukshetra or at any other University or Institute, recognised for the purpose.
Provided that, where a student has been enrolled as a candidate for the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy in another University with a similar topic (to be determined by the Board of Studies concerned) and has pursued a course of study for not less than three academic terms, he may, if the fulfils the minimum qualification laid down in Clause 3 above, be permitted by the Board of Studies concerned, to be enrolled as a Research student of the University and to submit his thesis after the expiration of not less than three academic terms.
Provided further that every candidate, shall stay at Kurukshetra for a minimum period of 3 terms, except that in exceptional cases, the condition of minimum stay at Kurukshetra may be relaxed by the Board of Studies concerned on the recommendation of the Chairperson of the Department.
(b) Every candidate shall submit his thesis, within a period of four years from the date of his registration, failing which his registration shall be cancelled, unless this period is extended in exceptional cases, by a maximum of 2 years, by the Vice-Chancellor, on the recommendation of the Supervisor and the Chairperson of the Department concerned.
Provided that the Vice-Chancellor may on the recommendation of the Supervisor/Chairperson of the Department concerned, extend this period for one year more in the case of blind candidates.
Provided further that on the recommendation of the Supervisor and the Chairperson of the Department, the Vice-Chancellor may condone delay in the submission of the Thesis up to one year if he is satisfied that the candidate could not do so within maximum permissible period on account of unavoidable circumstances.
(c) That every Supervisor shall, through the Chairperson of the Department, send to the Registrar, every six months at the end of March and September, a report on the work done by the Research Scholar.
(d) The Academic Council may, on the recommendation of the Board of Studies, cancel the registration of a Research Scholar whose work has been reported to be unsatisfactory.
11.
(a) On receipt of an application from a candidate, duly certified by the Supervisor, that his thesis is complete, the Academic Council on the recommendation of the Board of Studies concerned, shall draw a panel of six external examiners to evaluate the thesis of which not more than two shall be foreign examiners.
The examiners so recommended shall be of the rank of a Professor.
Only in exceptional cases, and for reasons to be recorded, the Board may recommend the names of not more than two Senior Readers who are qualified and have recognised research publications in journals of repute.
Before recommending the names, the Board of Studies shall have before them an abstract of the thesis including the chapter of contents.
(b) The candidate shall submit his Thesis within six months from the date on which his application is considered by the Board of Studies for the appointment of the examiners, provided that the Board of Studies may, for satisfactory reasons, extend the period.
14.
The candidate shall also submit a summary of the Thesis in about 300 words, indicating how far the Thesis embodies the results of his own research or observations and in what respects, his investigations appear to him to advance the study of the subject of his Thesis.
20.
The candidate shall pay the registration fee etc. within a month of the date on which the Vice-Chancellor accords permission to do so, failing which his registration shall stand cancelled.
Provided that the Vice- Chancellor may, in special circumstances for reasons to be recorded in writing, extend the period."
6.
After going through the Ordinances as reproduced above, I find that a candidate for the PhD Course is required to show his work on regular intervals to his Supervisor and the Supervisor alone and also to submit his progress reports to him.
It is thereafter the duty of the Supervisor to submit the half-yearly reports on the progress made by the candidate, who is working under his supervision, to the university with his own remarks.
7.
A reading of clause (b) of Ordinance 7 suggests that the Chairperson has only a limited role to play.
The Vice-Chancellor on the recommendation the Supervisor and the Chairperson may extend period for submission of thesis or condone the delay in submission thereof.
Clause (c) of Ordinance 7 provides that the Supervisor shall send to the Registrar, every six months at the end of March and September, a report on the work done by the Research Scholar.
This report is required to be sent by the Supervisor through the Chairperson.
The effect of non-submission of the reports by the Supervisor to the Registrar through the Chairperson or otherwise has not been indicated.
Though the word `shall' has been used in clause (c) Ordinance 7 yet to me, it appears that the provision is directory and not mandatory as it is not indicated therein or in any other provision as to what consequences shall flow if the six-monthly reports are not submitted by the Supervisor to the Registrar.
It is thus only a regulatory provision.
It is meant to be observed.
A Supervisor is not entitled to say that he will not submit the reports even if asked for by the Registrar but non-submission of the reports cannot lead to the conclusion that the thesis submitted by a Research Scholar shall not be got evaluated after it is duly approved by the Supervisor, only on the ground that six-monthly reports had not been submitted or these are not available.
The matter may entirely be different if the registration of a candidate has been cancelled before the submission of the thesis for whatever reason it may be.
However, it is not necessary to consider the matter any further in this particular case for the simple reason that the petitioner completed his thesis within a period of four years and Dr. Mrs. Sarla Malik who continues to be his Supervisor has duly approved the thesis within a period of four years as fit for evaluation.
The thesis with the certificate of the Supervisor is already with the University.
8.
Mr. Sibal, learned counsel for the respondents, however, submitted that the petitioner is not entitled to the relief prayed, for the simple reason that he did not submit his reports as per the University Ordinances and also did not submit an application with an abstract of thesis including the chapters of contents so as to enable the Board of Studies to consider the same and make recommendation to the Academic Council concerned for drawing up a panel of external examiners to evaluate the thesis.
Mr. Sibal submitted that the summary of thesis running into about 300 words as contemplated by Ordinance 14 has not been submitted by the petitioner and further he has also not deposited the fee as required by Ordinance 20.
Learned counsel for the respondents took pains to submit that the petitioner has levelled serious allegations of mala fide against respondent No. 3 and these allegations are totally uncalled for, and even if the petitioner has unconditionally withdrawn the said allegations, respondent No. 3 deserves to be compensated in that behalf.
But on a consideration of the matter, the contentions of Mr. Sibal have no merit, for the reasons notice hereinafter.
9.
Once the petitioner unconditionally and in an apologetic manner has withdrawn the allegations of mala fide, it is not necessary to state even a word thereafter.
I am sure that Dr.
Professor Hoshiar Singh, Professor and Head, Department of Public Administration, respondent No. 3, will show magnanimity and forgive the petitioner, a student, for the allegations levelled against him by the former, especially having regard to the fact that the petitioner withdrew this allegations at the very threshold of the hearing of the petition.
I am confident that Dr. Hoshiar Singh who has a rich experience as a Professor will act fairly and faithfully and forget everything even if there is any in his mind about the behaviour of the petitioner.
Thus, after considering the entire matter and having regard to the peculiar facts and circumstances of this case, I find that the thesis submitted by the petitioner deserves to be considered as per the Ordinances reproduced above, at a very early date, preferably within two or three months.
Some of the reasons in support of the above conclusion are:  i) The petitioner was registered for the PhD Course in the year 1989 and a period of more than seven years has already gone by and his thesis was admittedly complete with the report of the Supervisor on 2381993. ii) The Supervisor who continues to be Supervisor of the petitioner even now, never reported to the Deputy Registrar (R&S) that the petitioner did not submit the half-yearly reports.
If for any reason, the Supervisor did not forward these reports to the Deputy Registrar (R&S) through the Chairperson or if the same are not traceable with the university or with the Supervisor, it cannot in the facts of this case deprive the petitioner of his right to get his thesis evaluated.
(iii) The Supervisor has already approved the thesis submitted by the petitioner as fit for evaluation.
(iv) No Ordinance was brought to my notice during the course of arguments providing that a candidate registered for PhD Course is required to show his progress reports to a person other than his Supervisor during the period of his registration.
(v) Registration of the petitioner for the PhD Course has not yet been cancelled and Dr. Mrs. Sarla Malik has specifically been allowed to continue as his Supervisor even after her leaving the Kurukshetra University.
(vi) The petitioner had submitted his fourth half-yearly report in March 1991.
(vii) Even the written statement filed by respondents 1 and 2 indicates that the petitioner showed rough drafts of some of the chapters of his Ph.
D. thesis to the Dean, Faculty of Social Sciences on 25.6.1993 and the Dean was satisfied that the petitioner had done quite a bit of work purportedly pertaining to his thesis and, therefore, he deserves sympathetic consideration.
10.
It is in this backdrop hoped that Dr. Hoshiar Singh, respondent No. 3 as a Member/Chairman of the Board of Studies will consider the issue of appointment of Examiners and make recommendations in that behalf to the Academic Council at a very early date.
He will, however, ensure that if some formalities remain to be completed by the petitioner, such as submission of abstract of the thesis etc., he will get it completed from him and the petitioner has undertaken before me that he will immediately remove all possible objections if any that stand in the way of the Board of Studies or the Academic Council in the matter of appointment of Examiners.
As regards deposit of fee, the petitioner will deposit the same as and when asked to do so.
11.
As already concluded by me above that the petitioner has submitted his thesis and the same deserves to be evaluated, the exercise of appointing the examiners may now be completed within a period of three months.
Writ petition is allowed in the above terms with no order as to costs.