Jawahar Lal Gupta J (Oral) - The petitioner who is working as an Executive Engineer is aggrieved by the charge-sheet issued to him with memorandum dated March 15 1990.
A copy of the charge-sheet along with the memorandum has been produced as Annexure P-2 with the writ petition.
The petitioner prays that this charge-sheet be quashed.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
On June 30 1982 the Executive Engineer Public Health World Bank Division Rohtak allotted the work regarding construction of an Inlet Channel to Mr. Naresh Kumar Dalal a contractor.
This work had to be completed by August 30 1982.
The work was actually completed after some delay and handed  over to the authority concerned in the year 1983.
It appears that the then Executive Engineer had deducted an amount of Rs. 18000/- from the bill submitted by the contractor.
An additional amount of Rs. 10000/- had also been withheld as testing charges.
The contractor had challenged this action.
The matter was referred for arbitration to Mr. MN Sharma who is stated to be an officer of the Department.
In January 1984 the petitioner was transferred to the Public Health Division Bahadurgarh.
He had consequently to represent the Department before the Arbitrator.
He had produced certain records.
After consideration of the matter the Arbitrator gave his award on December 27 1984.
He awarded an amount of Rs. 28000/- to the contractor.
After a lapse of more than five years the department issued the impugned charge-sheet to the petitioner in which it was alleged that the petitioner ``gave quite misleading/false statement on 5121984 regarding completion of work before the Arbitrator.''
It has been further observed that the petitioner ``should not have based his entire defence on the strength of wrong certificate recorded by his subordinate rather he was required to confirm the completion report as provided under para 2122 of P.W.D.
Code.''
Observing that due to misrepresentation of facts by the petitioner the department had suffered a loss of Rs. 28000/- he was charged with having violated the provisions of rule 3(1) of Government Employees (Conduct) Rules 1966.
3.
The petitioner's submission is that he had merely produced the relevant record according to which the Sub Divisional Engineer and the Junior Engineer had certified that the work had been completed as per the departmental specifications.
By doing so he had committed no misconduct and that the action of the department in raising this controversy after the long lapse of more than five years was wholly arbitrary and unfair.
He has also pointed out that a reply to the charge-sheet had been filed on April 14 1990.
The relevant documents had also been produced.
Even thereafter the petitioner had made various requests to the respondents.
However in spite of the lapse of long time the enquiry proceedings were not concluded.
As a result he filed the present writ petition.
The petitioner prays that since no charge of misconduct is made out against him the impugned charge-sheet and the proceedings deserve to be quashed.
4.
The respondent contests the petitioner's claim.
It has been averred that the petitioner should not have based his entire defence on the strength of wrong certificate recorded by his subordinates.
It has been further mentioned that the petitioner had deducted an amount of Rs. 28000/- while passing the bill on December 4 1984 on account of delayed and defective execution of the work.
As such the respondent maintains that the petitioner ``had no locus standi to state before (the) Arbitrator that the work has been done as per PWD specifications.''
It has been further stated that ``the concerned Sub Divisional Engineer Shri Karan Singh and Shri Sukhbir Singh Junior Engineer have also been charge-sheeted under Rule 7 by the Department'' for recording wrong certificates about quality of work.
According to the respondent ``the entries made by the Junior Engineer/Sub Divisional Engineer in measurement books about the certificate recorded by them that the work has been done according to PWD specification is not based on facts.
While producing these documents before the Arbitrator the petitioner was required to make it clear that a certificate is not based on facts and the contractor even despite issue of repeated requests had failed to rectify the defects.''
On this basis the respondent prays that the writ petition has no merit and should be dismissed.
5.
The petitioner has filed a replication reiterating the averments in the writ petition and controverting the claim made by the respondent.
He has in particular quoted from the statement given by him.
This reads as under :-  ``Cross-sections of the filling required for construction of Inlet Channel are enclosed herewith.
The side slopes are steeper than as per requirements of stable sections.
These were constructed as per instructions of the then field staff who had recorded certificates of the work having been done as per PWD specifications as per record entries made on page 57 and page 198 of M.B.
No.
61.''
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
6.
It is the admitted position that the petitioner was not the Engineer-in- charge of the Public Health Division Bahadurgarh at the time of the allocation of the work of the contractor on the date when it was completed and handed over to the department.
In fact the work had been completed in the year 1983 while the petitioner had been posted at Bahadurgarh on January 18 1984.
It is also admitted that while passing the final bill the petitioner had deducted an amount of Rs. 28000/- from the final bill in accordance with the observations that had been made by his predecessor.
However when the proceedings before the Arbitrator were going on the petitioner had admitted that according to the certificates recorded by the field staff the work had been completed as per PWD specifications.
Mr. Khetarpal counsel for the respondent is not in a position to suggest that this statement was false or wrong.
In fact it is the admitted position that the certificate regarding completion of work according to specifications had been duly recorded by the Junior Engineer and the Sub Divisional Engineer.
It also appears that these two officials have been charge-sheeted by the department on account of recording ``wrong certificate about quality of work.''
In this situation the petitioner who had merely admitted a fact which existed on record cannot by any stretch of imagination be accused of having committed any misconduct.
Surely the department did not expect the petitioner to tell a lie or to withhold a fact which was apparent on the record.
7.
Mr. Khetarpal learned counsel for the respondent submits that the petitioner should have added that an amount of Rs. 28000/- had been deducted from the bill as the work had not been satisfactorily completed.
Learned counsel is however not in a position to produce the complete statement made by the petitioner.
It has not been shown that in fact the petitioner had not disclosed this fact.
In any event it was of no consequence as it is the admitted position that the contractor had sought arbitration only for the reason that an amount of Rs. 28000/- had been deducted from his bill.
8.
Otherwise Mr. Khetarpal has not been able to support the charge as levelled against the petitioner.
In this situation there is no alternative except to hold that the action of the respondent in issuing charge-sheet to the petitioner was wholly arbitrary and unfair.
The fact that this was done after a lapse of more than 5 years only makes the things worse.
No other point has been urged.
9.
In view of the above the impugned charge-sheet as also the proceedings that may have been held before the filing of this petition are quashed.
In the circumstances there will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.