JK Mehra, J (Oral) - This is a writ petition by Flying Officer KS Saini, who joined the Air Force as an Airman in Accounts Department and after earning promotion became a Warrant Officer.
He was working as Warrant Officer and had completed 25 years of service when the took competitive examination for being considered for commission in Air Force as per the Air Force instructions No. 48/75, as amended by Air Force Instructions No. 5/82.
He passed the said examination.
After completing his training, consequent upon his selection following his success in the competitive examination, he was commissioned in the rank of Flying Officer in Accounts Branch on 2191985.
It is contended by the petitioner that his selection resulted in his getting commissioned as Flying Officer.
On such appointment, if granted, after completion of 8 years of combined service, was to result in the petitioner being granted 2 years ante date for the purpose of pay only.
The said para 9 of the said instructions reads as under :-  "9.
Appointment :- Airmen who successfully complete the training will be granted commission as under against certain selected posts earmarked for them :- Serving MWOs, WOs and PIt sgts will be granted commission in the rank of Plt.
Offr.
Those WOs/MWOs who have to their credit 8 years combined service as MWOs/WOs and in the ranks at the time of grant of commission, will however be commissioned in the rank of Flying Officer and granted 2 years ante-date for purpose of pay only."
It is pointed out that a person being selected for commission as direct entrant to the Air Force would be initially commissioned as Pilot Officer and after serving for 2 years as Pilot Officer, he gets the rank of Flying Officer and as Flying Officer, draws at the initial appointment a salary of Rs. 830/- pm The case of the Warrant Officer, which is covered for recruitment under aforesaid para 9 of the Air Force Instruction 48 of 1975, is quite distinct and different from the direct entrants to the commissioned service of the Air Force because to be eligible for commission, a Warrant Officer and other ranks mentioned in the said para 9 are required to have a minimum of 8 years service to their credit.
In the present case, the petitioner had over 25 years of service to his credit.
From a reading of the said para 9, it also becomes clear that the petitioner on his appointment as Flying Officer has to be granted 2 years ante-date for the purpose of pay only which cannot be construed in any manner other than the petitioner being appointed as Flying Officer and being granted the increments, which he would have earned after serving for 2 years as "Flying Officer", which means Rs. 830+two further annual increments, which in the present case was of Rs. 40 each, making it a sum of Rs. 910, but the Accounts Officer denied this payment to the petitioner on the plea that 2 years ante-date meant only the period which they would have served as Pilot Officer on being commissioned.
I think, such a construction is wholly erroneous and not at all warranted by the instructions, particularly, instruction in para-9 because the petitioner was not to be appointed as Pilot Officer at all.
He was to be commissioned on selection as Flying Officer straightaway and if he was to draw a salary of Rs. 830 only then there would have been no need to add the words, "and granted two years ante date for purpose of pay only".
Accepting the construction of Accounts Officer would render the said words redundant.
It is a well known principles of construction that as far as possible meaning has to be given to every expression used so as not to render any part of the rule or statute redundant.
I have no doubt in my mind that the contention of Air Force Central Accounts Office is wholly misconceived and unjustified in construing that the very grant of the rank of Flying Officer amounted to grant of ante-date of 2 years for the purpose of pay.
What is contained in para-9 mentioned above, is that he would be commissioned as Flying Officer, which would automatically make available the minimum pay which the officer is to draw as a Flying Officer and there would have been no need to add further the aforesaid expression viz, "and granted 2 years' ante-date for purpose of pay only".
This view appears to have been accepted by the petitioner's own department also where Wing Commander Deputy Accounts Officer, Headquarters Western Air Command has written to Air Headquarters RK Puram, Department of Accounts, New Delhi vide his letrnytsnyd ter dated 22121986.
This provision is accepted as correct by Wing Commander T Parthasarathy, Command Accounts Officer, Hq.
Training Command IAF, Bangalore Office also in his letter dated 15.5.1985 addressed to Mr. R Venkatarathanam, Controller of Defence Accounts (AF), Rajpur Road, Dehradun, The relevant part of this letter is reproduced as under :- "1.
It is understood from AFCAO letter No. CAO/10204/OPS/Ptxx/78 dated 19 Jul 84 that CDDA had objected to the pay fixation of BCO Officers on the ground that they are not eligible for any ante-date except for initial pay purposes under IFA 30/74.
Accordingly huge recoveries have been made.
2.
This objection is applicable only for those who are commissioned in the rank of FG Officer.
The last sentence of para 9 of AFIR reads as follows :- "MWOs/WOs etc" will be commissioned in the rank FG Officer and granted two years of ante-date for the purpose of pay only".
A careful reading of this sentence bring out the following : (a) The Officer is to be commissioned firstly in the rank of FG Officer.
Initial Basic Pay on the Commissioning in the rank of Fg Officer is Rs. 830/- pm (b) And the officers so commissioned are to be given 2 years ante-date for the purpose of pay.
After this action, the pay becomes Rs. 910/-.
Thus, the initial pay of BC Officers automatically becomes Rs. 910/-.
(c) As the action to grant ante-date of two years for the purpose of pay follows the action of commissioning the benefit of ante date is a permanent benefit.
3.
The DCDA (AF) would have perhaps been correct had AFI been worded as follows : MWOs/WOs etc. are to be granted 2 years ante-date and commissioning in the rank of Fg Officer.
4.
In terms Para 49 of the Defence Accounts Department Office Manual Part I 1979, the only Fictionary meaning of the words will be adopted in interpreting the rules.
Therefore feel by above literal interpretation is correct and hence objection of DCDA (AF) on the above subject requires reconsideration by your office."
To illustrate the point, if a Warrant Officer with over 8 years combined service after passing the examination is selected as Flying Officer on 211996, the giving of 2 years ante-date for the purposes of pay only would mean that notionally he would be deemed to have been commissioned as Flying Officer for the purposes of pay only on 111994 and his pay would be fixed accordingly.
As a result of the above discussion, I hold that the respondent's interpretation of para 9 of the Air Force Instruction No. 48 of 75 and also of Air Force Instructions No. 5 and 82, is not correct.
In that view of the matter, Rule Nisi issued is made absolute and the respondents are directed to fix the salary of the petitioner after giving two increments, i.e. by ante-dating the appointment of the petitioner as Flying Officer by 2 years on 191985 for the purpose of pay only, i.e. to fix the salary so that the petitioner is paid a total sum of the salary at the start of the scale of Flying Officer plus two annual increment, which he would have earned, i.e., Rs. 830+40+40 =910/- and calculated accordingly throughout the period of his service after his being commissioned and pay to him the arrears within two months from today.
The respondents shall also pay costs to the petitioner, which are assessed at Rs. 2,500/-.
The writ petition is disposed of in the above terms.