NK Agrawal, J - This petition has been filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to appoint the petitioner on the post of Lecturer in Mathematics (Male) School Cadre in the Secondary Education Department Haryana strictly in terms of the inter se merit of the select list finalised by the Subordinate Services Selection Board (hereinafter referred to as the Board); further prayer made is that respondents be directed not to discriminate against the petitioner in the matter of appointment on the post of Lecturer by offering appointments to the candidates lower in merit than the petitioner.
2.
Board issued Advertisement No. 1/1995 on 2211995 inviting applications for the posts of Lecturers in different subjects including the subject of Mathematics.
In the subject of mathematics there were 8 posts of General Category, 3 for SC, 1 for BC and 3 for Ex Servicemen category (for short referred to as ESM).
Interviews/selections however were not made against the posts advertised vide Advertisement No. 1 of 1995 and in the mean time some more posts of Lecturers (Male) in Mathematics were further required to be filled for which another Advertisement No. 7/1995 was issued on 10.10.1995 by the Board.
For the subject of mathematics there were 24 posts in the General Category, 9 for SC category, 5 for BCA., 4 for BCB.
and 5 for ESM Besides one vacancy which was likely to become available upto 3131996 for SC category was also requisitioned against Advertisement No. 7 of 1995.
By combining the posts advertised by two advertisements i.e. 1/1995 and 7/1995 for the subject of Mathematics, there were 32 posts in the General Category, 13 for SC, 6 for BCA., 4 for BCB.
and 8 for ESM category for Lecturers (Males) School Cadre.
Posts which were advertised vide advertisement No. 1/1995 dated 2211995 were clubbed for appointment with the posts required to be filled vide advertisement No.
7.
(1) 1995.
3.
Petitioner is a dependent of Freedom Fighter as grand-father of the petitioner Kanhaya Lal was a Freedom Fighter.
Petitioner has annexed a certificate issued by the Deputy Commissioner, Rohtak, claiming that petitioner is a grandson of Kanhaya Lal who was a Freedom Fighter.
In terms of the Govt. of Haryana policy on reservation of various categories of candidates a dependent of Freedom Fighter is also considered under the category ESM subject to the non-availability of suitable ESM candidate.
Since the petitioner was a dependent of Freedom Fighter he had also applied for the post of Lecturer (Male) School Cadre for the subject of Mathematics under the Category of dependent of Freedom Fighters.
He was allotted Roll No. 591.
On the basis of over all performance of the petitioner, he was placed at Serial No. 32 in the over all merit of selected candidates which was finally recommended by the Board.
Result of the selected candidates was declared on 1821996 and select list was prepared and notified.
In all, 77 candidates were finally recommended in order of their merit including General Category, SC, BC, ESM/DESM.
Petitioner's name finds mention at Serial No. 32 in the over all merit list i.e. within 32 number of post advertised in the general category in terms of the combined number of vacancies advertised vide advertisements No. 1/1995 and 7/1995.
Case of the petitioner is that persons junior to him in the merit list in the General Category have been given letters of appointment ignoring the claim of the petitioner presumably on the pretext that since the petitioner applied under the category of dependent of Freedom Fighters, therefore, his case would not be considered against a seat in the General Category.
4.
In response to the notices issued written statement has been filed by the respondents.
Case set up in the written statement is that since petitioner had applied in the reserved category of dependent of Freedom Fighters his candidature could not be considered in the general category.
Other facts stated in the petition have been denied.
5.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
Stand taken by the respondents that since petitioner had applied in the reserved category of dependent of Freedom Fighter his case could not be considered in the general category in spite of his merit cannot be sustained.
Petitioner has competed alongwith others and is placed in select list at No. 32 in order of merit that is within the number of seats advertised for the general category.
It has been held in several judicial pronouncements that a reserved category candidate can compete for non-reserved post and in the event of his appointment to the said post his number cannot be added and taken into consideration for working out percentage of reservation.
It would be arbitrary to decline the relief to the petitioner who had come within merit for appointment of the general category only on the ground that he had also claimed his entitlement to the post in the reserved category of freedom fighter.
In this particular case, it would be seen that the Freedom Fighter's seat was available only if suitable candidates in the ESM category were not available.
There was no fixed number of seats for the dependents of Freedom Fighters.
The same was dependent on the contingency that appointment would be given to them only if suitable candidates from ESM category are not available.
Under such circumstances also, he could not be denied the opportunity to compete against the post meant for general category candidate.
Denial of appointment to the petitioner and the preference given to the persons lower in merit than the petitioner in the general category under these circumstances cannot be upheld.
The action of the respondents is arbitrary and discriminatory thus violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
For the reasons recorded above, this petition is accepted.
Respondents are directed to offer appointment to the petitioner according to his placement in the general merit list in accordance with law.
The direction given above be carried out within two months of the receipt/production of a certified copy of this order.
Petitioner shall be entitled to be placed in the seniority in the order of merit determined by the Board.
However, petitioner shall not be entitled to claim any arrears towards salary on the plea that he be deemed to be appointed from the date his juniors were appointed.
No costs.