JK Mehra, J (Oral) - I have heard the lengthy arguments addressed by both the parties.
This Writ Petition has been filed on account of certain anomalies which have come to exist between persons promoted from the ranks of Airman upto Warrant Officer and granted Branch Commission, which gives two years ante-date to such promotees in respect of their salary and the persons who were similarly placed and were found fit to be granted permanent commission.
It is canvassed by the respondents that permanent commission is in fact, more prestigious and the officers who are recruited and granted permanent commission, can go upto the rank of Air Marshal whereas those who were promoted by grant of Branch Commission, cannot be promoted beyond the rank of Squadron Leader.
Irrespective of that it has been pointed out that a Squadron Leader, who is enjoying Permanent Commission, would normally retire at the age of 52 years and an officer who is granted Branch Commission, has age of retirement fixed as 55 years.
The case of the petitioner is very hard inasmuch as he served the Air Force for about eighteen and a half years before being considered for Permanent Commission.
It is pointed out that there were certain persons in the category of Sergeant and above, who were not granted Permanent Commission and they opted for Branch Commission.
They included a person, who was in the administrative branch and worked as a Clerk with the rank of Junior Warrant Officer and was promoted by grant of Branch Commission.
The petitioner submits that originally, the Branch Commission was not in their services, and it was only in the year 1975 that this mode of promotion was provided possibly to do away with the stagnation in the service.
The petitioner argues that the Branch Commission was devised to eliminate the frustration in the Air Force staff resulting from stagnation, but in actual operation, the said mode has resulted in creating the disparities and anomalies between the officers who earn their promotion after their service with the Air Force in the administrative branch by earning Permanent Commission and those who are granted the promotion by giving Branch Commission.
These disparities become more pronounced following the recommendations of the fourth Pay Commission inasmuch as officers, who earned promotion by Permanent Commission, started drawing lower salary than those who got Branch Commission, though prior to promotion, the persons who got Branch Commission were junior to those who earned promotion by Permanent Commission.
In fact, the authorities in Air Force realised the disparities and recommended certain stepping up of the salary for Permanent Commissioned officers or vice versa to eliminate disparities.
The clarifications were sought by certain officers from the Controller General of Defence Accounts under AFI/1/S/87 para-9.
However, the position, as clarified, by Controller General of Defence Accounts vide its letter dated 2171993, did not agree with the suggestion and pointed out that the Branch Commission and Permanent Commission were two separate streams wherefrom officers were drawn.
Each stream has its own rules and criteria for recruitment and promotion.
As such, the stepping up could not be effected.
The stepping up was agreed to only where the anomalies had come to exist in the same stream of promotion.
In this case, the facts of this officer are quite hard because he, on completion of more than 15 years of service, applied for being relieved from Air Force, but his request was turned down and he was not allowed to leave and seek better career elsewhere.
He carried out studies and acquired post- graduate qualifications and thereafter got selected for Permanent Commission only to discover at the end of day that he had opted for wrong channel of promotion inasmuch as he is likely to retire on attaining age of 52 years instead of 55 years and will also continue to draw lower salary than his counter-parts, who got promoted through grant of Branch Commission.
While the appointment for Branch Commissioned Officers is normally required to be against selected posts earmarked for them, as per Air force Regulations 48/75, no such earmarking was observed and on the pretext that this is not found feasible by the authorities, this important factor was dispensed with and there is no distinction of service between Permanent Commissioned Officers and Branch Commissioned Officers.
2.
The entire discussion has shown that there are in existence certain anomalies, which need to be looked into by the authorities.
Unfortunately, the petitioner having himself opted for Permanent Commission, knowing what the future holds for him and the complete data which led to this policy not being available in this case, it may not be advisable to issue any writ except for a direction to the authorities to review the conditions of service applicable to Branch Commissioned Officers vis-a-vis Permanent Commissioned Officers, who have got Permanent Commission after serving the Air Force in administrative branch so that cause for grievance could as far as possible be removed and their grievances could be redressed.
3.
The petitioner has next urged the doctrine of equal pay for equal work and has contended that he is discharging the same duties which any other officer, who has been promoted by grant of Branch Commission is discharging and he should be put at par and not at a disadvantage of drawing lower salary.
He has further alleged that he and his junior in the non-commissioning ranks, namely Flight Lieutenant AP Ponappan, who has since died, were holding the same ranks of Flight Lieutenants and discharging same function and duties, but Flight Lt. AP Ponappan was drawing a higher salary than him.
When I pointed out hereinabove that the authorities must address themselves to such anomalies, I intended to cover such facts and circumstances also.
Irrespective of the views that have been expressed by the Controller General of Defence Accounts, the aforesaid anomalies are a real problem which need immediate attention of the authorities.
I have already clarified hereinabove that I do not wish to venture laying down any formula in the face of incomplete data to avoid possibility of any further anomalies arising as a consequence thereof, which may have the result of such remedy becoming worse than the malady sought to be cured.
4.
In the light of above discussion, I direct the Air Force Authorities to consider and review the position afresh and take appropriate steps to redress the grievance of persons placed as in this case and to avoid recurrence of any such anomalies.
The authorities, while reviewing the conditions of service with the aforesaid object, shall also look into the suggestions contained in the petitioner's application dated 2341993 and the possibility of adoption of any of those suggestions.
The necessary review of the conditions should take place within six months from today.
This Writ Petition is disposed of in the above terms.
Order accordingly.