Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioners are praying for a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the Respondent-Corporation "to consider and promote members of the Drawing Establishment of the Corporation by giving them their due share in promotion to the rank of Sub Divisional Officer/Shift Engineers strictly as per their quota."
The respondents contest this claim.
2.
It is the admitted position that the recruitment and promotion to the rank of Assistant Engineer is governed by the provisions of the Bye-Laws enacted by the Corporation on September 18, 1980.
It is also not disputed that a person becomes eligible for promotion only after he has passed the Departmental Professional and Departmental Revenue Examinations.
It was also been conceded that petitioner No. 1 had become eligible on October 1, 1992, while the two other petitioners had passed these examinations in August, 1991.
3.
It has not been shown that the quota of posts falling to the share of the members of the Drawing Establishment viz. the members of the Draftsmen and Tracers Services has not been given to the members of that class after August 1991.
It has also not been shown by the petitioners as to how many posts actually fell to the share of the category of the petitioners and who were the persons actually promoted against those vacancies.
However, Mr. Surya Kant submits the members of the Drawing Establishment have not been having their due share.
This position has been controverted on behalf of the respondents.
4.
On a perusal of the writ petition, there is nothing to show that any one junior to the petitioners was promoted as Sub Divisional Officer or Shift Engineer after August, 1991 when petitioners No. 2 and 3 had become eligible.
It has also not been shown that any one from amongst the other categories of employees was promoted after that date and that such a promotion was in excess of the prescribed quota.
In the absence of specific plea to the effect that a person who was not entitled to be promoted was actually promoted after the petitioners became eligible, it is not possible to entertain a vague claim for the issue of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to consider and promote members of the Drawing Establishment of Corporation by giving them their due share in promotion...." The matter could have been different if the petitioners had named specific persons who had been promoted in excess of their share.
On being repeatedly asked, Mr. Surya Kant has referred to the averment in para 15 wherein it has only been mentioned that "the members of the Drawing Establishment had been denied promotions to give excessive promotions to the Junior Engineers/AMIE Group."
This is totally vague.
Mr. Surya Kant has at this stage referred to the averments in para 12.
Even herein, it has not been shown as to who had been promoted in excess of the quota.
In any event, none of the persons who may have been wrongly promoted, has been impleaded as a party.
In this situation, the prayer made by the petitioners cannot be accepted.
5.
The petitioners have averred that they have submitted representations, copies of which have been produced as Annexures P-5, P-6 and P-7.
It is also their grievance that these representations have not been decided so far.
In the circumstances of the case, it appears to be just and reasonable to direct the Respondent-Corporation to dispose of these representations by passing a speaking order within four months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
In case, it is found that the posts meant for the petitioners were allotted to some other categories, necessary relief in accordance with the rules shall be afforded to them.
6.
The writ petition is, accordingly disposed of.
In the circumstances of the case, there will no order as to costs.
Ordered accordingly.