U.P.
Singh, CJ - University of Kerala has preferred this appeal against the judgment of the learned singe Judge, rendered in OP 10584 of 1995.
At the very threshold the question raised for consideration is based on the true and correct scope of power of the Syndicate in making appointments to the teaching and non-teaching staff of the University.
Chapter 3 of the Kerala University First Statutes and Rule 3 thereof deals with the provision relating to the appointment of teachers.
Rule 4 envisages a Selection Committee for appointment of Teachers.
It reads :  "(i) when posts are to be filled up after inviting applications by advertisement, the applications received shall first be screened by a Committee consisting of he Head of the concerned University Department of Study and Research, and Members of the Standing Committee of the Syndicate on Staff, Equipments and Buildings.
The applications found in order by the said committee shall be referred to a Selection Committee as specified below; (i) The Vice Chancellor who shall be ex-officio Chairman of the Selection Committee, and  (ii)(a) For the posts of Professor and Teaching posts of similar status : One Syndicate member to be nominated by the Vice Chancellor, three outside experts chosen by the Syndicate and the Dean of the Faculty, concerned.
xxxxx xxxxx (3) The recommendations of the Selection Committee shall be placed before the Syndicate, which shall make the appointments.
(4) Provided that when the syndicate proposes to make the appointment otherwise than in accordance with the above provisions, the Syndicate shall record its reasons and submit its proposals for the sanction of the Chancellor".
2.
Section 23 of the Kerala University Acts deals with the powers of the Syndicate :-  "23.
Powers of Syndicate - Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the executive powers of the University including the general superintendence and control over the institutions of the University shall be vested in the Syndicate and subject likewise the Syndicate shall have the following powers, namely - xxxxx xxxxx (viii) to appoint teachers and other employees of the University and prescribe their duties".
Therefore, the authority to appoint teachers and other employees of the University and to prescribe their duties is vested in the Syndicate.
3.
Chapter 4 of the Kerala University First Statutes deals with the terms and conditions of service of the non-teaching staff of the Kerala University (other than University teachers).
Part II thereof deals with the constitution of the Kerala University Service and Rule 8 deals with the recruitment to posts.
Rule 8 states :  "Recruitment to posts :- The Recruitment to posts shall be made on the basis of the recommendation made by a Selection Board consisting of the Vice Chancellor as Chairman, Convener of the Standing Committee of the Syndicate on staff, equipment and buildings, Convener of the Standing Committee of the Syndicate on Finance and two Syndicate Members to be nominated by the Vice Chancellor from time to time.
The Registrar shall be the Secretary to the Board.
The Board may conduct such tests as are deemed necessary to determine the suitability of candidates for appointment.
It may also fix the rates of fee for admission to the tests.
In making appointments by direct recruitment to posts of non-teaching staff in the University, the University shall observe the provisions of clauses (a), (b) and (c) of Rule 14 Rules 15, 16 and 17 of the Kerala State and Subordinate Service Rules, 1958 as amended from time to time.
Provided that it shall be competent for the Vice Chancellor to make recruitment to posts the maximum of which does not exceed Rs. 600 with or without the aid or advice of the Committee, in case he is of opinion that appointments to the University should be made immediately."
4.
On a bare reading of Rule 8 contained in Part II of Chapter 4 of the Statutes, it is obvious that the recruitment to the posts has to be made on the basis of the recommendation made by the Selection Board and the Board may conduct such tests as are deemed necessary to determine the suitability of candidates for such appointment.
In making such appointments by direct recruitment to the posts of non-teaching staff in the University, it shall observe the provisions of Rules 14 to 17 of the Kerala State and Subordinate Service Rules, 1958 as amended from time to time, which deals with the reservation in various posts.
The proviso to Rule 8 vests power in the Vice Chancellor, who shall be competent to make recruitment to the posts the maximum of which shall not exceed Rs. 600/- and that he can do it with or without the aid or advice of the Committee, in case, he feels that the appointments should be made immediately.
Rule 8 cannot be construed so as to hold that the recommendation of the Selection Board shall be binding on the Syndicate.
Such recommendation of the Selection Board is in the nature of aid and advice, which is given by the Selection Committee and in certain cases of emergency or urgency, the Vice Chancellor is empowered to appoint with or without the aid or advice of such committee.
Such selection committees are appointed by the Syndicate itself.
5.
Likewise, on proper construction of the scope of the provisions, Chapter 3 deals with the appointment of non-teaching staff; we do not find any distinction so as to hold that in the matter relating to the appointment of non-teaching staff the recommendation of the Selection Committee would be binding on the Syndicate.
The learned Single Judge proceeded on the footing that recommendation and advice of the selection committee, in respect of the appointment and recruitment of the teaching staff of the University, is not binding on the Syndicate; but in respect of the appointment and recruitment of the non-teaching staff of the University, the recommendation and advice is binding on the Syndicate.
With great respect, we do not find any distinction on the reading of the two provisions relating to the appointments of teaching staff and non-teaching staff.
Of course, when the Syndicate wants to take a different view in the matter, then it has to record reasons in accordance with sub-rule (4) of Rule 4 of Chapter 3, which provides specifically that when the Syndicate proposes to make the appointment otherwise than in accordance with the above provisions contained in Chapter 3 relating to the appointment of the teaching staff of the University, it shall record its reasons and submit its proposal for the sanction of the Chancellor.
6.
However, in the present case, the learned counsel for the University fairly contended that the question as discussed in the judgment of the learned single Judge did not arise for consideration on the date on which it was taken up for hearing, because the period for such appointment on the post had already expired and it had virtually become infructuous.
Therefore, we have not discussed the merit of the case.
But since the decision rendered in case would adversely affect the interest of the University in dealing with such cases of appointment, the University persuaded us to consider the legal aspect of the matter.
We make it clear that although the recommendation of the Selection Committee is not binding on the Syndicate but such recommendation should not be lightly brushed aside and due weight has to be given to such recommendations.
Even in cases of appointments to the non-teaching staff, if the Syndicate proposes to take a different view on such recommendation, the Syndicate shall have to record reasons.
In this view, we allow the appeal, but there shall, however, be no order as to costs.
Appeal allowed.