Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - On October 15, 1982, the Board decided to revert Er.
SN Vashisht, who was working as an Assistant Engineer, to the post of Junior Engineer, Grade I Aggrieved by this order, the petitioner filed the present writ petition on October 30, 1982.
Unfortunately, he expired on November 29, 1983.
Consequently, his widow and the children were substituted as petitioners.
2.
The short submission made by the learned counsel for the petitioner is that the impugned order by the which the petitioner was ordered to be reverted, is wholly illegal as the petitioner's reply to the show cause notice, was not considered and no reason whatsoever was assigned for ordering his reversion.
3.
The order of reversion is at Annexure P-5 with the writ petition, In para 1, the charges levelled against the petitioner have been delineated.
In para 2, it has been mentioned that after consideration of his reply to the charge- sheet, the case was entrusted to the Enquiry Officer.
Para 3 notices the fact that the petitioner was given a notice to show cause as to why he be not removed from service.
Thereafter, the order reads as under :-  "4.
Whereas after considering his reply dated 11282 to the show cause notice, the Board decided to revert Er.
SN Vashishit, Assistant Engineer to the reduced rank of Junior Engineer-I 5.
Now therefore, the PSEB is pleased to revert Er.
SN Vashisht, Assistant Engineer to the reduced rank of Junior Engineer-I" 4.
A copy of the reply filed by the petitioner to the show cause notice has been produced as Annexure P-4 with the writ petition.
He had raised various contentions It was inter alia submitted that there was denial of reasonable opportunity during the enquiry.
In particular, it was pointed out that proper opportunity to cross-examine the material witnesses or to lead evidence in defence was not given.
He had also explained the factual position in respect of the various charges.
No part of the reply submitted by the petitioner has been noticed.
No reason for rejecting it has been given.
The impugned order is totally laconic.
It does not disclose the process of reasoning by which the authority had come to the conclusion that the petitioner deserves to be reduced in rank.
5.
It is unfortunate that the petitioner is no more.
He having died, the widow and her children would only get some pecuniary benefit.
6.
In view of the above, the impugned order of reversion is set aside.
It is declared that Er.
SN Vashisht shall be deemed to have continued as an Assistant Engineer till his death on November 15, 1983.
The consequential reliefs in the nature of arrears of salary and retiral benefits as may be admissible in accordance with the rules shall be released to the petitioners within two months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
If the payment is not made within the stipulated period, the petitioners shall get all the arrears with interest at the rate of 12% per annum from the date of accrual till the date of actual payment.
The petitioner also be entitled costs which are assessed at Rs. 2000/-.
Petition allowed.