TS Doabia, J - The petitioner is aggrieved against his non-promotion to the post of Assistant Engineer.
He submits that he should have been promoted when respondent Nos. 4 and 6 were so appointed to the post of Assistant Engineers.
The brief facts for the purposes of this writ petition be noticed as under :  The petitioner submits that he was appointed as Sub-Engineer on 28th of May, 1984.
He submits that he is entitled to promotion to the post of Assistant Engineer.
He further submits that he possesses all requisite qualifications.
In this regard, he submits that he is possessing the Degree in Engineering from the Jabalpur Engineering College, Jabalpur.
He submits that because of this degree he was fully entitled to seek promotion to the post of Assistant Engineer.
His grievance is that even though the Bhopal Development Authority (hereinafter referred to as the Authority) was of the opinion that quota of promotees is available, without taking a decision in this regard, direct appointments were made by the State of Madhya Pradesh.
It is these appointments made by the State of Madhya Pradesh which have given rise to a challenge being made in this writ petition.
2.
It is submitted that the competent authority to make the promotion was the Authority only and therefore, the State of Madhya Pradesh should not have intervened in the matter.
3.
The reply given by the State of Madhya Pradesh is that on account of the provisions contained in Section 47 of the M.P. Nagar Tatha Gram Niwesh Adhiniyam, 1973, it had the requisite power to make appointments.
It is, accordingly, contended that the appointments of respondent Nos. 4 and 6 were validly made.
4.
The only argument which has been raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner is that Section 47 of the aforementioned Adhiniyam as it existed did not confer any power on the State Government to make appointment.
For appreciating the position, then, it would be apt to notice the provision as it existed :  "47.
Other officers and servants.- Every Town and Country Development Authority may appoint such other officers and servants as may be necessary and proper for the efficient discharge of its duties : Provided that no post shall be created save with prior sanction of the State Government : Provided further that the power of appointment shall be subject to such restrictions as the State Government may, from time to time, impose".
This Section 47 was amended by MP Act No. 11 of 1981 and it was indicated that the State Government can make appointments to the posts of officers who have been so nominated.
It is not in dispute that some State Service has since been constituted and the power of appointment to this State service now vests in the State Government.
5.
The net result so far as this petition is concerned, the appointment of the petitioner would be governed by the Adhiniyam as it existed in the year 1985-86 when the appointments of respondent Nos. 4 and 6 were made.
A perusal of aforementioned Section indicates that the appointments were to be made by the Town and Country Development Authority.
The only embargo which has been placed on the power of the concerned authority is that no post can be created without prior sanction of the Government.
If this be the position of law, then it can safely be concluded that the State Government had no authority to interfere in the matter.
The power to make appointment vested in the concerned Development Authority.
6.
The case of respondent-State is that Rules could be framed under Section 48 of the Adhiniyam and as the rules were not framed, therefore, the State Government was competent to act under Section 48(2) of the Act.
I am of the view that this position can again not be accepted.
The basis power has been conferred under Section 48 on the Chief Executive Officer of the Authority.
He is only to work under the superintendence and control of the Chairman.
Thus, the question is as to whether the State Government could, in exercise of superintendence and control, interfere with the functions entrusted to the Authority under Section 48 of the aforementioned Adhiniyam.
I am of the view that State could not take away the powers which were vested in the development authority.
A power which is supposed to be exercised by some functionary is to be exercised by that functionary alone.
It is, accordingly, held that at the relevant time, the power to make appointments vested with the Authority.
Once that power was exercised that above could be made subject-matter of superintendence and control.
This is not the position in this case.
The Chairman of the Authority had, in categoric terms, indicated that there are three posts of Assistant Engineers.
Two posts were to be filled from the departmental candidates and one by direct recruitment.
Instead of sending its approval, the State Government proceeded to make appointments under Sections 47 and 48 of the Adhiniyam.
Both these provisions are not available to it.
In this view of the matter, there is no other option that to direct the respondent-Authority to consider the case of the petitioner and give him promotion, if found suitable, from the date when the respondent Nos. 4 and 6 were recruited as Assistant Engineers.
it is, however, made clear that the appointment of respondent Nos. 4 and 6, who have continued to hold the posts for more than a decade, would not be affected.
The only relief to which the petitioner is entitled is that his case would be considered in accordance with law and if he is found fit, he would be given promotion from the date when respondent Nos. 4 and 6 were recruited.
There would be no order as to costs.
Security, if paid, be refunded to the petitioner.
Disposed of accordingly.