BA Khan, J - Petitioner is a candidate for the post of Lecturer in Radiotherapy in the Medical Education Department.
His eligibility for the post has come under cloud.
While he considers himself eligible under the Recruit0ment Rules read with a circular of the Medical Council of India (MCI), respondent No. 2 (Public Service Commission) has found him ineligible and has withheld his result of selection.
He accordingly seeks a direction to the Public Service Commission (PSC) to recommend him for appointment and not to re-advertise the post.
The record reveals that two posts of Lecturer in Radio-therapy discipline were referred to the PSC as far back as on 22121989.
The PSC thereafter issued repeated advertisement notifications in 1990 and 1991 which elicited response from a small number of candidates who were not eligible for one reason or the other.
The posts were then lately re- advertised vide notification No. 17-PSC of 1993 dated 1761993 fixing the last date for receipt of applications as 3071993.
Besides the academic qualification, experience prescribed, drawn from the Recruitment Rules (SRO- 225/88) was as under:  "As Registrar/Tutor/Demonstrator or as Senior Resident for a period of two years in a medical college or a recognised techning medical institution recognised by the Medical Council of India and the University of Jammu & Kashmir."
2.
Two candidates including the petitioner responded to this notification.
They were interviewed on 681994 and thereafter their result was not declared.
3.
Resisting this petition, the PSC has filed detailed objections tracing the sequence of events leading to the issuance of notification No. 17-PSC of 1993.
It has pointed out that considering the dearth of eligible candidates in the discipline or Radiotherapy and that two posts were lying vacant since 1989, it resolved to call the two candidates including the petitioner, for interview provisionally under Rule 36 of the Commission's (Business and Procedure) Rules, 1980 with a view to seek relaxation in their teaching experience, if they were found suitable.
On 1681994, however, it received a representation from Dr. Ashfaq Ahmed Naqash stating that he had refrained from applying for the post even though he fell short of teaching experience only by one month and that it would be discriminatory to accord relaxation to the candidates who had applied but were deficient in teaching experience.
Upon this, the whole matter was considered and it was resolved to re-advertise the posts as two candidates, including the petitioner, had been allowed to provisionally appear in the interview at their own risk and responsibility and as they lacked in teaching experience.
It is further submitted that no right accrued to the petitioner by calling him for the interview and the question of his selection did not arise even if the PSC had recommended his case for relaxation of the teaching experience unless the same was sanctioned by the Government.
4.
The first issue that requires to be examined is : Whether or not the petitioner was eligible for the post in terms of the eligibility prescribed in notification No. 17-PSC of 1993 as drawn from the Recruitment Rules (SRO- 225/88).
Petitioner emphatically asserts that he was eligible and for this his counsel Mr. Thakur placed reliance on the MCI communication date 491974 and the connotation of the word "Tutor" occurring in the eligibility clause.
According to him, even when a candidate had held beds under his charge during his post-graduation course or had conducted some tutorial work it was to be counted as teaching experience for purposes of appointment to the post of lecturer in the medical college.
He additionally contended that the petitioner was armed with a certificate from the PGI, Chandigarh, showing that he had worked as Resident Teaching Fellow from January 1990 to December 1992 and had thus discharged the duties of a "Tutor" making him eligible for the post in terms of the eligibility clause.
5.
The MCI communication dated 491974, provides as under:  "The executive committee resolved that the teaching experience of PG students who are holding teaching appointments, or  (2) holding beds under their charge, or  (3) doing tutorial work, may be considered as teaching experience for the purposes of appointment as lecturer in medical colleges."
As against this, the J&K Govt. Medical Education (Gazetted) Service Recruitment Rules (SRO-225/88) prescribed the eligibility for recruitment to the post of lecturer thus:  "xx xx xx QUALIFICATION M.D.
(Radiotherapy) or equivalent EXPERIENCE : As Registrar/Tutor/Demonstrator or a Senior Resident for a period of two years in a Medical College or a recognised teaching Medical Institution recognised by the Medical Counsel of India and University of Jammu/Kashmir.
xx xx xx xx" A comparative reading of the two provisions would show that the recommendation of the MCI contained in communication dated 491974 is not incorporated or reflected in the eligibility clause for the post of lecturer provided in the recruitment rules or for that matter contained in notification No. 17-PSC of 1988.
It, therefore, remains to be seen whether the PSC was under an obligation to determine the eligibility of the petitioner by taking into account the communication of the MCI or whether it had to do so only on the basis of the eligibility, qualification and experience prescribed in the advertisement notification read with the recruitment rules.
6.
The answer to this is very simple and does not require any research to be conducted for some precedent in support.
It is well settled that it falls within the domain of the employer to fix eligibility qualification for a post.
Once such eligibility is prescribed by the Rules or in the advertisement notice, it is for the candidates seeking selection to satisfy it and it is for the PSC or the selection body to feel satisfied about it.
The PSC, however, has to go by what is prescribed.
It has no power to alter or modify it or to fall back upon or derive support from some other source to reach such satisfaction.
It is a different matter where such prescribed eligibility is assailed for being irrational or unreasonable or incapable of being achieved, In that case a candidate has always a right to challenge it and to have it struck down.
But so long as a candidate responds to the notification without any reservation, he is bound to satisfy the requirements and conditions laid down therein.
He cannot claim right of consideration for selection or appointment as a matter of right and in disregard of the prescribed eligibility.
Nor is the PSC under any duty or obligation to entertain any such request or take in regard any such request or take in regard any other qualification or experience which is extraneous to the prescribed ineligibility.
The PSC may call even an ineligible candidate for interview in exercise of such power under rules and seek relaxation in the prescribed eligibility from the Competent Authority, but that is a different matter altogether.
Otherwise it has to adhere to the letter of the provided eligibility.
The logic behind is simple as it is the province of the employer to lay down the requirements for filling up a post.
(See AIR 1989 SC 134 - Dr NC Bindal v. State of U.P.)
7.
Tested thus, the petitioner's reliance on the communication of the MCI dated 491974 which provides for taking into account the teaching experience of the Post-gradaute students also, is rather misplaced.
This is so far the simple reason that it is recommendatory in nature and does not bind the Government-employer in any manner whatsoever.
It would be different if this recommendation was incorporated in the recruitment rules.
Therefore, so long as the prescribed eligibility clause stands as it is, both in the notification and the recruitment rules, there is no option to the petitioner but to satisfy it and there is no choice to the PSC but to adhere to it and feel satisfied whether or not a candidate fulfils it or not.
8.
The prescribed eligibility clause requires of a candidate to possess an experience of two years as Registrar/Tutor/Demonstrator or a Senior Resident in a medical college or a recognised teaching medical institution, recognised by the MCI or the University of Jammu/Kashmir.
It is not the petitioner's case that he had ever worked as a Registrar or a Demonstrator or a Tutor or a Senior Resident in any medical college or institution recognised by the MCI or the University of Jammu/Kashmir and had gained two years' experience.
His only claim is that he had worked as Resident Teaching Fellow in PGI, Chandigarh from January 1990 to December 1992 and had gained some teaching experience in that capacity even as a "Tutor" and, therefore, fell within the parameters of the prescribed eligibility clause.
9.
The submission appears to be more in despair than anything else.
As would be evident, the intent of the eligibility prescribed is that a candidate must have worked and gained two years experience as Registrar/Demonstrator/Tutor or the Senior Resident.
It does not suggest that a candidate who might have engaged himself in some kind of teaching should be regarded as "Tutor".
Therefore, it may not be of much relevance to go into the true connotation of the word "Tutor".
Considering that the petitioner had never worked as a tutor in any medical college or institution and had not gained any teaching experience as such, it would be illogical to hold in the context of the prescribed eligibility clause that even a Post-graduate student who may hold some beds under his charge in the course of training be regarded as a Tutor merely because he had imparted some kind of teaching in the process.
That surely is not the scope and spirit of the prescribed eligibility clause which refers to the post/position like Registrar/Tutor/Demonstrator/Senior Resident and requires that a candidate must have gained two years' experience while holding such post/position.
Any other interpretation would enable any Tom, Dick and Harry, engaged in imparting teaching of whatever type to claim the status of a Tutor and to bring himself within the eligibility clause.
Viewed thus, it is not possible to hold that the petitioner possessed that requisite teaching experience by having worked as a Resident Teaching Fellow at PGI, Chandigarh, for two years or that he should be regarded as Tutor for the purposes of prescribed eligibility clause.
10.
The next question that remains to be seen is : whether any right had inhered in the petitioner to be selected and whether any corresponding obligation was cast on the PSC to select him by reason of his having been interviewed despite his want of requisite teaching experience.
The PSC has answered this by relying upon rule 36 of its conduct of business rules.
Relevant rule reads thus:  "Applications received from the persons who do possess the necessary academic and technical qualification but do not possess the experience, if any, prescribed for a particular post may be called for an interview provisionally at the discretion of the Commission, a) If the response to the notice issued by the Commission has not been very substantial; or  b) If the candidates possess extraordinary academic and technical qualification".
This provision empowers the PSC to call such candidates for interview provisionally who possess necessary academic and technical qualification but do not possess the requisite experience wherever it feels that response to the advertisement notice had not been very substantial and where the candidates who have applied possessed extra-ordinary academic and technical qualification.
The case of PSC in this regard is that since its earlier notifications elicited little response from the eligible candidates, it had decided to act under rule 36 to call the petitioner and other candidates for interview provisionally and to consider their case for selection in relaxation of their teaching experience, if found suitable.
But before it could do so, it had received a representation from one Dr. Ashfaq Ahmed Naqash which persuaded it to retract and to re-advertise the two posts.
11.
The short point that arises is : whether the petitioner could claim selection merely because he was interviewed by the PSC ?
Taking in regard the explanation of the PSC which appears plausible and satisfactory on the face of it and the circumstances of the case, it cannot be held or said that the petitioner had acquired any right to be selected.
He had still to cross many more hurdles to claim selection, not to speak of the appointment.
Even if the PSC had proceeded on its original line of thinking and had recommended his case for relaxation of teaching experience to the Government there was no certainty or guarantee that he would have been granted relaxation or offered appointment.
There is many a slip between the cup and the lip and between the consideration for selection and for appointment.
Therefore, the decision of the PSC to re-advertise the posts cannot be faulted once it felt convinced that it would be discriminatory to other candidates who had not applied for these posts merely because they fell short of experience at the relevant time.
12.
In the result I hold that the petitioner had not acquired any right for being selected muchless for appointment to the post of lecturer in the Radiotherapy discipline in the facts and circumstances of the case.
Nor had the PSC committed any infraction of law and rules or infringed any of his rights by deciding to re-adverise the post.
Consequently, it is not possible to direct the PSC to declare his result or to restrain it from re- advertising the posts.
13.
This writ petition accordingly fails and is dismissed as such.