Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner who was working as a Sub Divisional Officer in the Public Works Department (B&R) Branch has filed these two petitions with a two-fold grievance.
Firstly, he was conveyed 'average' reports for the years 1984-85, 1985-86 and 1988-89 to 1990-91.
He represented against these reports.
The representations having been rejected, the petitioner has filed Civil Writ Petition No. 18550 of 1991 to challenge the reports as well as the orders passed by the appropriate authority.
Secondly, the petitioner complains that on the basis of these untenable reports, he was wrongly retired from service vide order dated March 5, 1992 on attaining the age of 50 years.
The petitioner submits that since he was wrongly graded as 'average', even the order of premature retirement cannot be sustained.
2.
The solitary contention raised by Mr. Surya Kant, learned counsel for the petitioner is that the remarks recorded by the Executive Engineer suffered from the vice of malafides.
There was a dispute of inter se seniority between the petitioner and the Executive Engineer, Mr. IK Madan.
It was on account of this dispute in which the petitioner had finally succeeded that Mr. Madan had recorded the petitioner's performance as 'average'.
Secondly, the counsel submits that the assessment of the petitioner's performance was wholly arbitrary and unfair.
There was no material on the basis of which his performance could have been assessed as average.
Accordingly, the learned counsel submits that the reports in which the petitioner's overall assessment was described as 'average' deserve to be considered as good.
On this basis, the learned counsel submits that even the order of premature retirement has to be quashed.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioner has been controverted by the learned counsel for the respondents.
The two questions that arise for consideration are-  (i) Do the remarks recorded against the petitioner suffer from the vice of malafides and arbitrariness ?
(ii) Is the order of premature retirement liable to be set aside. ?
Reg.
(i) 3.
Admittedly, Mr. IK Madan against whom allegations of malafides have been made has not been impleaded as party.
It is also not disputed that the remarks recorded by an Executive Engineer have to be reviewed by the Superintending Engineer and accepted or modified by the Engineer-in-Chief.
In the present case, the remarks had been finally recorded by the Engineer- in-Chief.
It was the report as finally approved by the accepting authority that had been communicated by the accepting authority that had been communicated to the petitioner.
In this situation, the allegation of bias or malafides as levelled by the petitioner does not appear to be well-founded.
It also deserves mention that it is not a case where in a stray or a single report, the petitioner's performance was assessed as 'average'.
In fact, it appears that the petitioner's record has been basically colourless.
At least on five occasions, the petitioner's performance was adjudged as average.
According to the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, the petitioner had been conveyed certain remarks even prior to 194-85.
He had not been allowed to cross the Efficiency Bar which had fallen due in the year 1981.
In fact it was only with effect from April 1, 1984 that the petitioner was permitted to cross the Efficiency Bar.
If different officers have repeatedly assessed the petitioner's performance as average, it cannot be said even prima-facie that the action is arbitrary or malafide.
4.
Mr. Surya Kant submits that since Engineer-in-Chief does not directly see the work, the acceptance of the remarks by him is of no consequence.
Even this submission cannot be accepted.
It deserves notice that the Engineer-in- Chief as head of the Organization oversees the work of all his subordinates.
There are occasional inspections when a senior officer gets a chance to examine the work from close quarters.
Besides that, the information reaches a senior officer through various sources.
Still further, it deserves mention that the petitioner had submitted representations against the various communications sent to him.
He had pointed out that he had been wrongly assessed as average.
These representations have been rejected by the Engineer-in-Chief and/or the Government.
It is reasonable to assume that he must have satisfied himself with regard to the assessment of the petitioner's performance.
There is not even a suggestion of any malafides on the part of the Engineer-in-Chief.
The reports recorded by the subordinate officers having been accepted and the representations against the remarks conveyed to the petitioner having been rejected, it appears that the petitioner has no justifiable grievance.
In any case, nothing has been brought on record to indicate that the remarks deserve to be expunged or that the petitioner's performance deserves to be graded as good.
In fact, no data or record has been pointed out by the counsel for the petitioner to show that the petitioner is in fact a good officer.
In view of the above, it cannot be said that the reports suffer from the vice of malafide or arbitrariness.
Reg: (ii)  5.
Coming now to the order of premature retirement, it deserves mention that the summary of the petitioner's record of service for the last 10 years has been produced as Annexure R.1 with the written statement.
The assessment of the petitioner's performance as given in the summary is under :-  "Year Grading Remarks 1981-82 Not written Under suspension 1982-83 Not written Under suspension 1983-84 Good -  1984-85 Average Remarks conveyed and representation rejected by Government vide letter No. 17/3/87-5-B&R(E) dated 9.7.1987.
1985-86 Average Remarks conveyed and representation reacted by the Government on merits vide Govt. letter No. 17/34/86-5-B&R(E) dated 18111987 1986-87 Good - 1987-88 (2 parts) Average Not conveyed as per Government instructions.
1988-89 Average Remarks conveyed and the representation rejected by Government on merits vide letter No. 17/43-B&R(E)-4-90 dated 2851991.
1989-90 Average Remarks conveyed and representation rejected on merits vide Government letter dated 2091991.
1999-91 Average Remarks conveyed and the representation rejected by Government on merits vide No. 11/36-B&R(E)-4-91 dated 29.6.1992."
A perusal of the above shows that no remarks were recorded for the years 1981-82 and 1982-83 as the petitioner was under suspension.
Out of the remaining eight years, the petitioner has earned only two good reports for the year 1983-84 and 1986-87.
During the remaining years, his performance has been assessed as average.
Having been found to be an average officer, the competent authority could have taken the view that he does not deserve to continued in service beyond the age of 50 years and that it was in public interest to retire him.
6.
The Constitution undoubtedly confers various rights on the citizen.
It provides for security of service and guarantee of equality of opportunity to a civil servant.
What we normally forget is that the Constitution also imposes certain duties.
Article 51-A enumerates the fundamental duties of every citizen.
One of these is "to strive toward excellence in all spheres of individual and collective activity so that the nation constantly rises to higher levels of endeavour and achievement".
A civil servant whose performance during long years of service has been assessed as merely average cannot be said to be striving towards excellence or making an attempt to enable the nation to rise constantly to higher levels.
He is virtually a "deadwood" which deserves to be "chopped off".
The competent authority took a view which in the circumstances of the case was a possible one.
It does not suffer from any legal infirmity and thus, calls for no interference.
7.
Faced with the above situation, Mr. Surya Kant submits that the petitioner has a legitimate claim for the grant of a higher scale of pay on completion of 12 years of service.
He submits that this issue even though raised in the petition may be left open so as to enable the petitioner to make a representation and approach the authority for the grant of requisite relief.
Mr. Amol Rattan, counsel for the respondents has no objection.
It is clarified that if the petitioner makes representation within one month from today for the grant of the pay scale of Rs. 4100-5300 on the basis of completion of 12 years of service, the appropriate authority shall consider and decide the matter within three months from the date of the receipt of the representation in accordance with law.
No other point has been urged.
In view of the above, the two writ petitions are dismissed.
However, in the circumstances of these cases, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petitions dismissed.