BA Khan, J - Petitioner is a Master in the Education Department and an aspirant for the post of senior lecturer in "Work experience" in the District Institute of Education and Training (DIET).
He seeks a direction to the respondents to consider him for appointment to the post of senior lecturer in "Work experience" and to appoint him to this post retrospectively from 2421989.
2.
Petitioner's case is that restructuring of DIETs throughout the country by the Ministry of Human Resources Development (HRD) had led to the creation of post of senior lecturers in "Work experience" in various DIETs.
Since, he possessed all the requisite qualification and experience for appointment to the post, he was eligible to be considered but the respondents had not done so and out of the 5 vacancies, they filed up 3 posts from amongst the candidates lacking requisite qualification and experience by Govt. Order No. 192 of 1989 date 2421989.
The particulars of those candidates are given in para 6 of the writ petition.
It is further urged that his case had been recommended by the Director of School Education but respondents had failed to accord consideration to his appointment to the post for which he was entitled on 2421989 when 3 other vacancies were filled up by the Govt. order supra.
It is further projected that the action is arbitrary and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
3.
Respondents have filed detailed objections and submitted that even though the Ministry of HRD had issued guidelines on personnel policy for DIETs, same had no binding character unless incorporated in the recruitment rules.
As such no rights could flow to the petitioner under these guidelines vis-a-vis his claimed eligibility.
It is pointed out that on the basis of guidelines received from the Govt. of India and keeping in regard the practical requirements of the department, Draft Recruitment Rules, both for gazetted and non-gazetted service of Teacher Education and Trainings wing, had been prepared and stand cleared by the ARI, Trainings Department and are now waiting clearance by the Public Service Commission.
Till promulgation of these rules, it has been decided to make a stop-gap arrangement on the posts of senior lecturers "work experience" from amongst the senior lecturers of plus two schools and on the basis of their seniority.
Since, petitioner did not fall in this category, there was no question of considering him for stop-gap arrangement and in case he was appointed to the post, it would take him three steps higher on the post of Master which he is presently holding.
4.
It requires to be hardly emphasized that the petitioner has no indefeasible right to be appointment to the post of senior lecturer "work experience".
His right guaranteed by Articles 14 and 16 is that of consideration, subject, of course, to his eligibility for the post.
It may be true that he considers himself eligible as per the guidelines issued by the Ministry of HRD, but that does not entitle him to the post as a matter of course or right, more so, when such guidelines do not partake the character of any recruitment rules for the purposes of prescribing any eligibility for the post.
Therefore, he could not stake all his claim on the eligibility indicated in such guidelines and that the State was not bound to appoint him merely for this reason.
5.
The explanation offered by the respondents for making a stop-gap arrangement to fill up the post of senior lecturer is both plausible and satisfactory.
Considering that they had decided to have these posts manned temporarily from amongst the senior lecturers of plus-two schools to which category the petitioner admittedly does not belong, it cannot be said that he had been wrongly excluded from consideration.
His right for consideration would come into existence only after the draft recruitment rules are brought into force and when the posts of senior lecturers are sought to be filled up substantively.
That occasion has still to arise.
6.
The petition, therefore, appears premature on the face of it and since no right of the petitioner had been infringed by the respondents, it deserves outright dismissal and is hereby dismissed.