Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioners are working as Canal Patwaris.
They complain that respondent Nos. 3 to 7, who are junior to them, have been promoted as Assistant Revenue Clerks without considering their claim.
A copy of the order dated July 4, 1991 by which respondent Nos. 3 to 7 were promoted, has been produced as Annexure P-3 with the writ petition.
The petitioners pray that this order be quashed and the respondents be directed to consider their claim for promotion with effect from the date the persons junior to them were promoted.
2.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondent Nos. 1 and 2, it has been inter alia stated that the appointment to the posts of Assistant Revenue Clerks is governed by the rules framed under Article 309 of the Constitution in the year 1956.
According to these rules, a person should be not more than 35 years of age for appointment to the post of Assistant Revenue Clerk.
This age limit had been relaxed by the Chief Engineer upto 40 years.
The petitioners were "found ineligible in view of the fact that they had crossed the prescribed age-limit of 35 years as well as the relaxed age upto 40 years".
It has been further stated that respondent No. 3 is senior to the petitioners and was granted age relaxation vide Chief Engineer/Drainage letter No. 26/6NGE II/90 dated 1191".
A copy of this letter has been produced as Annexure R-7.
Respondent Nos. 5 to 7 belong to categories for which reservation had been made in accordance with the instructions issued by the Govt.
It has been further stated that the rules of 1956 were superseded by the 'Haryana Irrigation Department Revenue and Assistant Clerks (Group C)_ Service Rules, 1991'.
The claim of various Patwaris was considered in accordance with the 1956 rules which were in force on the date of the occurrence of the vacancies.
As the petitioners were ineligible, they were not promoted.
On these premises, the respondents claim that the writ petition should be dismissed.
3.
A separate written statement has been filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 3 and 5.
Besides raising certain preliminary objections which have not been pressed, it has been stated that the appointment to the posts of Assistant Revenue Clerks has to be made in accordance with the provisions of 1956 rules.
Under these rules, no person has a right to be appointed merely on the basis of seniority.
The appointment has to be made by selection.
With regard to respondent No. 3 it has been pointed out that he was given benefit of military service vide order dated March 27, 1986.
Thereafter, his seniority was refixed and he was declared senior to petitioner Nos. 2 and 3.
It has been further pointed out that the Haryana Govt. has issued instructions for reservation of posts for members of Backward Classes and Scheduled Castes.
Respondent No. 5 is a member of the Backward Class.
His claim was considered along with that of the other eligible persons and he was duly selected and promoted out that the petitioners were ineligible as they wee more than 40 years of age.
4.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondent No. 6, it has been pointed out that he is a member of the Schedule Caset and has been promoted against one of the posts reserved for that class.
With regard to the other matters, the averments are broadly on the same lines, as in the written statements filed on behalf of the order respondents.
5.
The petitioners have filed a replication.
6.
Before noticing the respective contentions, it may be mentioned at the ouset that Mr. JS Maanipur did not press the claim as made on behalf of petitioner No. 2.
He is admittedly junior to respondent No. 3 in view of the order dated December 10, 1991, a copy of which is at Annexure R-9 with the written statement filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2.
Furthermore, he has no cause for grievance against the other respondents who had been promoted against vacancies reserved for the members of Scheduled Cases or Backward Classes as he belongs to the general category.
Learned counsel also conceded that respondent No. 4 was in fact found unsuitable for promotion and had, thus, been wrongly impleaded.
As for respondent No. 5, he stated that since none of the petitioners belonged to the Backward Classes to which the said respondent does, they have, thus, no cause of action against him as well.
The contest, thus, survives only in respect of petitioners Nos. 1 and 3 against the promotion of respondent Nos. 3, 6 and 7.
7.
In so far as petitioner No. 1 is concerned, Mr. Maanipur submitted that he is admittedly senior to respondent No. 3.
He had, thus, a right to be considered for the grant of relexation of age and promotion before the department could pass an order in favour of the said respondent.
Similarly, petitioner No. 3 who is a member of the Scheduled Castes, was entitled to be considered before respondent No. 6 and 7 who also belong to that class could be promoted.
The counsel for the respondents have controverted the claim.
8.
Admittedly, the vacancies had occurred prior to the June 25, 1991 when the new rules had been promulgated.
Consequently, the counsel have conceded that the appointment shall be governed by the 1956 rules.
Rule 5 of these rules, inter-alia provides that no person shall be appointed to the service who "in case of departmental candidate is more than 35 years of age, provided that the appointing authority may, in special circumstances to be recorded in writing, relax the age limit of 35 years".
Rule 10 inter alia provides that the posts of Assistant Revenue Clerks shall be filled up "by promotion from amongst Patwaris; provided they are educationally qualified and other wise suitable ".
Rule 12 relates to the determination of seniority.
It has to be determined "by the date of confirmation" in a grade.
9.
The petitioners have produced a copy of the seniority list of Canal Patwaris of the Bhakra Canal Circle, Kaithal, as it stood on March 31, 1991.
An extract from this lit is at Annexure P 4 with the writ petition.
In this list, the names of the petitioner Nos. 1 and 3 appear at serial Nos. 34 and 104, while those respondent Nos. 3, 6 and 7 appear at serial Nos. 82, 117 and 132.
After the grant of benefit of military service, the name of respondent No. 3 is at serial No. 49-A It is the admitted position that only one vacancy had been filled up on the basis of open merit.
Respondent No. 3 had been promoted.
Petitioner No. 1 was admittedly senior to him.
Still further, it has also not been disputed that he was younger to respondent No. 3.
Yet the respondents promoted respondent No. 3 by giving him relaxation of age.
It has not been shown that the claim of petitioner No. 1 for relaxation of age was considered.
This was unfair.
10.
It is no doubt true that rule provides that a person should not be more than 35 years of age so as to be eligible for promotion to the post of Assistant Revenue Clerk.
However, a power of relaxation has been vested in the appointing authority.
Prima facie, it appears that the prescription of age limit of 35 years is wholly arbitrary.
Admittedly, a person continues in service till the age of 58 years.
To provide that for 23 years of service he should not be considered for promotion was not fair.
However, this question has become academic in view of the fact that under the 1991 rules, the age limit has not been prescribed.
So far as the present case is concerned, it would suffice to notice that it was incumbent on the respondents to consider the claim of petitioner No. 1 for relaxation of age before any such relief was granted to a person junior to him.
It has been conceded before me that the petitioner's claim was not considered.
That being so, he was excluded from consideration only on the ground that he was more than 35 years of age and that he had even crossed the age of 40 years upto which relaxation had been granted by a general order passed by the Chief Engineer.
Admittedly, the petitioner was younger to respondent No. 3.
He was also senior to him.
Yet his claim of relaxation of age and thereafter for promotion was not considered.
This was unfair and violative of the guarantee of equality as enshrined in Articles 14 and 16.
Accordingly, the promotion of respondent No. 3 was in violation of the rights of petitioner No. 1.
As for petitioner No. 3 it may be mentioned that admittedly, he is a member of Scheduled Castes.
Respondent Nos. 6 and 7 also belong to that class.
Furthermore, the name of petitioner No. 3 appears at serial No. 104 in the seniority list while those of respondents No. 6 and 7 appear at serial Nos. 117 and 132.
The petitioner has been ignored only on the ground that he was overage.
It is true that petitioner No. 3 was born on March 14, 1949, while respondent Nos. 6 and 7 were born on November 5, 1952 and January 1, 1953 respectively.
In July, 1991, when the promotions were made, respondents No. 6 and 7 were all beyond the age of 35 years as prescribed under the rules.
Rule 5 confers power of relaxation only in the appointing authority.
Under the rules, the appointing authority in respect of the Assistant Revenue Clerks is the Superintending Engineer.
The power of relaxation could thus be exercised only by the appointing authority.
Learned counsel for the respondents has referred to the order dated May 6, 1991 issued by the Chief Engineer on the basis of which they submit that the Chief Engineer had granted the relaxation up to the age of 40 years.
This order is of no consequence.
The power of relaxation was vested only in the appointing authority.
It has not been shown that the power of appointment vested in the Chief Engineer.
Nor has it been pointed out from any document that orders for relaxation of age beyond the prescribed limit of 35 years had been passed by the appointing authority in respect of respondent Nos. 6 and 7.
No reasons as required under the Rule were recorded.
That being so, they were not in any way different from petitioner No. 3.
11.
It is clear that the action of the respondents in promoting respondent Nos. 3, 6 and 7 is not in conformity with the rules.
The claims of petitioner Nos. 1 and 3 were wrongly ignored.
12.
Accordingly, the writ petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to consider the claim of the petitioner Nos. 1 and 3 along with that of the other eligible candidates in accordance with the rules, with effect from the date the persons junior to them were promoted.
In case the petitioners are found to be suitable, they shall be promoted against the vacancies which may be available or by reverting the concerned respondents No. viz. 3, 6 or 7.
The needful shall be done within three months from the date of receipt of a certified copy of this order.
No costs.