Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner who is a member of the Scheduled Castes, is working as an Accountant in the Government Quality Marking Centre, Faridabad.
He prays that the order dated April 1, 1986 by which respondent No. 4 was promoted to the post of Deputy Superintendent at the District Industries Centre, Ambala, be quashed.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner joined service on December 17, 1976 in the Quality Marking Centre.
In July, 1981, the Director of Industries circulated a letter to the various Field Officers intimating that two posts of Deputy Superintendents had been earmarked for candidates belonging to the category of Scheduled Castes.
The officers were asked to recommend the names of persons working as Assistants/Accountants/Senior Scale Stenographers for promotion to the two posts of Deputy superintendents.
The petitioner's name was forwarded and duly considered.
However, he was not promoted.
A similar circular was also issued on July 28, 1983.
However, even this time it was felt that the petitioner needed more experience and he was not promoted.
In spite of the fact that the petitioner's name had been recommended on two occasions, he was not promoted.
In April 1986, respondent No. 4 along with two other persons was promoted as a Deputy Superintendent in one of the District Industries Centres.
The petitioner impugns this order on the ground that it is arbitrary, illegal and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
The respondents controvert the petitioner's claim.
It is pointed out on their behalf that the promotions have to be made in accordance with the proposed rules - "Haryana Industries Department State Service Class III Rules, 1985 (Field)."
In accordance with these rules, the posts in the District Industries Centres and Quality Marking Centres constitute two separate cadres.
Separate seniority lists are maintained.
Persons working in the District Industries Centres are considered against the posts in their cadre while those working in the Quality Marking Centres are considered separately within their cadre.
Since the posts of Deputy Superintendents against which respondents No. 4 and two other persons have been promoted are borne on the cadre of District Industries Centres, the petitioner had no right to be considered.
The other allegations made by the petitioner have also been controverted.
The petitioner has not filed any replication to controvert the stand taken on behalf of the respondents.
3.
Mr. KL Arora, learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the petitioner having been appointed as an Accountant on December 17, 1976, was senior to respondent No. 4 who had been promoted as such on December 24, 1979.
He further summits that the post of Deputy Superintendent having fallen vacant in the year 1981, the rules which may have been drafted by the Department in the year 1985 could not have been applied to the said post.
He has further submitted that the Draft Service Rules are not legally enforceable.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioner has been controverted by the counsel for the respondent.
4.
The questions that arise for consideration are:-  (i) Are the Draft Rules applicable in the instant case ?
(ii) Is the petitioner senior to Respondent No. 4 ?
(iii) Is the order of April 1, 1986 illegal and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution ?
Reg : (i)  5.
It is true that the conditions of service governing the employees of State Government can be prescribed under an Act of Legislature or the rules framed under Article 309 of the Constitution However, in a case where statutory rules have not been promulgated, the competent authority is not precluded from either laying down conditions by way of executive instructions or on the basis of Draft Service Regulations.
Such Draft Service Regulations may not be statutory.
As such, they may not be legally enforceable.
However, if the appointing authority frames certain regulations and uses them as guidelines till such time as the statutory regulations are framed by the competent authority, it cannot be said that its action is illegal or violative of any statutory provision of law.
In the present case, it is the admitted position that no statutory rules have so far been framed by the State Government.
At least none have been notified.
In fact, even though, the Draft Rules were framed in 1985, these have not attained a statutory character so far.
In such a situation, if the appointing authority has considered it appropriate to regulate the conditions of service of the employees in terms of the draft rules prepared by it, the action is just and fair.
It only places a curb on the appointing authority.
It restricts the discretion of the appointing authority.
It does not violate any provision of law.
This is all the more so in view of the fact that no instructions to the contrary are shown to have been issued by any one.
The matter could have been different if any instructions had been issued to the contrary by the State Government or any other authority superior to the appointing authority.
There is not even a suggestion to that effect in the present case.
In this situation, the Director of Industries cannot be blamed for having relied on the Draft Service Rules for regulating the service conditions of the employees working in the department.
6.
Accordingly, the first question is answered in the affirmative and it is held that the action of the authority in following the provisions of the Draft Service Rules - the "proposed rules" - cannot be said to be illegal or violative of any provision of law.
Reg: (ii)  7.
The inter se seniority of the employees working in a particular Department is always governed by rules.
Within a cadre, a person who joins earlier is normally senior to another who joins later.
However, the essential pre-condition is that the two persons should be working in the same cadre.
In the present case, it has not been shown that the petitioner who is working in the Government Quality Marking Centre, Faridabad, is borne in the same cadre as respondent No. 4 who was posted in the District Industries Centre.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has not been able to refer to any rule or instructions or even an executive order to show that persons working in the Distrist Industries Centres have a common seniority with those working in the Quality Marking Centres.
No seniority list has been produced to show that the Department ever prepared a joint seniority list of the persons working in the Quality Marking Centres and the District Industries Centres.
In such a situation, it cannot be said that merely because the petitioner had been promoted to the post of an Accountant earlier than respondent No. 4, he should ipso facto be treated as senior to him.
8.
Consequently, the second question is answered in the negative and it is held that there is nothing on record to show that the petitioner is senior to respondent No. 4.
Reg : (iii)  9.
Mr. Arora, counsel for the petitioner submitted that the post of Deputy Superintendent was initially circulated in the year 1981.
The names of persons working on the posts of Assistants, Accountants and Senior Scale Stenographers having five years' experience, were to be considered for promotion.
It is undoubtedly so.
Similarly, even two years later, an identical requisition was sent vide letter dated July 28, 1983.
However, on perusal of these two letters, it cannot be said that the vacancy which was sought to be filled in the years 1981 or 1983, is the same which has been filled up in the year 1986.
There is no clear or categorical averment in the petition that the posts which had been circulated in the years 1981 and 1983 have in fact been filled up in the year 1986.
Still further, it is the admitted position that the petitioner's name was duly recommended and considered in response to these two requisitions.
However, he was not found suitable for promotion.
It was observed that he needed more experience.
Still further, the petitioner has not anywhere alleged that no promotion was made at that time.
In fact, even a challenge to his superesession in the years 1981 and 1984 has not been made in the writ petition.
In this situation, it cannot be said that the three posts which have been filled up in the year 1986 through the impugned order, had in fact fallen vacant prior to the preparation of the Draft Service Rules in the year 1985.
If the petitioner had made a specific averment in this behalf, it would have been possible for the respondents to show that the vacancy which has been given to respondent No. 4 is not the same as had been circulated in the years 1981 and 1983.
10.
In any event, the petitioner had only a right to be considered.
It is the admitted position that he was duly considered in the years 1981 and 1984.
That being so, the petitioner cannot be heard to say that he was denied equality of opportunity at the time.
So far as the impugned order passed on April 1, 1986 is concerned, it is not disputed that in view of the provisions contained in the Draft Service Rules, persons working in the Quality Marking Centres were not eligible to be considered for the posts falling vacant in the District Industries Centres.
Respondent No. 4 admittedly belongs to the cadre of District Industries Centres.
As against this, the petitioner belongs to the cadre of Quality Marking Centres.
The two are borne on separate cadres.
That being so, the petitioner had no right to be considered for promotion against a vacancy in the District Industries Centres.
He cannot, thus, allege that there is violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
11.
Mr. Arora has also made a submission that after the filing of the writ petition various persons have been promoted in the Quality Marking Centres but the petitioner's name was not considered.
Such a grievance has not been made in the petition.
If that be so, the petitioner shall be entitled to seek this remedy in accordance with law.
12.
No other point has been urged.
13.
In view of the above, all the questions raised by the petitioner are answered against him.
Accordingly, the writ petition is dismissed with costs which are assessed at Rs. 2,000.
Petition dismissed.