BA Khan, J - Petitioners seek consideration for appointment to the post of Foresters in Jammu division in the reserved category of "Resident of Backward Areas" (ROBA) and all that falls to be considered is: whether SRO-126 of 1994 dated 2861994 (J&K Reservation Rules, 1994) can be given retrospective operation to bring within its fold all those posts and vacancies which have been advertised prior to its promulgation ?
2.
Petitioner responded to advertisement notice No. 4 of 1992 issued by respondent No. 2 inviting, amongst others, applications for the post of Forester in Jammu Division.
They come from village Goason in Akhnoor tehsil which stands admittedly declared as a backward area.
After they had submitted their applications, SRO-126 of 1994 dated 2861994 was brought into force providing reservations for appointment by direct recruitment in each service, class, category and grade in favour of permanent residents of the State belonging to any of the categories mentioned in rule 10 of the Rules.
One of the categories mentioned therein is "Residents of Backward Areas" for which reservation to the extent of 20 per cent of the available vacancies has been provided.
3.
Prompted by this, the petitioners moved respondent No. 2 and sought consideration under the ROBA category.
After they failed to elicit favourable response from the Board functionaries they filed this petition seeking a direction to respondent No. 2 to finalise the select list for appointment to the posts of Forester after granting them consideration under the ROBA category and for restraining the Board from finalising any select list without acting upon the Reservation Rules of 1994.
It appears that in the objections filed by the respondents to this petition it was disclosed that SRO-126 of 1994 had been subsequently amended by SRO-255 of 1994 dated 28111994 clarifying that the Reservation Rules of 1994 would not apply to such vacancies or the posts in respect of which the advertisement notice had been issued or selection process initiated by the selection authority before coming into force of these rules.
Upon this, petitioner sought amendment of the writ petition to challenge SRO-255 of 1994 which was allowed.
In the amended writ petition they now seek quashment of this SRO besides the reliefs sought by them in the original petition.
4.
Petitioners' case is that the Reservation Rules of 1994 are applicable to all available vacancies for which selection process was not finalised at the time of coming into force of these rules.
They rely on the expression "available vacancies' occurring in rule 10 of the Rules for this purpose.
It is alternatively contended by them that SRO-255 of 1994 dated 28111994 which excludes the application of Reservation Rules to such vacancies or posts in respect of which advertisement notice was already issued or selection process initiated before the promulgation of the rules, is discriminatory in character and it cannot take away the rights vested in them by SRO-126 of 1994 and was thus violative of their rights guaranteed to them under Articles 15(iv) and 16(iv) of the Constitution.
In other words, their case is that respondents were obliged to act upon the Reservation Rules in all pending selections and their refusal to do so negated the constitutional mandate under Articles 15(iv) and 16(iv) of the Constitution.
The stand of the respondents, on the other hand, is short and simple.
According to them physical tests for the posts of Forester had been conducted in 1995 much after SRO-225 of 1994 had clarified about the position of application of SRO-126 of 1994.
It is also submitted that the SRO-126 did not confer any right on the petitioners and the same was applicable to the vacancies and posts selection process for which was to be initiated after the promulgation of this SRO.
It is also urged that SRO -255/94 was validly issued and had amended SRO-126 of 1994 only to clarify the position about its application to the vacancies and posts in various services.
5.
I first propose to deal with the petitioner's first limb of argument regarding the application of SRO-126 of 1994 in their case.
Their case seems to be misdirected on the face of it.
This is evident from a plain reading of the terms of rule 10 on which they have staked the first part of claim.
The relevant rule reads thus:  "Except as otherwise provided in these rules, available vacancies shall be reserved for the direct recruitment in each service, class, category and grade in favour of permanent residents of the State belonging to any of the below mentioned categories which shall, as nearly as possible, constitute the percentage of available vacancies shown against each: (a) Scheduled Caste .. 8% (b) Scheduled Tribes .. 10% (c) Socially and educationally backward classes (other than scheduled castes and scheduled tribes: (i) Weak and under-privileged classes (Social Castes) .. 2% (ii) Residents of areas adjoining line of actual control ... 3% (iii) Residents of backward areas .. 20% The expression "available vacancies" occurring in this rule is referable to these vacancies which are available after the promulgation of these rules and does not cover such vacancies and posts which had been advertised or for which selection process was initiated before these rules came into force.
No other interpretation or intention is gatherable from the terms of rule 10 and any contrary interpretation would lend retrospective effect to these Rules which is neither intended nor provided.
Thus, it cannot be held that Reservation Rules brought in force on 2661994, would cover all those vacancies/posts in different services for which selection process had been already initiated prior to such rules.
Therefore, no right would flow from these rules to such candidates who had offered to undergo selection in the open merit category.
Nor could such a candidate be allowed to cash on these rules midway.
6.
The challenge to SRO-255 of 1994 dated 28111994 is equally untenable unbendable.
This SRO neither creates any class nor does it meet out any hostile discrimination to any one.
All that it does is to clarify the position about the application of Reservation Rules and nothing more.
Therefore, there is no question of this SRO running in any conflict with SRO- 126 of 1994.
Viewed thus, petitioners have no case on both the counts and their writ petition is devoid of any merits and is dismissed as such.