Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner was working as a Driver with the Haryana Roadways.
In February 1990, the petitioner sought voluntary retirement on the ground that his family condition is not good.
He gave a three months' notice to the Department.
However, in March, 1990, he withdraw his request.
In spite of this, the petitioner was retired from service with effect from April 30, 1990.
A copy of this order has been produced as Annexure P.1 with the writ petition.
He represented.
Vide letter dated September 20, 1993, the petitioner was informed that "since he had sought retirement first on the ground of weak eye sight and later on the ground of family problems and was allowed to retire, it would not be appropriate to take him back in service."
The petitioner challenges this order of the ground that the request for voluntary retirement having been withdrawn, the action of the respondents in retiring him from service cannot be legally sustained.
2.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents.
It has been pointed out that the petitioner had made a request for voluntary retirement on August 14, 1989.
A copy of this letter has been produced as Annexure R.I with the written statement.
It was mentioned by the petitioner that his eye-sight was weak.
He was called upon to get himself medically examined.
He did not report for medical examination.
However, he made another request for voluntary retirement on January 30, 1990.
This request was accepted by respondent No. 3 on February 2, 1990.
The petitioner was voluntarily retired vide order dated March 23, 1990 with effect from April 30, 1990.
A copy of this order has been produced as Annexure R.4.
It has been further submitted that the petitioner's request for voluntary retirement having been accepted by respondent No. 3 on February 2, 1990, he could not ask for its withdrawal thereafter.
Accordingly, it is maintained that the writ petition has no merit and deserves to be dismissed.
3.
This case had come up for hearing on February 9, 1996.
The petitioner was directed to get himself medically examined and produce a certificate regarding his fitness for the job of a driver.
In pursuance to this order, the petitioner has produced a medical certificate dated February 27, 1996 from the Medical Officer, General Hospital, Kaithal.
It has been certified that he is fit for the job of a driver.
4.
Mr. JK Goel, learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that the action of the respondents in retiring the petitioner with effect from April 30, 1990 is wholly illegal and deserves to be quashed.
No one has appeared on behalf of the respondents to contest the petition.
5.
It is the admitted position that the petitioner had made a request for voluntary retirement on January 30, 1990.
He had given a three months' notice.
He could, thus, be retired with effect from April 30, 1990.
However, before the crucial date, the petitioner had withdrawn his request.
He having withdrawn the notice before the date on which he could be retired, there was nothing which respondent No. 3 could have accepted.
In the very nature of things, the request for premature retirement had to remain inchoate till the actual date of retirement.
The request having been withdrawn, the authority could not have passed the impugned order.
6.
Even otherwise, the petitioner has produced a medical certificate from the Medical Officer, General Hospital, Kaithal, indicating that he is fit to work as a driver.
This is taken on record as Mark 'A'.
7.
In view of the above, the impugned order by which the petitioner was retired from service as also the order rejecting his representation, are set aside.
It is directed that the petitioner shall be got medically examined.
If he is found to be fit, he shall be reinstated in service.
The needful shall be done within one month from the date of receipt of a certified copy of this order.
However, keeping in view the fact that the petitioner was working as a driver, he could not have remained idle.
It was conceded by the counsel for the petitioner that back wages may not be paid.
Consequently, while reinstating the petitioner, the respondents shall not be liable to pay arrears of salary.
Otherwise, his service would be deemed to be continuous.
8.
The writ petition is, accordingly, disposed of.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to casts.