Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner has a two-fold grievance.
Firstly, he claims to be senior to respondents 3 to 6 as a clerk and challenges the order dated September 2, 1977 by which respondents 3 to 5 were promoted as Assistants.
Secondly, the petitioner complains that he was in any case senior to respondent No. 7 and had a right to be considered for promotion as an Assistant before the said respondent could be promoted.
He, consequently, impugns the order dated October 12, 1988 by which respondent No. 7 was promoted as Assistant on purely ad hoc basis.
2.
As for the first grievance, it is the admitted position that the respondents were appointed as clerks on different dates from December 27, 1961 to February 13, 1964.
The petitioner was admittedly appointed as a clerk on temporary basis on June 6, 1964.
His date of continuous appointment as a clerk is obviously later than the date on which the respondents had started working as such.
Consequently, the petitioner can have no claim for seniority against respondents 3 to 6.
3.
Mr. Patwalia, learned counsel for the petitioner, however, submits that vide order dated May 13, 1969, the Respondent-Board had decided to equate the pay scales of the posts of clerks and Octroi Moharrirs.
He further submits that on February 27, 1971, the Cantonment Board had passed a resolution by which the cadres of Tax Collectors, Grade I and Clerks were ordered to be merged.
On this basis, learned counsel submits that the petitioner who was appointed as a Moharrir on July 21, 1960 should rank senior to respondents 3 to 6.
Mr. Vashisht, on the other hand, points that the G.O.C.-In-Chief Western Command had not approved the resolution passed by the Board regarding the merger of two cadres.
4.
The contention raised by the counsel for the petitioner is wholly untenable.
Even if it is assumed for the sake of argument that the cadres had been merged, it is the admitted position that the pay scales were equated w.e.f.
September 1, 1967 only .
The merger was also to be effective from that date.
Admittedly, prior to September 1, 1967, the post of Moharrir was in a lower scale of pay than that of a clerk.
Consequently the service rendered by the petitioner from July 21, 1960 to June 5, 1964 before his appointment as a clerk, can't be equated to that of a clerk.
That being so, the petitioner is not entitled to claim seniority in the cadre of clerks with effect from the date of his appointment as a Moharrir.
5.
Since the claim of the petitioner with regard to seniority vis-a-vis respondents 3 to 6 cannot be sustained, his grievance against the order of the their promotion vide order dated September 2, 1977 is wholly lacking in merit and is rejected.
6.
The second part of the grievance relates to the petitioner's claim for seniority against respondent No. 7.
It has been alleged that respondent No. 7 had been appointed as a clerk on February 28, 1965.
Since the petitioner had been appointed as such in June 1964, he claims to be senior to the said respondent.
It has been further pleaded that the said respondent was promoted vide order dated October 21, 1988.
On behalf of the respondents, the factual position has not been disputed.
In para 15 of the written statement, it has only been averred that the Board had the right to promote the person who was found suitable.
It has, however, not been even suggested that the claim of the petitioner was considered and that he was found unsuitable.
In this situation, the claim of the petitioner for promotion as Assistant, deserves to be considered with effect from the date respondent No. 7 was promoted.
Since the petitioner had admittedly retired from service in April 1993, the consideration would only involve some financial benefits to him.
7.
In view of the above, it is directed that the Respondent-Board shall consider the petitioner's claim for promotion as Assistant w.e.f.
October 12, 1988.
In case, the petitioner is found suitable, he will be granted promotion with consequential benefits regarding refixation of pay and arrears of salary.
The petitioner shall be entitled to the revision of retrial benefits, if any, that may be admissible to the employees of the Board.
The writ petition is disposed of in the above terms.
No costs.