Amarjeet Chaudhary and N C Khichi, JJ.
- In this writ petition filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner has prayed for issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing respondents No. 1 and 2 to sponsor his candidature for admission to three-year Bachelor of Engineering Degree Course (Civil Engineering) at aegis of Regional Engineering College, Kurukshetra for the year 1995-96 by deeming the petitioner to be regularly appointed Junior Engineer from his initial date of appointment i.e. 551982.
2.
The case of the petitioner as set up in the petition is that he was appointed as Junior Engineer on 551982 through Employment Exchange on the basis of his academic qualifications and he continues in the service ever since then.
During his service career, the petitioner earned regular annual increments and his services were regularised in accordance with the policy of the State Government with effect from 31121990.
It has further been averred in the petition that Regional Engineering College, Kurukshetra invited applications for three-year Bachelor of Engineering Degree Course in Civil, Electrical and Mechanical Engineering vide advertisement which appeared in The Tribune dated 1481995.
According to the advertisement, 12 seats were reserved for candidates sponsored by the Government Departments.
Five seats were meant for Polytechnic Teachers and three for non-sponsored candidates.
One of the conditions was that the candidate who had minimum two years experience on or before 171995 was entitled to the admission against the sponsored seats.
The petitioner submitted an application for admission through proper channel but his application was not forwarded on the ground that he does not possess five years regular service.
The petitioner was informed that his service would be counted after the regularisation i.e. with effect from 111991.
3.
Petitioner further contends that he had put in 13 years of service.
He has unblemished service record throughout and as such he was duly selected.
He further contends that his application should have been forwarded.
4.
In the written statement filed by the respondents, the plea taken is that the services of the petitioner were regularised with effect from 31121990.
He did not fulfil the requisite conditions and as such his application was not forwarded to the Regional Engineering College, Kurukshetra.
It has been further averred that no right of the petitioner in any manner has been infringed.
5.
After having heard learned counsel for the parties and perusing the paper book, we are of the view that the application of the petitioner should have been forwarded and the entire service rendered by him should have been taken into consideration.
Though the petitioner was appointed on 551982 but his services were regularised with effect from 31121990.
Thus, the case of the petitioner for regularisation should have been considered as and when he became eligible for the same.
6.
Mr. D R Trikha, learned Deputy Advocate General, Haryana has informed us that as per information received by him from the Regional Engineering College, Kurukshetra, admission to special three-year Bachelor of Engineering Degree Course by the Regional Engineering College, Kurukshetra, shall commence in the year 1996 for which purpose the advertisement will be issued in the month of May, 1996.
For the foregoing reasons, this writ petition is disposed of with a direction that in case after the issuance of advertisement, petitioner submits his application, the respondents shall sponsor the same for admission to three years Bachelor of Engineering Degree Course after taking into consideration the entire service rendered by the petitioner.