RS Mongia, J - As per the averments made in the writ petition, General Manager, Haryana Roadways, Dadri Depot, had sent a demand to the Employment Exchange to forward names to fill up ten vacancies of the post of Conductors in Dadri Depot.
After considering the merits of person forwarded by the Employment Exchange, names of ten persons, which included the names of the petitioners, were recommended for appointment and even a waiting list was also displayed on the notice board.
In the later part of the judgment, we will refer to the list of the selected candidates as list I  2.
It has further been averred that on December 7, 1983, all the employees of the Transport Department, Haryana, went on strike and to meet an emergent situation, because there were no drivers and conductors, certain appointments were made to these posts at random so that the buses could be plied.
Nearly 1500 employees were recruited in this manner.
These included Drivers, Conductors and Workshop staff.
On rejoining of the staff, which had gone on strike, the employees, who had been recruited during the period of strike had become surplus.
The Transport Commissioner issued instructions on January 28, 1994 copy of which has been attached as Annexure P-2 as to how these approximately 1500 employees were to be dealt with.
It would be appropriate to notice the relevant portion of the decision of the Government as contained in Annexure P-2 :-  "After the withdrawal of the strike, Government decided that all the dismissed individuals should be taken back in service.
With the implementation of this decision, the Haryana Roadways would have been saddled with the additional new recruits amounting to around 1500 people, which would have placed an unnecessary recurring annual burden of around Rs. 2 crore.
Keeping the above financial implication, as well as the points mentioned above that the new recruits comprised of several people who were neither tested/interviewed, as well as some people who did not possess the basic qualification it was decided with the approval of the Government, that the new recruits should be tested by a Committee and only the most proficient/suitable individuals should be retained and that too upto a level which the Haryana Roadways can absorb without having the deleterious effect on the commercial operations.
Accordingly a committee had been constituted under the Chairmanship of Additional State Transport Controller (C) along with technical officers, to test all the individuals, examine their qualifications and past experience and recommend thereafter, the number of individuals who may be retained depotwise, based on their proficiency etc.
The Committee has submitted its final recommendations.
Based on this, the General Managers of each depot may be advised as follows :-  (i) It they have not so far dispensed with the services of any of the new recruits, then they may retain only the individuals who have been found suitable by the said committee and immediately dispense with the service of the balance new recruits; (ii) If they have already dispensed with the services of the people recruited during the strike, then they should recruit new people as and when required by them whenever vacancies arise in future, from the list as recommended by the Committee and as per the serial numbers suggested by the Committee.
No person other than the persons included in the list should be recruited, till the list is fully exhausted; (iii) About the people who were recruited during the strike but who have not been found suitable by the Committee to be included in this final short-list, the General Managers need to check/ascertain whether the individuals fulfil the basis qualification and possess the basic proficiency (Proficiency/knowledge being essential in the case of drivers/workshop staff).
If some individuals do not fulfil either the basic qualification or basic proficiency, then we cannot employ these individuals in future also since it would be against the public interest.
No doubt, under Section 25 of the Industrial Disputes Act, any individual who has been employed, gets a first right whenever new employment has to be made, but keeping in view the fact that at that time during the strike, the people were kept on an emergent basis without examining the basis qualifications or the basic proficiency, then it would be detrimental to public interest if such an individual is recruited even in future, on a mandatory legal basis.
In the case of those individuals who are not included in this final short list but who do fulfil the basis qualifications and basic proficiency, a complete seniority list of all such individuals should be immediately prepared by the depot General Managers.
The seniority list would depend upon the date of recruitment of the individual during the strike and if the date of recruitment being same, the normal Government rule regarding age be applied (i.e. older to be senior than the younger).
After the individuals in the final short list as selected by the Committee have been exhausted and all of those individuals in the short list have been employed in that depot, then the depot must utilise the seniority list to be prepared and maintained as mentioned above.
Only after that full seniority list is exhausted, can that depot General Manager think of any recruitment of any new individual through Employment Exchange."
3.
It would be seen from the above that the Committee had to screen those candidates who were appointed during the emergent situation created by the strike and a list had to be prepared under para (ii) above of the candidates who had been recommended and another list had also to be prepared under para (iii) above who were not found suitable but otherwise possessed the basic qualifications.
The list so prepared under paras (ii) and (iii) would be referred hereinafter as lists II and III The case of the petitioners is though their names are in list I, yet candidates who are in lists II and III are being appointed as Conductors but the petitioners are being ignored for appointment as Conductors.
According to the learned counsel for the petitioners, the petitioners had not been selected during the strike period though they were also given appointment during the period of strike and, therefore, candidates on lists II and III could not be preferred over the candidates in list I If after appointment, services were to be terminated, then the services of those persons who were selected and appointed during the period of strike could be terminated first and not of the petitioners as they were regularly selected.
4.
The case of the respondents, on the others hand, is that the petitioners were selected though prior to the strike but they were also selected apprehending the strike and were selected for appointment on contractual basis as apparent from Annexure R-1.
They are in no way better than the persons who were selected and appointed during the period of strike.
The petitioners were also asked to appear before the Committee appointed in view of the decision, copy of which has been attached as Annexure P-2, the reference to which has already been made above.
The petitioners did not appear before the committee but in spite of that their names were put on list III However, it may be observed that it has not been shown as to how the petitioners were informed that they were to appear before a screening committee.
It is the case of the petitioners that the question of asking them for screening test again did not arise as they had been regularly selected prior to the strike.
5.
On 2411995, we had passed an order directing the respondents to file an affidavit indicating as to what was that which was lacking when the petitioners were selected and their names were recommended vide Annexure P-1; meaning thereby how it is being said that petitioners had not been regularly selected.
The affidavit filed is only to the effect that the selection of the petitioners prior to the strike was not a regular selection and it was a make-shift arrangement without indicating as to what was lacking in their regular selection.
6.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, we are of the view that the selection of the petitioners was a regular selection though on a contractual basis and they need not have been put to screening test again.
The screening test was only for those employees who had been selected and appointed during the strike without any interview and judging their suitability.
The petitioners' name was on list I and they would certainly have better claim than those persons whose names are on lists II and III Learned counsel for the respondents stated that even persons on lists II and III are being appointed on contractual basis.
We are of the view that if any appointments, even on contractual basis, are to be made from lists II and III, the persons whose names are on list I, shall have to be given preference.
For the time being if any contractual appointment has been given to persons on lists II and III, it may not be disturbed but in future if any appointments are to be made of the candidates from lists II and III, then first list I will have to be exhausted and if appointments are made from list I, lists II and III and services of some of the Conductors are to be terminated, then first the candidates whose names are on list III and then of those candidates on list II will have to be terminated before terminating the services of the candidates on list I  7.
Consequently, we allow this writ petition and direct the respondents to make appointment of the Conductors as indicated above.
Petition allowed.