VS Aggarwal, J - Petitioner No. 1 Nasib Singh joined the Punjab and Sind Bank as a Probationary Officer on 23.3.1983.
He has been serving the Bank since then and had been posted on different stations.
Petitioner No. 2 Pritam Singh Kainth also joined the Bank on 2.4.1983 and is serving the Bank since then.
They have been working as JMGS-I and are members of Scheduled Castes.
2.
In exercise of powers conferred under Sections 19 read with Sub- Section 2 of the Section 12 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980, regulations have been framed called as Punjab & Sind Bank (Officers') Service Regulations, 1982.
Regulation 17(1) provides the promotion policy and reads :-  "Promotions to all grades of officers in the Bank shall be made in accordance with the policy laid down by the Board from time to time, having regard to the guidelines of the Government, if any."
For promotion from Scale-I to Scale-II the eligibility is in terms of length of service and paragraphs 21 of the Punjab & Sind Bank (Officers) promotion policy reads :-  "ELIGIBILITY FOR PROMOTION IN TERMS OF LENGTH OF SERVICE."
21 Promotion from Minimum no. of years of service to be eligible for promotion.
Scale-I to Scale-II 7 years of satisfactory service as officer including a minimum service of 2 years in a rural branch."
In this process all the policy decisions and major administrative decisions are governed by the Rules so framed and instructions that have been issued.
Pertaining to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, it is the case of the petitioners that instructions of the Government of India have been accepted.
It evolved the concept of quota system in the ratio of 15% and 7- 1/2% representation for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes which is to be considered both at the time of initial recruitment as well as at the time of internal promotions.
3.
The promotion policy drawn by the respondent-Bank had been circulated to all the branches vide letter dated 1691993.
Paragraphs 52 specifically prescribed the mode of making promotions by normal channel.
It contemplated that in the normal channel all officers who are eligible and fall within the zone of consideration would be required to undergo a written test to be conducted by the Bank or any other agency.
The test is to be of 100 marks.
Officers securing 40% marks in the written test would be offered promotion subject to availability of vacancies in the order of seniority.
It also provided that if sufficient number of officers fail to qualify the written test, the minimum qualifying marks would be reduced to 35% or it may abandon the entire test as may deem fit and proper.
4.
It appears that from 1980 to 1987 onwards there was no promotion from Scale-I to Scale-II.
As such large number of officers were not given any opportunity of participating in the promotion process.
In order to give them a better chance of promotion, the merit criteria was relaxed.
One time promotion was given by the Bank by dispensing with the merit and promoting officers who were found fit and satisfying certain criteria.
Subsequently, vide circular of 1971995 the Bank also amended the policy pertaining to normal channel of promotion and under para 52, now the written test was still to be of 100 marks but promotion was to be offered subject to vacancies available in order of the merit of the eligible officers.
5.
By virtue of the present writ petition, the petitioners claim that they are members of the Scheduled Castes and are entitled to be promoted from May, 1994 against the back-log of the reserved vacancies created against 48 vacancies and that they are entitled to sit in the examination that is to be held in September, 1995.
It was prayed that a writ of mandamus be issued directing the respondents to provide reservation in the promotion of Junior Management Grade Scale-I (JMGS-I) to Manager in Middle Grade Scale-II (MMGS- II) under the normal channel as per the promotion policy that was available.
It is also prayed that the amended promotion policy should be quashed by virtue of which the promotions have to be made only by method of merit, ignoring the seniority.
It is asserted that the earlier policy was based on seniority subject to fitness and as per instructions of the Government of India, 40 point roster has to be maintained with respect to vacancies for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
The Bank by virtue of their action has deprived the petitioners of their fundamental right for being considered to promotion and otherwise also the subsequent decision/promotion policy whereby the rule of seniority subject to fitness has been ignored and rule of merit has been attracted besides being discriminatory cannot operate retrospectively.
6.
In the reply filed by respondents 1 to 5 the petition has been contested pleading inter-alia that promotion policy of the Bank is made in terms of Regulation 17 of the Punjab & Sind Bank (Officers') Service Regulations, 1982.
Manager Scale-II is a vital position in the administative hierarchy of the Banks.
They are heading majority of the Bank branches.
The said branches are profit centres and service windows of the Banks.
The Bank, therefore, seeks that the officers with proven merit and who are competent should be promoted to that scale.
Keeping in view the same, the Government of India has given the guidelines on 1871990 that subject to availability of vacancies, all promotions from one scale to another should be on the basis of merit with weightage to the service record, educational qualification etc. without any weightage to seniority.
There was no dispute raised about the reservation policy circulated vide letter dated 1691993.
It was noticed that there was no promotion from 1980 to 1987.
Large number of officers have not got any opportunity of participating in promotion process.
In these circumstances one time special promotion drive was given to officers in Scale-I to Scale-II.
They were to be promoted if they satisfy the following criteria :-  "(i) No penalty whatsoever is awarded to the officers employees at any time in the past; (ii) The officer is not under cloud; (iii) The officer has secured atleast two, Good, in the preceding four years Appraisal reports; (iv) The officer has not been rated 'Below Average' in the preceding four years Appraisal reports; (v) The officer has not refused to undergo rural training of two years when offered; (vi) The officer has not refused promotion or sought reversion or did not participate in the promotion process under normal channel in the preceding four years; and  (vii) Any other factor worth considering."
It was further alleged that respondents by changing the guidelines for promotion on 1971995 has not barred the promotion chances of the petitioners and in any case the petitioners have no right to claim promotion on MMGS-II.
7.
On similar facts Prabhu Nath Chaudhary and others had filed a separate writ petition with similar relief.
The said facts do not require any repetition.
8.
It is a common case of the parties that the petitioners through their representative body had even been representing to the respondent-Bank pertaining to their grievance.
Attention was being drawn to the facts that subsequently the President and General Secretary of the Association had withdrawn the representations and expressed satisfaction with the reservation policy followed by the Bank.
On the strength of this writing (Annexure P-10) it has been urged that when the representative body had withdrawn the representations and accepted the decision of the Bank which is now being challenged, thus the petitioners have no right to agitate by virtue of the present writ petitions.
9.
However, our attention has also been drawn to the fact that it is being vehemently urged that the said letter was got signed from the President of the Association and in any case it will not affect the rights of the parties as such.
We are not concerned with the internal muddle of the Association.
Repeatedly the respondent-Bank was being informed that as per the decisions so taken, the reservation should be allowed on the basis of seniority subject to fitness.
If the President and the General Secretary of the Association suddenly was made to withdraw the earlier representations and express satisfaction for whatever reasons, will not put an end to the rights nor defeat the regulations of the Bank which were adopted in exercise of powers conferred under Section 19 read with Sub-section (2) of Section 12 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition & Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980.
The petitioner cannot be estopped in this regard for agitating their individual claims.
Therefore, the said contention of the respondent-Bank must be taken to be without any merit.
10.
The petitioners assail the present promotion policy that had been adopted by the respondent-Bank by amending para 52 with respect to promotion to MMGS-II which was described as the normal channel.
It reads :-  "52 NORMAL CHANNEL In the Normal Channel all officers eligible for promotion and falling within the zone of consideration would be required to undergo a written test to be conducted by the Bank or any other agency at the instance of the Bank.
The written test will be of 100 marks.
Officers securing minimum of 40% marks in the written test so held shall be offered promotion subject to the vacancies available in order of their merit.
PROMOTION TO SMGS- IV All eligible candidates for promotion shall be subjected to preliminary screening qualifying test to assess the requisite skills and abilities expected at Senior Management level.
The minimum qualifying marks shall be 40%.
The officers qualifying the test numbering not more than the officers falling in the zone of consideration would be subject to further process of promotion as per the promotion policy."
To appreciate the said contention of the petitioners, reference may well be made to the earlier method of promotion with normal channel also to MMGS- II.
The said policy earlier to the present decision of 1971995 reads :-  "52 NORMAL CHANNEL In the normal channel all officers eligible for promotion and falling within the zone of consideration would be required to undergo a written test to be conducted by the Bank or any other agency at the instance of the Bank.
The written test will be of 100 marks.
Officers securing minimum of 40% marks in the written test so held shall be offered promotion, subject to the vacancies available, in order of their seniority.
PROVIDED FURTHER, that in the event sufficient number of officers fail to qualify the written test so conducted, the CMD may after recording the reasons in writing relax the minimum qualifying marks stated hereinabove upto 35% or may abandon the entire test as deemed fit and proper."
11.
Learned counsel for the petitioners contended that the said decision is mala fide and illegal.
It has only been taken to put an end to the rights of the petitioners who are members of the Scheduled Castes.
Therefore, it should be struck down to be invalid.
12.
It has already been pointed out and mentioned above that promotion policy of the Bank is made in terms of Regulation 17 of the Punjab & Sind Bank (Officers') Service Regulations, 1982.
The said regulations have been made in exercise of the powers conferred by Section 19 read with Sub-section (2) of Section 12 of Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980.
There were two channels namely fast channel and a normal channel with respect to the promotions.
The Bank is not debarred for changing the said policy and by virtue of the decision circulated on 1971995 (Annexure P-12), the new policy had been adopted.
There is no bar, thus, on the Bank in amending the policy.
There is nothing to indicate as to why it would debar the members of the Scheduled Castes for competing with others.
The present policy only gives a good-bye to the earlier method and lays new guidelines for promotion based on merit.
All eligible employees of the respondent-Bank can compete on merits.
This has been done obviously to get the best talent.
The officers with proven merit will compete with each other and thereafter the selection would be made.
We find no merit in the said contention that it would outright debar the petitioners.
13.
However, it must be mentioned that the said decision so taken (Annexure P-12) would be prospective in nature and vacancies which occurred prior to the new decision would be governed by the old decisions.
The decision in the case of YV Rangaiah and others v. J Sreenivasa Rao and others, 1983 (1) SLR 789 supports the said view point.
Otherwise also perusal of the decisions dated 1971995 indicates that it was not retrospective in nature and there is no mention in this regard.
It had to operate prospectively.
We hold accordingly.
14.
In fact learned counsel for the petitioners insisted more with respect to 48 vacancies which were available prior to this decision.
There was no controversy raised before us that benefits and concessions were made available by the respondent-Bank to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
Guidelines had been issued by the Government and the same were accepted.
As per the policy framed, quota system in the ratio of 15% and 7-1/2% was made available for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes at the time of initial recruitment and even at the time of promotion.
A copy of the brochure on reservation for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes dated 2521976 has been placed on the record.
The relevant extract of the same reads :-  "The policy in regard to reservations for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes officers in posts filled by promotion on the basis of seniority subject to fitness has now been reviewed and it has been decided, in supersession of the orders contained in the aforesaid Para 2-C of the OM, dated 11th July, 1968, that there will be reservation at 15 per cent for Scheduled Castes and 7-1/2 per cent for Scheduled Tribes in promotions made on the basis of seniority subject to fitness, in appointments to all Class I, Class II, Class III and Class IV in grades of services in which the element of direct recruitment, if any, does not exceed 66-2/3 per cent.
2.
The procedure to be followed where promotions are made on the basis of seniority subject to fitness has been laid down in paragraph IB of Ministry of Home Affairs OM No.
1/9/58-R.P.S., dated the 16th May, 1959 which provides that in such cases a decision has to be taken on suitability of each individual officer for such promotion although there is no need for a comparative evaluation of their respective merits and that decision on the fitness or the unfitness of an officer for promotion should be taken by the Departmental Promotion Committee instead of by an individual officer.
While, therefore, referring proposals to the Departmental Promotion Committee for promotion on the basis of seniority subject to fitness in respect of vacancies expected to arise during a year, the following procedure may be followed to give effect to the decision mentioned in paragraph above :-  (i) A separate 40 point roster to determine the number of reserved vacancies in a year should be followed on the lines of the roster prescribed in Annexure I to the Ministry of Home Affairs OM No. 1/II/69-Est.
(SCT), dated the 22nd April, 1970, in which points 1, 8, 14, 22, 28 and 36 are reserved for Scheduled Castes and points 4, 17 and 31 are reserved for Scheduled Tribes.
(ii) Wherever according to the points in the roster there are any vacancies reserved for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, separate lists should be drawn up of the eligible Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes Officers, as the case may be, arranged in order of their inter-se seniority in the main list.
(iii) The Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes officers should be adjudged by the Departmental Promotion Committee separately in regard to their fitness.
(iv) When the Select Lists of officers in the general category and those belonging to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes have been prepared by the Departmental Promotion Committee, these should be merged into a combined Select List in which the names of all the selected officers, general as well as those belonging to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, are arranged in the order of their inter-se seniority in the original seniority list of the category or grades from which the promotion is being made.
This combine select list should thereafter be followed for making promotion in vacancies as and when they arise during the year.
xx xx xx xx  xx xx xx xx" It leaves no doubt that the said policy which was accepted and was based on the instructions of the Government of India provided for 40 point roster to determine the number of vacancies in a year and fixed points were available reserved for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
Select list of officers in General Category and those belonging to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes have to be prepared by the Departmental Promotion Committee.
The same has to be merged in a combined select list.
The names of all selected candidates i.e. General and that of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes had to be arranged in the order of their inter-se seniority on the original list of the category or grade from which the promotion has to be made.
The combined select list has to follow for making promotion as and when they arise during the year.
It is not being disputed that petitioners qualified and had put in 7 years service in Scale-I It has already been mentioned above that the method of promotion was a written test of 100 marks.
The officer securing 40% marks in the written test had to be offered promotion subject to vacancies available in order of their seniority.
The criteria of merit has now been added.
The conclusions are inescapable that vacancies namely 48 which were available had to be rotated in accordance with the instructions and the promotion policy earlier applicable.
15.
Learned counsel for respondents 1 to 5 urged that there was no promotion for many years.
Many senior general category officers were stagnated.
It was decided to have one time promotion.
16.
The said argument so much thought of has simply to be stated as rejected.
The petitioners also as per the relevant instructions and regulations had natural aspirations.
They must have joined the service of the Bank hoping that they would be promoted in accordance with the relevant instructions and the 40 point roster mentioned above.
Their rights as such could not be defeated by giving promotions to general category candidates ignoring the criteria of normal channel fixed as per paragraph 52.
The valuable right was available to the petitioners and merely because some other general category candidates suffered, is no ground to defeat the rules and instructions and criteria for promotion fixed by the Bank.
To that extent, the petition as such must succeed.
For these reasons, the petition is allowed and it is directed that petitioners entitled to be considered for promotion against the back-log of reserved vacancies created against 48 vacancies as per the normal channel of promotion under paragraph 52 of promotion policy framed under Regulation 17 of the Punjab & Sind Bank (Officers') Service Regulations, 1982, with respect to other reliefs claimed, the petition fails.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.