Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner who had secured 4964% marks in the Entrance Test for admission to the M.B.A.
Course prays for the issue of a Writ of Mandamus directing the respondents to "round up these marks to 50%" and to consider him for admission.
2.
A few facts may be noticed.
3 .
The petitioner is studying for the award of the Degree of M.Sc.
(Statistics).
Respondent No. 1 had issued a Prospectus for admission to the Course leading to the Degree of Master of Business Administration.
This admission was to be made on the basis of an Entrance Test.
The candidates had to appear in four papers carrying seventy marks each.
It was further stipulated that "Candidate must secure a minimum of 40% marks in individual papers and 50% in aggregate, in order to qualify for interview and group discussion".
According to the Prospectus, candidates who did not qualify in Written Test were not eligible to be called for interview and Group Discussion.
However, it was further provided that "in case the number of candidates qualifying the test is not sufficient, the Vice-Chancellor may allow ad hoc additional marks to raise the number of candidates qualifying the test."
4.
Accordingly, the petitioner appeared in the Entrance Test.
While he secured 40% marks in each of the four papers, he failed to secure 50% marks in the aggregate.
Resultantly, he was not called for interview.
The petitioner submits that in accordance with the criteria fixed by the University for this examination, "the decimal of percentage of marks 0.5 or more" had to be raised "to the next higher round integer and decimals less than 05 had to be ignored."
On this basis, the petitioner who had secured 4964% marks in the aggregate viz. 139 out of 280, claims that the University was bound to give him one mark so as to enable him to qualify for interview and Group Discussion.
He further complains that respondents 4 to 24 who had failed to secure 40% marks in one or more individual paper/s were given one to three marks by the Vice-Chancellor so as to enable them to qualify for interview and Group Discussion.
The action of the respondents in not doing so in the case of the petitioner was arbitrary and unfair.
5.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioner has been controverted by the respondents.
It has been pointed out that the petitioner who had failed to qualify for interview and Group Discussion has no cause of action which may be remediable through the present proceedings.
It has also been stated that the interview and Group Discussion had taken place on August 16/17, 1995.
The candidates have been admitted.
The petitioner's claim regarding the entitlement to the grant of marks so as to enable him to appear in the interview and Group Discussion has been specifically controverted.
6.
With regard to respondents 4 to 24, it has been stated that they had secured 140 or more marks in the aggregate.
It is true that they had not secured 40% marks in certain individual papers but the Vice-Chancellor in accordance with the provisions contained in Chapter III had allowed ad hoc additional marks so as to raise the number of candidates qualifying the test.
Since the number of candidates qualifying the test was not sufficient, the Vice-Chancellor had to allow ad hoc additional marks.
Out of respondents 4 to 24, five candidates had qualified for admission.
It has also been pointed out that according to the Prospectus, the respondents had to call the first 160 candidates for the forty general seats for interview.
In the present case, even by the grant of ad hoc additional marks only 119 candidates had qualified for interview and Group Discussion.
The petitioner who had not secured 50% marks in the aggregate was not called for interview.
Accordingly, the respondents pray that the Writ Petition should be dismissed.
7.
Mr. Harbhagwan Singh, learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that the University was bound to award one mark to the petitioner so as to enable him to secure 50% marks in the aggregate.
He further submitted that the action of the respondents is arbitrary and unfair.
A person with 25 marks in one paper was given as many as three marks so as to enable him to qualify for interview and Group Discussion.
The petitioner who needed only one mark was denied this benefits.
8.
On the other hand, Mr. SC Sibal, learned counsel for the respondent- University has submitted that the petitioner was not entitled to the grant of any mark so as to enable him to secure 50% marks.
He has further submitted that the action of the Vice-Chancellor in awarding marks to the candidates so as to enable a suitable number of candidates to qualify for interview and Group Discussion was legal and valid.
9.
The two questions that arise for consideration are :-  (i) Was the petitioner entitled to the grant of one mark so as to enable him to qualify for interview and Group Discussion ?
(ii) Was the action of the respondent-University arbitrary and discriminatory ?
Reg.
(i) 10.
The petitioner had admittedly secured 139 marks.
This came to 4964% marks.
Was he entitled to the benefit of rounding up so as to raise it to the next higher round integer ?
Mr. Harbhagwan Singh referred to the following provisions in the Prospectus to contend that 4964% marks had to be rounded up to 50%.
The provision reads as under :  "2.
For determining eligibility, the decimal of percentage of marks 0.5 or more shall be raised to the next higher round integer and decimals less than 05 shall be ignored.
For example, a candidate who has obtained 395% marks will be taken to have obtained 40% marks while a student who has obtained 3949% marks or less will considered to have obtained 39%."
This provisions appears in the beginning of the Prospectus.
It relates to the determination of eligibility of candidates to appear in the Entrance Test.
The minimum qualification that a candidate has to possess is Bachelor's Degree in any discipline from a recognised University with at least 50% marks.
it implies that if a candidate gets 4950% marks in the Degree Examination, he would be entitled to have it raised to 50%.
It does not, however, apply to a case where a candidate fails to secure the requisite percentage of marks in the Entrance Test.
It governs the eligibility of a candidate to appear in the Entrance Test and does not enable him to qualify for interview and Group Discussion.
This intention is clear from the opening words which clearly indicate that the benefit is admissible only for the purpose of determining eligibility.
11.
Accordingly, the first question is answered in the negative.
It is held that the petitioner was not entitled to claim the benefit of rounding up under Clause (2) in the Prospectus.
12.
No other provision providing for rounding up so as to enable a candidate to qualify for interview and Group Discussion having been pointed out, the claim made by the petitioner cannot be sustained.
Reg.
(ii)  13.
It was then contended by Mr. Harbhagwan Singh that the action of the respondents in giving as many as three marks to a candidate who had failed to secure 40% marks in each individual paper while denying benefit of one mark to the petitioner was arbitrary and discriminatory.
The claim was controverted by Mr. Sibal.
14.
It deserves notice that two conditions of eligibility had been prescribed.
Firstly a candidate had to secure 40% marks in each individual paper.
He had also to secure 50% marks in the aggregate.
It was further provided that the total number of seats is forty (including ten for NRI/Sponsored candidates).
Out of these, admission for thirty General seats will be subject to reservation rules of the University.
The remaining ten paid seats are earmarked for NRI/NRI-Sponsored/Industry/Institution sponsored candidates.
Against the thirty seats, 120 candidates had to be called for interview and Group Discussion.
The member of candidates who qualified for interview and Group Discussion was far below this number.
It was in this situation that the Vice-Chancellor decided to allow ad hoc additional marks so as to raise the number of candidates qualifying the test.
A provision in this behalf was specifically made in the Prospectus.
The only question that arises for consideration is - whether the Vice-Chancellor was bound to allow ad hoc additional marks so as to enable a candidate to secure 40% marks in the individual paper/s as also 50% marks in the aggregate or could he restrict the grant of ad hoc additional marks only to one out of the two classes ?
15.
Admittedly, the final merit list had to be prepared on the basis of the aggregate marks secured by the candidates.
The petitioner has given the details of the marks obtained by 21 candidates viz. respondents 4 to 24.
The details of the marks secured by these candidates has been produced as Annexure P7 with the Writ Petition.
A perusal thereof shows that the candidate at Serial No. 1 in this list, viz. Anupam Sharma had secured an aggregate of 141 marks.
The candidate at Serial No. 2 Ms. Ritu Bagai had secured 161 marks.
In fact, it is the admitted position that the total score of the respondents was more than that of the petitioner.
It appears that even though these candidates had secured higher marks than the petitioner, they had failed to secure 40% marks in one or the other paper.
One of the candidates, Amit Bhatt had secured less than 40% marks in two papers.
It was in this situation that the Vice-Chancellor had decided to grant ad hoc additional marks to certain candidates so as to bring the total number of candidates to be called for interview and Group Discussion closer to 120.
This action of the Vice- Chancellor was in strict conformity with the provision in the Prospectus.
It was specifically provided that "in case the number of candidates qualifying the test is not sufficient, the Vice-Chancellor may allow ad hoc additional marks to raise the number of candidates qualifying the test."
Admittedly, the number of candidates qualifying the test was far below the prescribed number of 120.
Accordingly, the Vice-Chancellor had chosen to allow ad hoc additional marks to raise the number of candidates.
The petitioner and many others like him who were similarly situated and had failed in secure 50% marks in the aggregate and were below respondents 4 to 24 in the merit list, were not called for interview.
16.
It appears that there were two classes of candidates.
One comprised of the persons who had failed to secure 40% marks in one or more subject/s but their total aggregate was higher than that of the petitioner.
The other consisted of the persons who failed to secure an aggregate of 50% marks.
The Vice-Chancellor has given the benefit only to the class which had secured the requisite percentage of marks in the aggregate.
Their total score was more than that of the petitioner and others who had failed to secure 50% marks.
The grant of ad hoc additional marks by the Vice-Chancellor is in strict conformity with the provision contained in the Prospectus.
It was resorted to with the permissible object of increasing the number of candidates as postulated in the provision.
The petitioner or others of his class were admittedly below the candidates who had been given this benefit in order of merit.
In this connection, the action can neither be said to be discriminatory nor arbitrary.
No one who had failed to secure 50% marks in the aggregate having been given the benefit of ad hoc increase in marks, the petiioner cannot complain that he has been discriminated against.
17.
In view of the above, even the second question is answered in the negative.
It is held that the action of the respondents is not arbitrary or discriminatory.
Accordingly, the plea raised on behalf of the petitioner is rejected.
18.
It also deserves noted that a similar complaint had been made in Civil Writ Petition No. 13060 of 1995.
The Division Bench which heard the matter was pleased to dismiss the Writ Petition.
Their Lordships were pleased to observe as under :  "Since only 71 candidates had qualified against 40 available seats, the Vice-Chancellor in his discretion and by following a uniform procedure, decided to call for interview 21 candidates who had secured 50% marks in aggregate, but had not secured 40% marks in each papers.
Incidently, all the private respondents have secured more marks than the petitioner collectively in all the papers i.e. in aggregate.
The petitioner having appeared in the written test and after competing in the interview with other candidates, cannot have any grouse at this stage when he has not been selected for admission."
19.
Mr. Harbhagwan Singh also submitted that some seats are still available and the petitioner can be adjusted against one of those seats.
On behalf of the respondents, it was pointed out that there are a number of other candidates who have secured 139 marks.
The classes have already started.
The admission of more candidates at this stage would result in upsetting the working of the Department.
The students who are admitted late shall not be able to keep pace with those who have already been admitted.
I think, the objection raised on behalf of the respondents is valid.
If the respondents are now directed to conduct a fresh selection and admit the selected candidates, the study of the students who have already been admitted shall be interrupted.
The petitioner who has already joined the M.Sc.
Course in Statistics, shall vacate the seat and it may not be possible to admit any other candidate against that vacancy.
Interruption in academic Courses at this stage will not be conducive to good education.
20.
No other point was urged nor requires going into.
21.
In view of the above, this Writ Petition has no merit.
It is accordingly dismissed.
However, in the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.