MS Liberhan, J. (Oral) - The only points raised by the learned counsel for the appellants are : (i) since the petitioner is Class III employee of the appellant-corporation, he is liable to be retired at the age of 58 years, (ii) the Standing Order as interpreted that the work-charged employees shall retire at the age of 60 years and regular employees would retire at the age of 58 years creates an arbitrary classification, resulting in discrimination.
2.
The skeletal facts necessary to answer the questions raised by counsel for the appellant in this Letters Patent Appeal against the order of Hon'ble Single Judge dated 121991 which emerge and are not disputed in the course of arguments are, respondent was employed with the appellant-corporation regular work-charged workman.
The Standing Order which has the force of law classify the workman as :-  (a) Permanent/Regular workmen, (b) Probationer.
(c) Regular work-charged workmen.
(d) Temporary/work-charged workmen.
(e) Casual workmen.
(f) Apprentice.
It is further defines permanent/regular workman which means a workman who has been engaged on regular basis against a regular post and included only persons engaged against a regular post and regularised as such in accordance with sub-caluse (b) which is relevant for the purpose of questions raised before us.
Regular work-charged workmen has further been defined as a workman who is appointed against a regular work-charged post determined by the Corporation and includes a probationer work-charged having been regularised in the manner, as in clause (b) i.e. on the expiry of probation period he is regularised.
The wages of such workman are chargeable to works.
3.
Similarly a temporary/work-charged workman has been defined a workman who has been appointed for a limited or specific period of time on the work of an essentially temporary nature or employed in connection with a temporary increase in work and includes a work-charged employee.
We need not refer the definitions of 'Casual Workman' and 'Apprentice', as the same are not relevant to determine the questions raised.
It would be expedient to refer to clause 16-A of the Standing Orders on the interpretation of which the contentions of learned counsel for the appellants are based.
In verbatim it runs as under :-  "16-A : RETIREMENT : The workman attaining the age of superannuation i.e. 58 years in the case of regular workman and 60 years in the case of regular workman of the status of class IV of the Government and temporary work-charged and regular work-charged workmen, shall retire.
The appointing authority, however, retains an absolute right to retire any workman except of the status of class IV in the Govt. service on or after he has attained the age of 55 years if his work is not found to be thoroughly satisfactory.
A corresponding right is also available to such a workman to retire on or after he has attained the age of 55 years".
4.
The Hon'ble Single Judge came to the conclusion that the petitioner is a regular work-charged workman and the plain reading of Clause 16-A of the Certified standing orders provides that regular workman except class IV service shall retire from service on attaining the age of superannuation i.e. 58 years, and regular workmen in class IV service as well as temporary work- charged and regular work-charged workmen shall retire on attaining the age of 60 years, for the reason, that clause cannot be read in order to take out regular work-charged workman from second set of employees i.e. class IV employees envisaged to retire at the age of 60 years.
There is no ground to warrant a finding that class IV employees whether they are work-charged workmen or not are required to be retired at the age of 58 years .
5.
On reading the judgment of learned Single Judge there can be no gain-saying that learned Single Judge on reading of the Standing Orders came to the conclusion that there are two categories of the employees :-  (i) Class III Regular Employees.
(ii) Class IV and work-charged employees, whether regular, temporary or ad hoc.
6.
The work-charged employees and class IV employees have been put in one category.
Consequently, the plain reading of the rule in conformity with the object of the rules provided two distinct ages of retirement.
We find no error in the finding returned by learned Single Judge, rather we find that it satisfies the object of reasonable classification.
A work-charged employee as defined has no security of service.
Workcharged employees are charged to work.
Their services come to an end with the end of the work undertaken by appellant-corporation.
It is on account of this uncertainty of service that benefit of two years in the age of retirement has been given to them in the interest of the workmen.
The conclusion reached is in conformity with the intention of the rule making authority or standing orders, which can reasonably be inferred by reading the definition of regular work-charged employee/workman, temporary/work-charged employee and permanent/workmen.
We are further of the opinion that the interpretation put by us is the only interpretation which can be put in order to ensure that none of the provisions of the standing orders is rendered redundant.
7.
So far as the first question that the respondent-workman belongs to first category i.e. Class III Regular Employees is concerned, it has no force to stand in view of the categorical stand taken by the appellants in their written statement that the respondent-workman was employed as work-charged employee.
By no interpretation the category of the employee i.e. his being work-charged can be converted into a permanent or regular workman Class III.
The categories provided as observed above are of permanent regular workmen and work-charged employees.
In view of the observations made above, we find no ground to interfere with the finding returned by the Hon'ble Single Judge.
The Letters Patent Appeal is accordingly dismissed, however, with no order as to costs.