Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner is serving as a Sub Inspector of Police in the State of Haryana.
He claims to have achieved distinctions at the national and the international level as a sportsman.
The details in this behalf have been delineated in the petition.
He complains that the action of the respondents in not granting him the increments in accordance with the instructions issued by the Government vide letter dated October 24, 1990, is arbitrary and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
He inter alia prays from the issue of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to release the special increments and to allow him to draw all the arrears with interest.
2.
The respondents contest the petitioner's claim primarily on the ground that the instructions being prospective and the petitioner having achieved the distinctions prior to October 24, 1990, he is not entitled to the grant of special increments.
It has been pointed out that there are two officers who are Arjuna Award winners.
Still, the increments have not been given to them as they had achieved the distinctions prior to the issuance of the letter.
3.
We have heard Mr. VK Jindal, learned counsel for the petitioner and Ms. Ritu Bahri, for the respondents.
4.
The primary contention raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner is that the action of the respondents in confining the grant of benefit under the instructions to only those who achieved the prescribed first, second and third position in national or international competitions after October 24, 1990, is arbitrary and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
The plea has been controverted by the learned counsel for the respondents.
5.
We have perused the instructions issued by the Government.
As the very subject matter of these instructions indicates, the object is to grant incentives and facilities to Haryana Government servants to participate in sporting events.
Besides providing for first class travel by train and the grant of leave etc., it has been stipulated as under :-  "(iv)(a) The number of increments to be awarded for achieving excellence in national events should be laid down at a scale lower than for excellence in international events and accordingly the sportsmen/women securing first, second and third position in national and international tournaments may be allowed one and two increments respectively.
(b) The total number of increments to be awarded to an individual should not exceed five in his/her entire career.
(c) The increments so granted would continue to be drawn at the same rate till retirement and would count for the purpose of retirement benefits but not for pay fixation on promotion."
It has also been provided that "these orders will come into effect on the date of issue of these instructions."
6.
The short question that arises for consideration is - Can the Government deny the benefit of special increments to a person only because he had achieved the prescribed distinction prior to October 24, 1990 ?
7.
Numerically, we are a nation of 900 million people.
In a sense, we are the second greatest nation of the world.
We are only next to China.
We boast of a distinguished heritage.
Our scriptures are probably the oldest in the world.
Yet, this mass of humanity, the multitude of men and women have done very little to show physical superiority over others.
The names of our athletes and sportsmen rarely reach the record books.
The medals tally at the Olympics seldom includes India.
If at all, we find a mention at the bottom of the list.
It is sad.
The dismal performance is not solely due to lack of facilities.
Even well-equipped gymnasiums and indoor stadiums or other sporting facilities fail to attract the youth.
One of the reasons which has contributed to the lack of interest is that the sports do not offer a respectable career in our country.
In this situation, any incentive howsoever small, can serve a purpose.
It can provide an incentive to a youngmen to work hard and to attain the distinction.
The decision of the Haryana Goverment to provide certain basic facilities like leave, travel and also the small incentive in the form of increments, is a step in the right direction.
Other employers and even State Government shall do well to emulate it.
However, the restrictive meaning that is sought to be given to the circular seems to be unwarranted by its plain language.
8.
The relevant portion of the circular has been extracted above.
A provision for the grant of increments to such civil servants as achieve the first, second or third position in national and international tournaments, has been made.
An outer limit of granting five increments has been imposed.
The letter does not say that the benefit shall be admissible to a person who achieves the distinction after October 24, 1990.
In our view, the letter embodies a reward for the person who has already achieved the distinction and an incentive to others who have not yet reached the prescribed level.
Ms. Bahri points out that the orders "come into effect from the date of issue".
This is undoubtedly so.
However, it only means that the increments shall be admissible only w.e.f.
October 24, 1990 and not from the date the person had achieved the distinction.
9.
It is true that the Government can make a classification.
Each classification must be reasonable.
It must have a nexus with the object sought to be achieved.
The purpose of the circular in the present case is obviously to encourage civil servants to attain excellence in the field of sports and those who attain excellence in sports constitute a homogeneous class.
No distinction can be made on the basis of the date or year in which the distinction was achieved.
The circular as it does not make a classification on the basis of the date on which a person has attained the first, second or third position.
By the process of interpretation, we cannot add to the words especially when there is no gap.
Plainly speaking, the circular guarantees the grant of increments to a sportsman, on the basis of the distinctions that he has achieved.
The petitioner qualifies the conditions of eligibility.
He has had a long sporting career from 1978 to 1989.
The distinctions attained by him entitle him to the grant of the special increments with effect from October 24, 1990.
The action of the Government in refusing to do so was illegal.
Consequently, the petitioner is entitled to the grant of increments as prayed for by him.
10.
Ms. Ritu Bahri points out that two officers who have not only achieved distinction in sports but have also been honoured by the Nation with the Arjuna Awards, have not been granted the increments.
That being so, she submits that even the petitioner is not entitled to the grant of the relief prayed for by him.
We can't uphold this submission.
Two wrongs never make a right.
The short question is - Are the increments admissible to a person who had achieved the requisite distinctions prior to October 24, 1990 ?
We think these are.
The mere fact the State Government has not granted the requisite relief to others, can be no ground for denying the benefit to the petitioner.
11.
We, accordingly, answer the question posed above in the negative.
We hold that the State Government cannot deny the benefit of special increments to persons who have achieved the prescribed distinctions prior to October 24, 1990.
12.
Accordingly, we allow the writ petition and direct the respondents to determine the number of increments due to the petitioner.
The arrears that become due to him on this account, shall be released within two months from the date of receipt of a copy this order.
In case, the petitioner is not paid the arrears as aforesaid, he will be entitled to the payment alongwith interest at the rate of 12% per annum from the date of accrual till the date of actual payment.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to his costs which are assessed at Rs. 3,000/-.
Petition allowed.