Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The two petitioners in these two cases impugn the action of the respondents in advertising the posts of Senior Scientific Officer (Physics) and Scientific Assistant (Physics) for being filled up by direct recruitment.
2.
Learned counsel for the parties have referred to the facts as averred in Civil Writ Petition No. 10990 of 1993.
These may be briefly noticed.
3.
The petitioner is a Graduate in Science.
She was appointed as a Laboratory Assistant in the Forensic Science Laboratory, Haryana on January 9, 1986.
She was initially appointed on ad hoc basis, but her services were regularised w.e.f.
January 1, 1991.
On May 25, 1993, the petitioner submitted an application with a prayer that her claim be considered for promotion to the post of Scientific Assistant.
The Director wrongly assumed that the petitioner had not acquired the requisite experience of three years and as such, ordered that the representation be put up in January 1994.
In the meantime, the post of Scientific Assistant (Physics) was advertised.
This advertisement was published in the Daily Tribune of August 7, 1993.
The petitioner submits that she fulfils the qualification for appointment by promotion and that the action of the respondents in not considering her claim, is violative of Articles 14 and 16.
She also alleged that Rule 9 of the Haryana Forensic Science (Group C Scientific Staff) Service Rules, 1979 gives totally arbitrary, unrestricted and unguided powers to the authorities to adopt any mode of recruitment.
It is, as such, being misused.
She also alleges that various persons who were similarly situated have been promoted from time to time.
According to her, the action of the respondents suffers from the vice of discrimination.
4.
The respondents contest the petitioner's claim.
It is alleged that the petitioner was ineligible for promotion as the period of "ad hoc service cannot be counted" as experience under the rules.
It has been further averred that the petitioner has been working as "Laboratory Assistant (Lie- Detection).
Her experience is not suitable to work as Scientific Assistant in Physics..." According to the respondents, the petitioner cannot be promoted to the post of Scientific Assistant (Physics) "not only because she has not completed three years of regular service as Laboratory Assistant but also (because) she had not acquired the required experience in the field of Physics which is required for the post of Scientific Assistant (Physics)."
While dealing with the petitioner's allegation of discrimination, it has been averred that promotions had been made in various cases on ad hoc basis and the services were regularised only after the respective incumbents had acquired the requisite qualifications and gained sufficient experience in "that particular field namely Physics, Chemistry, Biology, Serology etc...." The respondents further maintained that the provisions of the rules as well as their action in proceeding to advertise the posts is legal and valid.
5.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
Mr. SP Laler, learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that under the rules, a person who possesses the qualification of B.Sc in the second division with two years' experience in the rank of Laboratory Assistant, is eligible for promotion.
The petitioner fulfills both the qualifications and was as such eligible.
The action of the respondents in ignoring her claim for promotion is violative of the rules as well as Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
He has further submitted that the provisions of Rule 9 in so far as these authorise the competent authority to determine the method of recruitment, are wholly arbitrary and, thus, violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioner has been controverted by Ms. Ritu Bahri appearing for the respondents.
The questions that arise for consideration are -  (i) Is the action of the respondents in excluding the period of ad hoc service from consideration as experience legal ?
(ii) Is every Laboratory Assistant eligible for promotion to the posts of Scientific Assistants in different disciplines in spite of the fact that he has no experience in the particular field ?
(iii) Is Rule 9 ultra vires the Constitution ?
6.
The provisions of the rules may be briefly noticed.
The conditions of service governing the petitioner are contained in the Rules called the Haryana Forensic Science (Group C Scientific Staff) Service Rules, 1979.
These rules were published in the Government Gazette dated July 13, 1979.
Though the rules have been amended vide notification dated March 14, 1995, we are, however, concerned only with the provisions of the rules as these originally existed.
The Service consists of the posts specified in Appendix 'A'.
Rule 7 provides that "no person shall be appointed to the Service, unless he is in possession of qualifications and experience specified in column 2 of the Appendix B to these rules in the case of direct recruitment".
Rule 9 prescribes the method of recruitment.
A perusal of Appendix 'B' shows that the posts of Scientific Assistants are in the disciplines of Chemistry/Toxicology, Physics, Biochemistry, Serology, Ballistics and general.
Similarly, the posts of Laboratory Assistants are in the same specialities with an additional post of Laboratory Assistant (Document).
For the post of Laboratory Assistant, a candidate has to fulfil the qualification of B.Sc (Medical or Non-Medical group) depending upon the requirements of the particular post.
A few of the entries from Appendix 'B' can be usefully extracted.
These are as under :-  Sr. No.
Designation of post For appointment by direct recruitment or by transfer or by deputation of a person already in the service of any State or Government of India.
For appointment by promotion.
1 2 3 4 1.
Scientific Assistant Chemistry/ Toxicology.
M.Sc in Chemistry
Biochemistry or equivalent.
OR 
(i) B.Sc 2nd Class with Chemistry as one of the subjects or B.Sc (Hons) in Chemistry or Bio-Chemistry.
(ii) Two years experience in a Scientific Laboratory.
i) B.Sc with Chemistry as one of the subjects or B.Sc (Hons) in Chemistry or Biochemistry
(ii) Three years service in the rank of Laboratory Assistant 2.
Scientific Assistant Physics M.Sc.
in Physics or equivalent  OR (i B.Sc in Physics, Chemistry and Mathematics group or B.Sc.
(Hons) in Physics.
(i) B.Sc.
2nd Class in Physics, Chemistry and Mathematics group or B.Sc.
(Hons) in Physics.
(ii) Two years experience in Scientific Laboratory.
(ii) Three years service in the rank of Laboratory Assistant.
xx xx xx Laboratory Assistants + + 8.
Laboratory Assistant, Chemistry/Toxicology.
B.Sc.
Medical or Non- Medical group.
By directo recruitment only 9.
Laboratory Assistant Physics B.Sc.
Nn-medical group By directo recruitment only 10.
Laboratory Assistant Biology.
B.Sc.
Medical Group By directo recruitment only Rule 9 which deals with the method of recruitment provides as under :-  "9.
Method of recruitment - (i) Recruitment to the Service shall be made - (i) by direct recruitment; or (ii) by transfer, or deputation of an official already in the service of any State Government or the Government India;  (2) When any vacancy occurs or is about to occur in the Service the Inspector General shall determine the manner in which such vacancy shall be filled."
It is in the context of the above provisions that the contentions raised by the learned counsel for the parties have to be examined.
Reg : (i) & (ii)  7.
A perusal of the relevant entries in Appendix 'B' shows that the qualifications for the posts of Scientific Assistants in different specialities have been separately prescribed.
The academic qualifications prescribed for different posts have a reasonable relationship with the job requirements.
To illustrate, for the post of Scientific Assistant (Chemistry/Toxicology), the person concerned should have a degree of M.Sc.
in Chemistry or Bio-Chemistry for direct recruitment or passed the B.Sc.
examination with Chemistry as one of the subjects.
Besides that, he must possess the prescribed experience as a Laboratory Assistant.
Furthermore, even the posts of Laboratory Assistants are separately indicated in different specialities.
In the very nature of things, it is essential that a person should have worked as a Laboratory Assistant in the particular field before he can acquire the necessary experience entitling him for promotion to the next higher post of Scientific Assistant in that speciality.
Still further, it is relevant to keep in view the fact that the Forensic Science Laboratory is charged with the duty of examining documents, weapons or such other samples/ articles which may be forwarded to it for examination and report.
Its opinion/report is taken into consideration by the various agencies of the State and even the courts.
It is an expert organisation which has to give a precise report after a scientific and technical examination of the subject matter.
In the very nature of things, a person who is working on comparison of thumb impressions, may not be in a position to give an opinion in the field of Toxicology or Bio-Chemistry.
On an examination of the 'text' and the 'context', it appears clear that a Laboratory Assistant should have worked in the particular field before he can be eligible for promotion to the post of Scientific Assistant in the same field.
For this purpose, it is not enough that the candidate fulfils the academic qualifications.
He must also have experience in the particular branch in which he seeks appointment or promotion.
8.
Mr. Laler submits that the only requirement of the rules is that a candidate should have worked as a Laboratory Assistant for the prescribed period before he becomes eligible for promotion to the post of Scientific Assistant.
On a literal consideration of Rule 9, learned counsel appears to be right.
However, on a slightly deeper examination, it becomes clear that the posts of Laboratory Assistants are specifically designated as Laboratory Assistant, Chemistry/Toxicology, Physics, Biology, Serology and Ballistics etc. Consequently, it is clear that only a Laboratory Assistant who has worked in the field of Chemistry or Serology shall be eligible for promotion to the post of Scientific Assistant (Chemistry/Serology).
Similarly, a Laboratory Assistant (Physics) can be eligible for promotion to the post of Scientific Assistant in that speciality.
If it were not so, the requirement of the rule regarding experience would become wholly redundant, Merely by working as Laboratory Assistant (Chemistry), a person cannot be familiar with the subjects of Biology, Serology or vice versa.
9.
Consequently, it is held that under the rules, a person should have worked as a Laboratory Assistant in the particular field before he becomes eligible for promotion to the post of Scientific Assistant in that speciality.
10.
Mr. Bahri, however, submitted that even otherwise, a person becomes eligible for promotion after he has worked for a period of three years in the rank of Laboratory Assistant on regular basis.
11.
I am unable to accept this submission.
The purpose of the rule is that the employees should have an experience of working as a Laboratory Assistant for a period of three years before he becomes eligible for promotion.
The obvious purpose is that he should have actually worked on the post.
He should have learnt by working on the post.
He should be skilled in the field.
He should have practical knowledge in the speciality.
He should have personally observed or performed the duties of the post.
For this purpose, the nature of appointment viz. ad hoc or regular, has no relevance.
By performing the duties, the person acquires knowledge.
He becomes experienced.
It does not matter whether he has worked on ad hoc or regular basis.
It is enough that he has performed the duties of the post.
Accordingly, the contention raised on behalf of the respondents that the period of service rendered by a person on ad hoc basis cannot be taken into consideration, is rejected.
In view of the above, it is held that :-  (i) The period of service for which a person has worked on ad hoc basis cannot be excluded from consideration while determining his eligibility for appointment to the post of Scientific Assistant.
(ii) The person should have worked as a Laboratory Assistant in the particular speciality before becoming eligible for appointment/promotion to the post of Scientific Assistant, in that speciality.
The first two questions as posed at the outset are answered accordingly.
12.
Mr. Laler was at pains to point out that the respondents have actually promoted various persons from one post to another without insisting on experience in the particular speciality.
Factually, it appears to be so.
The respondents in turn have explained that initially, the appointments were made on ad hoc basis and after the incumbent had acquired reasonable experience, the orders of regular promotion were issued.
However, in my view, the action was not in conformity with the rules.
In any event, I cannot persuade myself to hold that merely because the respondents have ordered certain promotions which are not in strict conformity with the rules, a writ of mandamus should be issued and the mistake be repeated.
Nor can the action of the respondents in refusing to promote the petitioner be considered as suffering from the vice of discrimination.
Accordingly, the submission made on behalf of the petitioners is rejected.
Reg : (iii)  13.
Mr. Laler submits that the provisions of Rule 9 give an unbridled discretion to the competent authority to adopt any method of appointment to the post of Scientific Assistant.
It is, thus, arbitrary and violative of Article 15 of the Constitution.
Is it so ?
14.
Advancement in life is a natural human instinct.
Stagnation undoubtedly leads to frustration.
Reasonable chances for advancement are, thus, essential.
These provide an incentive to a person to work hard.
However, it is equally well to remember that individual good must yield place to the larger interest of the Society.
Furthermore, the State as an employer should have the right to select and appoint the best persons to man the posts.
If the past experience is an indication, our adherence to the rule of seniority has led to acceptance of mediocrity.
In the process, we have sacrificed merit.
15.
A perusal of Rule 9 shows that a person can be appointed by direct recruitment, by transfer or by deputation.
Strictly speaking, the rule does not provide for appointment by promotion.
However, a perusal of Appendix 'B' shows that in Column 4, qualifications for appointment by promotion have been laid down.
As a result, it can be legitimately concluded that the method of recruitment by promotion is also envisaged in Rule 9 (i) (iii).
Furthermore, the competent authority viz. the Inspector General has been given the discretion to decide about the mode of recruitment.
By virtue of the amendments notified on March 14, 1995, it appears that the post of Scientific Assistant has been re-designated as Senior Scientific Assistant.
The powers of of Inspector General have now been vested in the Director General and the method of promotion has been specifically mentioned in Rule 9.
Otherwise, so far as the present controversy is concerned, there is no material change.
It is clear that the discretion has been vested in a senior officer.
Persons who are already working in the department are not precluded from applying for the post.
They have a chance to compete.
In such a situation, it cannot be said that merely because the respondents have repeatedly resorted to the method of direct recruitment, the provisions of the rule are rendered unconstitutional.
16.
The State has the right to have the best of available persons to man every post.
If the persons who are already employed are given a chance to compete, the right to equality of opportunity is guaranteed.
Eligible persons have a chance to prove their merit and get selected.
The rule merely authorises the authority to choose one of the available methods.
The power is not shown to have been abused.
Consequently, the contention cannot be accepted.
The third question is, thus, answered in the negative.
17.
In Civil Writ Petition No. 16475 of 1992, the post is of Senior Scientific Officer (Physics).
The recruitment to this post is governed by the provisions of the rules called the Haryana Forensic Science (Group B) Service Rules, 1980.
The provision in Rule 9 envisages that the post can be filled up by promotion, direct recruitment or by transfer/deputation.
The authority has the right to determine the manner in which a vacancy shall be filled up.
In Appendix 'B', qualifications, academic as well as experience, have been prescribed.
In this service, the posts are of Senior Scientific Officers.
The specializations are the same as in case of Group C Service.
Consequently, whatever has been said with regard to the posts in Group C Service, is applicable to the posts in Group 'B' Service.
No other point has been urged.
In view of the above, I find no merit in these two petitions which are dismissed.
However, in the circumstances of these cases, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.