Amarjeet Chaudhary and VS Aggarwal, JJ.
- Dr. Sushil Kundra, who was a practising Medical Officer at Khanna, fell a prey to the bullets of terrorists.
He is survived by Smt. Saroj Kundra, the present petitioner, and two daughters, Archana and Vaishali, in their teens.
FIR No. 32 dated 1431993 was lodged with the Police Station, City, Khanna, copy of which is Annexure P-1 to the writ petition.
2.
The Punjab Government issues identity cards to the terrorist affected families.
Such a card was also issued to Smt. Saroj Kundra and her two daughters, on the instructions of respondent No. 3, on 1251993.
Deputy Commissioner, Ludhiana, sent a letter of condolence to the bereaved family and the petitioner was informed that the Government provides certain facilities to the victims of the terrorists.
The facilities are :-  1.
Financial assistance of Rs. 1 lac (Rs. 50,000/- cash and 50,000/- in the shape of NSCs.)
2.
Widow pension at the rate of Rs. 1500/- after the death of husband.
3.
Rs. 1500/- per month as subsistence allowance to the parents whose son or all sons (married/unmarried killed by terrorists) but dependent upon parents.
4.
Rs. 300/- per month as subsistence allowance jointly to the dependent parents of the deceased.
5.
Rs. 10,000/- for marriage to the daughters/sisters if (daughter/sister) dependent upon deceased.
6.
Employment in Class III & IV posts in Govt. service on priority basis according to the educational qualifications.
7.
Free education in Govt. Schools and aided schools to the children.
8.
2% seats are reserved in Medical, Professional and Technical Colleges/ Schools.
9.
2% quota is reserved in Govt. Houses/Plots/Booths at the reserved price.
10.
Identity Card is issued by the concerned SDO (C).
The petitioner, thereafter, applied for the grant of subsistence allowance/facilities admissible to the wards of the terrorist victims.
3.
The Government of Punjab, Department of Relief and Resettlement had also issued circular dated 26.9.1989 addressed to all the Deputy Commissioners in the State, S.D.Os.
(C) and the District Social Welfare Officers asking them for early disbursement of financial assistance (widow pension) to the widows of persons killed in terrorist violence.
Government had also framed certain rules in which the criteria for the grant of pension had been made.
However, the petitioner's request for grant of pension was not acceded to.
Left with no alternative, the petitioner has filed the present writ petition seeking direction to the respondents to grant subsistence allowance at the rate of Rs. 1500/- per month in view of the policy of the Government.
4.
On notice of motion having been issued, the respondents have put in appearance and filed written statement.
5.
It has been urged in the written statement that the petitioner is not entitled to subsistence allowance being employed in a School.
6.
After having heard the learned counsel for the parties, we find no merit in the submission of the State counsel and are convinced that the writ petition deserves to be allowed.
7.
The benefit of subsistence allowance to the petitioner has not been allowed only for the reason that she was in service.
Had the petitioner been not in service before the murder of her husband, even then as per Government policy, she would have been entitled to claim job and subsistence allowance.
The plea taken in the written statement is contrary to the policy decision of the Government.
The respondents have lost sight of the fact that the deceased besides his wife has also left two teen-aged daughters and the daughters of the deceased can also claim subsistence allowance, which is being provided by the State to the family of the deceased.
8.
In view of the discussion made above, the writ petition is allowed and the petitioner is held entitled to Rs. 1000/- per month as subsistence allowance from the date of death of her husband .