MS Liberhan and ML Singhal, JJ.
- Morsel facts in order to determine the questions raised by learned counsel for the petitioner are as under :  2.
The petitioner appointed as Lecturer in Library Science on 20.9.1984 with respondent No. 3 who started receiving 95% grant from the State Government with respect to the post of Senior Lecturer, Library Science.
The eligibility condition provided for the post of Sr.
Lecturer in Library Science is as under :-  Designation of the post Academic qualification and experience if any for direct recruitment.
Academic qualifications and experience if any for appointment other than by direct recruitment 1 2 3 Sr.
Lecturer in Library Science 1) First Class Master's Degree in Library Science from recognised University/Institute or First Class Bachelor degree in Library Science with 2nd class Master's degree in Library Science from recognized University/Institute; 8 years experience as Lecturer in Library Science 2) 5 years teaching experience as Lecturer in Library Science in a University or College affiliated to recognised University;  3) Knowledge of Hindi upto Matric standard.
xx xx xx 3.
When the petitioner was considered for promotion and recommendation was made to the State Government by respondent No. 3, the State Government declined to promote the petitioner vide its letter dated 2651995 which runs as under :-  "Government perused the matter that the service rendered by Ram Babu Singh Lecturer prior to 1.4.1990 is not possible to consider for romotion for the post of Senior Lecturer in Library Science."
Counsel for the State contends that respondents cannot appoint the petitioner or permit him to join as Senior Lecturer as and when they decide to fill the vacancy unless he has acquired the requisite experience as per eligibility conditions.
4.
The respondent-State in the written statement has put the defence that since the petitioner's initial appointment in 1984 was without any competition, his initial appointment cannot be counted w.e.f.
20.9.1984.
5.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner vehemently contends that he fulfils the eligibility condition including that of experience of 8 years.
In order to buttress his submission, counsel for the petitioner relies upon BN Barik and others v. Director of Public Instruction (Higher Education), Orissa, Bhubaneswar and another, 1988(7) SLR 211 and Shardendu Bhushan v Nagpur University and others, 1988(7) SLR 802.
Conspectus of law laid down in these judgments emerges that the experiences gained whether as an ad hoc or prior to the taking over of the institution has to be counted as experience for the purpose of appointment to the post of Senior Lecturer.
6.
It is a settled proposition of law that respondent cannot add grounds in the written statement in defence.
State Government can defend the impugned order duly on the grounds given in the order.
It cannot be defended by putting reasons later which are not imbibed in the order.
7.
In our considered view and in view of the law laid down, the petitioner had acquired the experience of 8 years required for the post of Senior Lecturer.
We fail to comprehend how the experience acquired by the petitioner can be written off solely on some imaginary grounds that the initial appointment of the petitioner was illegal particularly when the employer's case is that the petitioner's appointment was in accordance with law and rules.
Nothing has been pointed out by way of any statutory rule or instructions that the experience acquired by the petitioner during his appointment prior to grant of 95% grant has to be ignored or is not to be taken note of.
Even the impugned order, as referred above does not disclose any reason muchless a plausible reason.
8.
Keeping in view the totality of facts and circumstances of this case, impugned order Annexure P6 is quashed.
Respondent No. 3 shall be at liberty to appoint the petitioner by way of promotion as and when they decide to fill the post.
In view of the observations made above, writ petition is allowed.
No order as to costs.