Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - The petitioners who were the employees of States of Punjab and Haryana and at present are on deputation with the Bhakra Beas Management Board (hereinafter referred to as the 'Board') have filed the present writ petition seeking direction to the official respondents to consider them and all other eligible employees of States of Punjab and Haryana for promotion to the posts of Senior Assistants from the dates they became eligible as also to quash the order dated 681992, copy of which is Annexure P-8 to the writ petition, passed by the Chief Engineer, Bhakra Dam Project, respondent No. 7, promoting respondents 8 to 15 as Senior Assistants.
2.
Undisputed facts of this case which emerge from the file are that prior to the re-organisation of erstwhile State of Punjab, the construction of the Bhakra Nangal Project was under the charge of Punjab Irrigation Department for its civil components and erstwhile Punjab State Electricity Board for its electrical components.
After the re-organisation of State of Punjab, the Central Government in exercise of the powers conferred upon it under section 79(1) of the Punjab Re-organisation Act, 1966 (hereinafter referred to as the 'Act') for the maintenance, administration and operation of the Bhakra Nangal Project constituted Bhakra Management Board with effect from 1.10.1967, which was later on christened as Bhakra Beas Management Board when the completed components of the Beas Project were transferred to it by the Central Government under Sub Sections 5 and 6 of Section 80 of the Act.
All the employees of the Bhakra Nangal Project, who were engaged in the construction, maintenance and operation of the work, were to continue to be employed with the Board, which came into existence after the re-organisation of State, on the same terms and conditions of service.
The petitioner No. 1 joined the Irrigation Department, Punjab, on 1871962 as Clerk.
Petitioner No. 2 joined the Department of Industries, Punjab on 17.9.1963 as Clerk and later on he joined the Irrigation Department, Punjab.
He was transferred to the Bhakra Nangal Project on 16.11.1966 whereas petitioner No. 3 was appointed as Clerk on 2811963 by the erstwhile State of Punjab.
3.
It is pertinent to mention here that the seniority list of Clerks was being maintained by their respective departments.
The States of Punjab, Haryana and HP are the beneficiary States and the Board being an inter-State body has been drawing the personnel from the partner States.
Somehow the posts falling under the category of Class III and Class IV employees remained vacant as the partner States could not feed the Board by sending employees.
In these circumstances, the respondent-Board in order to meet the shortage of staff made certain direct recruitments and in order to regulate the service conditions, framed draft rules which were published in Part III, Section 4 of the Gazette of India dated 8101994.
Making of provision by the Board for the promotion of the employees recruited by it, agitated the petitioners and they have filed present writ petition.
4.
In this petition, the petitioners have impugned the action of the respondent-Board by taking a plea that the Board has no power to create its own cadre as also to frame service rules.
The other plea is that by fixing the promotional quota for the employees of the States of Punjab and Haryana, their conditions of service have been altered whereas the borrowing Department has no power to alter the service conditions of deputationists.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioners contends that the petitioners have a prior right of promotion in the borrowing Department.
As such, the promotions of respondents 8 to 15 should be quashed.
6.
Respondents have filed their separate written statements.
Respondent- Board, who is the contesting party, has canvassed with vehemence that the petitioners have no right to claim promotion in the Board and it is justified in creating its own cadre of employees, who have been recruited by it.
7.
On the basis of submissions of learned counsel for the parties, twin questions, which require consideration are whether any right of the petitioners has been taken away by the Board; and whether the Board can create its own cadre of employees?
8.
To the first proposition, our answer is in the negative and to the second proposition, our answer is in the affirmative.
9.
It is the admitted case of the petitioners that prior to the re- organisation of State, they were the employees of composite State of Punjab and after the re-organisation, petitioners 1 and 2 were allocated to the State of Punjab whereas petitioner No. 3 was allocated to the State of Haryana and they were on deputation with the respondent-Board.
It is also the admitted case of the petitioners that they are being governed by the Service Rules of their respective States/Departments.
Being the employees of States of Haryana and Punjab, their seniority is being maintained by their parent Departments.
10.
Sub Section (4) of Section 79 of the Act, which is relevant reads thus :-  "(4) The Bhakra Management Board may employ such Staff as it may consider necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions under this Act : Provided that every person who immediately before the constitution of the said Board was engaged in the construction, maintenance or operation of works in Sub-Section (1) shall continue to be so employed under the Board in connection with the said works on the same terms and conditions of service as were applicable to him before such constitution until the Central Government by order directs otherwise; Provided further that the said Board may at any time in consultation with the State Government or the Electricity Board concerned and with the previous approval of the Central Government return any such person for service under that Government or Board."
Proviso to rule ibid, envisages that the Board at any time in consultation with the State Government and with the previous approval of the Central Government can return any employee to his parent department/State.
As such, the petitioners' continuation with the Board is at the pleasure of the Board and it can repatriate them at any time.
The petitioners cannot claim to remain on deputation with the Board as a matter of right.
The Board is competent to revert them as and when it desires.
11.
The plea of learned counsel for the petitioners that the petitioners were given the benefit of ad hoc promotion is without any substance as the ad hoc promotion was given to the petitioners as ex-gratia compensation and the proposition of law is well settled that the compensation cannot be claimed as a matter of right.
12.
As mentioned in the earlier part of the judgment the beneficiary States could not feed the requirement of the Board.
Unable to get the personnel on deputation from the partner States, the Board had no option but to fill up the vacancies in the category of Class III and Class IV by resorting to direct recruitment.
The Board can employ such staff as it may consider necessary for efficient discharge of its functions.
This power is vested in the Board under Sub Section 4 of the Section 79 of the Act.
The partner States declined to own such employees recruited by the Board and integrate them in their cadres and as such the Board had no option but to create its own cadre of directly recruited Class III and Class IV employees.
The Board had taken a decision by issuing instructions dated 2451991 regarding ad hoc promotions policy and filling up the vacant posts in the Board.
There can be no bar in regulating the ad hoc promotions.
It will be pertinent to note here that the Unions of employees were also demanding that the employees of States be also given promotions as given to direct recruits.
The Board in order to give relief to them had made a provision in the draft rules in the Bhakra Beas Management Board Class III and Class IV Employees' (Recruitment and Conditions of Service) Regulations, 1994.
The promotional posts were to be filled up in the ratio of 33 :67 between the Bhakra Beas Management Board's employees and the employees of the partner States respectively and in the event of non- availability of required number of personnel from the partner States, the vacancies were to be filled up from amongst the Bhakra Beas Management Board regular employees.
13.
In the order dated 681992, copy of which is Annexure P-8 to the writ petition, it has been clearly mentioned that the promotions of these employees are purely on ad hoc basis and they are liable to be reverted at any time without assigning any reason.
The Board has a right to fix the quota/share for the partner States as well as for the directly recruited employee in order to safeguard the interest of the employees working under it.
For this purpose only provision for quota system has been made.
14.
The Board's direct recruits formed a separate class altogether and there can be no inter-se seniority between them and the State allocated employees.
15.
We are not inclined to accept the plea of learned counsel for the petitioners that a direction be issued to the respondent-Board to promote the petitioners in the Board or to make provisions for their promotion as a writ of mandamus cannot be issued to the legislature to enact a particular legislation.
Same is true as regards the executive when it exercises the powers to make rules which are in the nature of subordinate legislation.
16.
The rule can be challenged when there is violation of any of the provisions of the Constitution.
In the case in hand, there is no violation of any provision.
When an employee is taken on deputation, there can be no guarantee that he will earn further promotion.
17.
It is worthwhile to mention here that though the petitioners have no right to claim promotion, yet the Board had made a provision for their ad hoc promotion.
In this manner, the petitioners have been given twin benefits i.e. promotion in their parent Departments as well as in the Board.
For the reasons recorded above, the writ petition is dismissed being devoid of any merit.