VK Jhanji, J - This petition is by widow whose husband joined service of the Haryana State Government in the department of Development and Panchayat as Gram Sachiv on 1581950.
During his service career, a dispute arose with regard to his date of birth.
In the matriculation certificate as also in the service record, his date of birth has been shown 2541936.
On the basis of some complaint in the year 1972, the Sub-Divisional Officer, Thanesar opined that the date of birth as recorded in the service record of the employee is correct.
Later on, after almost 18 years, another enquiry was initiated when the petitioner was suspended on 1951989 and the Enquiry Officer in his report dated 1461991 expressed his inability to give any finding other than what had already been given in report dated 7121972.
The husband of the petitioner, on attaining the age of superannuation, retired from service on 3041994.
Barely after two months of his retirement, he died on 3061994.
His widow was issued notice dated 20.10.1994 by the disciplinary authority to show-cause as to why date of birth of her husband be not accepted as 211929 and the salary and other benefits for the period her husband remained in service beyond the age of superannuation i.e. for 7 years, 3 months and 28 days recovered from her and a cut in pension be imposed.
2.
Petitioner, on receipt of notice, desired to know as to under what provision of law she has been called upon to show cause and moreover she is not in possession of any document or record which should be made available to her so as to enable her to make any reply.
She also submitted that she has no source of income except family pension and the same be released to her along with other benefits.
Vide order dated 18111994, the disciplinary authority held that the date of birth of the employee is 211929 and directed recovery of pay received by the employee from 3111987 to 3041994 and cut in pension of the alleged excess service as also recovery of subsistence allowance for the period from 1951989 to 3041994.
Vide order dated 1121994, the Joint Director, Rural Development, Haryana accorded sanction to the grant of cash payment equivalent to 97 days earned leave in lieu of unutilised earned leave.
This order is being impugned in this petition on the ground that cash payment in lieu of unutilised leave upto 3041994 has not been made.
Both the orders are being impugned on the ground that family pension being a personal right, is free from any condition and cannot be withheld without there being any justifiable reason and the orders have been passed in utter disregard to the principles of natural justice.
3.
In the written statement, respondents have submitted that on decision given by the disciplinary authority with regard to the date of birth of the husband of the petitioner, pensionary benefits which in law are payable to the petitioner are being released and, therefore, no grievance can be made by the petitioner in this regard.
They have also submitted that there is no illegality in the orders which have been passed on the basis of decision given by the disciplinary authority.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that the pension can be withheld or withdrawn only if the husband of the petitioner had been found guilty of grave misconduct or negligent in causing pecuniary loss to the Government.
In this case, no such finding has been recorded by the disciplinary authority.
He also contended that the petitioner was never associated in any enquiry nor she was given any opportunity of hearing before the order came to be passed against her.
5.
In answer to these submissions, the learned counsel for the State submitted that the disciplinary proceedings against the husband of the petitioner were pending when he retired from service.
His retirement was subject to the result of the disciplinary proceedings.
He contended that the disciplinary authority was not satisfied with the report of the Enquiry Officer and, therefore, a show-cause notice was served on the petitioner but no reply whatsoever was received from the petitioner.
In these circumstances, he contended that the petitioner cannot make a grievance that she was not given opportunity of hearing before the passing of the orders.
6.
Having heard the learned counsel for the parties at some length, I am of the view that the writ petition deserves to succeed.
State has reserved its right to withhold or withdraw pension or any part thereof under rule 2.2(a) to 2.2.
(b) contained in Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume-II.
Rule 2.2(a) empowers the appointing authority to withdraw or withhold pension or any part of it if the petitioner is convicted of serious crime or is found guilty of grave misconduct.
Under rule 2.2(b), the Government is empowered to withhold or withdraw pension or any part of it, whether permanently or for a specified period and the right of ordering the recovery from a pension of the whole or part of any pecuniary loss caused to Government, if the pensioner is found in departmental or judicial proceedings, to have been guilty of grave misconduct or to have caused pecuniary loss to Government by misconduct or negligence, during its service including service rendered on re-employment after retirement.
Reading of Rules 2.2(a) and 2.2(b) of the ibid Rules makes if clear that the pension can be withheld or withdrawn or any part of it in the event of government servant having been found guilty of grave misconduct which led to the pecuniary loss to the Government.
In the present case, the only finding given by the disciplinary authority in its order dated 18111994 is that the date of birth of the employee is 211929 and he has got the benefit of excess service for 7 years 3 months and 28 days by getting his date of birth recorded as 2541936 in the matriculation certificate.
The order nowhere discloses that the husband of the petitioner has been found guilty of grave misconduct or has caused pecuniary loss to the Government due to his negligence.
In absence of any finding to this effect, I am of the view that the order has to be struck down being in disregard of legal provisions under which pension can be withheld or withdrawn on account of pecuniary loss caused to the Government by negligence or grave misconduct of the employee.
The order is also liable to be quashed because the same has been passed in violation of principles of natural justice.
No effective hearing has been given to the petitioner before the order came to the passed against her.
Petitioner being widow of government servant is entitled to the amount of pension to which her late husband was entitled to receive upto the date of his death as also other retiral benefits including gratuity, family pension under the Family Pension Scheme, 1964.
The order requiring her to refund the amount of salary drawn by her husband for the period 3111987 to 3041994 and again cutting this period for the purpose of pension and order regarding recovery of subsistence allowance received from 1951989 to 3041994 adversely affects the civil rights of the petitioner, which cannot be deprived to her without having been afforded proper opportunity to explain the charges which were found against her late husband.
7.
In answer to the show-cause notice, petitioner in her letter dated 2111994 specifically brought it to the notice of the disciplinary Authority that she has no knowledge as regards the date of birth of her husband and also that she has no document in her possession for giving reply to the show-cause notice.
She as a matter of fact asked the disciplinary Authority to provide her with copies of relevant documents and also to inform her as to under what provision of rules, regulations or law she has been called upon to show cause after the death of her husband.
Instead of providing her with any document/record or apprising her of the rules or regulations under which action was sought to be taken against her, the disciplinary Authority found her reply to be without any substance as it was of the opinion that along with the show-cause notice, she has been served with enquiry report together with reasons for disagreement.
In my opinion, this was not a sufficient compliance of principles of natural justice.
The entire record relating to enquiry held against the husband of petitioner was required to be made available to her.
The enquiry took place during the life time of her husband.
The Enquiry Officer submitted his report on 1461991 wherein he expressed his inability to give any finding other than what had been given in report 7121972 of the previous enquiry.
No action whatsoever was taken by the disciplinary Authority before the retirement of husband of the petitioner.
He retired on 3041994 and died on 3061994.
Show-cause notice has been served on the petitioner on 20.10.1994.
It was not expected of her to have kept all the documents/record of the enquiry.
It is also not the case of the respondents that husband of the petitioner made her aware of the proceedings of the enquiry.
In these circumstances, I am of the view that it was incumbent upon the respondents to make her available all the records which had been asked for and also the rules and regulations under which action was sought to be taken against her to enable her to make effective reply to the grounds which impelled the disciplinary Authority to come to a different conclusion than the one arrived at by the Enquiry Officer.
As already observed, the right to pension/family pension including its amount is a valuable right vested in a widow of a government servant and before that right is prejudicially affected, she was not only entitled to be informed of the reasons for withholding or withdrawing the pension but also all the records of the disciplinary proceedings on the basis of which action was sought to be taken against her.
This having not been done, orders impugned cannot be sustained.
8.
As a result, this writ petition is allowed and orders dated 18111994, Annexure P-6 and 1121994, Annexure P-7 are hereby quashed with a direction to the respondents to release all the retiral benefits and other dues to which husband of the petitioner was entitled to, as on the date of his retirement, i.e. 3041994 by taking his date of birth as 2541936.
It shall include the salary for the period the husband of the petitioner remained under suspension minus subsistence allowance.
Petitioner shall also be released family pension without any delay.
Respondents shall, however, be entitled to adjust the amount of marriage advance, if any, taken by the husband of the petitioner.
Petitioner shall be entitled to interest at the rate of 18 per cent per annum on the arrears upto the date of payment.
Petition allowed.