Ashok Bhan and PK Jain, JJ.
- Petitioner's father while in service of the State of Haryana died on 28101986.
At the time of the death of his father, petitioner was 11 years of age.
On attaining majority in the year1993, petitioner filed an application for appointment on compassionate grounds.
The case of the petitioner was not considered which necessitated the filing of this writ petition claiming appointment on compassionate grounds.
2.
Notice of motion was issued in response to which written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents.
3.
In the written statement filed, it has been stated that the petitioner had applied for appointment on compassionate grounds after a lapse of seven years of the death of his father and, therefore, his application for appointment on compassionate grounds could not be considered.
4.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
Petitioner was a minor when his father died and naturally he could not have applied for appointment on compassionate grounds being a minor and not eligible to apply for a Government job.
He could only apply for a job on attaining majority.
Petitioner applied for appointment on compassionate grounds within one year of attaining majority.
Under the circumstances, the stand taken by the respondents does not stand the scrutiny of being reasonable.
In CWP 2463 of 1991, decided on 2271992, it has been held that where a person was a minor at the time of death of his father, then he can apply for appointment on compassionate grounds immediately after attaining majority.
5.
Consequently, we accept this writ petition and direct the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner for appointment on compassionate Grounds in accordance with the instructions issued by the State of Haryana.
The case of the petitioner be considered within two months from the receipt production of a certified copy of this order.
Petitioner, if found eligible, would be entitled to the appointment on compassionate ground on his turn keeping in view the prior claim of such persons who may have applied on compassionate grounds earlier.
No costs.