GS Singhvi, J - This petition is directed against the orders (Annexures P-3 and P-4) vide which respondent Nos. 4 to 11 have been promoted as Junior Auditors in the Food and Supplies Department, Punjab.
2.
The petitioners as well as respondent Nos. 4 to 11 joined service in the Food and Supplies Department of the Government of Punjab.
While the petitioners have been appointed in the Subordinate Offices, respondents Nos. 4 to 11 have been appointed at the Head Office, i.e., the Directorate of Food & Supplies.
By orders Annexures P-3 and P-4 the private respondents have been promoted as Junior Auditors.
These promotions have been questioned by the petitioners on the ground that separate lists of seniority of clerks of the Subordinate Offices and the Head Office are maintained and, therefore, the Clerks of the Head Office cannot be promoted to the posts of Junior Auditors in the Subordinate Offices.
The petitioners say that the Department has promoted respondents Nos. 4 to 11 without considering their cases and this action of respondent Nos. 1 and 2 not only violates their legal and constitutional rights but is also arbitrary and unfair.
3.
In their reply respondent Nos. 1 and 2 have pleaded that the Clerks of Head Office are eligible to be promoted as Junior Auditors in terms of Rule 9(J) of the Punjab Food and Supplies Department (State Service Class III) Rules, 1968 (for short 'the 1968 Rules').
The respondents have stated that the posts of Clerks in the Subordinate Offices and the Head Office are governed by the same set of rules and, therefore, promotions of respondent Nos. 4 to 11, who are senior to the petitioners, cannot be declared as arbitrary and unconstitutional.
4.
The posts of Clerks have been specified in the Head Office as well as in the Subordinate Offices.
For recruitment to these posts identical qualifications have been prescribed and the pay scales are also identical.
Rule 9 prescribes the method of appointment.
The post of Junior Auditor is required to be filled by direct recruitment, by promotion and by transfer in accordance with Rule 9(J) of the 1968 Rules.
The relevant extract of Rule 9(J) reads as under :-  "9.
Method of appointment :-  Appointment to posts in the Service shall be made in the following manner :-  (A) xx xx xx xx (B) xx xx xx xx (C) xx xx xx xx (D) xx xx xx xx (E) xx xx xx xx (F) xx xx xx xx (G) xx xx xx xx  (H) xx xx xx xx (I) xx xx xx xx (J) In the case of Junior Auditors :-  (i) by direct appointment; or (ii) by promotion from amongst Computers at Headquarters/Clerks working at the Headquarters as well as in the Circle Offices; provided they have worked on the post of Computer/Clerk for a minimum period of 3 years.
(iii) by transfer or deputation of an official already in the service of the Government of India or of a State Government holding appointment equivalent to the post held by departmental official eligible for appointment by promotion."
Perusal of the above-quoted rule shows that clerks in the Head Office as well as in the Circle Offices are eligible to be promoted as Junior Auditors.
Therefore, the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners that the private respondents could not have been considered for promotion as Junior Auditors is liable to be rejected.
Admittedly, respondents Nos. 4 to 11 are senior to the petitioners by length of service.
Therefore, no illegality has been committed by respondent Nos. 1 and 2 in promoting respondents No. 4 to 11 as Junior Auditors.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition fails and is hereby dismissed.