Ashok Bhan, J - Prayer made in this writ petition is for issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to release the withheld amount of gratuity amounting to Rs. 28,539/- along with interest and damages w.e.f.
141989 i.e. the date the petitioner retired from service.
2.
It is a typical case which has resulted into harassment to the petitioner and loss to the Government due to deliberate inaction or sheer negligence on the part of the officials of the State Govt. Petitioner retired as Executive Engineer, P.W.D.
(B&R) Patiala, on 3131989.
On his retirement, petitioner was granted provisional pension w.e.f.
141989 but other dues were not released for which the petitioner made a representation on 1681989.
On 3111989, petitioner was granted regular pension and leave encashment.
Out of the total amount of Rs. 57,850/- towards the gratuity, Chief Engineer, P.W.D.
(B&R) Punjab granted sanction for the release of gratuity amount of Rs. 29,211/- on 21.2.1992 and withheld the balance amount of Rs. 28,539/- on the ground that two inquiries were pending against the petitioner which may result in recovery of Rs. 25,946/- from the petitioner.
3.
Petitioner was issued two charge-sheets just few days before his retirement.
The balance amount of gratuity was withheld under orders of Chief Engineer, PWD (B&R) Punjab to be released after the decision on the charge- sheet.
An Enquiry Officer was appointed.
Petitioner faced the inquiry and as per allegations made in the petition which have not been controverted in the written statement, Enquiry Officer submitted his report to the Punishing Authority on 2091993 which was received in the office of the Superintending Engineer, Ludhiana Circle, vide No. 1176 dated 20.12.1993 exonerating the petitioner of the charges levelled against him.
Punishing Authority, thereafter, did not take any action on the inquiry report.
Under these circumstances, present writ petition has been filed for release of the balance amount of gratuity which was illegally withheld and not released to the petitioner despite the fact that petitioner had been absolved of the liability and both the charge-sheets served on the petitioner having come to an end.
4.
In the written statement filed, basically the facts narrated above have been admitted.
In para 4 of the written statement, respondents have admitted that Enquiry Officer submitted his report to the government on 2091993 on which the government asked for the comments of the Enquiry Officer on the inquiry report on 4111993; that the case is pending for want of comments from the Superintending Engineer, Ludhiana, to whom the last reminder was issued vide letter No. 3566/I&CI dated 6101995.
That further action would be taken on receipt of comments from the Superintending Engineer and the balance amount of gratuity would be released after processing the inquiry report.
5.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
It is unfortunate that petitioner has not been released his balance amount of gratuity in spite of his having been exonerated by the Enquiry Officer.
No action has been taken on the inquiry report submitted by the Enquiry Officer for the last more than two years.
Stand taken by the respondents is untenable.
The action of withholding the balance amount of pension in spite of his having been exonerated by the Enquiry Officer and further taking of no action on the inquiry report for the last two years after the submission of the inquiry report just depicts the callous attitude of the respondent- authorities in dealing with their officers/officials after their retirement.
Punishing Authority should have taken action on the inquiry report within a reasonable time and could not sit over the same for indefinite period.
No worthwhile steps were taken by the Punishing Authority in the matter.
Under these circumstances, we are constrained to accept the inquiry report as final.
No further action should now be taken and it would be deemed as if the Punishing Authority agreed with the inquiry report.
We have resorted to this course to avoid any further harassment to the petitioner whose retiral benefits have not been released even after six years of his retirement.
6.
Accordingly, a direction is issued to the respondents to release the balance amount of gratuity within a period of two months from the receipt/production of a certified copy of this order.
Petitioner would also be entitled to interest at the rate of 12% per annum from the date of petitioner retired till its actual disbursement as the petitioner has been denied this amount during all this period for no justifiable cause.
7.
Commissioner and Secretary, P.W.D.
(B&R) Punjab, shall not hold an inquiry and fasten the liability on the defaulting officials for the delay caused in taking final decision on the report submitted by the Enquiry Officer and recover the interest amount from the officer responsible for not taking a final decision on the report.
Interest be recovered from the said officer for the period 2091993 till its disbursement because loss has been caused to the state exchequer by either deliberate inaction or sheer negligence on the part of the concerned officer.
Such public accountability has to be introduced and recovery made from the defaulting officials in order to save the State Govt. from losses/liability suffered due to deliberate inaction or negligence on the part of the government officials.
This writ petition stands allowed in the aforesaid terms.
Petitioner shall also be entitled to costs of Rs. 5,000/- by way of compensation for the harassment caused to him.