GS Singhvi, J - Twenty-three years, eight months and six days ago, the petitioner who was then working as Sectional Officer in Rori Division, Sirsa, was transferred to Augmentation Division at Karnal in the Irrigation Department of the Government of Haryana.
The petitioner joined at Karnal on 1741972.
His service book and other records were not sent from Rori Division, Sirsa to Augmentation Division, Karnal, which resulted in non- addition of the annual increments in the pay scale of the petitioner from the year 1972 and onward.
The petitioner made representation Annexure P-2 some time in April, 1973 to the Executive Engineer, Sirsa Division, Sirsa to send his personal register and service book.
This representation of the petitioner was forwarded to the Superintending Engineer, Hissar Bhakra Canal Circle, Hisar for necessary action.
The petitioner repeated his request vide Annexure P-3 dated 21.6.1973.
After a period of about three years, the Executive Engineer, Sirsa wrote to the Executive Engineer, Loharu Canal Division No. II, Charkhi Dadri that service book of the petitioner has not been traced out and the same seems to have been misplaced in the Accounts Branch of the Division.
He, therefore, asked the Executive Engineer to direct the Sectional Officer (Petitioner) to submit an affidavit showing the places where he worked and suspension/punishment, if any, awarded so that action may be taken to prepare a duplicate service book.
This did not result in favourable action despite a further representation made by the petitioner on 1951987 in which he gave details of the period of his work between 8.6.1967 to date.
He again made a similar representation on 161990 and had also submitted affidavit Annexure P-7 indicating the period of his working.
This affidavit was filed by the petitioner on 24.12.1992.
Despite this, no action was taken by the respondents to trace out the service book of the petitioner or reconstitute the same resulting in denial of grade increments to the petitioner since the year 1972 and further denial of the pay fixation etc.
He has, therefore, sought a writ of mandamus to direct the respondents to reconstruct his service book and pay all consequential reliefs and arrears of pay w.e.f.
1741972 along with interest at the rate of 18% per annum and also to give him promotion from December, 1979 on the post of Sub Divisional Officer when his junior Zile Singh was promoted.
2.
In their reply, the respondents have admitted the statement made by the petitioner that his service book was misplaced and the same is not traceable.
They have stated that the service book of the petitioner requires some more record to be consulted from the State of Punjab where the petitioner had worked before re-organisation of the State and as record of the State of Punjab is not made available, the respondents are not in a position to reconstruct the service book.
3.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties and have perused the record of the case.
4.
From the admitted facts, it is clearly borne out that during the last more than 23 years the respondents have not been able to trace out or reconstitute the service book of the petitioner and this is the position despite the fact that the petitioner had submitted his affidavit indicating the period of his working at different places from 891961 to 24.12.1992.
Under Rule 12.2 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume-II, the service book is required to be maintained by the concerned Head of the Department/Head of the Office and the same is not made available to the Government servant.
The fact that the service book of the petitioner was available till the year 1972 can be inferred from the fact that he was given the benefit of annual grade increments till the year 1971.
Letter Annexure P-4 written by the Executive Engineer, Sirsa to the Executive Engineer, Loharu Canal Division No. 2, Charkhi Dadri also fortified the fact that the petitioner's service book was available till the year 1972.
May be, that due to the fault of some employee in Rori Division, Sirsa from where the petitioner was transferred to Augmentation Division, Karnal in the year 1972, the service book of the petitioner got misplaced, but, then it was the duty of the departmental authorities to have got duplicate service book of the petitioner prepared on the basis of the affidavit filed by the petitioner and on the basis of the available record.
Their failure to reconstruct the service book of the petitioner for 23 years has remained unexplained.
Due to sheer negligence on the part of the departmental authorities to reconstitute the service book of the petitioner, he has suffered grave injustice during all these 23 years by not having allowed increments and pay fixation and also in the form of denial of promotion.
5.
In my considered opinion, the failure of the respondents to reconstruct the service book of the petitioner has resulted in denial of property right to the petitioner and it has also resulted in discrimination because he has been denied consideration for promotion when his junior Zile Singh was promoted on ad hoc basis.
6.
Consequently, the writ petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to reconstruct the service book of the petitioner within a period of three months.
Within next one month, they are directed to fix the pay of the petitioner in the revised pay scales which have come into force from time to time since the year 1972.
He shall be given benefit of the increments due to him since the year 1972.
The arrears of the pay due to such fixation shall be paid to him within next 15 days along with interest at the rate of 12% per annum from the date of increments became payable to the petitioner in the year 1972.
Within a period of four months of the submission of a certified copy of this order, the respondents are also directed to consider the case of the petitioner for promotion from the date his junior Zile Singh was promoted and if the petitioner is found suitable for promotion on the basis of his annual confidential reports etc., then, he should be given retrospective promotion as Sub Divisional Officer/Sub Divisional Engineer will all consequential monetary benefits.
Costs are made easy.