VS Aggarwal, J - In the year 1991, the respondent-Maharshi Dayanand University, Rohtak (MDU, Rohtak, for short) advertised three posts of Lecturers in Statistics.
One of them was against a leave vacancy.
Petitioner who is M.Sc.
and PhD in Statistical Genetics, applied against the said post and was called for interview.
The Selection Committee recommended the names of five selected candidates.
The name of the petitioner figured at Serial No. 3 in the list of recommended candidates.
In pursuance of the same she along with others was issued an appointment letter on November 16, 1991.
In the appointment letter, it was mentioned that petitioner had been appointed against the leave vacancy and for the present she would work against the leave vacancy.
It was further mentioned that as and when there falls a regular vacancy, her appointment shall be treated as regular from that very date.
The petitioner joined her duties.
2.
The Executive Council of the University Vide Resolution No. 28 approved the appointment of the petitioner.
She had been working against the leave vacancy of one Dr. HC Taneja.
Dr. HC Taneja resigned and his resignation was accepted on February 8, 1995.
The petitioner requested the respondent for regularising her to the said post in terms of the appointment letter.
The respondent on the contrary advertised the said post of Lecturer in Statistics and did not regularise the petitioner against the post that fell vacant.
3.
By virtue of the present petition, petitioner seeks that in accordance with the appointment letter issued to the petitioner, she should be appointed against the post that has fallen vacant on regular basis with all consequential benefits and advertisement so issued by the respondent be quashed pleading, inter alia, that the respondent-M.D.U., Rohtak is bound by the appointment letter issued and further that many other similarly appointed persons were regularised by the respondent in different Departments.
It has also been alleged that the person who was at Serial No. 4 of the Selection List is still working in the University.
4.
In the reply filed, the respondent contested the petition.
It is not disputed that the petitioner was appointed to the post of Lecturer in Statistics against a leave vacancy of Dr. HC Taneja.
Dr. HC Taneja has resigned.
With the acceptance of the resignation, a clear vacancy of the Lecturer in Statistics had occurred.
The petitioner is not entitled to be regularised because it is the case of the respondent that the post is required to be filled up by advertisement on All India basis.
There is no dispute about the letter of appointment that has been issued but respondent's case was that the particular condition relied upon by the petitioner is in violation of the rules.
There is no denial that some other persons have also been regularised who were initially appointed in leave vacancies and that the person at Serial No. 4 of the Selection List is still working.
5.
To appreciate the said controversy, it becomes necessary to refer to the facts which are not in dispute.
Annexure P1 is the copy of the Advertisement inviting applications for the posts of Lecturers in Statistics.
It reads :  "Applications on prescribed form are invited for the following post(s).
1.
Professor English - Two and Pub.
Admn.- One.
2.
Readers Rural Development - Two.
3.
Lecturers Geography - One M.B.A. - three statistics - three (one against leave vacancy) Rural Development - two."
6.
There is no controversy that the petitioner was called for interview and the Selection Committee had placed her at Serial No. 3 of the selected candidates.
The copy of the letter of appointment is Annexure P-4 and clause (3) of the same reads :-  "3.
You will be entitled to usual allowances and leave etc. as per University rules.
For the present, this appointment shall be against leave vacancy but as and when there falls a regular vacancy your appointment shall be treated as regular one from that every date."
7.
Learned counsel for the petitioner highlighted the said clause (3) so as to urge that though the petitioner was appointed against a leave vacancy, yet a clear vacancy has occurred as a result of the resignation of one of the Lecturers.
The petitioner, therefore, has right to be appointed on regular basis because this was the contract of service between the parties.
8.
The petitioner who had appeared along with others for interview is eligible and it is not the case of the respondent that she does not possess the requisite qualifications to be a Lecturer in Statistics.
When she appeared for the interview then in accordance with the regular procedure prescribed for appointment of a Lecturer she was selected and placed at Serial No. 3.
Since at that time there were three posts out of which one was a result of the proceeding on leave by one of the Lecturers she was appointed in the leave vacancy but the offer of appointment issued to the petitioner which has been reproduced above, leaves no doubt that the contract of service was that the appointment was against the leave vacancy.
However as and when there would be a regular vacancy her appointment was to be treated as regular.
This being the contract of service between the parties, the respondent indeed cannot retrace the steps because the petitioner joined in the leave vacancy on basis of the said assurance.
9.
Learned counsel for the respondent urged vehemently that as soon as she was appointed against a leave vacancy and a regular vacancy had occurred, the University necessarily had to advertise and pick up names afresh.
However, the said argument must fail because the equity must lean in favour of the equitable relief claimed.
Though the advertisement was of two regular posts and one in the leave vacancy yet the order of appointment issued to the petitioner clearly shows that this was a selection in anticipation of a regular vacancy that may arise.
She had been picked up and told that she would be selected and given regular appointment as soon as the vacancy occurs.
At the risk of repetition, it is to be mentioned that she had undergone the same process of selection as others.
Therefore, it cannot be said that regularising the petitioner in the vacancy would be in violation of any rules.
10.
In addition to that, there is no denial that person who was placed at Serial No. 4, is still working with the respondent.
It is totally unconscionable to permit the respondent to put the petitioner out of job and allow the next man to continue in service.
This has to be read in light of the fact that petitioner now has been working for last many years in the respondent-University.
The pleas that in these years she did not apply for other posts because she was given the offer that she would be regularised and in some cases she might have become overage, assume great importance.
As such, the contention of the petitioner must prevail in the facts of the case.
11.
For the foregoing reasons, the petition is accepted and the impugned advertisement issued by the respondent is quashed.
It is directed that the petitioner may be regularised in accordance with the offer of appointment.
Annexure P4, with all consequential benefits.