Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was a candidate for recruitment to the post of Assistant Professor at the Regional Engineering College, Kurukshetra.
He challenges the selection and appointment of respondents No. 4 to 6 on a two-fold basis.
Firstly, it is alleged that the selection is violative of the provisions of Articles 14 to 16 of the Constitution of India, inasmuch as he was excluded from consideration by adopting the process of short listing.
Secondly, it is submitted that the College had advertised only 2 posts and the selection and appointment of respondent No. 6 being beyond the advertised posts cannot be sustained.
2.
The respondents contest the petitioner's claim.
In the written statement filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 to 3, it has been pointed out that a total of 20 applications had been received for the three posts which were available.
Under Bye-law 6, the maximum number of candidates who could be called for interview was 18.
Accordingly, the applications were scrutinised and 18 candidates were called for interview.
The petitioner was one of the two candidates who were excluded during the process of short listing.
The 18 persons were interviewed by the Selection Committee.
It found 5 persons suitable for appointment.
The first 3 viz. respondent Nos. 4 to 6 have been appointed in pursuance to the recommendations of the Selection Committee.
It has been repeatedly averred that the number of posts which had been advertised was 3 and not 2.
One of these was a temporary vacancy which was likely to continue.
The respondents maintain that the selection and appointment of respondent Nos. 4 to 6 is in strict conformity with law.
3.
A separate written statement has been filed by respondent No. 4.
It has been alleged that the petitioner was not eligible as he did not possess the requisite experience.
An effort has also been made by the respondent to highlight his qualifications and experience to show that his selection and appointment is in conformity with law.
4.
The petitioner has filed a replication reiterating the position taken by him in the writ petition.
He has also referred to a document prescribing the minimum essential qualifications for the post of Assistant Professor.
In this behalf, it has been averred that "the minimum essential qualification for the post of Assistant Professor has been given in Annexure P-2------".
This document has not been produced with the replication.
However, a document described as general information and instructions to the candidates concerning advertisement published in the newspapers in June, 1994, is on the record.
It is certified as a true copy by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
Probably, it was produced at some stage during the pendency of the writ petition.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
The two questions that arise for consideration are :-  (1) Is the selection and appointment of respondent Nos. 4 to 6 violative of the provisions of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution ?
(2) Have the respondents made appointments beyond the number of posts which had been advertised ?
5.
Mr. Inderjit Malhotara, learned counsel for the petitioner has made a two-fold submission.
Firstly, it has been submitted that only 20 candidates having submitted applications, it was incumbent on the Selection Committee to interview all of them and that the respondents have illegally resorted to the process of short-listing.
It is also submitted that the petitioner was arbitrarily excluded under the garb of short-listing.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioner has been controverted by the learned counsel for the respondents.
6.
The Board of Governors of the respondent-College have framed Bye-laws in exercise of the power under Rule 13(xvi) of the Regional Engineering College (Kurukshetra) Society Rules.
These Bye-laws have been in force since July 16, 1963.
Bye-law 6 relates to the appointment of staff.
Clauses (iii) to (iv) are relevant for the decision of the present case.
These provide as under :-  "(iii) The terms and conditions of the post to be filled by advertisement, except the post of the Principal, shall be advertised by the Principal and all applications received within the date specified in the advertisement shall be considered by the Selection Committee : Provided that the Principal may, for sufficient reasons, consider any application received after the date so specified.
The preliminary selection of candidates, to be called for interview, shall be made by the Principal, in consultation with Chairman of the Department concerned and a summary of particulars of the candidates called for interview, shall be supplied to all the members of the Selection Committee.
The members of the Selection Committee may suggest names of other candidates for the posts of Assistant Professor and above to be called for interview.
(iv) Action required to be taken by the Principal in Bye-law 6(iii) shall be taken by the Chairman, BOG when the post of the Principal is to be filled.
The procedure stated in Bye-law 6(iii) shall apply in full in this case also except consultation with the Chairman of the Department concerned for making preliminary selection of candidates to be called for interview.
In making the preliminary selection under College Bye-law 6, the maximum number of candidates to be called for interview be limited as under :-  i) If the vacancy is for one post only.
: Ten ii) If the vacancy is for two posts only.
: Sixteen iii) If the vacancy is for more than 2 posts.
: Six per post."
A perusal of the above provision shows that the Principal of the College can select candidates to be called for interview.
He has to do so in consultation with the Chairman of the Department concerned.
It has also been provided that if there is only one vacancy, 10 candidates should be called for interview.
If the number of vacancies is 2, the number of candidates has to be 16.
If the vacancies are more than 2, the number of candidates has to be 6 per post.
Since the College claims to have advertised 3 posts, it was decided to call 18 persons for interview.
Furthermore, record has also been produced to show that the papers had been forwarded to Dr. NP Mehta, Professor and Chairman of the Department of Mechanical Engineering for recommending the names of candidates to be called for interview.
He had chosen the 18 candidates.
His recommendation was approved by the Principal of the College on July 20, 1994.
Thereafter, the candidates were interviewed by the Selection Committee on August 4, 1994.
In this process, the petitioner was excluded.
The action of the respondents in short-listing the candidates was in conformity with the provisions of Bye-law 6.
7.
Mr. Malhotra submits that no guidelines had been laid down for the purpose of conducting the preliminary selection and short-listing the applicants.
It is true that there is nothing on the file to indicate as to what guidelines had been followed.
However, it is equally clear that the qualifications for the post had been laid down.
The applications of the candidates were before the authorities.
Facts regarding each applicant had been duly tabulated.
Thereafter, a preliminary selection was made.
Still further, it is not difficult to imagine that the Chairman of the Department of Mechanical Engineering was aware of the prescribed qualifications.
He is also conversant with the requirements of the post.
Accordingly, if he decided to exclude two candidates on an objective consideration of the available data, it cannot be said without anything more that the action is either arbitrary or unfair.
8.
Equally, it cannot be said that merely because a written criterion does not exist on the file, the process of preliminary selection is vitiated.
In fact, the petitioner's application form has been produced before me.
A perusal thereof shows that he had passed the Diploma Examination in Mechanical Engineering from the Central Polytechnic, Chandigarh in the year 1985.
Thereafter, he had passed the AMIE examination in the year 1988.
Admittedly, it is not a Degree in engineering awarded by any University.
The candidate does not even study in a College or attend any classes.
He just appears in an examination.
Thereafter, the petitioner had passed the ME (Mechanical) Examination as a part-time student at the Punjab Engineering College, Chandigarh.
Still further, the petitioner had worked for 3 years as a Project Associate at the Technical Teachers Training Institute, Sector 26, Chandigarh from August 1989 to August 1992.
He was engaged in the production of video packages for mechanical students and technicians besides conducting short term courses.
He had also worked as a Project Manager and a Marketing Executive with two private concerns.
On consideration of the entire material, the competent authority could have taken the view that since the petitioner had not studied as a regular student for obtaining the degree in engineering and had done his post-graduation as a part-time student, he may not have the necessary background to be able to teach in an engineering college.
It cannot be said that the action in the circumstances of this case was arbitrary or unfair.
Still further, it has been pointed out by the learned counsel for the respondents and has not been controverted by Mr. Malhotra that on the same day viz. August 4, 1994, the petitioner was interviewed for the post of a Lecturer by the Selection Committee.
He was not selected.
Surely if the petitioner was found unsuitable for the post of Lecturer it cannot be said that he should be treated as suitable for the post of an Assistant Professor.
9.
Taking the totality of circumstances into consideration, it appears that the exclusion of the petitioner at the time of short-listing of candidates called for interview was not arbitrary and unfair.
The action was not violative of the provisions of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
The first point is answered in the negative and the contention raised by the learned counsel is rejected.
Reg : 2.
10.
It was then contended by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the college having advertised 2 posts, it could not have appointed 3 persons and that the appointment of respondent No. 6 is vitiated.
11.
Since there was a controversy relating to the actual number of posts which had been advertised, Mr. AS Virk, learned counsel for the respondent- College was asked if he had a copy of the original advertisement.
He has produced a copy of the document containing the general information and instructions to the candidates concerning Advertisement published in the Newspapers in June, 1994 for the posts of Professors, Assistant Professors and Lecturers.
This is taken on record as mark 'A'.
It consists of 4 pages.
At page 2, the relevant information in connection with the post of Assistant Professors has been given.
The posts in the Department of Mechanical Engineering are mentioned at page 3.
The number of regular vacancies has been given as 2.
One vacancy has been mentioned under the heading of "temporary, likely to continue".
In respect of temporary leave vacancy, the number of posts has been mentioned as 'nil'.
On a perusal of this document it is clear that in fact applications had been invited and the case was being considered for appointment against 3 posts.
Still further, at page 4, various 'notes' are given.
One of these notes is to the effect that the "number and nature of posts shown above may change at the time of selection".
An extract from this has been produced by the petitioner.
However, on a perusal of the cyclostyled document, which is said to have been given to the candidates along with the application forms, it is clear that the number of posts was 3.
12.
It is true that in the advertisement published in the newspapers, the number of posts was shown as 2.
However, the petitioner had applied for the post.
He suffered no prejudice on account of the change in the number of posts.
If at all, the number of candidates to be called for interview was increased.
As a result, the petitioner's chances for being called for interview improved.
The purpose of notifying the number of the posts is only to enable the candidates to assess their chances before applying for the posts.
In case a solitary post is advertised, the number of applicants may be less.
In case of larger number of posts, the number of candidates can be more.
However, in so far as the present case is concerned, the petitioner having submitted his application he was not affected in any manner, whatsoever.
It is only from a person who has not applied for the post on account of number of posts being less that a complaint of this kind may be heard.
In the present case, the petitioner having been considered and no prejudice having been caused to him, the grievance is wholly lacking in merit.
13.
It also deserves mention that the candidates had been cautioned that the number of posts is variable.
This should have given a sufficient indication to all concerned to feel that the number of posts could even be increased and they were at liberty to take their chance.
In view of the above, even the second question posed above is answered in the negative.
The contention raised by the petitioner is rejected.
According to document Mark 'A' and the written statement filed on behalf of the respondent, the number of posts was 3.
Respondent Nos. 4 to 6 have been appointed against the advertised posts.
However, in the written statement, it has been mentioned that the Selection Committee had recommended the names of 5 candidates.
Even if that be so, it would not be fair to fill up the 2 vacancies which may be available or may arise in future without issuing a fresh advertisement.
Mr. Virk appearing for respondents Nos. 1 to 3 states that the life of the panel has already expired and no more appointments are going to be made from amongst the candidates recommended by the Selection Committee.
That being so, the suggestion on behalf of the petitioner that even the other candidates are going to be appointed, does not survive.
In view of the above, I find no merit in this writ petition.
It is, accordingly, dismissed.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.