Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner challenges the order dated August 18, 1989 by which respondent No. 4 was promoted from the post of senior Translator to that of Superintendent Grade I He alleges that the action is violative of provisions of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution inasmuch as his claim for promotion was not considered and the quota fixed by the department had not been followed.
2.
The respondents contest the petitioner's claim on two-fold basis.
Firstly, it has been averred that the petitioner had been promoted as Superintendent Grade II on February 22, 1989.
He was on probation.
He was not entitled to be considered against this vacancy prior to respondents No. 5 and 6 who were senior to him.
Furthermore, it has been pointed out that the post in dispute had to be filled up from amongst the Translators.
Consequently, it is maintained that the quota rule had been adhered to.
3.
Mr. Jagdish Singh Khehar, learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that Mr. Bhagwan Singh who had been promoted as a Superintendent Grade I in the year 1984, belonged to the cadre of Translators.
Another person Mr. Harjit Singh belonging to the same cadre had also been promoted as Superintendent Grade I That being so, the two posts falling to the share of Translators had been duly filled up.
The third post could not have been filled up by promotion of another Translator viz. respondent No. 4.
Consequently he has urged that the post of Superintendent Grade I being a selection post, the petitioner has a right to be considered irrespective of the fact that respondents No. 5 and 6 who were working as Superintendents Grade II were senior to him.
The contentions raised on behalf of the petitioners have been controverted by the learned counsel for the respondents.
4.
The two questions that arise for consideration are :-  1.
Was the promotion of respondent No. 4 in violation of the quota rule ?
2.
Was the petitioner entitled to be considered for promotion alongwith respondent No. 4 ?
5.
Admittedly, there are no Rules governing the employees in the Punjab Vidhan Sabha Secretariat.
The decision to fill up posts of Superintendents Grade-I from different branches in the Secretariat is alleged to have been taken by the Speaker in the year 1984.
A copy of the order by which objections were invited has been produced alongwith the written statement filed by the fourth respondent.
In this communication, it was noticed that the number of persons holding posts in the General Branch was 41.
In the Publication Branch, the number of employees was 22 and in the Translation Branch, the number of senior Translators was 8.
On this basis, the posts were allocated to the three branches in the ratio of 60%, 25% and 15% respectively.
It is also the admitted position that there are 10 posts of Superintendents Grade I besides one post each of Private Secretary and Research Officer.
All the 12 posts had been distributed amongst the three branches.
As a result, 7 posts had been earmarked for the members of General Branch, three for those working in the Publication Branch and 2 for the persons working in the Translation Branch.
Have the respondents filled up the posts of Superintendents Grade I from amongst the senior Translators in excess of the two posts allocated to that category ?
According to the petitioner, Mr. Harjit Singh and Mr. Bhagwan Singh had been appointed as Superintendents Grade I from amongst the Translator.
No other vacancy fell to their share.
As such, respondent No. 4, who was also working as Senior Translator was not entitled to be promoted.
This position has, however, been controverted in the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents.
It has been admitted that Harjit Singh belonged to the cadre of Translators.
However, it has been pointed out that Mr. Bhagwan Singh who had been initially recruited as a Translators had been selected and appointed as Research Assistant on March 4, 1971.
Thereafter, he was confirmed as a Research Assistant on September 3, 1982.
He was further promoted from the post of Research Assistant to that of Research Officer in the year 1984.
According to the respondents, Mr. Bhagwan Singh did not belong to the cadre of Translators.
The petitioner has not controverted the facts as averred in paragraph No. 8 of the written statement filed on behalf of respondents 1, 2 and 3.
It has not been shown that Mr. Bhagwan Singh was working as a Translator at the time of his promotion in the year 1984.
The averment that he had in fact been selected and appointed as Research Assistant in the year 1971 and confirmed as such in the year 1982 has not been controverted.
That being so, it cannot be said that he was promoted from amongst the Translators.
Such being the position, it follows that there was a vacancy which had to be filled up from amongst the Translators.
Respondent No. 4 was admittedly eligible.
He was consequently promoted from amongst the Translators to the post of Superintendent Grade I  6.
Accordingly the first question as posed above is answered in the negative and it is held that promotion of respondent No. 4 was not violative of the decision regarding quota.
7.
Coming to the second contention raised by the learned counsel, it may be noticed that the vacancy having fallen to the share of Translators, persons working in the General Branch had no right to be considered.
The consideration had to be confined to the class of persons who were eligible to be appointed as Superintendent Grade I Since the posts had to be filled from amongst the Translators, the petitioner who was working in the General Branch was not eligible and could not as such claim a right of consideration.
Still further, even if it is assumed otherwise, there were two persons who were admittedly senior to him.
Respondents No. 5 and 6 had a prior right of consideration.
8.
Faced with this situation, Mr. Khehar urged that the post of Superintendent Grade I is a selection post.
Consequently, every eligible person had a right to be considered.
According to the learned counsel, respondents having not considered the petitioner, the guarantee of equality of opportunity as enshrined in Article 16 of the Constitution was violated.
Even this contention has no merit.
It has not been shown even prima facie that the petitioner was more meritorious than respondents No. 5 and 6.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been averred that the petitioner had been warned twice.
Copies of the communication sent to the petitioner have been produced as Annexures R-2 and R-3 with the written statement filed on behalf of to respondents No. 1 to 3.
It has also been pointed out that he had remained under suspension in the year 1982.
However, no action was taken against him as he had tendered apology.
As against this, the petitioner has not even suggested that there was any blemish on the record of respondents No. 5 and 6.
In this situation, it cannot be said that the interest of petitioner was in any way prejudiced or that there was any denial of equality of opportunity.
No other point has been urged.
In view of the above, I find no ground to interfere.
The writ petition is accordingly dismissed.
However, in the circumstances of this case, there will be no order as to costs.