SP Kurdukar, CJ (Oral) - This letters patent appeal is directed against the judgment and order dated August 28, 1984, passed by the learned Single Judge in Civil Writ Petition No. 3591 of 1978.
The controversy which needs to be considered in this letters patent appeal falls in a very narrow compass, namely, as to whether the appellant should have been given notional promotion to the grade of Rs. 250-380 (AS) which effect from January 6, 1964, on the plea that his juniors were promoted from that date, or the respondents were justified in giving the notional promotion to the appellant with effect from February 15, 1968.
The learned Single Judge in his impugned judgment accepted the affidavit filed on behalf of the respondents and the relevant portion thereof was reproduced in the first paragraph of the judgment (see page 8).
After relying upon the affidavit filed on behalf of the respondents the learned Single Judge concluded as under :-  "The stance taken by the Railway Administration is plausible and no fault can be found thereto in these proceedings.
The proposed order of the Railway Administration embodied in the afore-referred two letters if finalised would comply with the order of RN Mittal, J and meet the claim of the petitioner as best as it could be in the circumstances.
Let an order in that regard be issued to the petitioner within a span of fifteen days and all dues to the petitioner be released simultaneously."
While assailing the contents of the affidavit reproduced by the learned Single Judge in his judgment on page 8 of the paper-book, and the finding recorded by the learned Single Judge, as reproduced herein before, Mr. Bal Ram Gupta, the learned counsel for the appellant, urged that the affidavit filed by the Railway Administration was totally false and, in fact, the appellant never failed in any of the tests alleged to have been held in the years 1964, 1966 and 1967.
We are afraid to accept this contention because firstly no rejoinder was filed on behalf of the appellant to controvert this factual aspect stated on oath by the Railway Administration and secondly, in the memo of appeal no contention is taken up on behalf of the appellant that the statement contained in the affidavit of the Railway Administration that the appellant had failed in the tests held in the years 1964, 1966 and 1967 was totally false and, in fact, neither any such test was held nor he ever appeared for the test during those years.
There is, in fact, no challenge to the affidavit whatsoever in the memorandum of the letters patent appeal.
It is only during the course of the arguments that the learned counsel for the appellant tried to urge that the statement contained in the affidavit relating to the holding of the tests in the years 1964, 1966 and 1967, and the failure of the appellant therein was false.
The first submission, therefore, has no substance and must be rejected.
2.
It was then urged by Mr. Bal Ram Gupta, the learned counsel for the appellant, that the issue as regards the holding of tests in the years 1964, 1966 and 1967, cannot be re-opened in view of the judgment of another learned Single Judge in Civil Writ Petition No. 1924 of 1976 (See Annexure P-1).
The learned counsel urged that, in fact, the learned Single Judge has rejected the argument raised on behalf of the Railway Administration that the appellant was required to pass the requisite test before he could be considered for promotion.
He pointedly drew our attention to the portion of the judgment at pages 34 and 35 of the paper-book.
We have carefully gone through the said judgment and in our opinion, it is not possible to hold that the learned Single Judge while disposing of Civil Writ Petition No. 1924 of 1976 was ever called upon to consider the tests which were held in the years 1964, 1966 and 1967.
This very judgment was considered by the learned Single Judge in Civil Writ Petition No. 3591 of 1978 and vide his order dated February 9, 1984, directed the Railway Administration to consider the claim of the appellant for notional promotion.
It is only pursuant to this direction that the Railway Administration considered the claim of the appellant and accordingly gave him the notional promotion with effect from February 15, 1968.
If the appellant wanted to contend that no such test was required to be passed by the appellant in the years 1964, 1966 and 1967, he ought to have urged before the learned Single Judge as such and accordingly sought a direction that no such test was required to be passed by the appellant and he should have been considered eligible for notional promotion in the year 1964.
No such contention was raised before the learned Single Judge while direction was given vide order dated February 9, 1984.
At this stage, it was contended that there was no occasion to raise this contention since the Railway Administration disclosed this fact first time in the affidavit which was filed on August 28, 1984.
Be that as it may, the fact remains that the affidavit filed on behalf of the Railway Administration was accepted by the learned Single Judge and in the absence of any challenge thereto, it is not possible to accept any contrary contention.
The Judgment of RN Mittal, J, has now been complied with pursuant to the directions issued by the learned Single Judge in the impugned order dated August 28, 1984.
3.
There is no substance in the letters patent appeal.
The letters patent appeal to stand dismissed.
In the circumstances, there will be no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.