NK Sodhi, J - Petitioners who were working on different posts with respondent No. 2 served a demand notice on the management alleging that their services had been terminated without any notice or charge sheet and without complying with the mandatory provisions of Section 25-F of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (for short the Act).
On receipt of the their demand notices the Conciliation Officer took cognizance of the dispute and initiated conciliation proceedings.
It appears that the management stated before the Conciliation Officer that the services of the petitioners had not been terminated and that they could join their duty without claiming any back wages from the management.
Thereafter, the State Government rejected the demand notices and declined to refer the dispute for adjudication stating that the dispute was premature as they were still on the muster roll.
The petitioners allege that they are not being allowed to join duty and that their services had in fact been terminated and that the management gave an undertaking before the Conciliation Officer only with a view to avoid payment of back wages.
The workmen have filed this petition challenging the order of the State Government declining to refer their dispute for adjudication.
The management has not appeared to contest the case.
2.
After hearing counsel for the petitioners, I am of the opinion that there are disputed questions which need to be decided by the adjudicating authority under the Act.
The State Government by declining the reference has virtually decided those issues in favour of the management which it cannot do while exercising its powers under Section 10(1) of the Act.
It is well settled that disputes both with regard to facts as well as law must be left to the adjudicating authorities to decide and the Government cannot take upon itself to do that job while exercising powers under Section 10 of the Act.
Since the appropriate Government has chosen to decide the disputed questions, there is no option but to quash the impugned order Annexure P-2 and direct the State Government to refer the dispute for adjudication.
This should be done within two months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
No costs.