JL Gupta, J - The petitioners were admitted to the 4-year course leading to the degree of B.Sc.
Agriculture at the respondent-University in the year 1990-91.
In April, 1991, they appeared in Part-I examination.
In spite of the fact that each of the petitioners had secured 40% marks in the written papers as well as 40% marks in each of the practical papers, they were declared to have failed.
This was done on the ground that the petitioners had failed to secure 50% marks in the aggregate "of all the subjects excluding English, Punjabi and Punjab History and Culture."
The petitioners complain that the action of the respondent-University is illegal.
The respondent controverts this by saying that at the time of the examination, the Ordinance of the University provided that a candidate had to secure 50% marks in the aggregate.
2.
Admittedly, in the year 1990 when the petitioners were admitted to the course the stipulation that a candidate has to secure an aggregate of 50% so as to pass the examination was not there.
It was introduced later on.
The exact date is not available on the record.
It is not clear as to whether this condition was imposed after the petitioners had taken the examination or before.
In any event, there is nothing on the record to show that the petitioners were made aware of this condition prior to their appearing in the examination.
Still further learned counsel for the respondent has very fairly pointed out that on December 29, 1992 the Syndicate of the University has again abrogated the requirement of securing 50% marks in the aggregate.
3.
Keeping in view the fact that the petitioners had no knowledge regarding the requirement of securing 50% marks in the aggregate at any stage prior to their appearing in the examination, it does not appear to be just and reasonable to enforce this condition in their case.
Moreover, the University has itself decided to repeal this condition with effect from the year 1992.
4.
Taking the totality of the circumstances into consideration, it appears to be just and reasonable to direct that the petitioners' result should be governed by the Ordinance which was in force on the date of their admission.
According to that Ordinance, the requirement of securing 50% marks in the aggregate did not exist.
5.
In view of the above, the writ petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to declare the result of the petitioners of part-I examination.
The result of the subsequent examinations of the petitioners shall be declared.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.