Ashok Bhan and PK Jain, JJ.
- Prayer made in this petition is for quashing of order Annexure P-5 imposing the penalty of stoppage of one increment with cumulative effect passed by respondent No. 2 and order Annexure P-7 passed by the appellate authority rejecting the appeal against the order Annexure P-5.
2.
Petitioner is working as Gram Sachiv in the office of Block Development and Panchayat Officer, Fatehabad.
For the lease of Shamlat land of village Kharkan for 1990-91, an auction was held on 251990.
The auction was presided over by the Social Education and Panchayat Officer, Sirsa in the presence of Sarpanch, Members of the Gram Panchayat of the village, interested parties and the bidders.
Petitioner was directed by the Presiding Officer to note down individual bids in the lease register.
While recording the bids in the lease register the total of approved final bids exceeded the total of such bids communicated by the Presiding Officer for plots No. 6, 7 and 8.
Since there was a discrepancy in the amounts some cutting was made in the lease register to rectify the error.
Lease amount was initially mentioned to be Rs. 98,800/- whereas it should have been Rs. 1,04,700/-.
Entries were changed from Rs. 98,800/- to Rs. 1,04,700/-.
The amount of auction money collected at the spot was handed over to the Sarpanch of the Gram Panchayat against proper acknowledgement against receipt in Form No. IV.
Entry in the proceeding book was also made to confirm the fact that a sum of Rs. 1,04,700/- has been realised at the time of auction and not Rs. 98,800/- as had been indicated by the Social Education and Panchayat Officer, Sirsa.
3.
Complaints were made that petitioner had changed the figures of the auction money.
Action was taken on those complaints and petitioner was placed under suspension on 30.9.1990.
Petitioner was served with a memorandum of charges along with charge-sheet issued by the Director, Development and Panchayat, Haryana, under Rule 7 of the Haryana Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1987 (hereinafter referred to as the Rules).
Inquiry Officer was appointed.
Petitioner filed reply to the show cause notice issued to him.
Charges levelled were denied by the petitioner.
Charge No. 1 which is relevant for the decision of this writ petition is reproduced below :-  "Charge No. 1 : This charge against Shri Babu Ram (Gram Secretary) is regarding embezzlement of amounts relating to plot No. 6 to 8 of Shamlat land of village Kharkan during 1990-91."
After grating the full opportunities to the parties to lead their evidence and hearing their arguments, Inquiry Officer exonerated the petitioner of all the charges including charge No. 1.
On Charge No. 1, the following finding was recorded :-  "In this connection, I have perused Gram Panchayat Kharkan record namely proceeding book, cash book and Form No. 4 of the receipt book again.
After scrutiny it has been found that except for the lease register, there is no cutting in proceeding book, cash book and in form No. 4 of the receipt book.
According to the record the total amount of lease money was collected on the spot.
That the auction of all the plots of shamlat land of Gram Panchayat Kharkan was conducted in the presence of Social Education and Panchayat Officer, Sirsa, as in the lease register, it has been certified by him that the auction took place in his presence.
Shri Babu Ram, Gram Secretary, has admitted that in view of inadvertent entry of wrong figure, cutting had to be made.
He did not make any cutting intentionally.
In the light of all the facts it has been found that cutting in the lease register were not made with dishonestly.
Since there is no cutting in the relevant record and this charge is not proved".
4.
Punishing Authority did not agree with the report of the Inquiry Officer on Charge No. 1.
A show cause notice was issued to the petitioner to which reply was filed by him.
Personal hearing was also given to the petitioner.
Punishing Authority held that since there was an over-writing/cutting in the amount of bid, therefore, Charge No. 1 is proved.
No finding was recorded regarding the intention of embezzlement of the lease money by the petitioner.
Punishment of stoppage of one increment with cumulative effect was ordered to be imposed.
Appeal filed by the petitioner was rejected vide order Annexure P-7.
It was held that the punishment was awarded to the petitioner on good grounds; that no case was made out for interference in the order of punishment.
Petitioner aggrieved against the aforesaid orders Annexures P-5 and P-7 has filed the present writ petition in which notice of motion was issued.
Written statement has been filed.
With the consent of counsel for the parties, this petition is being disposed of at the motion stage.
5.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
We find substance in the submissions raised by the counsel for the petitioner and hold that orders Annexures P-5 and P-7 are liable to be quashed.
6.
Charge against the petitioner was that cuttings were made by him in the lease register with the intention to embezzle the lease money.
Except for the lease register, there was no cutting in the proceeding book, cash book and in Form No. IV of the receipt book.
The amount mentioned in the proceeding book, cash book and in Form No. IV of the receipt book is Rs. 1,04,700/- whereas in the lease register the amount of bid money is recorded as Rs. 98,800/-.
On realisation of the mistake, necessary corrections were made in the lease register to bring the amount of lease money in consonance with the other supportive documents.
Petitioner made the corrections in the lease register thereby increasing the amount by nearly Rs. 6,000/-.
Punishing authority has held that there are certain cuttings/over-writing in the bid amount but no finding has been recorded to the effect that the cuttings were made with the intention to embezzle the lease money.
In the absence of the finding regarding intention to embezzle the lease money, no punishment could be awarded to the petitioner.
It is clear that there was no intention on the part of the petitioner to embezzle the amount because he increased the amount in the lease register by about Rs. 6,000/- and brought it at par with the amount mentioned in the proceeding book, cash book and Form No. IV of the receipt book.
Auction of all the plots of the shamlat land was conducted in the presence of Social Education and Panchayat Officer, Sirsa, as in the lease register, it has been certified by him that auction took place in his presence.
Petitioner himself admitted that in view of the inadvertent entry of wrong figures in the lease register cuttings had to be made.
The actual amount handed over to the Sarpanch was more than the amount mentioned in the auction register.
The corrections were made in the auction register to bring it at par with the actual amount realised and the amount mentioned in the other documents i.e. the proceeding book, cash book and Form No. IV of the receipt book.
In the light of these facts, it cannot be held that cuttings in the lease register were made with any dishonest intention.
Inquiry Officer had rightly absolved the petitioner of Charge No. 1.
The order passed by the punishing authority and that of appellate authority Annexures P-5 and P-7 respectively imposing the punishment only because there was over- writing/cutting in the another register cannot be sustained specially when there is no finding regarding any intention on the part of the petitioner to embezzle the lease money.
For the reasons stated above, we allow this writ petition and quash the impugned orders Annexures P-5 and P-7 passed by respondent Nos. 2 and 3.
No costs.