Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - Counsel for the parties are agreed that these six writ petitions viz. Civil Writ Petitions Nos. 15954 of 1993, 41, 273, 375, 707 and 812 of 1994, involve a common question of law and can be disposed of by one order.
A brief reference to the pleadings of the parties in CWP No. 812 of 1994, may be made.
The petitioners herein are working as Special Police Officers.
They pray that the respondents be directed to consider their claim for promotion to the rank of Constable with effect from the date/s persons junior/s to them have been promoted.
2.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been inter alia averred that the petitioners were appointed as temporary SPOs/Auxiliary Constables on fixed rates and that they are not entitled to be considered for appointment as Constables.
3.
The petitioners have filed a replication.
Alongwith it, they have produced a copy of the Standing Order issued by the Director General of Police, Punjab, vide memorandum dated July 26, 1990.
A copy of the memorandum alongwith the Standing Order has been produced as Annexure P-17.
This Standing Order was issued for the purpose of giving "incentive and further induction as Constable" to the persons working as Special Police Officers/Auxiliary Constables.
Educational qualifications, physical standards and the process of selection including the physical tests that a person has to qualify, have been laid down.
Provision for medical examination etc. has also been made.
In clause (13), it has been provided as under :-  "(13) : Further Avenues of Promotion.
The Auxiliary Constable will be eligible for recruitment as Constable after one year of service provided his work and conduct is found satisfactory by the District Senior Superintendent of Police.
The District Senior Superintendent of Police will make selection out of the eligible Auxiliary Constables for appointment as Constable.
After their selection as Constables, they shall be governed by the Punjab Police Rules."
4.
After the issue of the Standing Order, the Director General of Police, Punjab, issued another memorandum dated November 19, 1991.
Certain modifications were made.
It was inter alia provided that there should be no direct recruitment of constables.
Appointments should first be made as Special Police Officers.
The minimum period for which a person had to serve before becoming eligible for absorption as constable was reduced from one year to six months and the absorption had to be made in accordance with "seniority and suitability".
It was further provided that even those Special Police Officers who had not been apointed in accordance with the recruitment standing order but had completed six months' service "can be absorbed as constables after giving the above relaxation provided their work and conduct have been assessed as satisfactory."
5.
Mr. DS Brar, learned counsel for the petitioners, has contended that in accordance with the provisions of the Standing Order, the competent authority has to consider the claims of the various SPOs for appointment as Constables in order of their seniority.
Persons juniors to the petitioners having been already appointed, the guarantee enshrined in Article 16 of the Constitution has been violated inasmuch as the claims of the petitioners have not been considered.
Mr. DS Dhillon, learned counsel for the respondents submits that the claims of the petitioners for appointment as constables shall be considered by their respective District Superintendents in accordance with the provisions of the Standing Orders.
6.
In view of the fair stand taken by the counsel for the respondents, the writ petition is disposed of with the direction that the respective District Superintendents of Police shall consider the claims of the petitioners for absorption as constables with effect from the date/s the person/s junior to them were appointed.
In case, the petitioners are found suitable, orders of their appointment shall be issued.
The consequential reliefs relating to the fixation of pay and payment of arrears of salary, shall follow.
The needful shall be done within six months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.