SP Kurdukar, CJ.
- This bench of writ petition raises a common question relating to interpretation of cut off date prescribed in the advertisement, dated January 23, 1995, Annexure P.1.
2.
In Civil Writ Petition No. 2252, we issued notice of motion returnable on February 17, 1995.
The matter stood adjourned from time to time to enable the respondents to file the written statement.
In this writ petition, the University Grants Commission is also impleaded as second respondent through its Secretary.
As per the office report, the University Grants Commission has been served, but none appears for the second respondent.
In some of the connected writ petitions, notices of motion were also issued, but in some they were not issued to avoid delay.
3.
For the purpose of this judgment, we may refer to the averments contained in Civil Writ Petition No 2252 of 1995.
4.
The Haryana Public Service Commission, Chandigarh, vide Advertisement No. 6, Annexure P-1, invited applications for 200 temporary posts of Lecturers (College Cadre) in various subjects in the Haryana Education Service (Group B) as detailed in the said advertisement.
It is not necessary to give the break-up of these 200 temporary posts.
5.
The first petitioner, Sadhana Chaudhary, passed her MA Music (Vocal) Examination from the Panjab University in the year 1988-90 and thereafter joined MPhil.
course in the same University for the session 1991-92.
The first petitioner submitted her thesis on January 25, 1993.
Vive voce test was held some time in November, 1993, and consequently, she was declared successful and the degree of M Phil., Annexure P-2, was awarded to her on December 14, 1993.
It has been averred in the petition that the first semester examination for M Phil was held in May, 1992 and the result of the first semester examination was declared on February, 16, 1993 and it was only thereafter that the first petitioner became qualified to take her viva voce test in November, 1993.
It is pleaded that the delay in appearing for the viva voce test and consequential late awarding of the degree is because of the delay on the part of the Panjab University and consequently, there was further delay in declaring the result of the first semester examination.
6.
The second petitioner Arti Ahluwalia passed her MA Music (Vocal) from the Panjab University in 1989-91 in first division.
The second petitioner thereafter took admission in M Phil.
course of the Panjab University for the session 1991-92.
This petitioner had even submitted her thesis on October 7, 1992.
However, viva voce test was held in December, 1993.
She was declared successful and consequently the M Phil.
decree.
Annexue P/3, was awarded to her on December 14, 1993.
It is pleaded by this petitioner that there was delay in completing the Course on the part of respondent No. 6 because the result of the first semester examination which was held by the University in May, 1992, was declared on February 16, 1993.
7.
From the various petitions before us, it appears that some of the students felt that they were not eligible in term of the eligiblity test prescribed in paragraph 5 of Annexure P/1 and, therefore, they did not apply for these posts.
Some of the candidates it appears, did apply, taking risk of eligibility test.
The only question that needs to be considered in all these writ petitions is as to whether the eligibility test in paragraph 5 prescribed by the Haryana Public Service Commission, in Annexure P/1, is discriminatory, arbitrary or otherwise.
Paragraph 5 reads as under :-  Eligibility Test.
- Candidates besides fulfilling the above essential qualifications against serial Number 1 to 4 in the respective subjects should have cleared the eligibility test for Lecturers conducted by the University Grants Commission, Council of Scientific and Industrial Research or similar test accredited by the University Grants Commission.
This condition will, however, not apply to the following categories of candidates :-  (a) All candidates who have already been awarded Ph.
D. degree.
(b) Those who have been awarded MPhil.
degree upto 31st December, 1992.
(c) Those who have submitted their PhD thesis upto 31st December, 1993.
(d) All candidates who have passed the University Grants Commission, Council of Scientific and Industrial Research or Junior Research Fellowship Examination".
(Emphasis supplied) It is not necessary for us to scrutinise the applications of the various petitioners as to whether they fulfil the essential qualifications prescribed in paragraphs 1 to 4 of Annexure P/1.
It is for the Haryana Public Service Commission to verify the various applications received from the candidates to these 200 temporary posts.
We leave this issue to be scrutinised by the Haryana Public Service Commission.
8, The main challenge in these writ petitions relates to the eligibility test.
Mr. Mittal, the learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioners urged that there is no rational basis whatsoever incarnating out an exception in terms of paragraphs 5(b) and (c).
Counsel urged that the advertisement was issued sometime in January, 1995, and between December 31, 1992 and December 31, 1994, many candidates might have obtained either M Phil.
degrees or PhD degrees or submitted their Ph.
D. thesis.
The learned counsel urged that the prescription of clearing the eligibility test to be conducted by the University Grants Commission, Council of Scientific and Industrial Research or similar test accredited by the University Grants Commission in respect of the candidates who have obtained their M Phil Decrees after December 31, 1992 or have submitted their PhD thesis after December 31, 1993, is arbitrary and has no nexus with the object sought to be achieved.
He also urged that there is no rationale behind prescribing two cut off dates, ie, December 31, 1992 in respect of the MPhil.
and December 31, 1993, in respect of submission of the PhD thesis.
He, therefore, urged that the prescription of the above two cut off dates is totally artificial, discriminatory and without any ratinale behind it.
He thus urged that the clearing of the eligibility test for the candidates who have obtained the M Phil.
degrees after December, 31, 1992 of the submission of the thesis for PhD degree after December 31, 1993, be extended till December 31, 1994.
This submission is based on the fact that the advertisement, Annexure P/1 was issued on January 23, 1995.
9.
Mr. Kamal Sharma, the leaned Addl.
AG Haryana, appearing for respondents Nos. 3 and 5, however, urged that they have to follow the directions issued by the University Grants Commission.
According to Mr. Sharma, it is the University Grants Commission which has not only prescribed the requisite qualifications for the recruitment of the temporary posts of the Lecturers but also prescribed the eligibility test.
According to Mr. Sharma, respondents No. 3 and 5 are bound by the instructions given by the University Grants Commission.
Mr. Sharma, therefore, urged that the eligibility test prescribed in paragraph 5 of the Annexure P/1 is perfectly valid and calls for no interference.
10.
Mr. Mehtani, counsel for the first respondent.
the Haryana Public Service Commission, urged that the Commission has to abide by the instructions received from the State of Haryana and as per the instructions, advertisement, Annexure P/1, is issued.
Mr. Mehtani, therefore, urged that the advertisement, Annexure P/1, suffers from no illegality and calls for no interference.
11.
The University Grants Commission, the second respondent, has been served, but nobody is present to represent the said respondent.
Rest of the respondents are served, but they have made no submission before us.
12.
Having considered the rival contentions in detail, we are of the opinion that the prescription of cut off dates in respect of the M Phil.
degrees and the submission of the PhD thesis in paragraph 5 of the advertisement, Annexure P/1, has neither any basis nor it has got any nexus with the object sought to be achieved.
As stated earlier, the advertisement in question, Annexure P/1, was issued on January 23, 1995, whereas the dates prescribed in Annexure P/1 in paragraph 5 were much earlier and such prescription overlooks the eligible candidates who had acquired M Phil.
degrees or submitted the PhD thesis after respective cut off dates.
The cut off dates so prescribed in paragraph 5 of Annexure P/1, in our opinion, are totally unjust and based on no rationale.
The result of such cut off dates is that the candidates who obtained MPhil.
degrees after December 31, 1992, or submitted the thesis after December 31, 1993, are required to undergo eligibility test to be conducted by the University Grants Commission, Council of Scientific and Industrial Research or similar test accredited by the University Grants Commission.
This, in our opinion, amounts to creation of an artificial class amongst the eligible candidates though similarly situated, ie., having obtained M Phil.
degrees after December 31, 1992,or having submitted Ph.
D. thesis after December 31, 1993, respectively.
The cut off dates, ie., December 31, 1992 for M Phil.
degree and December 31, 1993, in case of submission of Ph.
D. thesis, are far easier to the date of the advertisement, Annexure P/1 which was issued on January 23, 1995.
13.
There is no justification either in the affidavit filed by the State of Haryana or on behalf the Haryana Public Service Commission.
The learned counsel appearing for respondents Nos. 1 and 3 also could not explain and give any satisfactory justification which would be acceptged as a valid one.
As stated earlier, the objection is very limited relating to such of the candidates who have obtained the Decrees after December 31, 1992, or submitted PhD thesis after December 31, 1993, yet they are required to appear for the eligibility test for Lecturers, to be conducted by the University Grants Commission, Council of Scientific and Industrial Research of similar test accredited by the University Grants Commission.
In our opinion, the candidates who have applied or are applying for the Lecturers' posts pursuant to Annexure P/1 and if they have obtained M Phil.
degrees or submitted PhD thesis before December 31, 1994, ie.
prior to the date of the publication of advertisement, Annexure P/1, ie., January 23, 1995, it would not be necessary for them to appear in the said eligibility test.
Our interpretation would be more consistent with the exceptions carved out in paragraph 5(a) to (d) and this would not amount to any discrimination.
14.
In view of our aforesaid discussion, it would be now necessary to issue directions to respondent Nos. 1 and 3 to issue the corrigendum extending the dates in paragraphs 5(b) and (c) of Annexure P/1, upto December 31, 1994.
Corrigendum to be issued expeditiously and not later than one month.
If any applications are received during this period on the basis of eligibility test that has been prescribed, will be processed and such of the candidates who possess M Phil.
degrees upto December, 1994, or have submitted their PhD thesis up to December, 31, 1994, will not be required to appear for the eligibility test to be conducted by the University Grants Commission, Council of Scientific and Industrial Research or similar test accredited by the University Grants Commission.
15.
Respondent Nos. 1 and 3 to ensure that as and when any such advertisement in issued, they will bear in mind that the eligibility dates be not far off from the date of advertisement.
16.
In the result, the writ petition succeeds and is allow in terms of the above direction.
Annexure P-1, prescribing two cut off dates in paragraph 5(b) and (c) and a cut-off date in Annexure P-7 stand substituted as indicated above.
In the circumstances, there will be no order as to costs.
Dasti order.
Petition allowed.