GS Singhvi, J - Termination of the service of the petitioner brought about vide Annexure P-7 dated 31101994 issued by the Senior Medical Officer, Dhuri, on the basis of the verbal order of the Civil Surgeon, Sangrur, is under challenge in this petition.
Rejection of the prayer of the petitioner for reinstatement vide Annexure P-9 is also under challenge.
The petitioner's prayer is for quashing of Annexures P-7 and P-9 and for her reinstatement and regularisation of service on the post of Water Carrier/Trained Dai in accordance with the Government policy contained in circular (Annexure P.6).
2.
The petitioner, who possesses certificate of registration as a trained Dai issued by the Punjab Nurses Registration Council (Annexure P-1), was appointed as a Water Carrier at Women Hospital, Dhuri, with effect from 17.5.1971.
Initially, her appointment was for six months but later on she was continued without any interrruption.
She was paid wages fixed by the Deputy Commissioner.
During the course of her employment, the petitioner discharged duties as a Dai as would appear from the documents (Annexures P-3 and P-4).
On 441988, the petitioner made an application to the Civil Surgeon for being appointed as a trained Dai and her case was recommended by the Senior Medical Officer, Dhuri, but the respondents did not take any step for appointing the petitioner as trained Dai against the available vacant posts.
After about 23 years and five months of service, respondent No. 5 issued the impugned letter (Annexure P-7) terminating the service of the petitioner in the garb of relieving her from duty.
The representation made by the petitioner as well as the notice for demand for justice sent by her counsel failed to yield any favourable result as respondent No. 4 has rejected her claim for reinstatement vide Annexure P-9 dated 221995.
3.
The petitioner has challenged the termination of her service on the ground of arbitrariness and violation of principles of natural justice.
She has also raised a plea of mala fides by alleging that after the termination of her service, one Smt. Santosh Rani wife of Bittu, who is working as Jamadar in the Civil Hospital, Dhuri, has been appointed in her place.
4.
In their joint reply, the respondents have pleaded that the petitioner was appointed as a part time employee and she was paid wages at the rate fixed by the Deputy Commissioner.
According to the respondents, petitioner's designation was erroneously mentioned as trained Dai and in fact she never worked as trained Dai in the Civil Hospital, Dhuri.
According to the respondents' service of the petitioner had been terminated as the same was no longer required and such action was taken by them in order to save wages.
5.
A careful perusal of the reply filed by the respondents shows that they have not denied the petitioner's assertion regarding the total period of her service.
It is, therefore, proved that the petitioner had been in the service of the respondents for 23 years and over 5 months before being removed vide Annexure P-7.
The respondents have not explained as to under what provision of law, they had continued an employee on part time basis for more than 23 years and five months.
In the absence of such explanation, it is reasonable to conclude that the respondents have exploited the petitioner by keeping her a part-time employee for a period which is equivalent to almost 2/3rd of ordinary service career of a Government servant.
Apart from that no cogent reason has been assigned by the respondents for dispensing with the service of the petitioner.
In Annexure P-9, it has been stated that last order sanctioning the appointment of persons like the petitioner was given upto 2821994 and, therefore, her service had been terminated.
However, this reason is clearly falsified from the office order dated 2351994 issued by the Civil Surgeon himself sanctioning appointment of the petitioner and three others upto 2821995.
When the appointment of the petitioner had already been sanctioned upto 2821995, there could be no justification to terminate her service w.e.f.
31101994.
This fortifies the petitioner's plea that her service has been dispensed with for extraneous considerations and we have no hesitation to hold that the action of respondent Nos. 4 and 5 is patently arbitrary and malicious.
6.
Claim of the petitioner for regularisation of service and also for appointment as trained Dai is quite justified.
In Annexure P-3, issued as early as in 1983, the petitioner has been described as trained Dai.
This shows that although the petitioner was appointed as Water Carrier, she was in fact asked to discharge the duties as trained Dai.
In his recommendation made on the application of the petitioner for appointment as Dai, the Senior Medical Officer has recorded that the petitioner has been working in the institution for last 15 years and her work and conduct is satisfactory.
The fact that the petitioner is a qualified trained Dai has also not been denied and further that vacant post of trained Dai is available has also not been controverted.
Keeping a person as part-timer for 23 years and 5 months and ignoring his case for regularisation cannot in any manner be justified particularly when regular posts of Water Carrier and trained Dai have become available.
In our opinion, the present one is a fit case in which the petitioner deserves to be regularised in service and appointed a Dai/Water Carrier against the available vacant post.
We are further of the opinion that she deserves to be compensated for the harassment caused to her due to wholly arbitrary and mala fide termination of service.
7.
We, therefore, allow the writ petition.
Orders (Annexures P-7 and P-9) are quashed with a direction to the respondents to reinstate the petitioner in service and they are also directed to regularise her service against the available vacant post of Water Carrier/Dai within four months of the submission of the certified copy of this order.
The petitioner shall also get compensation amounting to Rs. 5,000/- in the form of costs.
This amount shall be recoverable by the Government from the officer under whose directions service of the petitioner was terminated vide Annexure P-7.