GS Singhvi, J - In response to the notice issued by the Maharshi Dayanand University, Rohtak, for admission to MBBS/BDS courses for Medical Colleges and Dental Colleges, petitioner Rachna Arora submitted her application for admission claiming benefit of reservation in the category of dependents of ex-servicemen.
She passed the written test by securing 581 marks.
The petitioner was called for interview but was not given admission though the candidates having secured lesser marks, including respondent No2, were admitted to the MBBS course.
The only ground given by the respondent-University for ignoring the candidature of the petitioner against reserved seat is that in the certificate issued by the Zila Sainik Board, Karnal, priority number of the petitioner has not been indicated.
The petitioner says that her father was in receipt of disability pension and his disability was attributable to military services and, therefore, she ought to have been admitted to the Course in preference to the respondent No. 2 who secured only 509 marks as against 581 marks of the petitioner.
Respondent No. 1 has opposed the prayer of the petitioner on the ground that the petitioner had not indicated her priority number while submitting the application form and had claimed herself only to be a ward of the ex-serviceman and, therefore, she is not entitled to be admitted in the MBBS course.
Respondent No. 1 has pleaded that Annexure 1 does not contain any indication that disability of the petitioner's father was attributable to Army services and as per letter Annexure R-2 dated 1101974 issued by the ASC Records (MT), Aurangabad, father of the petitioner was invalidated out of service on account of "Chronic Anxiety Neurosis" which cannot be treated as attributable to the military service.
2.
Respondent No. 2 has not filed any reply to the writ petition.
3.
In her replication, the petitioner has stated that at the time of interview held on 15.9.1994, she was directed to produce certificate of 11th Class and her father's disability certificate and this was complied with vide letter Annexure P-6 written by her father.
4.
Argument of Shri Malik, learned counsel for the petitioner, is that the petitioner, who is admittedly more meritorious than the respondent No. 2, had a right to be admitted to the course and denial of admission to her is vitiated by arbitrariness and unfairness in the action of the respondent- University.
Shri Malik argued that disability pension is given to only those ex-servicemen, whose disability is attributable to the military services and, therefore, the very fact that father of the petitioner has been receiving disability pension is a conclusive proof of his having been boarded out from military services due to disability attributable to the military service and, therefore, the respondent-University was not justified in denying admission to the petitioner.
He further argued that the petitioner had furnished the certificate indicating priority number much before the last date fixed for admission and, therefore, the respondent-University was not justified in ignoring her claim.
5.
Shri Vikrant Sharma, learned counsel for the respondent-University, on the other hand argued that the petitioner had not indicated her priority number in the form prescribed by the University and, therefore, her candidature could not be considered against the priority No. 4.
Shri Sharma argued that submission of the form Annexure P-4 and the document Annexure P-5 at a later stage could not entitle the petitioner to claim benefit of reservation amongst the wards of the disabled ex-servicemen against priority No. 4.
6.
Perusal of the Prospectus issued by the responder-University for admission to MBBS/BDS courses in the medical colleges situated in the State of Haryana shows that on being authorised by the State Government, the University conducted the examination for admission to the said courses.
Chapter II of this Prospectus contains scheme of the examination and Chapter IV deals with number of seats, reservation of seats and its distribution and duration of course.
Relevant extract of Chapter IV reads as under :-  CHAPTER -IV No. of seats, reservation of seats and its distribution and duration of course.
MBBS Course Medical College, Rohtak (i) No. of seats : 115 seats (98 to be filed by the University and 17 seats (15%) by the CBSE (ii) Distribution of seats : Reserved : 49 seats 
Open Merit : 49 seats (iii) Reservation of seats : Out of 98 seats to be filled up by the University (A) Reserved Seats Categories No of seats (a) Nominee of the Govt. of India 2 (b) Schedule Castes/Tribes (20%) : 19 (c) Socially - Educationally - Economically Weaker Sections of Society other than the SC/ST and Backward Class Candidates 9 (At least 3 out of these seats will be for girl candidates) (d) Physically Handicapped (1%) (Children having permanent disability of not less than 40% provided the candidate is otherwise fit for admission to MBBS) : 1 (The selected candidates will have to appear before the Medical Board for assessment whether they are fit to carry out the duties despite being Handicapped).
(e) Backward Class Candidates 10% : 10 (f) i) Children of deceased or disabled J.C. Os.
and other ranks in Defence Services (if there are no such cases, children of ex-servicemen) 2 (ii) Children of deceased or disabled JCOs.
and other ranks in Para Military Forces (if there are no such cases.
Children of ex-personnel of Para Military Forces) 2 (iii) Children of deceased or disabled officers in defence Services (if there are no such cases, children of ex-servicemen.)
1 (iv) Children of deceased or disabled officers in Para Military Forces, (if there are no such cases, Children of ex-personnel of Para Military Forces 1 (g) Children/Grand children of Freedom Fighters including INA personnel belonging to Haryana.
2Maharaja Agarsen Institute of Medical Research and Education, Agroha (Hisar) (i) No. of seats : 35 seats (ii) Distribution of seats : Reserved : 17 Seats  Open : 18 Seats (iii) Reservation of seats : Out of 35 Seats to be filled by the University, the distribution of 17 reserved seats is as under : (A) Reserved seats Category No. of seats (a) Nominee of Govt. of India : 1 (b) SC/ST Candidates : 7 (c) Socially-Economically-Educationally weaker section of Society other than SC/ST and BC candidates : 2 (Atleast one about of these Seats will be for girl Candidates) (d) Backward Class candidates : 4 (e) Children/Grand children of freedom fighters including INA Personnel belonging to Haryana.
: 1 (f) (i) Children of deceased or disabled officers in Defence Services (if there are no such cases, children of ex-servicemen).
1 (ii) Children of deceased or disabled JCO's and other ranks (if there are no such cases, children of ex-servicemen).
1B.D.S.
Course Dental College, Rohtak (i) No. of Seats : 20 seats (17 seats to be filled by University and 3 seats (15%) by C.B.S.E.
New Delhi on All India basis).
(ii) Distribution of seats : Reserved Open : (iii) Reservation of seats : Out of 17 seats to be filled by the University (A) Reserved Seats :<T< TD>  Category No. of Seats (a) Nominee of the Govt. of India : 1 (b) Scheduled Castes/Tribes : 3 (c) Backward Class candidates : 2 Note : The admission against the above seats will be made on provisional basis subject to approval of the Dental Council of India, New Delhi.
DAV Centenary Dental College, Yamunanagar Total Number of seats : 40 Distribution of seats : Free Seats : 20 SC/ST : 4 (20%) BC : 2 (10%) Children of ex-servicemen : 1 Open : 13 Payment Seats : 20 SC/ST : 4 (20%) BC : 2 (10%) Children of ex-servicemen : 1 N.R.I.
: 2 Open : 11 Note : The above distribution of seats can be increased and/or decreased at the discretion of the University; total number of seats will, however, remain the same at 40.
Note :  1.
The priority for filling up of seats under category (f) in Medical College, Rohtak, and MAIMRE, Agroha and two seats for ex-servicemen in DAV Centenary Dental College, Yamuna Nagar will be in following order :-  Priority (i) Killed in action : 1 (ii) disabled in action and boarded out from the service.
: 2 (iii) died while in service and death attributable to service : 3 (iv) disabled in service and boarded out with disability attributable to service.
: 4 (v) Gallantary award/other award winners.
: 5 Within the category under (v) above, priority will be given in following order :-  (a) Param Vir Chakra (b) Ashok Chakra (c) Sarvottam Yudh Seva Medal (d) Mahavir Chakra (e) Kirti Chakra (f) Uttam Yudh Seva Medal (g) Vir Chakra (h) Shourya Chakra (i) Yudh Seva Medal (j) Sena/Navsena/Vayusena Medal (k) Mention in despatches.
(vi) Other Ex-servicemen/Ex-para Military personnel."
Chapter-IV contains special instructions/information.
Para 8(d) of this Chapter specified the certificates pertaining to special reservations; Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes (Appendix-f); Backward Classes (Appendix- G); Socially, Educationally, Economically Weaker Sections of Society (Appendix-H-I and H-II); Physically Handicapped (Appendix-I); Children of deceases/disabled/Ex-servicemen/Ex-para Military personnel JCO's and other ranks, officers rank (Appendix-J) and children of freedom fighters including INA personnel belonging to the Haryana State (Appendix-K) etc. Appendix-J contains the pro forma of certificates to be submitted by the children of deceased/disabled/discharged Military/Para Military Forces personnel, Ex- servicemen - Ex-personnels of Para Military Forces.
This certificate is to be issued by the Zila Sainik Board.
7.
Perusal of the extract of Chapter-IV shows that as many as 49 reserved seats which were to be filled by the Medical College, Rohtak, were distributed amongst the nominee of the Government of India, Scheduled Castes/Tribes, Socially-Educationally-Economically Weaker Sections of Society, Physically handicapped, Backward class candidates and the children of deceased or disabled JCO's and other ranks of Defence Services Similar reservation has been made in the seats to be filled at Maharaja Agarsen Institute of Medical Research and Education, Agroha.
Note given below the enumeration of seats for various courses indicates the priority for filling of the seats under category (f).
As per this priority list, the wards of those killed in action are placed at No. 1, wards of those disabled in action and boarded out from the service are placed at No. 2, wards of those who died while in service and death is attributable to service are placed at No. 3, wards of those disabled in service and boarded out with disability attributable to service are placed at No. 4, gallantary award and other award winners are placed at No. 5 and in category (vi) are other Ex-servicemen/Ex-para military personnel.
The form issued by the University requires a candidate to mention as to whether he/she belongs to any of the reserved categories and if so, to which he/she belongs.
Such candidate is also required to indicate the name(s) of the reserved category(ies) in order of preference.
The petitioner gave out that she belongs to reserved category being a ward of Ex-serviceman.
In the certificate (Annexure P-1) issued by the Zila Sainik Board, Karnal, it has been clearly indicated that the petitioner is a ward of Ex-serviceman and she is entitled to the benefit of reservation of seats.
In para 4 of the certificate, it has been indicated that father of the petitioner was discharged on medical ground.
In para 5, he has been shown to have been disabled during service and his disability has been shown as 40%.
In para 6, it has been indicated that he was boarded out as belonging to category 'EEE'.
Annexure P-4 is a copy of the certificate Annexure P-1 which further gives indication that pension is given to those individuals whose disability is attributable to the military service.
Otherwise no disability pension is given.
Annexure P-5 is the order for grant of disability pension.
From this record, it is more than evident that the petitioner was entitled to the benefit of reservation as a ward of Ex-serviceman who was disabled during the military service and was boarded out from service due to disability and he was being paid disability pension on the date of submission of application by the petitioner for admission to the MBBS course.
8.
In my opinion, the material placed on record by the petitioner sufficiently brought out the fact that she was entitled to reservation in priority 4 amongst the wards of disabled/discharged military/para military forces personnel.
The certificate produced by the petitioner was issued by the Zila Sainik Board and though priority number was not indicated in the certificate (Annexure P-1), the said certificate clearly bore out the fact that father of the petitioner was boarded out from service on medical ground and he had suffered disability to the extent of 40% during the military service.
In the face of this document, the University was not at all justified in ignoring the case of the petitioner for admission to the MBBS course even though she was secured 581 marks i.e. 72 marks more than the respondent No. 2.
In my view, the denial of admission to the petitioner in MBBS course is patentl arbitrary and, therefore, the University's action is contrary to Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
9.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is allowed.
Action of respondent No. 1 in not giving admission to the petitioner in the MBBS is declared illegal and a mandamus is issued to respondent No. 1 to admit the petitioner in the said course.
If for that purpose, it becomes necessary, the admission of respondent No. 2 should be cancelled because she is far less meritorious than the petitioner.
This action be taken by the University within one month of the submission of certified copy of this order.
Parties are left to bear there own costs.