GS Singhvi, J - We have heard learned counsel for the petitioner as also for respondent No. 1.
2.
The petitioner was admitted to the course of Diploma in Homoepathic Medicine and Surgery in the year 1992 at Homoeopathic Medical College, Abohar.
This course is of four years' duration.
After the petitioner had completed the course of study of first professional, she was compelled to go to Tarn Taran looking to her family conditions.
The Principal of the College at Tarn Taran did not raise any objection to the grant of permission to the petitioner to appear in the examination and it is given out that the petitioner appeared in the annual examination from the College at Tarn Taran.
However, migration to the College at Tarn Taran has been disallowed on account of the demand made by the Homoeopathic Medical College, Abohar which has called upon the petitioner to deposit the full fee for the second and third Professionals for getting No Objection Certificate for migration.
3.
Petitioner's contention is that in terms of Regulation 7 of the Punjab Homoepathic Practitioners Regulations, 1974, the college from which a student seeks migration is entitled to charge the tuition fee for the month in which the migration is sanctioned by the Council and in that event the College to which the student migrates is not required to charge fee from him/her for that month.
Her plea is that there is no provision in the Homoepathic Medicines Act and the Regulations framed thereunder requiring a candidate to deposit fee for the entire period of the course in case a candidate seeks migration from one College to another.
4.
Learned counsel appearing for respondent No. 1 could not point out any provision of law which authorised the College from where a student seeks migration, to charge fee for the entire course.
In fact, in Para 8 of reply filed on behalf of respondent No. 1, it has been mentioned that the college from which a student seeks migration is entitled to charge tuition fee for the month in which migration is sanctioned by the Council and not beyond that in accordance with Regulation 7(7) of the Punjab Homoopathic Practitioners Regulations, 1974.
5.
In the face of the provision contained in Regulation 7(7), action of respondent No. 2 in demanding fee for the second and third Professionals cannot but be treated as contrary to the statutory Regulations.
6.
Consequently, the Writ Petition is allowed.
Demand made by respondent No. 2 from the petitioner to deposit entire fee for second and third Professionals is declared illegal.
The petitioner is directed to deposit fee for month with respondent No. 2.
Respondent No. 2 is directed to issue College Leaving Certificate and No Objection Certificate within a period of two weeks of the deposit of fee by the petitioner.
Petition allowed.