SC Datta, J - The petitioner was enrolled as an Inspector of Border Security Force in the year 1986 when he was of the age of 21 years being a graduate and distinguished sportsman.
As per BSF Service Rules, 1969, the enrolled candidate is required to execute an agreement mentioning therein the service conditions.
In this connection, it will be relevant to notice the conditions of service, which are reproduced herein below :-  "Subject to the provisions of the Border Security Force Act and the Rules made thereunder, the period for which you are enrolled shall be ----------- years which may be extended by mutual agreement.
2.
If you absent without leave or desert, the total period of such absence shall not count towards the said period of years.
3.
On completion of the said period of -------------- years of service or further extension of tenure you will be entitled to claim your discharge and you will be discharged with all convenient speed, unless the country is engaged in hostilities or a state of emergency has been declared or the battalion to which you belong is more than 15% under strength.
4.
You are liable to be discharged during the first year of the service if you are not likely to become an efficient member of the Force.
5.
You will also be liable to be discharged if the Central Government decides to disband the Force or a portion of it."
2.
Pursuant thereto, the petitioner executed an agreement and was enrolled for three years as per Conditions of Service.
Petitioner states that during his service with the BSF he has brought good name and fame for the Department from home and abroad.
It has been alleged that he was kept busy all the times in sports activities and was not sent to any training resulting in denial of further promotion in service.
Accordingly, he submitted his resignation to the authority concerned on 10121994 for its acceptance, but is was declined on the ground of exigency of service and being an outstanding athlete of BSF athletic team.
According to the petitioner, the resignation is required to be dealt with under rule 19 of the Rules, which reads as under :-  "(3) The Central Government may refuse to permit an officer to resign : (a) if an emergency has been declared in the country either due to internal disturbances or external aggression; or (b) if considers it to be inexpedient so to do in the interests of the discipline of the Force; or  (c) if the Officer has specifically undertaken to serve for a specified period and such period has not expired.
(4).
The provisions of this rule, shall apply to and in relation to Subordinate Officers and Enrolled persons as they apply to and in relation to any of the officers of the Force and the powers vested in the Central Government under sub-rules (1) and (2) shall be exercised in the case of a Subordinate Officer by a Deputy Inspector General and in the case of an Enrolled person by a Commandant."
3.
He submits that none of the provisions of this rule is applicable in his case inasmuch as no emergency is declared in the country and the interest of discipline of the Force would not suffer in the event of acceptance of his resignation because he had already completed three years' tenure with BSF as per mutual agreement arrived at between the parties.
He contends that refusal of acceptance of his resignation is, therefore, not in accordance with the rules and as such, is illegal and so the order of rejection of his request for acceptance of resignation deserves to be quashed.
4.
According to the respondents, the competent authority did not consider it to be expedient to accept the resignation of the petitioner in the interest of the discipline of the Force.
It is, however, admitted that the petitioner's term of appointment, which was for three years only by virtue of an mutual agreement, had expired in 1989.
It is evident that the tenure of appointment of the petitioner has not been extended by mutual agreement as is required under the rules in force.
The petitioner was appointed in 1986 for a period of three years on the basis of a mutual agreement, but his term expired in 1989.
The petitioner continued to work as an Inspector.
Nevertheless, the fact remains that the term was never extended by the competent authority by and under a mutual agreement as is required under the rules.
Therefore, the competent authority reserved to itself the power to discharge or to terminate or to retire the petitioner any time, but at the same time does not allow the petitioner to resign as prayed for by him on account of personal difficulties.
This action on the part of the respondents can be regarded as arbitrary use of power.
It is apparent that the petitioner joined the service in the year 1986 at the age of 21 years.
It is undisputed that he has brought the name and fame for the Department at home and abroad.
It is noticed that the petitioner is unwilling to serve the Department for variety of reasons; one of the reasons being denial of promotion.
Presumably, he has attained the age of 29/30 years at the present moment and as such, it would not be desirable to compel an unwilling official to continue in service, especially in the field of sports.
For the aforesaid reasons, it seems that the rejection of resignation of the petitioner is wholly unwarranted and so cannot be sustained.
5.
In view of the above, we allow the writ petition, quash the order, annexure P-2, dated 15121994 and direct the respondents to accept the resignation of the petitioner from the present post and relieve him of his duties within one month from the receipt of copy of this order.
Petition allowed.