KA Swami, CJ - This writ appeal is preferred against the order dated 28th June, 1994 passed by the learned single Judge in WP No. 3067 of 1992.
2.
In the writ petition, the petitioner sought for quashing the order dated 3rd December, 1991 bearing RC No. 36178/D3/91 issued by the Director of School Education, Madras and further to direct respondents 1 to 4 to approve the appointment of the petitioner as a Secondary Grade Assistant Teacher made under the appointment order dated 1291986 by the 5th respondent and to pass such other orders as may be necessary.
3.
Learned single Judge has dismissed the writ petition holding that the vacancy to which the petitioner was appointed, was reserved for scheduled castes and scheduled tribes, that the procedure followed for appointing the petitioner was not in accordance with law, therefore the appointment was bad, hence the 4th respondent was justified in refusing to accord approval to the appointment of the petitioner made on 1291986 by the management of the private school.
4.
Having regard to the contentions urged in this appeal, the point that arises for consideration is as to whether the procedure followed by the Management for appointing the petitioner as a secondary grade school teacher is justified in law.
5.
As per the counter-affidavit filed by the Management, the vacancy in question in the secondary grade school teacher fell on 161986.
This vacancy was, according to the roster system, reserved for a candidate belonging to scheduled caste/scheduled tribe.
The Management of the School called for a list of candidates belonging to scheduled castes and scheduled tribes from the Employment Exchange.
It was informed that no candidate belonging to SC/ST and open category for appointment as secondary grade school teacher was available.
Thereafter, the Management requested the Employment Exchange to send a list of names of the candidates belonging to backward class category.
Accordingly, the Employment Exchange sent the list of candidates belonging to backward class and open category.
In the interview, no candidate belonging to backward class appeared.
However, the candidate belonging to open category appeared and the petitioner was selected and appointed on 1291986.
6.
As per the Tamil Nadu Recognised Private Schools (Regulation) Rules, 1974 (hereinafter referred to as the Rules), the appointment was required to be approved by the 4th respondent.
Accordingly, the Management sought for approval of the same.
The 4th respondent by the order impugned in the writ petition refused to accord approval on the ground that as the vacancy was reserved for scheduled castes and scheduled tribes, the same ought to have been filled up by a candidate belonging to SC/ST category and as such, the appointment was illegal and it would not be approved.
Learned single Judge has taken the same view.
7.
It may be pointed out here that the provisions contained in sub-rule 9(ii) of Rule 15 of the Rules have not been brought to the notice of the learned single Judge, nor it has been taken into consideration by the 4th respondent.
The said sub-rule reads thus :-  "9(i) The claims of the candidate belonging to Backward Classes, Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes shall also be considered for the remaining 32 per cent of unreserved vacancies which are filled on the basis of merit.
Where a candidate belonging to Backward Classes.
Scheduled Castes, or Scheduled Tribes is selected on the basis of merit in the said 32 percentage the number of percentage reserved for Backward Classes, Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, as the case may be, shall not in any way be affected.
(ii) If a qualified and suitable candidate belonging to any of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes or Backwards Classes is not available for selection for appointment in the turn allotted for them in the cycle, the turn so allotted to the Backward Classes shall not lapse and the number of candidates to be selected in that recruitment shall be reduced by the number of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes candidates not available for selection against the turn reserved for them; the unfilled vacancies reserved for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes shall be carried over to the next recruitment and selection for appointment to that post in the next recruitment shall be made first for the carried over turn and then the normal rotation shall be followed.
If qualified Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes candidates are not available, even then, the carried over turn shall lapse and the vacancy shall be filled by the next turn in the order of rotation."
Clause (i) of sub-rule 9 of Rule 15 of the Rules provides that even if the candidates belonging to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and Backward Classes are selected on merits in the merit quota, the number of percentage reserved for them should not in any way be affected.
In other words, if a candidate, belonging to Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe or Backward Class, is selected on merits, his selection shall not be counted against the quota reserved for them.
Clause (ii) of Sub-rule 9 of Rule 15 of the Rules, which is relevant for our purpose, very specifically provides that whenever a vacancy reserved for Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Backward Classes arises and no candidate belonging to Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes or Backward Classes as the case may be is available for selection for appointment, the vacancy allotted to the Backward Classes as per the roster, reserved for them, shall lapse.
However, the vacancy reserved for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes as per the roster will not lapse.
In the event of non-avalability of candidates belonging to that category, for selection and for appointment, such vacancy shall have to be carried forward to the next recruitment and to that extent, the number of vacancies to be filled up shall have to be reduced and in the next recruitment, the Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribes vacancy so carried forward shall have to be filled up first and if no qualified Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe candidate is available, then such carried over vacancy would lapse and it shall have to be filled up in the order of rotation of the roster by the candidate belonging to the category or clause as per the rotation.
In the instant case, the vacancy reserved for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes arose for the first time on 161986.
Therefore in the event of non-availability of candidates for selection and appointment, belonging to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, the vacancy ought to have been carried forward to the next recruitment and as such, it would not have been filled up.
Whereas, in the instant case, the vacancy was not carried forward, but the same was filled up by the appointment of the petitioner, who belongs to Open Category.
Consequently, it follows that the appointment of the petitioner made to the vacancy reserved for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes cannot be sustained.
As such, the 4th respondent is justified in refusing to accord approval.
It is only a long time thereafter, a candidate belonging to Scheduled Caste has been appointed on 11.12.1993.
8.
It may be pointed out here that the petitioner worked as a secondary grade teacher from 1291986 to 20th February 1992.
He has not been paid the salary for the aforesaid period, because the approval was not accepted to the appointment of the petitioner.
It is submitted that as the appointment was illegal it is the Management which is responsible to pay the salary and not the State Government.
It may be pointed out that as far as the petitioner is concerned, he is not at fault.
He was appointed as a secondary grade teacher and pursuant to the appointment he worked as a secondary grade teacher from 1291986 to 20.2.1992.
If the candidate belonging to SC and ST are available and appointed to the vacancy the State Government was required to pay the salary.
In the instant case, the services of the petitioner were availed.
The management has taken full advantage of his service.
The State Government or the concerned officers of the State Government ought to have immediately objected to the appointment of the petitioner as secondary grade teacher and informed the management that the appointment was illegal, as such, if the management were to avail the services of the petitioner, the liability to pay the salary would be on the management only.
Whereas the State Government or the concerned officers of the State Government did not either issue any direction or pass any orders in this regard till 20th February, 1992.
Therefore, it is not now open to the State Government to refuse to disburse the salary to the petitioner on the ground that the appointment of the petitioner was illegal.
Therefore, we are of the view that the State Government is also liable to release the grant equivalent to the salary and allowances etc. payable to the petitioner for the period from 1291986 to 20.1.1992.
By making such disbursement, the State Government is not put to any additional expenditure, because the petitioner has rendered service as secondary grade teacher which any other SC or ST candidate, if available for appointment, would have rendered.
Therefore, the contention of the learned Government Pleader cannot be sustained.
9.
For the reasons stated above, this writ appeal is disposed of in the following terms :  (i) The order passed by the learned single Judge under appeal is confirmed for the reasons stated by us and not for the reasons stated by him.
(ii) The 5th respondent shall within a month from today, submit the pay bills of the petitioner for the period from 1291986 to 20th February 1992.
(iii) On receipt of such bills, respondents 1 to 4 shall accord sanction to them and disburse the salary to the petitioner within a period of 4 weeks from the date of receipt of such pay bills.
The CMP is also disposed of.
No order as to costs.
Order accordingly.