Paritosh Kumar Mukherjee, J - This will petition was moved on behalf of Tapas Kumar Nandy and 57 others, who are working for gain as Lecturers under different Polytechnic Institutes of West Bengal praying for issue of necessary directions upon the respondents and each one of them to implement the AICTE recommended pay scales with effect from January 1, 1986 for the lecturers along with career advancement, namely (i) Senior Lecturers' scale of Rs. 3000-100-3500-125-5000/-, (ii) In the alternative Lecturers' Selection Grade Scale of Rs. 3700-125-4950-150-5700/- to the petitioners who have completed 8 years and 16 years of service respectively, as Lecturers on January 1, 1986 or thereafter, in the Govt. Polytechnic Institutions in West Bengal, irrespective of their qualifications in relaxation of the terms and conditions as laid down by the AICTE as has been done in granting and implementing the AICTE recommended pay scale to the Principals of Polytechnic Institutions in West Bengal with effect from 111986 as per Govt. order dated 15th June, 1991 being annexure `C' to the writ petition, irrespective of their qualifications, in relaxation of the terms and conditions as laid down by the AICTE in its recommendation letter dated 20th September, 1989.
2.
This writ petition has come up for hearing in the presence of the respondents and without any affidavit.
3.
Miss Samapti Chatterjee led by Mr. Malay Bose, learned advocates appearing for the petitioners, after placing the facts from the writ petition submitted that the actions of the respondents are not justified, as the petitioners made repeated representations on July 8, 1991 and December 6, 1991 to the Hon'ble Chief Minister, West Bengal, the Minister-in-Charge of Finance, Hon'ble Minister of State-in-Charge, Department of Technical Education and Training, Director of Technical Education, West Bengal and also to the Secretary, Department of Higher Education, West Bengal, praying, inter alia, to implement the pay scale recommended to the petitioner but could not obtain any favourable decision from the said authorities for which the present writ petition has been filed.
4.
Having heard the submissions of Miss Chatterjee led by Mr. Malay Bose for the petitioners and having considered the facts stated in the instant writ petition together with the recommendation submitted by A.I.T.C.E.
I am of the view that the petitioners should not be discriminated in payment of grant of pay-scale as recommended by AICTE communicated by the letter dated September 20, 1989 with retrospective effect from January 1, 1986.
5.
Accordingly, I allow the writ petition by directing the respondents and each of them to implement the recommendation of AICTE pay scales to the petitioners as the pay-scale paid to the Principals, Polytechnic Institutions in West Bengal with effect from 1186 as per the Government Order dated June 15, 1991 irrespective of the qualifications of the petitioners, in relaxation of the terms and conditions as laid down in the recommendation contained in the letter dated September 20, 1989.
6.
Such grant of pay-scale should be given as quickly as possible preferably within a period of 2 months from the date of communication of xerox copy of this dictated order.
7.
This order virtually disposes of the writ petition.
This writ petition is, thus disposed as above, without any order as to costs.
8.
The petitioner is directed to serve an extra copy of the writ petition along with the signed xerox copy of this dictated order on the concerned respondents.
Order accordingly.