Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner has a two-fold grievance.
Firstly she is aggrieved by the order dated October 1, 1991, by which respondent No. 5 was confirmed in the rank of Assistant Sub-Inspector, while the petitioner was merely placed on probation for a period of one year.
Secondly, the petitioner is aggrieved by the action of Respondent No. 4 in deputing Respondent No. 5 for the Upper School Course and ignoring her.
2.
In order to resolve this controversy, only a few admitted facts need to be noticed.
The petitioner was confirmed as Head Constable with effect from July 1, 1981.
She was promoted to the rank of Assistant Sub Inspector on October 22, 1982.
This promotion was made on purely ad hoc basis.
She was regularly promoted on September 17, 1986.
As against this, respondent No. 5 was confirmed as Head Constable four years after the petitioner with effect from July 1, 1985.
She was promoted as Assistant Sub Inspector on September 17, 1986.
On basis of these facts, the petitioner alleges, and it appears rightly, that she was senior to Respondent No. 5 and had a right to be considered for promotion as well as for deputation to the Upper School Course prior to her.
3.
The respondents contest this claim on the ground that Respondent No. 5 was "Confirmed in the rank of ASI earlier to the petitioner on the basis of her better service record."
It has been further averred that the petitioner had just average record of service and had not completed 5 years' service as ASI on 171991.
So she was not eligible for deputation to Upper School Course."
4.
The short question that arises for consideration is - Is the action of the respondents in placing the petitioner on probation while respondent No. 5 has been confirmed valid ?
5.
It is the admitted position that the petitioner was confirmed as Head Constable with effect from July 1, 1981.
It is also admitted that she has been continuously working as Assistant Sub Inspector since October 22, 1982, when she had been promoted on ad hoc basis.
She was appointed on regular basis with effect from September 17, 1986.
As against this, Respondent No. 5 has been confirmed as Head Constable on July 1, 1985 and was promoted as Assistant Sub Inspector on September 17, 1986.
Seniority in the rank of Head Constable and Assistant Sub Inspector is governed by the provisions of Rule 12.2(3).
According to this provision, the seniority is "reckoned in the first instance from the date of first appointment....Seniority shall, however, be finally settled by dates of confirmation...." Since the petitioner had been confirmed as Head Constable prior to Respondent No. 5, she was apparently senior to her in that rank.
Even if it is assumed that the petitioner and respondent No. 5 had been promoted to the rank of ASI on September 17, 1986, the petitioner had a right to be considered for confirmation as Assistant Sub Inspector alongwith the respondent.
She was over-looked and was merely placed on probation.
The explanation furnished in the written statement is that respondent No. 5 has a better record of service.
However, no details in support of this averment have been furnished.
It has not been shown that in fact the petitioner's record of service was inferior to that of respondent No. 5.
Even at the hearing today only a file containing the confidential reports of respondent No. 5 has been produced.
However, the reports of the petitioner have not been shown.
Still further, even the actual file on which the claim of the petitioner and Respondent No. 5 may have been considered has not been produced.
Faced with this situation, Mr. Dhillon has referred to the confidential report of Respondent No. 5 for the period from February 20, 1990 to March 31, 1991, in which the Superintendent of Police had graded her as `Very good'.
The reviewing authority, viz. the Deputy Inspector General of Police, Patiala Range had, however, graded the respondent as a `good ASI'.
This report bears no date.
It is, therefore, not clear as to whether or not this report was actually available at the time of the passing of the impugned order.
Taking the totality of circumstances into consideration, it does not appear to be possible to hold that the claim of the petitioner and respondent No. 5 was considered in accordance with the rules or that the petitioner was not found suitable for confirmation.
6.
Mr. Dhillon relies on the instructions issued by the Inspector General of Police vide letter dated May 22, 1964, by which the guilding principles governing the confirmation in various ranks have been laid down.
Firstly, in view of the principle enunciated in Sardul Singh v. State of Punjab, 1970 SLR 505, the Inspector General of Police has no jurisdiction to issue instructions supplemental to the rules.
However, even if it is assumed that he can do so, an officer can be confirmed after having put in four years of service if he has a good record and after five years in case the officer has an average record.
In the present case, the petitioner had admittedly been working as Assistant Sub Inspector since October 22, 1982.
She has thus completed almost 9 years of service when the impugned order was issued on October 1, 1991.
As against this, the respondent had not worked for five years.
7.
In view of the above, the impugned order in so far it relates to the petitioner and Respondent No. 5 cannot be sustained.
It is accordingly directed that their case shall be considered afresh in accordance with the rules.
8.
As for the deputation to the Upper School Course, it may be noticed that respondent No. 5 has already completed the course.
So far as the petitioner is concerned, she was also deputed for this course in pursuance to the order dated June 3, 1992 passed by GC Garg, J His Lordship had, however, directed that her result would only be declared if the writ petition succeeds.
9.
In view of the above, the writ petition is allowed.
The order dated October 1, 1991 (Annx.
P.1 with the Writ Petition ) is quashed in so far as it relates to the petitioner and Respondent No. 5.
The respondents are directed to reconsider the claim of the petitioner and Respondent No. 5 in accordance with the rules.
The petitioner's result of the Upper School Course shall be declared.
The above directions shall be carried out as expeditiously as possible and in any case within three months from the date of the receipt of a copy of this order.
In the circumstances of the case there will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.