VK Jhanji, J - In this petition, challenge is to order dated 11889 by which petitioner has been ordered to be compulsorily retired under Rule 5(vii) of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970.
2.
Vide order dated 8/9.9.1987, the petitioner when posted as Sectional Officer (Civil) Municipal Committee, Jaitu, was placed under suspension with immediate effect.
On 2891987 a charge-sheet was served on the petitioner.
The charges were that the petitioner had remained absent on 861987, 1261987, and 1761987 and thereafter with effect from 2461987 without any sanctioned leave and further it had been noticed by the then Administrator of Municipal Committee, Jaitu that 34,000 bricks which had been shown to be consumed by the petitioner towards construction of a road had actually not been used.
Further a bill was prepared by the petitioner for Rs. 17,430/- for the supply of stone metal but actually no supply was made on the spot.
Still further 4000 cubic feet filling of earth work had been got done by the petitioner in the Harijan Basti whereas there was no such provision in the estimate.
Petitioner gave a reply to the charge-sheet, denying all the charges.
The Director, Local Government appointed Shri SS Gill, Deputy Director, Local Government, Ferozepur, as Enquiry Officer.
On conclusion of enquiry, the enquiry report was submitted on the basis of which order dated 1181989 retiring the petitioner compulsorily from service was passed.
The order is being challenged on the ground that the enquiry is vitiated because the Enquiry Officer did not observe the principles of natural justice and the enquiry so conducted was in flagrant violation of mandatory provisions of the rules and principles of natural justice.
It is the allegation of the petitioner that enquiry has been conducted in utter disregard of the principles of natural justice.
He has alleged that the enquiry proceedings were concluded in about an hour or so in spite of the fact that the said date was not fixed for defence evidence nor for the statement of the petitioner.
The Enquiry Officer though told the petitioner that the next date would be intimated for defence evidence and statement of the petitioner, but no further proceedings took place after 17.5.1988 and without affording any opportunity to the petitioner the enquiry report was submitted.
The petitioner has further alleged that statement of one Sham Lal, Work Munshi, was recorded who was neither cited as witness nor summoned as witness by the department.
The Enquiry Officer who has been arrayed as respondent No. 4 in his written statement has admitted that enquiry was held in the afternoon of 17.5.1988 as in the forenoon an important meeting of the Executive Officers of Ferozepur Region was held at Kotkapura.
He has also admitted that RK Singla, Executive Officer, who was also the Presenting Officer in the enquiry was examined as witness and he produced various documents as existed in the record of the Municipal Committee.
He has further admitted that Sham Lal, Work Munshi, who was not listed as witness was called for giving evidence as his evidence was very crucial for finding out the discrepancies of stone metal as he has been keeping the record of this material being the Work Munshi.
It has been denied that the petitioner was not given any chance to cross-examine RK Singla, Executive Officer and Sham Lal, Work Munshi.
It has been averred that the petitioner gave his statement in defence in which he stated that his statement dated 21101987 addressed to the Director, Local Government, Punjab, be read as his defence.
In this very statement, petitioner closed his evidence.
It has been averred that allegation of the petitioner that he was not given adequate opportunity of hearing, is not correct.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that the enquiry against the petitioner was only an eye-wash and sheer formality as the Enquiry Officer was pre-determined to conclude the enquiry on 17.5.1988 itself.
Counsel also contended that if the record is summoned, it would show that the petitioner was not given opportunity to cross-examine the Store Munshi.
Counsel further contended that copies of the relevant/material documents including the report of the Administrator on the basis of which charge-sheet was served on the petitioner, were not supplied to the petitioner.
In answer to these submissions, learned counsel for the State has submitted that the enquiry was conducted in accordance with rules and procedure and no prejudice whatsoever has been caused to the petitioner by recording the statement of Work Munshi.
4.
In order to ascertain the truthfulness of the allegations of the petitioner that he was not given a chance to cross-examine the witnesses and the material documents were not supplied to him, the record of the Enquiry Officer was called for and on perusal of the same, I find that in noting dated 351988 it is recorded that enquiry would be held on 551988 at 11 am at Jaitu.
However, no proceedings were recorded on 551988.
The next noting is dated 1651988 wherein it is recorded that a telephonic message has been received from the Enquiry Officer that he would conduct the enquiry on 17.5.1988 at 11 am at Jaitu.
As admitted by the Enquiry Officer, enquiry was not held at 11 am on 17.5.1988 but was held in the afternoon when the Enquiry Officer came from Kotkapura.
It has also come on record that letter dated 30.4.1988 (Annexure P-4) was received by the petitioner from the Enquiry Officer whereby he was told that enquiry would be held on 551988 at 11 am in the office of Municipal Committee, Jaitu.
The endorsement on this letter shows that a copy of this letter was sent to the Executive Officer, Jaitu (Presenting Officer) with a request to appear on the place mentioned in the letter along with the record.
The second copy was sent to the Administrator, Municipal Committee, Jaitu, with a request to appear as witness in the enquiry.
Admittedly, the date of enquiry was postponed to 17.5.1988.
Record further shows that firstly the statement of RK Singla, Executive Officer, was recorded who produced and got exhibited various documents.
Immediately after his statement, the statement of petitioner appears to have been recorded.
There is no cross-examination of this witness.
Statement of Work Munshi, Sham Lal, has been recorded after recording of statement of the petitioner.
It is further revealed that after the Examination-in-Chief of RK Singla, the Enquiry Officer has recorded that opportunity was given to the petitioner to cross-examine this witness and some cross-examination appears to have been conducted, but after the examination-in-chief of Sham Lal, Work Munshi, it has not been recorded that any opportunity was given to the petitioner to cross-examine Sham Lal, Work Munshi.
It is hardly necessary to emphasize that a right to cross-examine the witness who has given evidence against the delinquent employee is a valuable right and if it appears that an effective exercise of right has been prevented by the Enquiry Officer by not giving to the delinquent employee an opportunity of cross-examination to which he is entitled, that inevitably would be that the enquiry has not been held in accordance with rules of natural justice.
5.
It is not acceptable that recording of statement of Work Munshi has not caused any prejudice to the petitioner.
The department had initially proposed to examine two witnesses namely, Executive Officer and the Administrator, Municipal Committee, Jaitu, in support of the charges as is clear from perusal of list of witnesses.
Copy of letter dated 30.4.1988 (Annexure P-4) which has already been referred to above has further revealed that the same was sent to the Administrator, Municipal Committee, Jaitu, with a request to appear as witness.
From the enquiry file, I find that Administrator was not examined at all and further Sham Lal, Work Munshi, who was not cited as witness was examined.
In the written statement, the Enquiry Officer has fairly admitted that the statement of this witness was very crucial.
Enquiry report also shows that this statement has been heavily relied upon by the Enquiry Officer in proving charges against the petitioner.
If the statement/evidence of this witness was crucial for proving charges against the petitioner, it was incumbent upon the department to cite him as witness and also to supply copies of the documents which were required to be produced and proved by the said witness.
Recording of statement of this witness has certainly caused prejudice to the case of the petitioner and principles of natural justice have been violated by adopting such a course by the Enquiry Officer.
Learned counsel for the respondents has not been able to explain the circumstances in which this departure had taken place.
It also deserves to be noticed that charges Nos. 3 and 4 are based on the report of Administrator who on inspection of the site found that 34,000 bricks which had been shown by the petitioner as consumed towards construction of a road have not been consumed and the stone metal was not used at the site.
The Administrator though was cited as witness but was not produced for the purpose of cross-examination to test the correctness of his report.
The Executive Officer who was examined, admittedly had no personal knowledge in regard to the allegations which had been levelled against the petitioner.
Record shows that the enquiry was to be held on 17.5.1988 at 11 am at Jaitu, but was held at 445 pm and concluded on that very day without giving adequate opportunity to the petitioner to meet the charges.
This conduct of the Enquiry Officer lends credence to the allegation of the petitioner that the Enquiry Officer was under pressure to conclude the enquiry on that very day.
"Any attempt to short-circuit the procedure based on considerations of natural justice must, we think, be discouraged if the rule of law has to prevail, and in dealing with the question of the liberty and livelihood of a citizen, considerations of expediency which are not permitted by law can have no relevance whatever.''
(AIR 1966 SC 282).
Thus, in the circumstances of this case, it is difficult to sustain the enquiry report and the order retiring the petitioner compulsorily from service.
For the reasons recorded above, the writ petition is allowed and order dated 1181989 (Annexure P-6) retiring the petitioner compulsorily from service is quashed.
However, it shall remain open to the respondents to hold a fresh enquiry against the petitioner, in case they intend to hold one and pass fresh order.
There shall be no order as to costs.