NK Sodhi, J - Bhakra-Beas Management Board - the first respondent herein (for short, the Board) - was constituted under Section 79(1) read with Section 80(6) of the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966.
A project colony was set up at Nangal Township for providing residential accommodation to the officers, staff and workmen engaged for the construction/maintenance and operation of Bhakra Dam, Power Houses, Nangal Dam and other appurtenant works.
The residential accommodation built at Nangal Township is primarily meant for officers, staff and workmen engaged in the administration, maintenance and operation of the aforesaid works.
It is claimed that there is shortage of accommodation even for the Board's staff and a large number of them are living in below status shelter/sub-shelter accommodation.
Some years back a few teachers employed in Punjab Government Schools and Industrial Training Institute at Nangal met the Chairman of the Board and pleaded that since they were serving as the officers and staff of the Board at Nangal, they should also be considered for allotment of the Board's residential accommodation in second priority.
On this representation, the Chairman observed as under :-  "If the teachers are serving our community certain percentage of house could be allotted to them."
The Chief Engineer, Bhakra Dam was accordingly requested to examine the matter and submit a proposal/recommendation for approval by the Chairman.
Information regarding total number of employees of educational institutions at Nangal who were eligible for allotment and number of houses in their authorised occupation was sought from the Chairman, House Allotment Committee.
It appears that after examining the matter a proposal was put up to the Chairman of the Board who agreed to provide accommodation to the teaching staff employed in the Government Schools including Industrial Training Institute at Nangal in relaxation of the office order dated June 7, 1982 subject to the following conditions :-  1.
The allotment is restricted to the total number of 174 houses presently in occupation of the teaching staff subject to their seniority vis-a-vis availability of accommodation.
2.
They will have separate seniority and will be treated in 2nd priority.
3.
All new allotments shall be restricted to shelter/sub-shelter accommodation and no improvements in the status of house with the existing teaching staff shall be allowed.
4.
All new cases will be scrutinised properly and all allotments shall be made with the specific approval of the Chief Engineer/Bhakra Dam."
As is clear from the aforesaid conditions, the allotment of residential accommodation to the staff/employees of the government schools including Industrial Training Institute was restricted to 174 houses which were then in the year 1983 occupied by them.
2.
Petitioners herein are teachers in different government schools at Nangal and the only grievance made by them in this petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution is that in spite of 174 houses having been reserved for allotment to teachers, very few have been allotted to them and this according to them is contrary to/in violation of the approval granted by the Chairman of the Board whereby those houses were reserved for teaching staff of the schools.
It is contended on their behalf that some of those houses have been allotted to schools and classes are being run there while others have been kept vacant for allotment to the employees of the Board who may be retiring on some future date and that some of them have been reserved for couple cases.
It is also alleged that the Board prepared seniority lists of teachers who are eligible for allotment of residential accommodation but those lists (Annexure P-3 with the petition collectively) contain the names of such teachers who are residing in the accommodation allotted to their spouses either by the Board or by the authorities of National Fertilizers Ltd - a government company.
What in fact is submitted is that total number of houses allotted to the teachers of government schools including Industrial Training Institute is far less than 174.
3.
Mr. Bawa appearing for the Board admitted that some houses have been kept vacant as they stand reserved for couple cases to be allotted to the employees of the Board on some future date on the retirement of their spouses.
It is also not in dispute that a few houses have been allotted to schools where classes are being run and the justification for this change in user is that the education institutions had no other accommodation with them.
It is, however, admitted that as per the policy decision (Annexure P-1 with the writ petition), a total of 174 houses stood allotted for the teachers and other staff working in various government schools including Industrial Training Institute at Nangal.
The preparation of seniority lists of the teachers (Annexure P3 with the petition) has also been admitted but it is stated that these lists contain only the names of the teachers and did not include the other staff working in the education institutions such as clerks, peons, chowkidars, malis, sweepers etc. who have also to be allotted accommodation within the quota of 174 houses.
4.
It is common case of the parties that a total of 174 houses stood reserved for allotment to the teaching and non-teaching staff of schools including Industrial Training Institute at Nangal.
It appears that as of date, less number of houses have been allotted to the staff of these institutions.
Without going into any disputed issues raised by the parties, I consider it appropriate and just to direct the respondent-Board to ensure that a total of 174 houses are allotted to the teaching and non-teaching staff of government schools including Industrial Training Institute at Nangal.
For this purpose, the Board should prepare the lists of all the eligible staff under different categories and make allotments to them as per their seniority as and when the accommodation is available and this process should continue till a total of 174 houses are allotted to them.
It is made clear that this quota of 174 houses will include teachers, clerks, peons and other staff of the institutions.
In case any accommodation is shared by any member of the staff on twin basis, the number of allottees may exceed 174 but the total number of houses to be allotted shall not exceed this number.
The Board is further directed not to keep any house/quarter vacant and allot the same to the eligible members of the staff for whom 174 houses have been reserved in terms of its policy decision.
Ordered accordingly.
There is no order as to costs.