B Kumar, J - This petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India seeks direction in the nature of mandamus requiring the opposite parties to consider the petitioner for regularisation after excluding certain adverse materials against him and a writ or direction in the nature of certiorari for quashing adverse material.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as an Assistant Engineer in the Public Works Department, Uttar Pradesh where he joined on 2nd February, 1973.
He continued to work as an ad hoc Assistant Engineer.
In May 1979 UP Regularisation of Ad hoc Appointments (on the posts within the Purview of the Public Service Commission) Rules, 1979 came into force.
The petitioner along with other Assistant Engineers, who had been working on ad hoc basis, were considered under these Rules and a list was issued on 23rd February, 1980 whereby 181 Assistant Engineers were regularised.
However the petitioner's name did not find place in the list.
According to the petitioner he has been arbitrarily not regularised.
One of the reasons given by him is that one entry made against him for the year 1978-79 was expunged in part by an order, passed by the Public Services Tribunal on 28.4.1992 while the other part of the entry was expunged by the Engineer-in-Chief on a representation, made by the petitioner by an order dated 5th June, 1992 but was considered in not regularisation.
3.
In the counter-affidavit, filed on behalf of the State, it was stated that after the initial consideration for regularisation the opposite parties again reviewed the cases of the persons who had not been regularised earlier on 25th of June, 1982.
In that selection also the petitioner was not found fit and was not selected for regularisation but his services were not terminated, because of an interim order passed in this case.
4.
The petitioner's case was considered for regularisation in June, 1982 and it does appear that at the time of consideration an adverse entry existed against him for the year 1978-79.
In this entry integrity of the petitioner had not been certified.
5.
Subsequently by an order passed in 1992 this part of the entry of the petitioner for the year 1978-79 was expunged by the Public Services Tribunal in a claim petition, filed by the petitioner.
Remaining part of the adverse entry awarded to him for this year was expunged by the Engineer-in-Chief by his order dated 5th June, 1992 on petitioner's representation.
6.
Adverse remarks were expunged.
Consequence would be that they would stand erased and wiped out.
It shall be assumed that they had never existed and ceased to be valid consideration for taking any decision based on the performance of the petitioner.
If any decision is arrived at resting on these remarks which have been expunged even if some other material was relied upon, the decision will stand vitiated as based on extraneous consideration.
7.
When the petitioner's case was considered for regularisation in June, 1982 this entry formed a part of the record having bean awarded to him for the period 1978-79 while as a result of the order of the Tribunal and the order of expunction, passed by the Engineer-in-Chief this entry could not have been so considered.
Consideration of this entry could have potentially affected the conclusions of the Committee about regularisation of the petitioner in 1982.
8.
In these circumstances the consideration of the petitioner for regularisation in 1982 stands vitiated by consideration of adverse material against him which material could not have been considered by the Committee.
The decision to the extent it relates to the petitioner, therefore, is not tenable and is, therefore, liable to be set aside.
9.
As a result we direct that the petitioner be considered for regularisation as on 25th June, 1982, considering the material, excluding the entry for the year 1978-79 which has since been expunged.
Petition is allowed accordingly.
There shall, however, be no orders as to costs.
Petition allowed.