GS Singhvi, J - The petitioner served the Indian Army from 2311969 to 2391972.
He was discharged from the Indian Army on medical grounds.
He was given medical category 'EEE' at the time of discharge from the service.
He was granted disability pension from 24.9.1972 to 2081974 as would appear from extract of the entries from the Pass Book (Annexure P-2).
After his disability pension was stopped, the petitioner is said to have made representation to the various authorities and he even served notices of demand for justice (Annexure P-3 and P-4) but without any success.
The petitioner has pleaded that stoppage of the disability pension, which was paid to him upto 2081974, is per se arbitrary and discriminatory.
The petitioner has relied on Regulations 173, 183 and 186 of the Pension Regulations and has pleaded that after having granted him the benefit of disability pension, the respondents could not have withheld the payment of the disability pension.
The petitioner has further pleaded that vide Annexure P-6, the benefit of the disability pension has been extended to the cases of those persons whose degree of disablement subsequently falls below 20 per cent and these instructions have been made applicable in respect of those who are in service on 111973 and in this manner a patent discrimination has been brought about amongst the ex-servicemen who are in receipt of disability pension as on 111973 and who became entitled to the grant of disability pension after 111973.
2.
Argument of Shri Sehgal, learned Counsel for the petitioner, is that the petitioner was discharged from the Military service on the ground of permanent disability and, therefore, it was not open to the respondents to deny the disability pension to the petitioner after 2081974.
He also submitted that the classification sought to be made between those who retired prior to 111973 but were in receipt of the disability pension and those who are discharged from service after 111973 and will thereafter receive the disability pension, is wholly arbitrary and discriminatory Shri Sehgal argued that when the Government has taken a decision to continue to grant the benefit of the disability pension to those whose disability is less than 20 per cent, such benefit cannot be restricted to a particular class of persons.
3.
No reply to the writ petition has been filed on behalf of the respondents and none has appeared to argue the case.
4.
From the documents which have been placed on record, it is clear that the petitioner was discharged from the military service on the ground of low medical category.
He was given medical category 'EEE' at the time of discharge from the service.
Annexure P-2 is conclusive proof of the fact that the petitioner was given disability pension.
This disability pension must have been given to the petitioner on fulfilment of the conditions enumerated in Regulations 173 of the Pension Regulations.
By virtue of order (Annexure P-5) the Government of India took a policy decision to extend the benefit of the disability pension to the Army personnel below the officer rank who were granted disability pension at one time but whose disability fell below 20 per cent at a later stage.
Annexure P-6 contains similar instructions regarding the grant of disability pension of those whose disability falls below 20 per cent.
However, the instructions contained in Annexure P6 have been made applicable only to those who were on the effective strength of the Army on 111973.
If the petitioner has been discharged from the service after 111973, he would have become entitled to the grant of disability pension notwithstanding the fact that his disability was subsequently reduced below 20 per cent.
Therefore, now it has to be seen whether the restricted application of the instructions contained in Annexure P-6 has got any rationality.
There can be no manner of doubt that the petitioner was in receipt of the disability pension as on 111973 and he continued to draw the disability pension upto 2081974.
Some of the Army personnel who were discharged from service after 111973 and who were given disability pension after 111973 were placed at par with the petitioner.
With reference to the object of giving the benefit of disability pension to those whose disability fell below 20 per cent, the petitioner and others who were discharged after 111973 constituted one class.
With reference to the object aforementioned, there could be no rationales of confining the benefit of the disability pension only to those who were discharged after 111973.
The entire object of extending the benefit of the disability pension even after the reduction of the degree of disability will be frustrated in the cases of the persons like the petitioner, who was actually in receipt of the disability pension on 111973 but whose disability fell below 20 per cent after 111973 are denied benefit of disability pension.
To me, fixation of the date as 111973 has absolutely no nexus with the object of granting the disability pension to those who were initially having the disability of 20 per cent or more but whose degree of disability reduced at a later point of time.
To this extent the provisions contained in Annexure P-6 are liable to be declared as unconstitutional.
5.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed.
The following expression in the order Annexure P-6 is declared ultra vires to Article 14 of the Constitution :-  "These orders will take effect from 1st January, 1973 i.e. these will apply to all those who were on the effective strength of the Army on that date and who became non-effective thereafter."
The respondents are directed to give benefit of the disability pension to the petitioner as had been given to those who have been discharged from the service after 111973.
However, the benefit of arrears of pension shall not be admissible to the petitioner.
He shall get the benefit of the disability pension from the date of filing of the writ petition i.e. 2091993.
The respondents are directed to take effective steps for grant of monetary benefits to the petitioner in terms of this order within a period of four months of the submission of a certified copy of this order.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.