VK Jhanji, J - In this petition, petitioner is seeking a writ in the nature of certiorari for quashing order dated 681991 (Annexure P-10) whereby representation of the petitioner with regard to fixation of his seniority was dismissed.
As a consequence of the quashing of said order, he is also seeking a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to re-fix his seniority.
2.
Petitioner was appointed as Sub-Inspector in the Department of Consolidation in the erstwhile State of Pepsu on 1671952.
Petitioner continued to work as such till the State of Pepsu was merged in the new State of Punjab.
He worked in the State of Punjab as a confirmed employee of the Consolidation Department.
On 1111966, State of Punjab was re-organised and as a result thereof petitioner was allocated to the State of Haryana.
Government decided to wind up the Department of Consolidation and a decision with regard to absorption of the staff working in the Consolidation Department was taken.
Vide letter dated 1571968, the Deputy Secretary to Government of Haryana informed all concerned that at the time of winding up of the Consolidation Department, the Government had decided that the staff which would become surplus, would be absorbed in the Settlement Organisation of the Revenue Department.
Consequently, a number of Consolidation Officers, Assistant Consolidation Officers have been absorbed as Tehsildars/ Naib- Tehsildars.
Likewise, Head Assistants, Assistants, Clerks, Kanungo, Patwaris and Peons etc. have been/are being absorbed against equivalent posts.
For all intents and purposes, including pay etc.
This absorption is to be treated as transfer and not fresh appointment by the Settlement Department.
On 1571968, petitioner was absorbed in the Settlement Organisation of the Revenue Department.
Vide order dated 591969, he was transferred as a Revenue Patwari.
In the Gradation List issued with regard to the Officers/Officials of the Consolidation Department as on 1101970, the name of the petitioner did not find mention.
Vide order dated 10111978 (Annexure P-3), the petitioner was transferred to Consolidation Department.
In this order, it was mentioned that the officials transferred to Consolidation Department shall keep their liens on their present posts in the respective districts.
Again in the seniority list of Patwaris in the Department of Consolidation of Holdings as on 971980, petitioner was not shown to be an employee of the Consolidation Department.
Vide order dated 1721986 of Settlement and Consolidation Officer, Jui Mandal, Bhiwani, petitioner was appointed as Peshi Kanungo - Tehsildar-cum-Consolidation Officer, Bhiwani.
In the seniority list of Kanungo in the Bhiwani Circle circulated on 3111989, the date of appointment of the petitioner as Kanungo was shown as 2821986 and the Department to which he belongs was shown as Revenue Department.
Having felt aggrieved of the date of his appointment being shown as 2821986, the petitioner made a representation on 1121989 in which he submitted that he is senior to all those Kanungos shown at Serial Nos. 21, 23, 27, 28, 32 and 34 in the seniority list of 1970.
According to him, they were all Sub-Inspectors or Patwaris in the year 1953-54 whereas he was Sub-Inspector in the year 1952.
While his representation was pending, the petitioner was promoted as Assistant Consolidation Officer on 31101989 on ad-hoc basis and he retired as such on 31.10.1990.
Since his representation had not been decided, he filed Civil Writ Petition No. 14760 of 1990 and vide order dated 16111990 respondents were directed to consider the representation of the petitioner in accordance with rules by passing a speaking order.
Respondents vide impugned order rejected the representation of the petitioner.
Though in the order, it has been conceded that the petitioner was appointed as Sub-Inspector in the Consolidation Department on 1671952 and other employees i.e. respondents No. 3 to 11 were appointed later than him, yet he could not be considered because his name did not find mention in the Gradation List of Consolidation Department as he stood transferred to the Revenue Department.
His representation has also been rejected on the ground that after coming to the Revenue Department, his lien remained with the Revenue Department.
Thus, it has been held that he has been correctly given the date of promotion as Kanungo with effect from 2821986 and as Assistant Consolidation Officer with effect from 31101989.
In the written statement, respondents have reiterated the stand taken by them while deciding the representation of the petitioner.
3.
Having heard the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that the writ petition deserves to succeed.
The matter in issue has come to be covered by Full Bench judgment given in Kartar Singh and others v. State of Punjab and others, 1989(4) SLR 340.
Before the Full Bench, Patwaris of Consolidation Department on their retrenchment were permanently absorbed in the Revenue Department as Patwaris.
They were denied the benefit of service rendered in the Consolidation Department.
The action of the Government in denying them this benefit was quashed and it was held as under :-  ``It is the admitted case of both the sides that when recruitment to the Consolidation Department took place there were some employees of the Revenue Department who were recruited to the Consolidation Department and there were some direct employees.
In the Consolidation Department all the employees had their seniority inter-se.
The Consolidation Department employees had to be absorbed on abolition of the Consolidation Department itself.
The employees who had earlier been Revenue Department employees had to be taken in the Revenue Department on their original seniority and there was no way out for the Government.
So far as the other employees, who were direct employees of the Consolidation Department, some of them may be senior to those who were taken from the Revenue Department and others may be junior to them.
Once the employees who had been recruited from the Revenue Department got their seniority in the original Department on the basis of their earlier service there is no reason why an employee of the Consolidation Department who happens to be senior to the other employee should not be given seniority over them.
Similarly if an employee who is junior to such Revenue Department employees and has rendered service of the Consolidation Department for a sufficiently long time.
Both the departments being Government Departments the State Government could decide the method of absorption which means in this case the employee of Consolidation Department goes to the Revenue Department with all service and other benefits earned by him by the time he is absorbed and he will be entitled to be placed in such a place having regard to valuable period of his life. "
In this case also, the petitioner though originally belonged to Consolidation Department but on winding up of the Department, he was permanently absorbed in the Revenue Department.
Vide order dated 10111978, petitioner was transferred to the Consolidation Department and in the Consolidation Department itself, he was promoted as Kanungo and later as Assistant Consolidation Officer but while fixing his seniority, benefit of service rendered in the Consolidation Department before his absorption in the Revenue Department, was not taken into consideration.
It is also not the case of the respondents that in the parent Department, when the persons junior to the petitioner were promoted, the petitioner was asked to give option to return to his parent department or that his case too was considered for promotion at the time his turn came for promotion in the parent department.
Petitioner having been denied the right of being considered for promotion when his juniors were promoted in the parent department, is certainly entitled to the benefit of service rendered by him in the Consolidation Department.
Learned counsel for the respondents has not been able to give any justification as to why the benefit of service rendered by the petitioner in the Consolidation Department with effect from 1952 when he joined as Sub Inspector was not given to him while fixing his seniority and subsequent promotion.
4.
Thus, having viewed the facts and circumstances of this case in the light of judgment of the Full Bench in Kartar Singh's case (supra), I am of the view, that the petitioner is entitled to the relief as prayed for.
Consequently, the writ petition is allowed, order dated 681991 (Annexure P- 10) is quashed and the respondents are directed to refix the seniority from the date of his appointment i.e. 1671952 in the Consolidation Department.
As a result of re-fixation of his seniority, petitioner shall be entitled to all consequential benefits.
Respondents 1 and 2 shall complete the exercise within six months from the date of receipt of this order.
No costs.
Petition allowed.