Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner prays for the issue of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to redetermine his pension after taking into consideration the service rendered by him on work-charged basis.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner joined the service with the Bhakhra Dam Project in work- charged capacity on September 25, 1953.
He resigned on January 27, 1962 and joined the Beas Dam Project on February 1, 1962.
On April 15, 1978, the petitioner was retrenched from the service of the Beas Dam Project.
He was paid retrenchment compensation amounting to Rs.11803.20 besides an amount of Rs.8550/- which was paid to him as gratuity.
After a lapse of more than four years, the petitioner joined the service of the respondent-Board as Special Foreman on work-charged basis on August 6, 1982.
On July 31, 1990, the petitioner retired on attaining the age of superannuation.
These are the admitted facts.
3.
The short question that arises for consideration is - Is the petitioner entitled to include the service rendered by him from September 25, 1953 to April 15, 1978 with the service rendered by him with the Electricity Board from August 6, 1982 to July 31, 1990 for the purpose of computation of his pension?
4.
Mr. SS Nijjar, learned counsel for the petitioner, submits that in view of the fact that the Punjab State Electricity Board has adopted the Punjab Civil Services Rules, the interruption in service from April 15, 1978 to August 5, 1982 should be condoned and the petitioner should be held entitled to the determination of his pensionary rights on the hypothesis that he had entered the service of Board on September 25, 1953.
The claim is controverted by Mr. RD Bawa, learned counsel for the respondent-Board.
5.
At the outset, it may be noticed that the Punjab State Electricity Board has been constituted under the provisions of Section 5 of the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948.
It is an autonomous body.
Service with the Board is not service under the State Government.
The employees of the Board are not civil servants.
The protection of Article 311 is not available to the employees of the Board.
While the State Government can frame rules under Article 309 of the Constitution for persons holding civil posts, the conditions of service of the employees of the Board are governed by the Regulations framed under Section 79 of the Act.
Another fact which deserves mention is that even when the Board adopts certain rules framed by the State Government, the employees of the Board do not automatically become the employees of the State Government and they continue to be governed by the conditions of service prescribed by the Board.
The adoption merely implies that the rules framed by the State Government under Article 309 shall be deemed to have been framed from the date of adoption by the Board under the relevant provisions of the Act.
6.
It is in the background of this factual position that the question posed above has to be examined.
Rule 423 on which the reliance has been placed by the learned counsel for the petitioner, reads as under :-  ``4.23.
In the absence of a specific indication to the contrary in the service record, an interruption between two spells of service rendered under the State Government shall be treated as automatically condoned, and the pre-interruption service shall be treated as qualifying service for pension purposes, except where the interruption has been caused by resignation, dismissal or removal from service or due to participation in a strike, but the period of interruption itself shall, under no circumstances, be reckoned as qualifying service for pension purposes."
A persual of the above provision shows that if a person has served for two separate spells, the gap or the interruption is condoned for the purpose of computing the qualifying service for fixation of pension.
The exception to this rule is when a person has resigned or has been dismissed or removed from service.
Of course, the period of interruption is not taken into consideration while determining the qualifying service.
This rule does not mean that if an employee has served the State Government for some time and thereafter, he has served the Electricity Board, the gap in between the two spells of service, is to be condoned.
7.
What is the position in the present case?
Admittedly, the petitioner had served the Bhakhra Project and the Beas Project on September 25, 1953 to April 15, 1978.
On the last mentioned date, the petitioner was retrenched from service and all benefits due to him like gratuity and retrenchment compensation etc. were duly paid.
It has also been conceded that the posts of these two projects carried the benefit of Contributory Provident Fund and the amount due to the petitioner on that account was also paid to him.
Mr. Nijjar submit that this was service under the State Government.
Assuming it to be so, the petitioner's service with the State Government came to an end on April 15, 1978.
After a lapse of more than four years he joined the service of the Board on August 6, 1982.
He superannuated on July 31, 1990.
The gap between April 15, 1978 to August 6, 1982 was not such as may be condonable under Rule 423 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules as referred to above.
The two spells of service had not been rendered under the State Government.
These are under different employers.
Since this gap cannot condoned, the two periods of service cannot be joined together for the purpose of computing the qualifying service for payment of pension.
No other point has been urged.
Accordingly, there is no merit in this petition.
It is dismissed.
However, there will be no order as to costs.