VK Jhanji, J - In this writ petition under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India, petitioner Raj Beer Kaur widow of Sukhdev Pal Singh is seeking a direction in the nature mandamus of directing the respondents to release GP Fund and payment under the Group Insurance Scheme on account of death of her husband while in service.
2.
Petitioner's husband Sukhdev Pal Singh was appointed as Junior Engineer on 2691986 in Punjab Government, P.W.D.
(B&R) Branch.
He, unfortunately died on 3131991 while he was posted as Junior Engineer in the office of the Executive Engineer, Provincial Division, P.W.D.
(B&R), Kapurthala.
He left behind his wife i.e. petitioner, two minor sons, aged 2 and 5 years.
Petitioner, on the death of her husband, applied to the respondent that she should be paid family pension and all other pensionary benefits including the payment under the Group Insurance Scheme.
All other benefits have since been paid to the petitioner except the payment under the Group Insurance Scheme.
Petitioner has been denied this benefit only on the ground that when husband of the petitioner was transferred from Jalandhar to Kapurthala, as per last pay certificate received from the Executive Engineer, Jalandhar, there was no mention regarding deduction of monthly subscription on account of group insurance made by the deceased.
It appears that office at Kapurthala did not deduct the subscription of group insurance from the salary bill of the husband of the petitioner.
3.
Having heard the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that the petitioner is entitled to a writ of mandamus as prayed for.
The Scheme known as Punjab Government Employees Group Insurance Scheme, 1982 was notified by the Punjab Government on 1581982.
The Scheme was made compulsory for all those employees who joined Punjab Government service after the Scheme was notified.
As regards employees who were already in service on the date the Scheme was notified, they had the discretion to opt out of the Scheme which was required to be exercised by 30.9.1982.
Admittedly, the husband of the petitioner joined service after the Scheme came into force.
Clause 9(3) of the Group Insurance Scheme provides that subscription for a month shall be recovered by deduction from the salary/wage of a member of the Scheme for that month irrespective of the date of payment of salary/wage for that month.
Clause 9(4) provides that the subscription shall be recovered every month including the month in which the member of the Scheme ceased to be a member of the Scheme or remains on leave other than extra-ordinary leave or under suspension.
4.
Punjab Government vide circular letter dated 2131989 raised the subscription with effect from 1.1.1990 in the units of Rs15/- per month and the amount of insurance was increased from Rs. 10,000/- to Rs. 15,000/- each unit of subscription.
As already noticed, the husband of the petitioner joined service on 2691986 i.e. after the notification of the Scheme.
He automatically became a member of the Scheme since the Scheme was made compulsory for all those employees who entered service after the Scheme was notified on his death, the petitioner was entitled to the payment of group insurance.
This benefit cannot be denied to the petitioner on the ground that when her husband was transferred from Jalandhar to Kapurthala, no mention was made in the last pay certificate regarding subscription on account of group insurance.
It was the duty of the Drawing and Disbursing Officer to deduct subscription from the salary of the employee concerned.
In case there was some doubt or confusion because of non-mentioning of deduction in the last pay certificate, the Drawing and Disbursing Officer ought to have made enquiry in this regard but no such enquiry appears to have been made.
The petitioner cannot be denied the payment of group insurance because of the lapse of the Drawing and Disbursing Officer.
5.
Accordingly, this writ petition is allowed and a direction is given to the respondents to pay the amount of group insurance to the petitioner as admissible under the scheme.
Petitioner shall be entitled to interest at the rate of 12 per cent per annum from the date the petitioner became entitled to the payment till actual payment.
No costs.