AP Chowdhri, J - The challenge in this writ petition is to order Annexure P-10 dated January 14, 1994, removing the petitioner from service following departmental enquiry.
2.
The brief material facts of the case are that on March 22, 1990, the petitioner was posted as Executive Officer in Municipal Committee, Jagraon.
In 1991 an order for 40 MT of bitumen was placed with Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited.
Sudhir Kumar clerk/purchase clerk deposited bank draft of Rs. 1,42,570/- dated June 22, 1991, with the said corporation as the price of the bitumen.
The mathura Refinery despatched 3 tankers containing bitumen on July 8, 1991.
Two tankers reached Jagraon on July 9, 1991 and the third one on July 10, 1991.
At that time Ishar Singh was Sectional Officer in the Engineering Department of the Municipal Committee.
It was he who was supposed to receive the material and enter the same in the stock register.
Ishar Singh was succeeded by Darshan Singh, Sectional Officer, on August 20, 1991.
The fourth tanker was despatched from Mathura on August 30, 1991.
On November 28, 1991, Darshan Singh, Sectional Officer, reported to the Administrator that Sudhir Kumar, purchase clerk, wanted him i.e. Darshan Singh to enter two goods receipts on account of the receipt of two tankers in the stock register.
As he had no himself received the material, he had difficulty in making the entry in the stock register.
On December 2, 1991 Sudhir Kumar was suspended.
A preliminary enquiry into the alleged embezzlement of two tanker loads of bitumen i.e. third and fourth ones, which had not been entered in the stock register was conducted by Mr. DS Bedi, PCS Regional Deputy Director.
Copy of the report it Annexure P-1.
The conclusions reached by Mr. Bedi were (i) that the third tanker had been misappropriated by Sudhir Kumar in connivance with Ishar Singh, Sectional Officer, and (ii) that the fourth tanker had been misapprorpriated by Sudhir Kumar in connivance with Darshan Singh, Sectional Officer.
With regard to Yash Raj Goyal, Executive Officer, Mr. Bedi observed as under :-  ``The Executive Officer also cannot escape from nengligence in the performance of his duties.
Ishar Singh has alleged that he brought the matter to the notice of the Executive Officer about the non-receipt of remaining bitumen.
He should have remind the Refinary in case the delay was made by he Refinery in the supply of Bitumen.
xx xx xx xx.''
The petitioner Yash Raj Ishar Singh and Darshan Singh were placed under suspension vide order dated January 19, 1992, Annexure P-2.
A criminal case was also registered by the Administrator of the Municipal Committee vide Memo, Annexure P-3 dated April 17, 1992.
Inter alia, it was stated in the said Memo.
that the Executive officer-Yash Raj Goyal and the Sectional Officer Darshan Singh were not at fault (vide pages 42 and 43 of the paper books).
On June 9, 1992, the petitioner was served with a charge sheet.
He filed a reply denying all the charges.
A regular enquiry was held against the petitioner .
Ishar Singh and Darshan Singh aforesaid by Mr. HS Sodhi, Deputy Director, Local Government, Jalandhar.
The Inquiry Officer examined five witnesses.
PW-1 was Mr. Sham Lal Goyal successor of the petitioner, and he simply stated that the incident had taken place prior to his joining and he was, therefore, not aware of any of the material facts PW-2 was Sudhir Kumar, purchase clerk.
PW-3 was Mr. Darshan Singh Bedi, PCS, who proved the preliminary enquiry report Exhibit PW 3/1 produced in the enquiry.
PW-4 was Ishar Singh, Sectional Officer and PW-5 was Darshan Singh Sectional Officer.
Both PW-4 and PW-5 were the persons against whom in addition to the petitioner the regular enquiry had been held.
The sixth witness Mr. SD Bhalla, Superintending Engineer, who had retired by them, could not attend the proceedings.
Ultimately his report Exhibit PW 6/2 in the enquiry proceedings was tendered in evidence.
3.
In defence, the petitioner examined Rajinder Kumar and Ashok Kumar Sharma contractors who had worked for M./C.
besides giving a written statement of his defence.
The petitioner was received that by order Annexure P-7 dated January 8, 1993.
The Inquiry Officer submitted his report Annexure P-8 dated June 24, 1993.
He held most of the charges framed against the petitioner proved.
After furnishing a copy of the enqiry report and serving a show cause notice and considering the reply of the petitioner, the impugned order of removal Annexure P-10 was passed on January 14, 1994.
The same has been assailed on various grounds in this petition.
4.
The contention of Mr. PS Patwalia, learned counsel for the petitioner, is that apart from formal witnesses, namely, Mr. Sham Lal Goyal PW-1 and Mr. Darshan Singh Bedi PW-3, the only witnesses examined in this case are co- delinquents, namely, Sudhir Kumar, purchase clerk PW-2, Ishar Singh, Sectional Officer PW-4 and Darshan Singh, Sectional Officer PW-5.
He pointed out that apart from recording the statements of the aforesaid Sudhir Kumar, purchase clerk, Ishar Singh and Darshan Singh, Sectional Officer, during the enquiry, the Inquiry Officer had also taken on record the written statements from the said persons.
One set comprised statements of Sudhir Kumar, Purchase clerk PW-2, Ishar Singh, Sectional Officer PW-4 and Darshan Singh Sectional Officer PW-5 recorded in the course of enquiry as witnesses for the prosecution, while the other set consisted of written statement of defence or what may be more conveniently called written arguments filed by the aforesaid alleged co- delinquents.
The contention of Mr. Patwalia is that nothing incriminating against the petitioner was deposed by the aforesaid three witnesses appearing as such witnesses in the course of the enquiry.
Mr. Patwalia also contended that firstly there is no substantive evidence against the petitioner in the deposition of the witnesses examined in the enquiry.
In any case, that evidence being of co-delinquents could not be the sole basis of finding the petitioner guilty.
He further argued that in so far as written arguments filed by the various co-delinquents are concerned.
The same could never be used as evidence against the petitioner.
Learned counsel submitted that a summing that strict rules of evidence did not apply to departmental proceedings, the minimum requirement of natural justice and fair play is that if there appeared anything incriminating in the written argument filed on behalf of co- deliquents against the petitioner, and the Inquiry Officer proposed to use the same against the petitioner, such material should have been put to the petitioner in order to give his a change of meeting the same and giving his version in that regard.
This had not been admittedly done.
It was, therefore, a case of no evidence in so far as the petitioner is concerned.
5.
The further contention of Mr. Patwalia is that there is ample material on record to show that apart from about 20 MT of bitumen, which had admittedly been received and duly entered in the stock register, about the same quantity i.e., the balance about 20 MT of bitumen had been received and the same had been supplied to the contractors in connection with the construction of certain roads and the bills submitted by those contractors contained reference to the said bitumen and it was, therefore, proved that the entire quantity of 40 MT of bitumen had, in fact, been received by the Municipal Committee, though the entry of the two tankers i.e. third and fourth tankers was not made in the stock register, which had resulted in the entire unfortunate development.
6.
Lastly, Mr. Patwalia contended that admittedly the case initially was that the petitioner was not in any way responsible for the alleged misappropriation of bitumen.
Later on he was sought to be involved only on account of his being incharge of the property of the Municipal Committee only on the ground of failure to exercise effective supervision to protect the property of the Municipal Committee, but the Inquiry Officer had gone to the other extreme and had held the petitioner liable for misappropriation in connivance with the Sectional Officer.
There was no evidence or reliable clinching circumstantial evidence to fasten such a vicarious liability for misappropriation in far as the petitioner is concerned.
7.
A perusal of the written statement filed on behalf of respondents 1 and 2 shows that averments therein have been made in very general terms.
In particular, reference has not been made to any piece of evidence other than the statements of the three co-delinquents, namely, Sudhir Kaur PW-2, Ishar Singh, Sectional Officer PW- 4 and Darshan Singh, Sectional Officer PW-5.
Nor has it been specifically pleaded that apart from the written arguments filed on behalf of the aforesaid three witnesses, there was any evidence on which the findings of the Inquiry Officer were based.
It has also not been specifically controverted any where that the copies of the written arguments filed on behalf of three co-delinquents was at any stage furnished up the petitioner and he was called upon to explain the same.
The written statement does not, therefore, purpose to make out any case that the findings by the Inquiry Officer were based on any evidence apart from the material consisting of the depositions of the three co-delinquents on the one hand and the written arguments filed on behalf of the three co-delinquents.
8.
In the presence of the learned counsel for the parties, I have gone through the statements of aforesaid PW-2, PW-4 and PW-5 in the enquiry report Annexure P-8.
It would be seen that these statements have been reproduced in extenso in the enquiry report.
I have also perused the written arguments filed on behalf of PW-2, PW-4 and PW-5 before the Inquiry Officer, which, too, have been noticed in detail in the enquiry report.
The Statements of Sudhir Kumar PW-2, Ishar Singh PW-4 and Darshan Singh PW-5 made in the course of the enquiry do not contain any incriminating reference against the petitioners except to the extent that they say that the duty to verify the stock register was of the Executive Officer, which he failed to carry out.
Darshan Singh PW-5 in his written arguments improved upon his statement recorded during the enquiry and made the following additional allegation against the petitioner :-  ``.......On 19111991 at about 430 pm Shri Yash Raj Goyal had called him in the office before you and said that Darshan Singh who did development work during the tenure of Ishar Singh SO did not enter the bill in B.M and he should hand over the concerned record of those works to Sudhir Kumar Clerk, so that he should get prepared will while going to Municipal Committee Mansa tomorrow.
In compliance with this verbal order, he came to the office at 445 pm and handed over the concerned files and M.Bs.
to Sudhir Kumar Clerk but Sudhir Kumar also demanded stock register of bitumen but he told that Ishar Singh had prepared the bill from the MB and there was no need of stock register and he had refused to give stock register.
Upon this Sudhir Kumar told him that if they were not to hand over the stock register to him, then there was no necessity of going to Mansa.
On the asking of all this by Sudhir Kumar, he had a suspicion if some bungling may not be made in the stock register.
Upon hearing this talk of Sudhir Kumar, he had flatly refused to give stock register but upto this date Sudhir Kumar had not disclosed about the previous tankers but on this date except stock register, he had been giving other record upto 515 pm and he started towards bus stand for getting bus for Raikot at 515 pm At that time SO Shri Yash Raj Goyal was sitting in his office and Sudhir Kumar told the EO the Darshan Singh SO had not handed over to him the stock register and you may get the stock register delivered.
Upon this EO Sahib sent the peon after him towards bus stand to call the SO saying that he was called by the EO Sahib.
He was standing at the bus stand when he reached there because the bus stand when he reached there because the bus for Raikot was not lying vacant.
He told the person to inform EO that he had already boarded the bus.
From the above it is clear that the EO had joined hands with Sudhir Kumar and they had misappropriated two tankers of bitumen outside.
On 201191 Sudhir Kumar clear had taken the concerned record about the works to Ishar Singh SO but Ishar Singh had refused to prepare the bill and asked him to prepare bill while at Jagraon and Sudhir Kumar told about this to him on 21.11.1991.
Shri Ishar Singh SO came to Municipal Committee Jagraon on 271191 and on his arrival EO Sahib and Sudhir Kumar asked him to prepare the bill and also told him that they had misappropriated two tankers of bitumen earlier and the bitumen which had been left on the roads was entered in the bills in the MBs and both the tankers are entered in the stock register be adjusted against the bitumen used in the construction of roads.
All these talks had taken place in connivance with Ishar Singh EO and Sudhir Kumar, and after Sudhir Kumar and Ishar Singh came to the office and demanded record and stock register regarding the works done upon which he told Ishar Singh and Sudhir Kumar that you should take M.Bs.
and the files.
They should see that in the office if they wanted to see the stock register and he would not allow them to take the stock register outside.
After hearing all these talks, he refused and after making consultations, they again came to the office and told that last two tankers were misappropriate.''
Nothing incriminating is to be found in the written arguments submitted on behalf of Ishar Singh SO who appeared as PW-4.
The result of the above discussion is that the petitioner has been held guilty only on the ground of the improved statement made by Darshan Singh PW-5 in the written arguments.
Otherwise there is no evidence against the petitioner.
It bears repetition that the aforesaid written arguments submitted on behalf of Darshan Singh PW-5 were at no stage put to the petitioner, nor was he called upon to explain his position with regard thereto.
Assuming for the sake of argument that the written arguments filed by the co-delinquent is given the status on statement made against the delinquent, the minimum rule of fair play requires that the same should have been put to the petitioner to clear his position and effectively defend himself.
This has admittedly not been done.
It has been seen from the foregoing discussion that no other evidence appears against the petitioner.
In this sense, this is a case of no evidence having been produced against the petitioner.
9.
Mr. Patwalia invited my attention to the statement of Sudhir Kumar, purchase clerk PW-2 reproduced in extenso at page 77 of the paper book, in which inter alia he stated that bitumen weighing 9520 MT is still lying in the stock.
Some bitumen out of the same had been used, through the same was not entered in the stock register.
He further referred to the statement of Ishar Singh PW-4, in which he stated that Shri SD Bhalla, Superintending Engineer, had verified the development work done at Jagraon on March 5, 1992, and at that time bitumen was laying in the stock according to the stock register.
Reference was also made to the statement of Darshan Singh PW-5 in which he stated that some bitumen from the two tankers entered in the stock register by Ishar Singh was consumed for the construction of Community Hall building and the remaining bitumen was lying in stock.
Reference was also invited to the statement made by Rajinder Kumar contractor examined in defence by the petitioner.
It will be useful to reproduce the relevant part of the statement as under :-  ``The bitumen used in these works had been supplied by Municipal Committee, Jagraon.
The four bills which had been submitted bear the signatures of his brother which I identify.
According to the bills submitted by him, 1396 MT of bitumen had been used.
Shri Sushil Kumar contractor had constructed road, Shri Lajpat Rai Khad Madan.
I recognise the signatures of Shri Sushil Kumar, contractor.
According to bill submitted by him, 204 MT of bitumen had been used in the construction of that road.
This contractor had used the bitumen supplied by the Municipal Committee for the construction of road.
Besides, this, Shri Sushil Kumar, Contractor had done the work of Lajpat Rai Road.
350 MT of Bitumen had been used in at work which had been supplied by the Municipal Committee.
This work is incomplete, the contractor had not submitted the bill.
He had been going in Municipal Committee, Jagraon.
At this time, also two tankers of bitumen are lying in the committee.
Some bitumen had been used for the construction of Committee Hall.
The payment of works done by him has not been made to him.
Director Local Government, Punjab vide his letter No. 4-DSS-M-SS-93/9145 dated 1531993 had directed the Municipal Committee, Jagraon to make payment after verifying the works at the spot and making measurements.
I am producing a copy of the letter which is marked B-1.
I am producing copies D-2 to D-7 of bills and MB'' It would, therefore, be seen that according to Rajinder Singh a total of 1396 + 204 + 350 MT of bitumen = 195 MT had been consumed.
One tanker of bitumen is a little less than 10 MT.
It follows that two tankers of bitumen had been consumed on the works already executed during the relevant period under the Committee.
The statement of the witness is supported by the bills raised by him and produced in evidence as Exhibits D-2 to D-7.
After verifying the aforesaid bills, the Government had ordered payment to the contractor.
These bills clearly mention about the fact that bitumen had been supplied by the Municipal Committee.
The statement of Rajinder Singh DW-1 is further corroborated by that of Ashok Kumar Sharma DW-2.
The aforesaid aspect of the case and the material available on record did not receive due attention of the Inquiry Officer or of the higher authorities, which has resulted in grave prejudice to the petitioner.
If on the basis of the above material is it held that, in fact, the total quantity of 40 MT of bitumen, which was in question, had, in fact, been received and part of which had been used in connection with the works of the Committee and part of which was still lying in the stock, the only matter which would be left would be that two of the tankers carrying bitumen had not been entered in the stock register as they were required to be done and this has led to the entire problem.
There was otherwise no case of any misappropriation.
Since the present proceedings are not by way of appeal against the findings recorded by the Inquiry Officer, I would refrain from recording a firm finding that the entire quantity of 40 MT of bitumen had been received by the Municipal Committee and there was, thus, no question of any misappropriation.
However, it must be observed that this was an important aspect of the case and there was considerable material on record which the Inquiry Officer and other authorities have failed to take due notice of, resulting in serious prejudice to the petitioner.
10.
At the initial stage, there was either no charge against the petitioner or the only charge was that he failed to exercise necessary supervision which made it possible for bitumen being misappropriated.
The Inquiry Officer, however, ultimately held that the bitumen had been misappropriated in connivance with the petitioner.
Admittedly, there is no direct evidence of alleged connivance.
In most cases, connivance cannot be proved by direct evidence.
It is more often than not a matter of inference.
But it is equally clear that for drawing an inference some clinching circumstantial evidence must be available on record.
I have carefully scanned the rather lengthy report prepared by the Inquiry Officer and I am unable to find any such clinching material which would warrant the finding that the petitioner was guilty of conniving the alleged misappropriation of the bitumen.
11.
Ishar Singh SO against whom also the enquiry was held is stated to have filed an appeal against the punishment imposed on him.
I was informed at the time of hearing that the appeal has since been accepted by the Government and the matter has been sent back for holding a fresh enquiry against him.
12.
Arguments in the connection petition Sudhir Kumar v. The State of Punjab, CWP No. 2190 of 1994, were also heard.
That writ petition was straightaway admitted.
The main grievance of the petitioner therein is that no enquiry whatsoever was even held against him and he was not be of the delinquents in the regular enquiry which was conducted by Mr. HS Sodhi, Deputy Director, Local Government, Jalandhar, against Yash Raj Goyal, EO and Ishar Singh and Darshan Singh S.Os.
Strangely enough, based on the findings in that enquiry report, however, a direction was given to take action against Sudhir Kumar and promptly the Committee terminated his services by the order which was impugned in that writ petition.
Be that as it may, even written statement has not been filed in that writ petition and it is, therefore, not possible to dispose of that other writ petition.
The same be listed for hearing separately as soon as it is complete.
13.
For the reasons hereinbefore stated, CWP No. 1441-A of 1994 is allowed and the impugned order Annexure P-10 is set aside.
Further appropriate action according to law in the light of this order shall be taken as expeditiously as possible and in any case within two months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order by the punishing authority.
Petition allowed.