GS Singhvi, J - The only issue raised in this writ petition relates to the entitlement of the petitioner to the benefit of senior scale (Rs3,000-4,500) in the cadre of Lecturers with effect from the date of completion of 8 years service.
2.
Petitioner joined service as Lecturer in Commerce at DN College for Women, Faridabad, on 5121983 after having been selected for appointment on that post.
Later on the petitioner was selected for appointment as Lecturer in Geeta Vidya Mandir Girls College, Sonepat.
She worked in DN College for Women upto 30111988 and with effect from 1121988 she joined in Geeta Vidya Mandir Girls College, Sonepat.
During the course of her service, the petitioner was awarded PhD degree on 25.9.1989.
Her request for counting of service rendered in DN College for Women'.
Faridabad, for fixation of her pay was accepted by the Director, Higher Education, Haryana, who conveyed his decision to the Principal of Geeta Vidya Mandir Girls College, Sonepat.
vide letter dated 591991 for protection of the pay of the petitioner.
The petitioner submitted representation (Annexure P-2) dated 26111991 to the Director, Higher Education, Haryana, and claimed the benefits of senior scale in terms of the guidelines issued by the University Grants Commission.
This was followed by a reminder dated 1781993.
Having received no response from the respondents, the petitioner has filed this petition for issue of a writ of mandamus to the respondents to grant her senior scale with effect from the date of her acquiring the degree of PhD  3.
The writ petition has been opposed by respondent Nos1 and 2 on the ground that the Central Government has declined to give financial assistance to the Government of Haryana to meet out the additional expenditure involved in the revision of pay scales of the lecturers in the event of counting of their total service for the purpose of grant of senior/selection grade.
It has been stated that the Government of Haryana wrote letter dated 10.1.1992 to the Government of India to let it know whether the latter would meet 80 per cent expenses but the Government of India did not agree with the proposal.
Thereafter the Government of Haryana considered the financial implications of the grant of benefit of senior and selection grade and decided that it was not possible for the State to bear the entire financial burden.
Regarding the petitioner, it has been stated that her claim was rejected by the Government vide dated 1731993 (Annexure R-II).
It has been further pleaded by respondent Nos. 1 and 2 that the petitioner joined her service in Geeta Vidya Mandir Girls College, Sonepat, with effect from 1121988 after resigning from DN College for Women, Faridabad and, therefore, she cannot claim that she has rendered 8 years continuous service as on 25.9.1989.
By quoting extract from the circular issued by the University Grants Commission, the respondents have pleaded that only those Lecturers could claim benefit of senior scale, who have completed 8 years of continuous service after regular selection.
The respondents have also pleaded that case of the petitioner could be considered only by a scrutiny committee in terms of circular (Annexure R-5) issued by the Government of Haryana and as the case of the petitioner was not so considered, the petitioner has no right to claim benefit of senior scale.
4.
In her replication, the petitioner has reiterated her claim for grant of senior scale.
She has further stated that condition of attending two refresher courses/summer institutes is not applicable to her case, because such condition was not enforced qua Mrs. Madhu Walia, Mrs. Manjula Aggarwal, Mrs. Neeta Mittal, Mrs. Kamal Likhyani, Dr. Neera Garg, Mrs. Neeru Gupta, Dr. Veena Chug and Shri Narender Prabhakar.
5.
Along with the reply to this replication, the respondents have enclosed Annexures R-5 to R-8 to show that the petitioner cannot claim benefit of her service in DN College for the purpose of counting 8 years service/5 years service on the basis of which she could claim the benefit of senior scale.
6.
The only argument advanced by Shri RS Mittal, Senior Advocate, appearing for the petitioner is that under the guidelines issued by the University Grants Commission, there is no requirement that 8 years service after regular appointment should be continuous and in the face of the conditions of eligibility prescribed by the University Grants Commission, the respondents cannot exclude the service rendered by the petitioner as a Lecturer in Commerce at DN College for Women, Faridabad.
Shri Mittal submitted that respondent No.2 had ordered counting of past service of the petitioner while directing protection of her pay vide letter (Annexure P-1) and, therefore, it is no more open to the respondents to now contend that the service rendered by the petitioner at DN College is not counted for the purpose of guidelines issued by the University Grants Commission.
Learned Assistant Advocate General argued that the petitioner cannot take advantage of her past service because she had resigned from the service of DN College for Women, Faridabad, and had independently joined the service of Geeta Vidya Mandir Girls College, Sonepat.
Learned Assistant Advocate General argued that service rendered after regular selection under a single employer could only be counted for the purpose of giving benefit of senior scale and service rendered under two different employers cannot be combined for computing the period of service in terms of para 11 of Appendix-I to the circular issued by the Government of India containing the guidelines of the University Grants Commission.
7.
Paras 10 and 11 of the letter dated 22.7.1988 issued by the Ministry of Human Resources and Development (Department of Education) which contain University Grants Commission's guidelines for grant of senior scale to the Lecturers read as under :-  ``Para 10 of Appendix-I In order to encourage research, in continuation of Post-graduate studies, candidates who, at the time of their recruitment as Lecturers, possess PhD or MPhil degree will be sanctioned three and one advance increments respectively in the scale of Rs. 2,200-4,000 along with the benefit of corresponding years of service for the purpose of promotion.
The existing lecturers without research degrees, and those similarly situated, recruited in future will be eligible for a similar benefit in service for the purpose of promotion as and when they acquire research degrees, but will not be eligible for advance increments.
Existing lecturers with research degrees will also be eligible for a similar benefit.
Para 11 of Appendix-I Every lecturer will be placed in a senior scale of Rs. 3,000-5,000 if he/she has: (a) completed 8 years of service after regular appointment, with relaxation as provided in para 12 above; (b) participated in two refresher courses/summer institutes, each of approximately 4 weeks' duration or engaged in other appropriate continuing education programmes of comparable quality as may be specified by the UGC; (c) consistently satisfactory performance appraisal reports.
Explanation: All lecturers in the existing scale of Rs. 700-1,600, who have completed 8 years of service on 111986, will be placed through a process of screening/selection as indicated in para 20 below, in the scale of Rs. 3,000- 5,000.
The benefits of service provided in para 10 will be available for the initial placement also."
8.
Letter dated 27111990 (Annexure R-6) issued by the University Grants Commission contains an explanation to the requirement of service incorporated in the earlier guidelines.
This letter also reads as under :-  ``Kindly refer to para 3 of this office letter of even number dated 29th January, 1990 containing the decision of the Commission regarding counting the experience of a person, before appointment as a lecturer in the university/College, rendered in equivalent grade in other Universities/Colleges and the national laboratories or R & D organisations (CSIR/ICAR, DRDO, UGC etc.) and ``UGC Research Scientist, as qualifying service for placement in the senior scale/selection grade.
The Commission in consultation with Ministry of Human Resources and Development (Department of Education) reconsidered the matter at its meeting held on 11th October, 1990, and resolved revised guidelines as follows for counting of previous service for purpose of senior scale/selection grade under the career advancement scheme for lecturers : 1Previous service without any break as a Lecturer or equivalent in a University, College, national laboratory or other scientific organisations (CSIR, ICAR, DRDO, UGC etc.) and as a UGC Research Scientist should be counted for placement of Lecturers in Senior Scale/Selection Grade provided that :-  (a) the post was in an equivalent grade/scale of pay as the post of lecturer; (b) the qualifications for the post were not lower than the qualifications prescribed by UGC for the post of lecturer; (c) the lecturers concerned possessed the minimum qualification prescribed by UGC for appointment as lecturers; (d) the post was filled in accordance with the prescribed selection procedure as laid down by the University/State Government; (e) the appointment was not ad hoc or in a leave vacancy of less than one year duration.
2.
No distinction should be made with reference to the nature of management of the institution where previous ``service was rendered (private/local body/Government) if the above criteria are satisfied.
You are requested to bring the above decision to the notice of the colleges under your jurisdiction also."
9.
By Annexure R-8, the University Grants Commission had relaxed the condition to participate in Refresher Courses/Summer Institute in respect of the lecturers, who were appointed before 111986.
Later on this date was extended to 31121993.
10.
There is no dispute between the parties that it the total period of service rendered by the petitioner at DN College for Women, Faridabad and Geeta Vidya Mandir Girls College, Sonepat, is taken into consideration, the petitioner will be deemed to have completed the requisite period of service so as to be entitled to the grant of senior scale in the cadre of Lecturers.
However, controversy between the parties is on the issue of treating the service rendered by the petitioner at DN College for Women, Faridabad, together with the service rendered by her in Geeta Vidya Mandir Girls College, Sonepat.
11.
Language used in para 11 of Appendix-I to the letter dated 22.7.1988 uses the expression ``completed 8 years of service after regular appointment".
The word `continuous' has not been used between the word `of' and the word `service'.
The expression used in para 11 is not so couched as to indicate that the University Grants Commission intended continuous service of 8 years after regular appointment as a condition precedent to the grant of senior scale.
The ambiguity, if any, in the earlier guidelines stands clarified by the letter dated 27111990.
That letter clearly shows that according to the University Grants Commission itself previous service rendered by an employee before appointment as a lecturer in the university/College can be counted for the purpose of grant of senior scale/selection grade under the Career Advancement Scheme for lecturers on fulfilment of various conditions enumerated in that letter.
First and the foremost requirement is that the previous service must be without break and must be in the cadre of lecturer or equivalent in a university, college, national laboratory or other scientific organisations or as a UGC scientist.
Further conditions are that the previous post must be in an equivalent grade/scale of pay as compared to the post of lecturer.
The qualifications must be the same.
The incumbent must possess the qualifications prescribed by the University Grants Commission for appointment as a lecturer and the selection must be a regular selection.
An ad hoc appointment or an appointment in a leave vacancy has been excluded.
In so far as the petitioner is concerned, she fulfils all these conditions, inasmuch as her appointment at DN College for Women, Faridabad, was on the post of lecturer.
Her appointment was preceded by a regular selection.
She fulfilled the minimum qualifications prescribed by the University Grants Commission.
The qualifications of two posts of lecturer held by her were similar and the pay scale was identical.
In view of this, there is little justification for not counting the service rendered by the petitioner as lecturer in Commerce in DN College for Women, Faridabad, as a part of her total service for the purpose of grant of senior scale.
In my opinion, there is no justification to read the word `continuous' in para 11 of Appendix-I to the letter dated 22.7.1988 issued by the Government of India, particularly when the University Grant Commission has clarified the whole matter vide letter dated 27111990.
The mere fact that the petitioner had resigned from the service of the College at Faridabad before joining the Geeta Vidya Mandir Girls College, Sonepat, is of no consequence in view of the fact that the University Grants Commission has itself made it clear that previous service rendered by a lecturer is countable for the purpose of grant of senior scale on fulfilment of certain conditions.
It would have been a different case if the guidelines issued by the University Grants Commission had contained a requirement of 8 years continuous service after regular appointment.
12.
Above all, in so far as the petitioner is concerned, there has been no physical break in her service, because she resigned from DN College on 30111988 and joined at Geeta Vidya Mandir Girls College, Sonepat, on 1121988.
13.
The plea taken by the respondents about the non-availability of funds is wholly irrelevant because the University Grants Commission's guidelines are uniformly applicable to all the lecturers in the country and, therefore, it is for the respondents - State Government to decide in consultation with the Central Government as to from which source provision should be made for giving effect to the guidelines issued by the University Grants Commission.
It is not open to them to deny benefit of senior scale to some persons on the grounds of non-availability of funds.
14.
In view of the above discussion, the writ petition is allowed.
The decision of the respondents not to grant senior scale to the petitioner is declared illegal.
The respondents are directed to consider the case of the petitioner through screening committee for grant of senior scale in the cadre of lecturers in accordance with the University Grants Commission's guidelines.
If the petitioner is found suitable by the screening committee, she should be granted the benefit of senior scale by counting her service with effect from 5121993.
Appropriate order should be passed in this regard within a period of three months and necessary benefits in the form of arrears should be given to the petitioner within next two months.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.