GS Singhvi, J.- The petitioners, who are presently, holding the post of Hydrologists in the Agriculture Department of Government of Haryana have jointly filed this petition with the prayers to quash Annexure P-6 whereby respondent No2 has been promoted as Joint Director, Agriculture and also for issue of direction to respondent No1 to consider their cases for promotion to that post.
2.
All the petitioners possess the qualification of MSc.
Geology (Hons).
Petitioner Nos. 1 and 2 were selected by the Haryana Public Service Commission for the post of Assistant Geologist in the year 1976 and were appointed on the said posts by the Government of Haryana.
Petitioner No3 was selected in the year 1972 by the Haryana Subordinate Services Selection Board for the post of Technical Assistant in the Agriculture Department.
He joined duty on that post in the year 1972 itself.
He was promoted as Assistant Geologist in the year 1976.
Petitioners Nos. 1 & 2 were promoted as Hydrologists vide order dated 22.7.1982 Annexure R-2/4 and petitioner No3 was promoted as Hydrologist vide order dated 2991983 (Annexure R.2/5).
The names of the petitioners appear at Sr.Nos.
33 to 35 in the gradation list of Haryana Agriculture Service Class I Officers (Annexure P-2).
Respondent Nos.2 joined service in the Agriculture Department with effect from 12101983 on being appointed as Deputy Director, Agriculture.
By order Annexure P-6 respondent No2 has been promoted as Joint Director, Agriculture, alongwith seven other persons.
It is this order of promotion of respondent No2 to the post of Joint Director, Agriculture, which has been made the subject - matter of challenge in this writ petition.
3.
Petitioners have pleaded that respondent No2 is junior to them because his name appears at Sr. No. 36 in the seniority list Annexure P-2 and even though they are senior to respondent No2, respondent No1 has promoted respondent No2 without considering the cases of the petitioners.
4.
Writ petition has been opposed by the respondents Nos. 1 & 2.
In its reply, respondent No1 has admitted the facts relating to appointments and promotions of the petitioners to a large extent.
Only in regard to petitioner No3, it has been stated that he was appointed as Technical Assistant, a Class III post, in the year 1972 on ad hoc basis and was appointed on regular basis on the said post in the year 1974.
He was appointed as Assistant Geologist in the year 1978 by direct recruitment.
Respondent No1 has said that the provisions of the Punjab Agriculture Service (Class I) Rules, 1947, which have been adopted by the Government of Haryana, are not included in Appendix `A' attached to these rules and they are ex-cadre posts.
According to respondent No1 persons who are holding ex-cadre posts in the Ground Water Cell are not entitled to be considered for promotion against the cadre post and in any case the post of Joint Director, Agriculture, is not a post in the line of promotion - So far as the holders of the posts of Hydrologists are concerned.
Further plea of respondent No1 is that the petitioners got out of turn promotion on the posts of Hydrologists on the basis of their special qualification in Geology and, therefore they can have no right to be considered for the post of Joint Director, Agriculture.
5.
In a separate reply, respondent No. 2, has also raised those pleas which have been raised by respondent No1.
In addition, he has pleaded that the petitioners are holding isolated ex-cadre posts against which they were appointed in pursuance of the administrative instructions issued by the Government of Haryana vide Annexure R2/2.
Respondent No2 has further pleaded that the promotion of the petitioners as Hydrologists cannot be considered as one made under the Rules of 1947 because they have not been promoted in consultation with the Haryana Public Service Commission.
Further case of respondent No2 is that the petitioners do not possess five years experience on the post of Deputy Director, Agriculture, or equivalent Class I post so as to be considered eligible for promotion to the post of Joint Director, Agriculture.
6.
The Punjab Agriculture Service (Class-I) Rules, 1947 have been adopted by the Government of Haryana and it is the admitted position that these Rules regulate recruitment to the Haryana Agriculture Service Class I Rule 2 of these Rules contains definitions of various terms and expressions.
Rule 3 lays down the method of recruitment.
In terms of rule 3(1) recruitment to the research and teaching posts shown in Appendix `A' is required to be made by direct recruitment through the Haryana Public Service Commission.
Recruitment to the post shown in Appendix `A' other than research and teaching posts is required to be made by direct recruitment or by promotion as per the decision of the Government.
But in so far as the posts of Deputy Director, Agriculture, are concerned, they are required to be filled atleast 50% by promotion from Class II service.
Rule 4 refers to the qualification for direct recruitment.
Rule 10 refers to the qualifications for appointment by promotion.
Appendix `A' contains a list of post in the Haryana Agriculture Group `A'.
This list is divided into three parts.
The first part deals with research and teaching posts, the second part deals with administrative posts and the third part deals with temporary post in connection with the schemes sanctioned from time to time by the Central Government etc. By notification dated 191973 rule 4(5) has been added in these rules by the Government of Haryana.
Amendments have also been made in rule 10 vide notifications dated 191978, 671979 and 1031989.
Rules 4, 9, 10 and Appendix `A' are relevant in the context of the questions which are required to be determined in this case and, therefore, their reproduction is useful.
These rules are Appendix `A' read as under :-  "4.
Qualification for direct appointment (1) Every candidate for appointment must have received a good general education and possess a degree, diploma or other approved qualifications.
Performance will be given to distinguished graduates of a recognised University.
(2) For administrative posts, weight will be given to the possession of :- (a) a university degree with honours in science or the Diploma of recognised college of agriculture or other like distinction; (b) Practical experience of Agriculture; and (c) Experience of Research work.
(3) For research posts, recruitment will be made from amongst candidates who possess a university degree with honours or other similar qualification in the special science concerned and preference will be given to those who have spent atleast two years in research work under a scientist of established reputation and have studied science from an agricultural point of view.
(4) Other things being equal, preference will be given to a candidate who has himself worked for the cause of National independence or has rendered some outstanding social or public service.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub Rules (1) to (4) the minimum qualification and experience in respect of the following posts shall be as under :- Sr. No.
Designation of Post Academic Qualifications and experience if any, for direct recruitment.
1.
Deputy Director of Agriculture (a) Atleast 2nd Class MSc.
in Agriculture from a recognised Indian or Foreign University.
(b) Five years practical experience in Agriculture Research or Extension or both after acquiring the minimum basic qualifications.
(c) Adequate knowledge of Hindi.
9.
Appointments to the Service  All appointments to the service will be made by government after consultation with the Commission, provided that it will not be necessary to consult the Commission in cases of officiating promotion to posts where at the time of making the promotions there is reason to suppose that the officiating promotion will be for not more than six months.
10.
Qualifications for Appointment by Promotion  Appointments to the Service by promotion of officers belonging to the Class II Service, including temporary officers or the holders of temporary posts in the Class II service; will be made by selection on the advice of the Commission on the basis of :-  (i) Merit (ii) Special training and experience required for the post and (iii) Approved service.
Provided that the minimum academic qualifications and experience, if any, for appointment other than by direct recruitment to the following posts shall be as shown against each :- Sr. No.
Designation of post Academic qualifications and experience if any, for appointment other than by direct recruitment 1.
Additional Director of Agricuture Five years experience on the post of Joint Director of Agriculture or equivalent posts.
2.
Joint Director of Agriculture Five years experience on the post of Deputy Director of Agriculture or equivalent Class-I post.
3.
Deputy Director Agriculture (i) A degree or diploma in Agriculture from recognised Indian or Foreign University.
(ii) Five years practical experience in Agriculture Research or extension or both.
4.
Joint Director (Statistics) Five years experience on the post of Deputy Director (Stat) or equivalent Class-I post.
5.
Agriculture Engineer Five years experience as Assistant Agricultural Engineer or Subject Matter Specialist (Engineering) or Sub-Divisional Officer (Gobar Gas Plant).''
APPENDIX `A'  List of posts in the Punjab Agricultural Service Group `A'.
Designation of post Existing number of posts I (a) Research posts Analytical Chemist one Fruit Specialist One Entomonologist One Economic Botonist for cereals, cotton & oil seeds One Plant Pathologist One Economic Botanist for milets One I (b) Teaching Principal, Govt.
Agricultural College, Ludhiana One II Other posts- Administrative + Director of Agriculture One Additional Director of Agriculture One Joint Director of Agriculture Six Deputy Director of Agriculture Fifteen Marketing Officer One Temporary posts in connection with the schemes sanctioned from time to time by the Central Govt., State Govt., Indian Council of Agricultural Research and Commodity Committees such as Indian Central Cotton Committee, Indian Central Oil Seeds Committee, Indian Central Sugarcane Committee etc.
Classification to be made according to the nature of the post to be declared by Govt., viz, Research, Teaching and Engineering or Administrative.
+ State Biochemist One Vegetable Botanist One Economic Botanist for sugarcane One Statistician One Cotton Extension Officer One 7.
The first argument of Shri JSKhehar, learned counsel for the petitioners, is that the posts of Hydrologists, against which the petitioners were promoted, have been sanctioned in the Ground Water Cell as administrative posts and, therefore, they will be deemed to be in the cadre.
Learned Counsel argued that the action of the Government in promoting the petitioners as Hydrologists, who were holding Class II posts, shows that the posts of Hydrologists have been treated as higher in the ladder of promotion vis-a-vis the posts of Haryana Agricultural Service Class II The assignment of seniority to the petitioners in the category of administrative posts is conclusive of the fact that the posts of Hydrologists constitute a part of the cadre under the Rules of 1947, argued Shri Khehar.
Learned Assistant Advocate General and Shri Malhotra, on the other hand, argued that the mere creation of the posts of Hydrologists as administrative posts will not make these posts as part of the cadre constituted under the Rules of 1947.
Learned counsel argued that encadrement of a post in the service can be made only by amendment of Rules made under Proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India, and as no such amendment has been made by the Governor of Haryana for encadrement of the post of Hydrologists in the Rules of 1947, administrative order (Annexure P.1) cannot be treated as having the effect of bringing the posts of Hydrologists in the cadre.
8.
The expression "Class II Service" has been defined in rule 2(a) as the Haryana Agricultural Service Class II The word `service' has been defined in rule 2(f) as the Haryana Agricultural Service Class I Rule 3(1) and (2) refers to the posts shown in Appendix `A'.
Part III of Appendix `A' empowers the Government to classify temporary posts sanctioned in connection with the schemes of the Central Government, State Government etc. as research, teaching or administrative posts.
A reading of the various provisions of the Rules of 1947 and particularly Appendix `A' shows that the rule - making authority has envisaged that the various cadres in the Haryana Agricultural Service Class I would consist of temporary as well as permanent posts.
In their very nature, the schemes sanctioned by the Central Government, the State Government etc. are of temporary duration and, therefore, the posts created for such schemes are ordinarily temporary.
Nevertheless, such temporary posts form part of the cadre in view of the fact that the Government has been authorised to classify these posts in any of the three categories, i.e., research, teaching or administrative.
A look at Annexure P.1 also shows that the Government has exercised its powers in terms of part III of Appendix `A' of 1947 Rules for declaring the posts of Hydrologists/Geologists and other posts mentioned in that order as administrative posts.
Therefore, Shri Khehar is right in making the submission that the posts of Hydrologists against which the petitioners were promoted constitute a part of the cadre.
The mere fact that the petitioners were promoted without the consultation of the Haryana Public Service Commission does not in any manner change the position.
Orders of promotion of the petitioners, which have been placed on record by the rival parties, unmistakably show that the petitioners have been promoted as Hydrologists (HAS-I) from the lower posts of Assistants Geologists (HAS- II).
Apparently, the Government did not consider it proper to consult the Haryana Public Service Commission because these posts were to be filled by direct recruitment for which requisition was to be sent to the Haryana Public Service Commission.
The order passed in favour of Sunil Kapoor petitioner No3 further shows that the matter was referred to the Haryana Public Service Commission for its approval.
The mere fact that the Haryana Public Service Commission has not given its approval will not in any manner detract from the fact that the petitioners have been promoted against the temporary posts of Hydrologists, which form part of the cadre under the Rules of 1947.
9.
The contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners that they have been denied consideration for promotion to the post of Joint Director, Agriculture, at the time of issue to Annexure P.6 and, therefore, their right of equality as guaranteed by Articles 14 and 16 has been infringed required a close scrutiny.
Shri Khehar argued that being members of Haryana Agricultural Service Class I, the petitioners have been placed at Sr. Nos. 33 to 35 in the seniority list Annexure P2 and, therefore, without considering their cases respondent No. 2, whose name finds place at Sr. No. 36, could not have promoted as Joint Director, Agriculture.
Ms. Ritu Bahri and Mr. Malhotra have on the other hand argued that even if the posts of Hydrologists are treated as part of the cadre, the petitioners cannot make any claim for promotion because they do not fulfil the requisite experience which could entitle them for consideration for promotion to the post of Joint Director, Agriculture.
Learned counsel pointed out that the petitioners were given promotions as Hydrologists without any consideration to the cases of a large number of persons whose names have been placed above them in the gradation list of HAS.
Class II (Annexure R.1) and, therefore, they cannot get a march over more senior persons in the matter of promotions to the post of Joint Director, Agriculture.
10.
Persual of Annexures R.2/2 and R.2/3 shows that the posts of Hydrologists were created by the Government in the Ground Water Cell vide order dated 27111980.
The Government issued an administrative order laying down the qualifications for the posts of Hydrologists etc.
This administrative order was necessitated in view of the fact that neither rule 4 nor rule 10 makes any reference to the posts of Hydrologists nor these rules stipulate the qualifications for the various posts sanctioned vide Annexure R2/2.
Government's order Annexure R2/3, which was issued with the approval of the Haryana Public Service Commission, can appropriately be termed as an order issued on exercise of the administrative powers of the Government and it was intended to fill in the gap in the Rules of 1947.
This action of the Government was perfectly justified because 1947 Rules are silent on the question of qualifications for the posts of Hydrologists etc.
In terms of Annexure R2/3 only a person having three years experience as Assistant Geologist or its equivalent post could be appointed as Hydrologists and as the petitioners were having the requisite experience, they were promoted in the years 1982 and 1983 notwithstanding the fact that they were junior to others in HAS.Class II Perusal of rule 4(5) shows that for the post of Deputy Director, Agriculture, a person is required to possess atleast 2nd Class MSc.
in Agriculture from a recognised Indian or a foreign University, five years' practical experience in agriculture research or extension or both after acquiring the minimum qualifications and adequate knowledge of Hindi in so far as direct recruitment is concerned.
For promotion to the post of Deputy Director, Agriculture, a person must possess a degree or diploma in agriculture from a recognised Indian or a foreign University and five years' practical experience in agriculture research or extension or both.
For the post of Joint Director, Agriculture, which is required to be filled by promotion, 5 years' experience on the post of Deputy Director, Agriculture, or equivalent Class I post, is essential.
Similarly, for the post of Joint Director Statistics, five years' experience on the post of Deputy Director, Statistics, or equivalent Class I post, is essential.
A cumulative reading of the rules as well as the order Annexure R2/3 clearly shows that the rule - making authority as well as the Government have designedly prescribed separate qualifications for different posts and the rules as well as the administrative order envisage promotion of a junior person who is qualified for such promotion.
A senior person in HAS.
Class II can be denied promotion if he is not qualified for a particular post or a class of posts.
This, in fact, happened in the case of the petitioners who were promoted as Hydrologists notwithstanding their lower position in the seniority list in HAS Class II  11.
The petitioners have not claimed that they were holding the posts of Deputy Directors of Agriculture on the date of issue of order Annexure P.6 whereas respondent No. 2 was holding the post of Deputy Director, Agriculture, and had acquired almost 10 years' experience on the date of issue of order Annexure P.6.
12.
Argument of Shri Khehar that the petitioners should be deemed to be holding equivalent Class I posts cannot be accepted.
Though the word `equivalent' has not been defined in the Rules, this term has acquired a definite meaning in the service jurisprudence.
A post can be considered as equivalent to another post only if the two posts carry similar qualifications and the duties required to be discharged by the holders of the two posts are also similar apart from an identity of pay-scales.
The presence of all the elements is essential for treating one post as equivalent to the other.
The mere identity of pay-scales cannot be treated as sufficient for treating one post as equivalent to the other.
The post of Deputy Director, Agriculture, can be filled only from amongst those who possess a degree or diploma in Agriculture with a specific experience.
A person holding the post of a Hydrologists does not necessarily possess degree or diploma in Agriculture and in fact it is not the case of the petitioners that any one of them does possess degree or diploma in Agriculture.
Similarly, a person working as Hydrologist cannot claim that he has acquired experience in agriculture research or extension or both.
In fact such a claim has not been made by the petitioners.
It is also not their case that duties required to be performed by the Deputy Director, Agriculture, on the one hand, the Hydrologists on the other, are similar.
Though the holders of the two posts may be working in the field of agriculture, their duties cannot be treated as synonymous.
Therefore, the post of a Hydrologist cannot be treated as equivalent to the post of Deputy Director, Agriculture, even though such a post may fall in the category of Class I posts.
Acceptance of the plea of the learned counsel for the petitioners that the post of a Hydrologist should be treated as equivalent to that of a Deputy Director, Agriculture, would logically lead to the consequence that the post of Hydrologists should also be treated as equivalent to that of Deputy Director (Statistics).
This, in my opinion, would lead to an absurd situation.
A person working as Hydrologist will then claim promotion to the post of Joint Director, Statistics, as well as Joint Director, Agriculture, despite the fact that he may not have worked even for a single day in the field of agriculture research or extension or statistics.
Therefore, the claim of the petitioners to be considered eligible for promotion to the post of Joint Director, Agriculture, has to be rejected notwithstanding their higher position in the seniority list of HAS.
Class I Logically, it must be held that by promoting respondent No2 as Joint Director, Agriculture, respondent No1 has not violated the petitioner's right of equality.
In the result, the writ petition fails and the same is hereby dismissed.