Harjit Singh Bedi, J. (Oral) - Civil Writ Petition Nos. 18899, 19219 of 1997, 17337, 17911 and 17935 of 1998 are being disposed of by a common judgment.
The facts have been taken from Civil Writ Petition No. 18899 of 1997.
2.
The petitioners took the joint entrance test held by the Punjab State Board of Technical Education and Industrial Training, respondent No. 1 in June 1996 for admission to various disciplines in Engineering.
On the basis of their merit in the joint entrance test, the petitioners were granted admission in the Thapar Polytechnic, Patiala, respondent No. 2 (hereinafter called the `Polytechnic').
The petitioners appeared in the 1st and 2nd semester examination of their respective courses and were ultimately given admission to the 3rd semester through the result of the 1st and 2nd semesters had, in the meanwhile, not been declared.
The petitioners also completed the course of instruction for the 3rd semester and were awaiting the start of the examination thereof when a notice, Annexure P-2, dated 21111997 was put on the notice board pointing out that as they had failed to earn 26 credit points upto July 1997, they were not eligible to sit in the 3rd semester examinations, which were to be held in December 1997.
It is the petitioners' case that they were caught totally unawares by the notice and have accordingly approached this Court by way of present writ petition, impugning the notice, Annexure P-2, on the ground that it was without jurisdiction and in violation of the Examination Rules.
It has also been prayed that the stipulation that the petitioners were required to earn 26 credits before they could be permitted to sit in the 3rd semester examination was bad and that in any case the rigour of this condition needed to be relaxed for the reasons given in the writ petition.
3.
Notice of motion was issued in this case on December 19, 1997 and the petitioners where permitted to sit in the 3rd semester examination subject to further directions that may be given in the case.
It is the conceded position that under the interim orders of this Court passed from time to time, the petitioners in CWP Nos. 18899 and 19219 of 1997 have taken all the six semester examinations as of now but the result thereof has not been declared on account of the pendency of the present litigation.
4.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of respondent No. 1.
It has been pleaded that the petitioners had been granted admission to a scheme called the Multipoint Entry and Credit System (hereinafter called the `Scheme'), which had been introduced in the year 1995 in the Thapar Polytechnic, Patiala with the express purpose of improving the quality and standards of technical education.
It has also been pleaded that as per this scheme, the assessment of the student's merit was to be made on the basis of credits and a minimum total of 145 credits were necessary in order to clear the course.
It has further been pleaded that each candidate was required to earn 18% of the 145 credits (equivalent to 26 credits) by the end of the 2nd semester before he could be allowed to continue in the 3rd semester and that if such a candidate failed to reach this level of proficiency, he was to be asked to leave the course.
It has further been explained that the scheme had been formulated under the auspices of the World Bank and had in fact been implemented on a trial basis in the year 1995.
It has also been highlighted that as per the prospectus for the year 1996-97, Annexure R-1/1, the petitioners were fully aware of the fact that they were being granted admission under the Scheme and the conditions of its application and that the provisions of the credit system had been set out in the prospectus itself.
5.
A written statement similar in content has been filed by respondent No. 2 as well but specific reference has been made to the details of the scheme and in particular to sub-rule (4) of Rule 72 with regard to the requirement of 145 credits in all with 26 credits at the end of the 2nd semester.
It has also been clarified that the result of the 2nd semester examination had been declared on 4.11.1997 and 10111997 and that on the receipt of representations from various quarters, the answering respondent had forwarded the applications for a mercy chance to respondent No. 1.
A copy of this communication has been appended as Annexure R-2/1.
6.
A replication has also been filed by the petitioners and it was at this stage that a categorical statement was made for the first time by the petitioners that they were unaware of the stipulation of obtaining 26 credits being a condition precedent for going on to the 3rd semester and alternatively that they were in any case governed by the Examination Rules of July, 1989, appended as Annexure P-3 to this petition.
A replication identical in content has been filed to the reply filed on behalf of respondent No. 2.
Various other documents have been put on record during the course of the long hearing of the petition and at one stage, it had been urged by the learned counsel for the petitioners that the Scheme had in fact not been adopted by the Polytechnic nor sanctioned by the State Government and as such it could not be enforced.
7.
Respondent No. 1 thereafter filed Civil Misc. Nos. 9541 and 9542 of 1999 pointing out that the scheme had been adopted by the Polytechnic as was clear from Annexure A-1, dated 13101995, whereas, sanction as also the clearance for the expenses involved had been given by the State Government, vide Annexure A-2 way back on 23.1.1992.
8.
Mr. Deepak Agnihotri, the learned counsel for the petitioner, has raised three basic arguments during the course of the hearing.
He has first argued that as the examinations till date were being conducted by respondent No. 1, the Board, the examinations were to be governed by the Examination Rules, Annexure P-3, which had been adopted on 16.8.1993 and as these Rules did not provide for the detention of a candidate for admission to the 3rd semester on failure to earn 26 credits, the action of the respondents was contrary to law.
In this connection, an alternative plea has also been raised by reference to Section 38 of the Punjab State Board of Technical Education and Industrial Training Act, 1992, which provided for the promulgation of the Rules by notification in the official gazette and as no notification, as visualised, had been published, the Scheme could not be enforced.
He has also urged that the petitioners had as on the date of the notice, Annexure P-2, dated 21111997, completed their instruction for the 1st and 2nd semesters and it was only at the time when they were to take the 3rd semester examination that they had been held ineligible on account of shortage of credits and as the petitioners were not made aware of this condition, they were not bound by it and as such were entitled to go on to the 3rd semester under the Examination Rules, Annexure P-3.
He has finally submitted that the Principal of the Polytechnic had vide Annexure R-2/1 informed the Board that the Scheme had not been fully implemented and that as the result of the petitioners for the 1st and 2nd semesters had been declared late, the rigour of the credit system qua these students needed to be relaxed in the given facts of the case.
9.
Mr. Ramesh Kumar, the learned counsel for the another set of writ petitioners, has in addition argued that the Scheme had not been approved by the Board and in the light of this position, the petitioners were not bound by its terms.
He too has relied upon the Examination Rules, to contend that the petitioners could not be held back at the 3rd semester stage and were to be allowed to proceed to the examination for the 3rd semester in the light of Rule 6(i) and (ii) of these Rules.
10.
The learned counsel for the parties have been heard at very great length through hearings spreading over several months.
As the petitioners of CWP Nos. 18899 and 19219 of 1997 had, in the meanwhile, and under the interim orders of this Court, completed the course of six semesters, I had more than once requested Mr. Patwalia, the learned counsel appearing for respondents 1 and 2, to get instructions from the Board as to whether these petitioners could be accommodated.
He sought adjournments time and again for the purpose but ultimately expressed his helplessness in the matter pointing out that it would set a bad precedent and in any case the observations of the Supreme Court in Special Leave Petition (Civil) Nos. 21946-47 of 1997 (Thapar Institute of Engineering and Technology Patiala and another v. Onkar Singh and others, decided on 1041995 in Civil Writ Petition No. 11327 of 1994), precluded the Board and the Polytechnic from giving any such concession.
11.
It is in this background that the matter has been finally examined by me on merits.
As would be evident, the primary question would be as to whether the petitioners were aware of the requirements of the Scheme more particularly of the fulfilment of the 26 credits system and as to whether the scheme had in fact been enforced in a valid way.
12.
In the prospectus for the years 1996-97, Annexure P-1, it has been clearly provided that the Scheme was being introduced only at the Polytechnic with effect from 1995.
In the subsequent paras, the various aspects of the scheme with regard to the entry in the course, nature of subjects that were available, the criteria and the details of the credit system and the method of the determination of the credit, were clearly laid down and it was specifically provided that a student would have to earn 145 credits for the award of a diploma.
It is, therefore, obvious that the 145 credits would have to spread over three years i.e. six semesters constituting the course.
Mr. Agnihotri has, however, laid great emphasis on the fact that the prospectus did not postulate that a candidate had to earn 26 credits before he should be permitted to go to the 3rd semester and has urged that as this fact was not known to the petitioners and had not been published anywhere, they could not be bound by this provision.
13.
To my mind, this argument lacks merit for the reason that the initial and primary grievance of the petitioners in the writ petition was that a relaxation be given in the requirement of 26 credits as the result of 1st and 2nd semester had been declared late and, in the meanwhile, the petitioners had gone on to the 3rd semester and had been stopped short from taking the 3rd semester examination just before it was due and that the delay in the declaration of the result of the first semesters had brought about a loss of two years as had the result been declared in time, they would have been able to take their chance in some other course.
In the prospectus, Annexure P-1, it has been clearly provided that the students would be admitted to this course only at the Polytechnic and that the successful candidates would be awarded diplomas by respondent No. 1, the Board.
The respondents have also produced before me the detailed Scheme and in sub-rule (4) of Rule 72, it has been clearly provided that a candidate was called upon to obtain 18% of the total credits by the end of the 2nd semester, which would amount to 26 credits in all.
It is also clear that the first course under this scheme was started in the year 1995 and the petitioners' course was in fact the second one.
It is, therefore, difficult to believe that the petitioners were unaware of the requirement of getting 26 credits.
Moreover, in the body of the writ petition, the petitioners have not stated that they remained unaware of the Scheme and have primarily urged that relaxation be granted to them and that the aforesaid provision be quashed.
The plea of ignorance has been taken by the petitioners, for the first time, in the replication that they filed in response to the written statement, in which the respondents had taken a stand that as the petitioners were fully aware of the scheme, they could not challenge the same at this stage.
14.
Mr. Agnihotri has then argued that the petitioners were in fact bound by the conditions laid down in Annexure P-3 i.e., Examination Rules, framed by the Board and adopted with effect from 16.8.1993 and these Rules did not provide for any grading and as a matter of fact, Rule 6 visualised the promotion of a candidate from lower to the higher semester without clearing the lower semester in certain circumstances and as such, the petitioners could not be relegated to the 1st semester stage.
To my mind, this argument also lacks merit.
It is the conceded position that the Scheme has been formulated under the auspices of the World Bank in only 1 out of the 33 Polytechnics in the State, i.e. the respondent No. 2, Polytechnic.
Moreover, the petitioners took admission under the prospectus, Annexure P-1, and when the same is read with Annexure P-3, it is apparent that two courses visualised are totally desperate (separate ?)
as Annexure P-1 provided for a full course from start to finish whereas, Annexure P-3 the Examination Rules framed by the Board with regard to the diploma in Engineering examination held in the other Polytechnics did not visualize any grading or requirement of minimum credits for going up the ladder.
It bears reiteration that Annexure P-1, the prospectus issued for the Scheme provided not only for the procedure for admission to the course but also the duration of the course, the method of assessment and the fulfilment of the requirement of a minimum credit grading.
The Rules, Annexure P-3, could not, therefore, apply to such a situation.
As a matter of fact, Mr. Patwalia appears to be right when he contends that the Scheme was a complete and self-contained one dealing in detail with the conduct of the entire course.
In this connection, he has referred to Annexure P-1 once again to contend that as per the note given in paragraph 2 at page 3, the students admitted under the Scheme would receive instruction at the Polytechnic and the Board, respondent No. 1, would be awarding only diplomas to the successful candidates as a result of examination to be held by it.
15.
Faced with this situation, Mr. Agnihotri has argued that as the Scheme had not been notified as a provided by Section 38 of the Act, it could not be enforced.
To my mind, this argument too lacks merit.
As already mentioned above, the scheme, Annexure A-1, had been adopted after having been sanctioned by the State Government, vide Annexure A-2.
Moreover, Section 38 of the Act is not attracted in this situation and the matter would be covered by Section 39 of the Act, which provides that the Board may, with the approval of the Government, make regulations consistent with the Act and the rules framed thereunder and sub-clause (i) provides for the manner of recognition of the courses of study, the type of training and examinations to be conducted by an institution for the purposes of eligibility for the diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions.
It is appear (apparent ?)
from Annexure A-2 that the State Government had not only given the clearance but the sanction to the start of Scheme in the year 1992 although the course had been initially started in the year 1995.
16.
Mr. Agnihotri's final argument with regard to the hardship suffered by the petitioners of CWP Nos. 18899 and 19219 of 1997 must now be dealt with.
It is true that the result of the 1st and 2nd semester examinations was declared late i.e. on 4.10.1997 and 10111997 about a month before the end of the 3rd semester course and in this connection reference needs be made to Annexure R-2/1 appended to the written statement of the College.
It is also true that the examination for the 2nd semester had been taken by the petitioners in July, 1997 and the result had been declared 4 months thereafter and that if the petitioners been informed about their failure to get 26 credits within a reasonable time, they might have opted out of the Scheme and gone on to some other course.
It was in this light that the Principal of the Polytechnic vide Annexure R-2/1 had sent a fax message to the Secretary of the Board, recommending that relaxation ought to be given to the petitioners and other similarly situated students with regard to the 26 credit points.
This request was, however, not acceded to with the result that the petitioners had to approach this Court and as of now, the petitioners have taken not only the 3rd but the 4th, 5th and 6th semester examinations as well and are awaiting the outcome of the writ petition for the declaration of their results.
The petitioners in the other connected writ petitions, however, who had joined the course in the year 1997 ie after two years of the start of the course, had received no interim orders from this Court and after having failed to obtain 26 credits by the end of the 2nd semester, were asked to leave the Polytechnic.
It was for this reason that I had requested Mr. Patwalia, the learned counsel representing the two main respondents, to get instructions as to whether the petitioners of CWP Nos. 18899 and 19219 of 1997 alone could be accommodated.
As already noted, Mr. Patwalia, however, could not persuade the respondents to accommodate the petitioners.
I am of the opinion that it would be extremely harsh to non-suit the petitioners after the interim orders that they have received from this Court but in the light of the observations of the Supreme Court in Thapar Institute of Engineering and Technology, Patiala's case (supra), it would be impossible, notwithstanding my personal feelings about the matter, to interfere on behalf of the petitioners in these two writ petitions as well for reasons that follow.
The Thapar Institute of Engineering and Technology, Patiala, which is a sister concern of the Polytechnic had a clause in their curriculum, which also provided that a candidate had to secure a certain grade average to continue with the course and on failure to do so was required to leave the Course.
Some students, who could not obtain the necessary grades approached this Court by way of C.W.P.
No. 11327 of 1994 praying for a mercy chance and the High Court in a short order observed that as some students had been given a mercy chance in the previous year, there was no reason as to why the petitioners should also not be given one this year as well.
This direction was made on 791994.
The order was challenged in appeal and in the Hon'ble Supreme Court in its order dated 1041995 observed that the practice of the Court in giving mercy chances repeatedly while observing in each order that the concession was not to be cited as a precedent, was to be seriously deprecated.
It was directed as under :  "At this stage, it would be inappropriate to snatch from them the relief granted by the High Court.
Therefore, after expressing our strongest reservation to the course adopted by the High Court, we keep the direction issued by it in favour of the respondents intact confining it to its own facts and circumstances, making it clear that henceforth no such order in accord therewith shall ever be passed either by the petitioner-Institute on its own, unless it chooses to amend its Rules and Regulations, or by the High Court, when approached for the purpose."
17.
Mr. Agnihotri has, however, relying upon the observations of the Supreme Court that as the students before it had already passed out of the course, it would not be appropriate to `snatch' from them the relief granted by the High Court has made a prayer for a similar order in the light of the fact that the petitioners herein too have taken the examination upto the 6th semester, under the interim directions of this Court.
To my mind, this prayer cannot be accepted.
In the face of the unequivocal language used by the Supreme Court, it would (notwithstanding the unfortunate situation in which the petitioners stand placed) be absolutely imprudent on my part to even entertain the possibility of giving a similar relief to the petitioners.
The observations that have been made hereinabove would be relevant in CWP Nos. 18899 and 19219 of 1997.
No benefit can, however, be taken by the petitioners in the other cases because they had joined the Polytechnic in the year 1997 and have already abandoned the course as they had obtained no interim orders in their petitions.
For the reasons recorded above, these writ petitions are dismissed.
Dasti order.
Petitions dismissed.