N K Sodhi, J - The only claim made by the petitioner in this petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution is for the issuance of an appropriate writ, order or direction to the Punjab State Cooperative Milk Producers Federation Ltd, Chandigarh (for short, Milkfed) to release to him the grade of Rs. 510-800/ on the principle of `equal pay for equal work' as according to him all other carpenters working with Milkfed are drawing that grade.
2.
Petitioner was employed as a carpenter with the Punjab Dairy Development Corporation Ltd, Chandigarh (hereinafter referred to as PDDC) which was incorporated as a government company under the provisions of the Companies Act, 1956.
He was given his pay in the pay scale of Rs. 400-600 (revised) though there were carpenters who were also working in the Grade of Rs. 510-800 (revised).
According to the petitioner, this amounted to violation of his fundamental right under Article 14 of the Constitution because of his being treated unequally in the matter of pay scale.
The assets and liabilities of PDDC were taken over on 941983 by Milkfed which is a cooperative society registered under the Punjab Cooperative Societies Act, 1961.
All the employees of PDDC were initially taken over by Milkfed on notional deputation and thereafter options were called from the employees for their permanent absorption in Milkfed.
Sub-clauses (i) and (ii) of clause 8 of the terms and conditions of absorption which are relevant read as under :-  ``8.
Other Terms and Conditions: (i) The employees shall be allowed to draw the basic pay, which they are presently getting in the pay scale of PDDC plus the allowances as admissible thereon according to the Milkfed Rules/Instructions.
In case any employee is drawing pay less than the minimum of the pay scale against which he is absorbed, he will be allowed the pay at the minimum of the pay scale of the post.
(Presently DA, HRA and CCA is being allowed to Milkfed employees as per Punjab Govt. rates).
(ii) No employee would be placed in lower pay scale than that being held by him presently as an employee of PDDC.''
The petitioner gave his option for permanent absorption in Milkfed.
3.
The case of the respondents is that in PDDC all appointments upto the grade of Rs. 400-600/- were made by the Managers of the Milk Plants and for appointment on the posts with higher pay scale including Rs. 510-800/-, the Managing Director alone was competent.
Before the assets and liabilities of PDDC were taken over by Milkfed, some posts of carpenters in the scale of Rs. 510-800/- fell vacant and the Managing Director invited applications from all eligible persons and the petitioner also applied but he could not be selected.
S/Shri Hazari Lal and Jarnail Singh were, however, selected and appointed carpenters in the scale of Rs. 510-800/-.
After the employees were taken over by Milkfed, the latter had no post of carpenters in the scale of Rs. 510-800/-.
Those carpenters who were already drawing this scale in PDDC had to be accommodated in view of the terms and conditions of absorption and they could not be placed in the lower pay scale than what they were drawing with PDDC.
For this reason, all those carpenters from PDDC who were drawing pay in the scale of Rs. 510-800/- continued to draw that scale and the same was made personal to them making it clear that they would continue to draw so long as they were in the service of Milkfed.
It is the firm stand of Milkfed that they have carpenters working in each Milk Plant and all of them are drawing pay in the scale of Rs. 400-600/- as this is the only scale for them in terms of its staffing pattern.
As observed earlier, only a few of the carpenters who came from PDDC in the pay scale of Rs. 510-800/- are drawing that scale presently which is personal to them.
It is further stated on behalf of the respondents that S/Shri Hazari Lal and Jarnail Singh are drawing pay in the scale of Rs. 510-800/- because they have come from PDDC and were selected to this grade before the assets and liabilities of PDDC were taken over by Milkfed.
The petitioner competed with them but could not be selected.
Since the grade of all the carpenters in Milkfed is Rs. 400-600/-, the petitioner is not entitled to the higher grade.
In view of the aforesaid facts as stated by Milkfed.
It is submitted that the petitioner is not entitled to the higher scale of Rs. 510-800/- and that there is no violation of the principle of `equal pay for equal work' as alleged by the petitioner.
4.
I have heard counsel for the parties at length and find no merit in the grievance made by the petitioner.
It is true that some of the carpenters in Milkfed are drawing pay in the scale of Rs. 510-800/- but they are those who have come from PDDC and in view of the terms of their absorption, their pay scale could not be reduced.
The pay scale has, therefore, been made personal to them.
Besides a handful of those carpenters, there is no other carpenter with Milkfed who is drawing higher pay scale of Rs. 510-800/-.
As a matter of fact, the pay scale of a carpenter in Milkfed according to its staffing pattern is Rs. 400-600/- which now stands revised.
The principle of equal pay for equal work is after-all a facet of the equality clause enshrined in Article 14 of the Constitution and unless the petitioner can show some discrimination he cannot claim the higher grade.
I am of the opinion that there is no discrimination as all the carpenters of Milkfed are drawing pay in the same scale i.e. Rs. 400-600/- (subsequently revised) and the petitioner cannot claim parity with those carpenters who came from PDDC and were drawing pay in the scale of Rs. 510-800/-.
The petitioner has also come from PDDC and he too competed for this higher grade and having failed he cannot now make a grievance of the same.
5.
In the result, the writ petition is dismissed leaving the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.