VK Jhanji, J. (Oral) - The grievance made by the petitioners here is that the pay scale of the post of Assistant Pump Driver is Rs. 950-1800/-, whereas they, being Assistant Pump Drivers are being paid salary in the pay scale of Rs. 750-1350/-.
2.
It has been alleged in the petition that petitioners had earlier been appointed as Pump Drivers on daily wage basis.
Thereafter, they were appointed as Assistant Pump Drivers on workcharged basis in the pay scale of Rs. 750/-, 1350/-, with an initial salary of Rs. 750/- plus other allowances as sanctioned by the Board of Directors of the Punjab Small Industries and Export Corporation (in Short, the Corporation) from time to time.
Vide representations dated 1891991, petitioners submitted before the Corporation that scale attached to the post of Assistant Pump Driver is Rs. 950-1800/-, whereas they are being paid salary in the scale of Rs. 750-1350/- and, therefore, they be also released the pay scale of Rs. 950-1800/-.
It has further been stated that the Authorities are sitting tight over the matter and not releasing the desired scale, though as per Government instruction is admissible to the employees of the Corporation.
Petitioners have annexed with the petition, Annexure P-3, a letter of the Punjab Government specifying the scale of Rs. 950-1800/- in respect of Assistant Pump Drivers working on work- charged basis in the Public Health branch of the government.
Annexure P-4 is letter dated 17101989 whereby Corporation had adopted the revised pay scales w.e.f.
111986 for the work-charged staff of the Engineering wing on the pattern of scales of pay of Punjab Govt. work-charged staff of the P.W.D., as notified vide Punjab Govt. notification i.e. Annexure P-3.
Initially, petitioners in the petition mentioned that one Ravinder Singh, Assistant Pump Driver, who is working in the Corporation at Focal Point, Khanna, on work- charged basis has been given the scale of Rs. 950-1800/-, whereas the same scale had been denied to them.
3.
Respondents in their written statement have taken the stand that no Assistant Pump Driver has been given the pay scale of Rs. 950-1800/-.
As regards Ravinder Singh, it has been stated that there is no employee in the name of Ravinder Singh working as such, but in the replication the petitioners have clarified that the person concerned is not Ravinder Singh, but one Ravinder Nath.
Petitioners also annexed with the replication an order of transfer, Annexure P-5, showing the transfer of Ravinder Nath from Khanna to Sangrur, and also Annexure P-7, showing that the said Ravinder Nath has been drawing salary in the pay scale of Rs. 950-1800/-.
Respondents in their rejoinder have not denied this.
In the rejoinder, the plea taken by them is that the Corporation has framed its own promotion policy vide letter dated 1571991, thereby superseding all previous decisions/notifications, and according to the said promotion policy, petitioners have been placed, in the scale of Rs. 810-1440/-.
4.
Having heard the counsel for petitioners at some length, I am of the view that the writ petition deserves to succeed.
The so-called policy which the respondents have annexed with the rejoinder is not in fact a policy, but only a recommendation made by a committee consisting of two Executive Engineers and one S.D.E.
The recommendations contained in the said letter have been made only after the petitioners were appointed to the post of Assistant Pump Drivers.
The policy/recommendations cannot be made applicable to the petitioners because the same were not in vogue at the time when petitioners were appointed.
Respondents in their written statement have not denied that the Assistant Pump Drivers working on work-charged basis in the Public Health Branch of Government of Punjab are drawing salary in the scale of Rs. 950-1800/- w.e.f.
111986.
The scales as specified by the Government have been made applicable to the work-charged staff of the Engineering wing of the Corporation as is evident from letter dated 17101989, Annexure P-4.
Petitioners who have been appointed to the post of Assistant Pump Drivers since 2961990 have not been given the pay scale of Rs. 950-1800/-.
When the same is admissible to the Assistant Pump Operators.
The Corporation itself has given this very scale to Ravinder Nath who is working in Corporation as Assistant Pump Driver.
Accordingly, the action of the respondents being arbitrary, cannot be sustained.
Consequently, this writ petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to release to the petitioners, the pay scale of Rs. 950-1800/- with effect from the date they were appointed to the post.
Petitioners shall also be entitled to interest at the rate of six per cent on the amount due, which shall be paid to them within three months from the date of communication of this order.
Petition allowed.