Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - These two writ petitions, viz. CWP Nos. 1114 of 1994 and 9621 of 1993 raise a common question and consequently they have been listed together for hearing.
The petitioners in these two cases are the employees of the Haryana Urban Development Authority.
Their pay scales have been revised with effect from April 1, 1993.
The pay scales of the persons holding similar posts in the Government and others working in HUDA itself have been revised with effect from May 1, 1990.
The primary claim made by the petitioners is that the differential treatment suffers from the vice of discrimination.
Learned counsel for the parties have referred to the facts as averred in CWP No. 1114 of 1994.
The facts may be briefly noticed.
2.
The petitioners are working in the cadres of Deputy District Attorneys and Assistant District Attorneys.
The posts of Deputy District Attorneys were initially in the pay scale of Rs. 2000-3500.
The Assistant District Attorneys were in the pay scale of Rs. 1640-2900.
These pay scales were revised and raised to Rs. 2375-3600 and Rs. 2000-3500 respectively.
While the persons holding these posts under the State Government have been granted the benefit of the revised scales of pay with effect from May 1, 1990, those working in the Haryana Urban Development Authority have been given the benefit of the revised pay scales with effect from April 1, 1993.
The petitioners aver that various categories of employees given in the Haryana Urban Development Authority have been given the revised scales of pay with effect from May 1, 1990.
On these premises they complain that the action of the respondents infringes the guarantee of equality and is violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
3.
The respondents contest the claim.
According to them, the employees cannot claim modification of their pay scales with effect from a particular date as a matter of right.
The Council of Ministers had taken a decision on May 14, 1990 to give effect (to) the revised pay scales with effect from the 1st of the month in which the proposal was approved..." It has been further averred that even if the Government had not revised pay scales with effect from April 1, 1993 the beneficiaries had no legal right to claim the revision.
4.
Even though no written statement has been filed by the Haryana Urban Development Authority in this case, but in the connected writ petition, viz. CWP 9621 of 1993, a written statement has been filed.
It has been inter alia averred that in the matters of pay scales, the Authority carries out the directions of the State of Haryana through the Haryana Bureau of Public Enterprises, set up by the Government vide notification dated November 20, 1989.
In order to meet the challenge on the ground of discrimination, it has been averred that the pay scales had been unauthorisedly allowed by the Chief Engineer to various employees.
Such an erroneous act by an officer on deputation cannot be taken to be an act of the Authority.
On these grounds, it is prayed that the writ petition be dismissed.
5.
I have heard counsel for the parties.
The only ground of challenge is that the action of the respondents is discriminatory.
6.
Admittedly, the petitioners are working in the cadres of the Deputy District Attorneys and Assistant District Attorneys.
They have been granted the same scales of pay as are sanctioned by the Government in respect of its own employees in these cadres.
The petitioners have averred that their duties are the same as those discharged by the persons working in the Government.
Neither in the reply filed on behalf of the respondents nor at the time of hearing, any facts have been disclosed to show that there is any difference between the petitioners and those working with the Government which may justify a differential treatment.
It is true that the employees working with the respondent-authority are not the employees of the State Government.
However, even the respondent-Authority is an instrumentality of the State.
If the petitioners are discharging substantially the same duties as those performed by the persons working on similar posts in the Government, they are normally entitled to parity of treatment unless it is shown that there is a valid basis for classification.
None having been disclosed, the complaint based on the infraction of Article 14 of the Constitution appears to be well founded.
It can happen that a corporation may be suffering heavy losses.
It may have a good reason to deny a parity of treatment.
However, no such plea has been raised.
Consequently, the claim made by the petitioners appears to be well founded.
7.
It is not only that the State Government has given the revised scales of pay to its employees with effect from May 1, 1990, but even within the Authority, certain categories of officers like Superintending Engineers and Assistant Executive Engineers etc. have been granted the revised scales of pay with effect from May 1, 1989.
Others holding lower posts like those of the Electricians, Assistant Pump Operators have been given the benefit of revised scales of pay with effect from May 1, 1990.
If the employees of the Authority itself have been given the higher scales of pay with effect from May 1, 1989 or May 1, 1990, there appears to be no basis for denying the similar reliefs to the petitioners.
Learned counsel for the respondents submit that the pay scales were erroneously sanctioned by the Chief Engineer to the various categories of employees with effect from May 1, 1990.
Accordingly, it is submitted that the Authority is not bound by a wrong order.
The argument seems to be wholly misconceived.
Even the Chief Administrator of HUDA had granted the revised scales of pay to the Superintending Engineers and various other categories of employees vide order dated May 31, 1991 with effect from May 1, 1989.
Still further, it is nobody's case that the orders were illegal and had been subsequently withdrawn.
On the contrary, it has been admitted that the incumbents of these categories of posts continue to get their pay in the revised scales as granted vide orders, referred to above.
Looked at from any angle, the charge of discrimination is clearly established.
Accordingly, it is held that the petitioners shall be entitled to be placed in the revised scales of pay with effect from May 1, 1990.
Consequential reliefs shall, follow.
The needful shall be done by the respondents within four months from the date of the receipt of a copy of this order.
In the circumstances of these cases, there will be no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.