GS Singhvi, J(Oral) - Though this petition has been filed jointly by Rameshwar son of Makhan Singh and Krishan Chand son of Shiv Lal, learned counsel for the petitioners has made a statement during the course of hearing that he wants to withdraw the writ petition on behalf of Krishan Chand son of Shiv Lal with a liberty to file a fresh writ petition on behalf of that petitioner.
That request has been accepted by a separate order.
Therefore, now I am required to adjudicate upon the claim made by the petitioner Rameshwar son of Makhan Singh.
2.
The land belonging to the family of the petitioner Rameshwar and other landowners of village Khukrana was acquired for the construction of Thermal Power Project Panipat.
The acquisition proceedings were initiated by the State of Haryana and the land was handed over to the Haryana State Electricity Board.
Similar acquisition of lands were made by the Government of Haryana for the Haryana State Electricity Board.
Since the acquisition of the land resulted in depriving the land-owners of their only source of livelihood, the Haryana State of Electricity Board took a policy decision to give employment to one member of the family of the land-owners whose land was acquired.
In pursuance of the policy decision of the respondent-Board, the petitioner Rameshwar made an application dated 24111989 Annexure P.5 and prayed that he may be given employment in accordance with the policy of the Board.
Since he did not get the job or even a reply from the authorities of the Board, the petitioner Rameshwar sent further representations to the concerned authorities.
In response to one of such representations, the Executive Engineer, Civil Works, Division III, PTPP, Panipat, wrote Annexure P2 dated 25111992 and informed the petitioner that the Board has not entertained his application for giving employment in lieu of the land acquired because the said acquisition was not for the Board.
The petitioner once again made representations to the Board but failed to persuade the authorities of the Board to give him employment on a suitable post and, therefore, he has filed this petition and has prayed therein for issue of a writ of mandamus to respondents Nos. 1 and 2 to appoint him on a suitable post in accordance with the policy decision.
3.
The petitioner has alleged that a large number of persons, named in para 4 of the writ petition, whose land was acquired alongwith the land of the petitioner, have been given employment on the posts of Meter Reader/Drivers in the service of the Board but in his case a different treatment has been meted out by the Board and in this manner the Board has violated his fundamental right of equality before law guaranteed under Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
4.
The writ petition has been opposed by respondents Nos. 1 and 2 who have disputed the claim of the petitioner that his land was acquired by the Government of Haryana for the construction of Thermal Power Project.
According to the respondents, the land of the petitioner had in fact been acquired for the construction of Feeder and return channel for supply of water to the Panipat Thermal Plant.
The respondents have further alleged that a scheme was framed by the Board in the year 1985, which was circulated by letter dated 651985 (Annexure R.2) issued by the Secretary, Haryana State Electricity Board, for giving employment to the dependants of the land-owners.
This policy was withdrawn vide Memo.
dated 11.8.1988 (Annexure R.3).
However, subsequently, the Board decided to extend this scheme and in response to the resolution passed by the Board in its meeting dated 2621992 letter Annexure R.4 dated 28.10.1992 was issued for considering the claims of those who had applied up to 13121991 for employment as dependants of the land-owners.
Respondents have pleaded that as the land of the petitioner was not acquired for the construction of the Thermal Power Plant, he is not entitled to any relief by way of employment.
5.
The only argument advanced by the learned counsel for the petitioner is that when similarly situated persons have been given employment in accordance with the policy decision of the respondent-Board, there is no justification for not giving employment to the petitioner Rameshwar.
Learned counsel argued that acquisition of the land for construction of the Feeder and return channel for supplying water to the Panipat Thermal Plant was acquired for the purpose of Thermal Project and, therefore, the Board is not justified in declining employment to the petitioner.
6.
A look at the various documents filed alongwith the writ petition unequivocally show that the land belonging to the family of the petitioner Rameshwar was acquired by the Government in connection with the Panipat Thermal Project.
Construction of Feeder and return channel for supplying water to the Thermal Power Project was nothing but acquisition for the purpose of Thermal Power Plant.
Therefore, there could be no justification for taking the view that the petitioner is not entitled to employment because the acquisition of land belonging to his family was not for the Thermal Power Plant.
Moreover, Annexure P.3 clearly shows that the land belonging to the family of the petitioner had in fact been acquired for the construction of the Panipat Thermal Power Plant.
The award passed on the basis of the acquisition made by the State of Haryana also contains a stipulation that the land was acquired for the purpose of construction of the Panipat Thermal Power Plant, Panipat.
In view of this factual position, the respondents cannot with any element of justification plead that the petitioner is not entitled to the benefit of the policy decision of the Board for giving employment to one dependent of the land-owner whose land is acquired.
7.
No other reason has been put forward by the respondents for not considering the claim of the petitioner for employment.
It has not been denied that the petitioner had made an application as early as on 24111989 for the purpose of employment as a dependant of the land-owner whose land was acquired.
In this view of the matter, the petitioner is entitled to a writ of mandamus against the respondents for appointment in accordance with the policy decision contained in Annexure R.2 read with Annexure R.4.
8.
Consequently, the writ petition is allowed in so far as it relates to Rameshwar son of Makhan Singh.
The respondent-Board and its functionaries are directed to appoint Rameshwar petitioner on a post commensurate with his qualifications within a period of two months from the receipt of a certified copy of this order.
Parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.