Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioners in these 12 writ petitions (viz. CWP Nos. 616, 1136, 1465, 2355, 2360, 2741, 2742, 2783, 4891 of 1992; 5897, 14229 & 14300 of 1993) are aggrieved by the selection for the 11 posts of Assistant Secretaries made by the Haryana State Agricultural Marketing Board.
The facts as averred in C.W.P.
No. 1465 of 1992 may be briefly noticed.
2.
The petitioners are working on different posts in the Board.
On July 16, 1991, the Board advertised 11 posts of Assistant Secretaries.
The petitioners as well as a number of other candidates applied for these posts.
They were interviewed from October 29 to October, 31, 1991.
As a result, respondent Nos. 4 to 19 were selected.
The petitioners aver that the respondents were not eligible for the posts inasmuch as they did not fulfil the qualification of 3 years' experience in a Govt. or Semi-Govt. organisation as prescribed under the rules and mentioned in the advertisement.
3.
No written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondent-Board.
However, written statements have been filed by some of the selected candidates in which the averments made by the petitioners have been controverted.
It has been averred that the selected persons fulfil the qualification as prescribed in the advertisement.
4.
The Motion Bench by its order of February 27, 1992 in C.W.P.
No. 616 of 1992 had directed the Registrar, Cooperative Societies "to verify the certificates of the private respondents by the next day of hearing."
In pursuance to the direction by the Motion Bench, the Assistant Registrar had submitted a report dated May 18, 1992 in respect of three persons viz. M/s. Krishan Kumar, Jagroop Singh and Manohar Lal Bharti.
It was reported that the certificate produced by Krishan Kumar was in conformity with the record of the Society while those issued in cases of the other two persons were not supported by the record of the respective Societies.
This report is on record as Annexure 'X', in C.W.P.
No. 2741 of 1992.
Relying thereon, the learned counsel for the petitioners have contended that the entire selection is tainted with doubt and should be quashed.
On the other hand, learned counsel for some of the selected candidates have pointed out that the ex parte report given by the Assistant Registrar cannot be treated as conclusive so as to set aside the entire selection.
5.
I have heard counsel for the parties.
While it is the prerogative of the employer to lay down qualifications for a post, it appears to be equally clear that such qualifications must have a reasonable relation to the job requirements and only those who fulfil the prescribed qualification should be appointed.
In the present case, the advertisement specifically provided that the candidate must have, besides the academic qualifications, three years' experience in a Govt. office or a Semi-Govt. body.
A person who did not fulfil this qualification would obviously not be eligible to be considered for appointment.
Further, the report sent by the Assistant Registrar clearly shows that the Selection Committee had considered persons who did not actually fulfil this qualification.
In this situation, one view can be that the whole selection is vitiated.
However, as has been rightly pointed out by the learned counsel for the respondents, it may not be fair to upset the entire selection on the basis of the report of the Assistant Registrar especially when it has not even been stated that the selected candidates had been given an opportunity to put forth their view point.
In this situation, it appears to be just and proper to remit the matter to the Chief Administrator of the Board, who will examine the qualifications of each selected person.
In case, the petitioners so desire, they may put for the factual position with regard to each selected candidate in writing.
If on consideration of the material as may be produced by the petitioner, the Chief Administrator finds that there are doubts regarding the eligibility of one or the other candidate, he would give an opportunity to that candidate to show that he fulfilled the qualifications.
Thereafter, the respondent shall decide the matter finally by passing a speaking order.
In case it is found that a person who did not fulfil the prescribed qualification has been selected, the selection and appointment of such persons shall stand quashed.
The needful shall be done within three months from the date of the receipt of a copy of this order.
The writ petitions are accordingly disposed of.
In the circumstances of these cases, there will be no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.