VK Jhanji, J. (Oral) :- In this petition selection of PK Goel respondent No4 to the post of State village and Industry Organizer has been challenged by the petitioner on the ground that respondent No. 4 did not have a requisite qualification prescribed for the post and petitioner alone was eligible to be selected and appointed.
It is not in dispute that the qualification prescribed for the post is a Graduate and at least five years administrative experience as well as experience of Khadi & Village Industries working on a responsible post.
One Balhar Singh son of Naunihal Singh had also challenged the selection of respondent No4 in C.W.P.
No. 12848 of 1991.
The said petition was decided by the Division Bench on 1691993, Before the Division Bench a copy of the certificate showing the qualification of respondent No4 as BA with Economics was produced and hereto it has not been denied that respondent No4 is a Graduate and the other contention that respondent No4 did not have a requisite experience was also repelled by the Division Bench by saying that "the second contention of learned counsel for the petitioner that respondent No.2 has no experience stands belied in view of the fact that the respondent has been serving in the institution - respondent No. 1 for the last about 16 years".
In view of the decision of the Division Bench in C.W.P.
No. 12848 of 1991, I find that respondent No4 had the requisite experience prescribed for the post and was therefore eligible to be considered.
It has come in the written Statement of respondents No.2 and 3 that petitioner too was called to appear in written test but he did not choose to appear and after considering the claim of the candidates including the petitioner, respondent No4 was selected and appointed against the post in question as a result of the overall performance both in written test and the interview.
Accordingly, there being no merit in the petition, the same shall stand dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.