MS Liberhan and KK Srivastave, JJ.
- The only grievance made by the learned counsel for the petitioner is that he was at Sr. No237 in the merit list of All India Pre-Medical/ Pre-Dental Entrance examination held by the Central Board of Secondary Education, Delhi.
The petitioner gave preference of Govt. Medical College Chandigarh as it was held out to be a recognised college.
Though the counsel for Union of India contends that it was never held out so.
Petitioner had now learnt the college being not recognised one, consequently petitioner should be given a chance to exercise for preference for college of study afresh.
2.
The contention of counsel of Union of India cannot be accepted on the face of it.
Once it is stated to be an Institution of Union of India as floated by it, in ordinary course it is accepted that it is recognized one.
Govt. can be attributed the intention of commercial enterprise in education, nor Govt. can be permitted to commercialise education.
In the facts and circumstances of this case, it would be reasonable to infer that it was held out to be recognized institution.
It was only a crude attempt to get out of their promise held out to the people at large or at least given impression by overt or covert act of Govt.  3.
Learned counsel for the respondent-the Medical Council of India has submitted that for recognition of the College, its inspection has already taken place and certain deficiencies which were found were pointed out to the College as well as the concerned University.
4.
Learned counsel for the Medical College has submitted that so far as the deficiency with respect to providing of attached General Hospital, General Hospital Sector 16, Chandigarh having 500 beds has been put at the disposal of the Medical College, Chandigarh.
So far as deficiency in providing the staff is concerned appropriate steps have been taken and the Planning Commission has already sanctioned the funds.
The papers are waiting clearance from the Health Ministry, for according sanction of the posts.
The fact is not being disputed by the counsel of Union of India.
It is further stated that in case the petitioner is permitted to shift his college, one seat will go waste.
Be that as it is without expressing our opinion on the merits of the case, ends of justice would be served if the concerned Ministry is directed to take appropriate steps for sanctioning the posts within one month from today.
Keeping in view the fact, that, since the career of the students is involved for want of recognition because of non-compliance of the deficiencies pointed out by the Medical Council of India, respondent No1 is directed to sanction the posts within one month.
5.
At this stage, it has been pointed out that the sanction of the posts has to be accorded by the Government of India which is not a party though the Director General of Health Service (Medical Examination Cell), New Delhi has been arrayed as respondent No1.
In order to obviate any hypertechnicality, on the oral request of counsel for the petitioner, Union of India is arrayed as party.
Mr. Harinder Singh Giani, Sr. Panel Counsel for Union of India has accepted notice on our direction.
In view of the factual position not in dispute and we are directing to decide the matter, no written statement is required for.
6.
Resultantly, respondent No1 and the newly added respondent are directed to decide the matter with respect to sanctioning of the posts as required by the Medical College, Chandigarh and the Medical Council of India.
We have no doubt that the Union of India and the authorities concerned would rise and act to the occasion, to save and protect the career of more than 150 students who have been admitted in the Govt. College in question.
We have got no doubt that a curtain will be drawn on cold administrative attitude towards the fate of students within one month thereafter of the sanctioning of the posts and the compliance of the objection raised by the Medical Council of India who will consider the case of recognition within 15 days for recognition.
Respondent No. 3 is directed to comply with the deficiencies within one month from the date of sanctioning of the posts.
Appropriate funds will also be released accordingly by Union of India.
With the said observations, the writ petition is disposed of.