SP Kurdukar and Swatanter Kumar, JJ.
- Admitted.
2.
Pleadings of the parties are complete.
By consent writ petition is placed on board and called out for hearing.
3.
The petitioner was appointed as Helper Electrician on 21111977.
The next promotional post is that of Assistant Electrician.
Since the petitioner was not considered for the said promotional post the present writ petition has been filed for the issuance of an appropriate direction.
4.
It appears that at some stage the respondents had amended their eligibility clause and for the promotional post it was prescribed that an employee must be Middle pass.
Since the petitioner was not Middle pass, he was not considered.
It also appears that the said policy was not given effect to and kept in abeyance, Shri Balraj Singh, H.C.S.
filed the return on behalf of the respondents and in paragraphs No8 and 9 he has clearly admitted that the condition of Middle pass imposed for the post on unskilled mechanic should not be complied with until it is notified.
It is further stated that the previous practice had continued.
If this be so, in our opinion there was no justification for not considering the petitioner for the promotional post of Assistant Electrician.
The seniority list Annexure P/6 shows that the petitioner is at Serial No.5 whereas one Ram Kumar son of Rup Chand was at Serial No.14.
Ram Kumar son of Rup Chand was Middle pass and the respondents promoted him to the post of Assistant Electrician on 351989.
Since Ram Kumar son of Rup Chand was Middle pass, it appears that he came to be promoted in 1989 superseding the claim of the petitioner on the footing that he is not Middle pass.
In view of the affidavit filed on behalf of the respondents it is clear that the condition of Middle pass was not notified and previous practice continued.
The said condition was withdrawn by the Transport Commissioner, Haryana, vide his order dated 1231991 (Annexure P/3).
In view of these admitted facts petitioner will have to be considered for the promotional post of Assistant Electrician from the date when the said condition was withdrawn i.e. 1231991.
5.
The respondents are directed to give promotion to the petitioner if he is found suitable to the post of Assistant Electrician and deemed date be given as if promoted on 1231991.
It is also made clear that he be given notional promotion without any monetary benefit.
The respondents to regularise the petitioner's case in accordance with law as early as possible and preferably within three months from today.
The writ petition to stand disposed of in the aforesaid terms.