G S Singhvi, J (Oral) - Selection of respondents No. 3 to 7 for appointment on the posts of Veterinary Dressers is the subject matter of challenge in this writ petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
2.
Brief facts of the case are that in order to fill the posts of Veterinary Laboratory Attendants and Veterinary Dressers, the Deputy Director Integrated Cattle Development Project, Bhiwani sent a requisition to the Employment Exchange, Bhiwani, which in turn sent information to different Employment Exchanges in the District of Bhiwani.
About 20 candidates, including the petitioner and respondents No. 3 to 7 were sponsored by various Employment Exchanges.
The candidates were interviewed by respondent No. 2 on 221989.
On the basis of interview, respondent No. 2 selected respondents No. 3 to 7 for appointment and called upon them to appear before the Chief Medical Officer, Bhiwani, for Medical Examination.
The petitioner has questioned this selection on the ground that he possessed better qualifications as against respondents No. 3 to 7.
He has stated that while he possessed academic qualification of Matriculation with Animal Husbandry as compulsory subject in the Pre-University examination and has experience of about one year and six months of working as Animal Attendant, respondents No. 3 to 6 are 3rd to 7th class pass and have little experience of working.
He has also pleaded that no candidate belonging to backward classes has been selected and even though he belongs to that category benefit of reservation has not been given to him.
3.
Respondent No. 2 has controverted the claim of the petitioner on the ground that the selection was made by him in accordance with the policy guidelines and the norms prescribed by the Government.
While admitting that there exists reservation policy, respondent No. 2 has stated that respondents No. 3 and 5 belong to backward classes and they have been selected.
Along with the additional affidavit filed by respondent No. 2, copy of letter dated 29.4.1988 written by the Director, Animal Husbandry, Government of Haryana, has been enclosed as Annexure A/T A copy of the letter of the Government dated 17101990 has also been enclosed as Annexure B/T It has also been stated in the additional affidavit that duties of Veterinary Dressers and Laboratory Attendants are to cleanse Veterinary Institution, removal of animal dung, to catch and control the animals and to assist in the treatment of animals and their lookafter.
4.
Respondents No. 3 to 6 have filed a separate reply and they have pleaded that their selection is in accordance with the Government policy and after due consideration of the candidature of the petitioner.
5.
The only argument advanced by the learned counsel for the petitioner is that being a person possessed with better academic qualifications, the petitioner had a preferential right to be selected and appointed as Veterinary Laboratory Attendant/Veterinary Dresser but respondent No. 2 has arbitrarily selected respondents No. 3 to 7.
Learned counsel argued that a person having passed only class 3rd examination can under no circumstances be treated better as against a person who had passed Matriculation examination and Pre- University examination.
Learned Assistant Advocate General and learned counsel appearing for the private respondents have argued that the selection was made by respondent No. 2 on the basis of the performance of the candidates at the interview and in accordance with the guidelines laid down by the Government and, therefore, the petitioner can have no grievance against the impugned selections.
Learned Assistant Advocate General pointed out that no academic qualification has been prescribed for recruitment to the posts of Veterinary Laboratory Attendants/Veterinary Dressers and in the absence of such prescription of qualifications, the petitioner cannot claim preference in the matter of selection.
She also pointed out that the recommendations made by the Director, Animal Husbandry, have been accepted by the Government and in view of Annexure B/T the selection was required to be made after assessing the candidate's knowledge of regional language, rural management and cleanliness of animals.
6.
After having given my thoughtful consideration to the rival contentions, I am of the view that this petition is without substance and is, therefore, liable to be dismissed.
A reading of Annexure A/T together with Annexure B/T clearly shows that the Director had conveyed to the Government that candidates sponsored by the Employment Exchanges are mainly of urban origin and they do not have any knowledge of catching and handling the animals.
Such candidates used to avoid work after selection for Class IV posts and on some occasions the candidates were unable to perform their duties.
He, therefore, suggested general guidelines for the purpose of selection of candidates for appointment to Class IV posts in the Veterinary Institutions.
The recommendations made by the Director were accepted by the Government as would appear from letter Annexure B/T Respondent No. 2 has specifically pleaded that he had made selections keeping in view that guidelines laid down by the Government.
The petitioner has not shown that the selection was made by respondent No. 2 for any extraneous consideration or that respondent No. 2 was biased in favour of respondents No. 3 to 7.
In the absence of any such allegation in the writ petition, the only ground on which the selection could be questioned by the petitioner related to violation of provisions of law or the constitutional provisions.
That, in my opinion, the petitioner has failed to show.
When the guidelines issued by the Government for the purposes of selection of candidates do not require any particular academic qualification, the petitioner cannot claim any preference in the matter of selection and appointment on the ground that he possessed better academic qualification and, therefore, the selection made by respondent No. 2 cannot be held to be as contrary to law or the constitutional code of equality.
7.
In the result, the writ petition fails and the same is hereby dismissed.
Petition dismissed.