VK Jhanji, J. (Oral) - Petitioners joined the Haryana Prosecution Department as Assistant District Attorney, Grade-I Later on, this post was designated as Deputy District Attorney.
Petitioner No. 1 was promoted as District Attorney on 121984 and posted in the CID Wing of the Police Department.
Petitioner No. 1 retired from service from 1111988.
Petitioner No. 2 was promoted as District Attorney on 1621984 and posted in the Police Headquarters.
Petitioner No. 2 retired from service from 121989.
In the Prosecution Department, when the pay scales were revised w.e.f.
1.4.1979, the District Attorneys who were posted in the districts were allowed a special pay of Rs. 150/- per month, whereas the District Attorneys working in offices, like Advocate-General, Haryana, Excise and Taxation Department and like-wise, were allowed a special pay of Rs. 200/- per month.
Petitioners who had been posted in offices were given special pay of Rs. 150/- per month.
Subsequently, with the revision of pay scales w.e.f.
111986, the special pay was doubled, meaning thereby that those who were getting special pay of Rs. 150/- were to be paid Rs. 300/- per month and those getting Rs. 200/- were to be paid Rs. 400/- per month.
Petitioners made representation to the respondents stating therein that their counter-parts who are working in the offices like Advocate-General, Haryana, Excise and Taxation Department and like-wise, are getting special pay of Rs. 200/- per month, whereas they have been discriminated and are being paid special pay at the rate of Rs. 150/- per month.
Their representation was finally decided on 1531989 (Annexure P-7) and the special pay of these two District Attorneys (petitioners) who were working in the CID Wing of Police Department and the Police Headquarters respectively was increased from Rs. 300/- month to Rs. 400/- per month with immediate effect, meaning thereby that the relief was given to the petitioners when they had already retired from service.
The grievance of the petitioners in this writ petition is that they were entitled to special pay at the rate of Rs. 200/- w.e.f.
121984 and 1621984 respectively, i.e. with effect from the date they were promoted as District Attorneys, and posted in the offices of CID Wing and C.P.O.
of Police Headquarters respectively, and at the rate of Rs. 400/- per month with effect from 111986, when the special pay of the similarly circumstanced persons was increased from Rs. 200/- to Rs. 400/- per month.
2.
In reply, counsel for the respondents has stated that the case of the petitioners cannot be equated with the District Attorneys who are working in the offices of Advocate-General, Haryana, Excise and Taxation Department or other offices, because it was for the Department to fix the special pay of the District Attorney(s) working under it, and the Department of CID and the Department of CPO Haryana, had fixed the special pay of the petitioners at the rate of Rs. 150/- per month and, thus, the entitlement of the petitioners was to that extent alone.
3.
Having heard the learned counsel at some length, I am of the view that the stand of the State cannot be accepted.
Petitioners were not directly recruited in the Department of CID and the Department of CPO Haryana, but were the employees of the Haryana Prosecution Department.
As revealed, all District Attorneys working in the districts were getting special pay of Rs. 150/- month, but on increase, started getting Rs. 300/- per month, whereas the District Attorneys working in the offices were getting 200/- per month as special pay, but on increase, started getting Rs. 400/- the month.
This anomaly was pointed out by petitioners and it was on their representation that the anomaly was removed and order dated 1531989 (Annexure P-7) was passed vide which special pay of the District Attorneys working in the offices of CID and the CPO Haryana, was enhanced from Rs. 200/- to Rs. 400/- per month, with immediate effect.
No meaningful relief was given to the petitioners as at the time when the said order was passed, the petitioners already stood retired from service.
Once the anomaly was corrected, then it was required to be corrected from the date it existed, i.e. the date on which petitioners were promoted as District Attorneys; otherwise, there would be no meaning in removing an anomaly from a date subsequent to the date when the pay scales were revised.
Thus, in my view, the writ petition deserves to succeed.
4.
Consequently, the writ petition is allowed, and order, Annexure P-7, is quashed to the extent that petitioners shall be entitled to get special pay at the rate of Rs. 200/- per month with effect from the date they were promoted as District Attorneys and at the rate of Rs. 400/- per month with effect from 111986, i.e. the date when pay scales were revised and the amount of special pay was doubled.
Respondents are directed to determine the amount within a period of four months from today and make the payment to the petitioners two months thereafter.
Petitioners shall also be entitled to interest at the rate of 12% pa. on the amount received by them, which shall be calculated from the date of their entitlement till the date of payment.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.