N K Sud, J - The petitioner herein was a Lecturer in the Department of Geography, Maharshi Dayanand University, Rohtak (for short "the University").
His services were terminated by the University vide order dated 2121997 (Annexure P-10).
The petitioner is aggrieved by the said order as according to him his services had been illegally terminated.
2.
The facts giving rise to this controversy are that an advertisement was issued by the University on 18101995 for two posts of Lecturers in Geography.
One of these posts was reserved for the Scheduled Castes and we are not concerned with the said post in this writ petition.
The petitioner had sent in his application for the post of the Lecturer in open category and had been called for interview along with 25 other candidates on 28111995.
The interview committee recommended a panel of three names in order of merit as under :-  1) Sh. Sachinder  2) Sh. Pradeep Kumar (the petitioner herein)  3) Ms. Preeti Rekha  3.
The recommendation of the selection committee was approved by the Executive Council of the University in its meeting held on 8121995.
In accordance with this recommendation appointment was offered to Sh. Sachinder who has been placed at Sr. No. 1 in order of merit.
He has admittedly accepted this position and is working against the said post.
Meanwhile a leave vacancy occurred in the Department of Geography against the post of Reader.
Another Lecturer in this department Dr. Nina Singh, who was qualified for this position, was given appointment against this leave vacancy on 8121995.
As a consequence of Dr. Nina Singh joining as a Reader, a leave vacancy occurred against the post of Lecturer in the Department of Geography.
The petitioner was appointed against this post of leave vacancy on 11121995.
In the letter of appointment it had clearly been explained that the same was against a leave vacancy and as such was temporary in nature.
4.
As the petitioner did not receive his salary for the month of January, 1997 he submitted a representation to the University on 421997 for releasing his pay.
He was informed by the University that the salary had been withheld under the orders of Vice Chancellor dated 2011997.
It may here be mentioned that even before the aforesaid order of the Vice Chancellor had been communicated to him on 621997 by an endorsement on his letter, the petitioner had already instituted a Civil Suit in the Court of Civil Judge (Jr. Division), Rohtak on 31.1.1997 and had even obtained an interim stay.
5.
The Executive Council of the University in its meeting held on 721997 discussed the case of the petitioner at item No. 32 and took the following decision :-  "Considered the appointment of Sh. Pardeep Kumar as Lecturer in Geography against leave vacancy.
RESOLVED to review the appointment of Sh. Pardeep Kumar as he was offered appointment by the Vice-Chancellor on his own without the approval of the Executive Council which is the appointing authority in terms of Clause (c) of Statute 12.
FURTHER RESOLVED that Sh. Pardeep Kumar should be relieved forthwith after vacation of stay by the Civil Court as his appointment was void ab-initio."
In pursuance of this decision, the services of the petitioner were terminated vide impugned order dated 2121997 with effect from that date.
6.
Meanwhile in the civil suit pending before the Civil Judge (Jr. Division), Rohtak, the petitioner submitted an application pointing out that since there were certain technical defects in the suit, he be allowed to withdraw the same in order to file a fresh suit.
This request was accepted and his suit was dismissed as withdrawn.
7.
Mr. Surya Kant Sharma, learned counsel for the petitioner, vehemently contended that the termination order was clearly illegal.
According to him, it was not correct to say that there was no approval of the Executive Council in respect of the appointment of the petitioner as a Lecturer of Geography.
He placed reliance on the report of the Selection Committee dated 28111995 in which the petitioner had been placed in the panel of three recommended candidates which recommendation had been approved by the Executive Council in its meeting held on 8121995.
He further submitted that the petitioner had been appointed as a Lecturer against the leave vacancy of Dr. Nina Singh who in turn has been appointed as a Reader also against a leave vacancy.
As the person, against whose leave vacancy Dr. Nina Singh had been appointed, had not returned, the appointment of Dr. Nina Singh as a Reader had been regularised by the Vice Chancellor.
He, therefore, pleaded that for the same reason the petitioner, who was working against the leave vacancy of Dr. Nina Singh, ought to have been regularised as the said post became vacant on her regular appointment as a Reader.
He also referred to the case of another Lecturer in English Mrs. Rashmi Malik who had been regularised under similar circumstances.
8.
Sh. JS Sidhu, learned counsel appearing for the University on the other hand at the very outset raised a preliminary objection on the maintainability of the present writ petition.
According to him, the petitioner had filed a civil suit against the same cause of action and had even obtained an interim stay and as such he was not entitled to seek remedy in this Court later after withdrawing the civil suit.
For this proposition reliance was placed on the decision of a Division Bench of this Court in the case of SK Mittal v. The State of Haryana & others, 1996(4) AIJ 486.
It was also pleaded that the petitioner was not right in saying that the Executive Council had granted approval to the appointment of the petitioner.
The petitioner's name had been included in the panel recommended by the Selection Committee for the specific post of a Lecturer in the Geography Department.
The Executive Council in its meeting held on 8121995 had granted approval to this recommendation.
It was contended that the panel of three names was in order of merit and the petitioner had been placed at Sr. No. 2.
Once the nominee at number 1 position had accepted the post of the Lecturer, the panel stood disbanded.
Therefore, for any subsequent appointment, the Vice Chancellor could not act on his own and make an appointment without following the required procedure for selection of a Lecturer.
9.
We have heard the counsel for the parties and have perused the record.
We are in agreement with the arguments advanced on behalf of the University.
It has been correctly pointed out that once the petitioner had chosen to pursue his remedy in a civil Court he could not be permitted at a later stage to withdraw that suit and approach this Court to seek redressal for same cause of action.
The decision of this Court in the case of SK Mittal (supra) fully supports this proposition and we may usefully reproduce the following observations of this Court from page 489 of the report :-  "The rule that the High Court will not ordinarily exercise jurisdiction under Article 226 where an equally efficacious alternative remedy is available to the petitioner is based on a sound principle of public policy, namely, that if the party approaching the High Court for issue of a writ can get similar relief by filing appeal, revision or civil suit, the extraordinary jurisdiction should not be exercised by the High Court.
This also means that the High Court will not convert itself into a substitute of the civil Courts and various statutory adjudicating bodies.
In a given case a person aggrieved by the action of the State or its agencies may avail the remedy of civil suit thinking that he will be able to get effective relief from the competent civil Court.
Such person may also apply for grant of temporary injunction for protection of his rights.
Once this course is adopted, it is not permissible for that person to give up the remedy of civil suit and approach the High Court merely because at a subsequent point of time he thinks that the proceedings in the civil Court will last longer than the period which would be consumed in the decision of a writ filed for seeking similar relief."
In view of the above observations of this Court, we are of the view that the present writ petition is not maintainable on this score alone.
10.
Even on merits, there is no substance in the arguments advanced on behalf of the petitioner.
It has been correctly pointed out that the panel of three names, in which the petitioner had been placed at No. 2 position, as recommended by the Selection Committee on 28111995 and as approved by the Executive Council of the University in its meeting held on 8121995 stood disbanded the moment the nominee at No. 1 position had accepted the appointment.
It is evident from the record that thereafter no procedure was followed for filling up the leave vacancy post of Dr. Nina Singh.
Apparently the Vice-Chancellor had given this appointment to the petitioner under a misconception that since the petitioner was placed at No. 2 in the panel of names recommended by the Selection Committee, he could be offered this post.
Realising his mistake, he had correctly placed the matter before the Executive Council in its meeting dated 721997 which had decided that the appointment of the petitioner was void ab-initio.
It is evident, that despite the above decision of the Executive Council having been taken as early as on 721997, the services of the petitioner could not be terminated till 2121997 because of the interim stay operating under the orders of the Civil Court.
We, therefore, find no illegality in the order of termination passed by the University.
It may be mentioned that the petitioner had referred to the appointments of Dr. Neina Singh as a Reader in the Department of Geography and Ms. Rashmi Malik as a Lecturer in English under similar circumstances.
However, neither the said appointments are in dispute before us nor the above mentioned two persons are parties to this writ petition.
We, therefore, do not think it necessary to opine on the legality or otherwise of their appointments.
Needless to say that even it some irregularity or illegality was committed in the aforesaid two appointments, the same could not confer validity to the appointment of the petitioner which was otherwise void ab- initio.
In view of above, we find no merit in this writ petition which is hereby dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.