Jawahr Lal Gupta, J - Is the action of the respondents the Kurukshetra University and the Shri Krishna Govt. Ayurvedic College, Kurukshetra, in accepting the application forms of the candidates for admission to Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery Course after the last date viz. August 26, 1994, illegal ?
This is the short question that arises in these three writ petitions.
Learned counsel for the parties have referred to the facts as averred in C.W.P.
No. 12241 of 1994.
These may be briefly noticed.
2.
The respondent-College admits 50 students every year to a five year course leading to the Degree of BAMS (Ayurvedacharya).
The College admits the students on the basis of the entrance test conducted by the respondent- University.
For this purpose, the University issued a Handbook of Information.
The conditions of eligibility were prescribed.
For admission to the entrance test, the candidates had to submit their application forms upto 4 P.M. on July 18, 1994.
The test was to be held on August 14, 1994.
Clauses 10 and 11 of the Instructions for the candidates provided as under :  "10.
The University shall publish the merit list of the candidates who approached in the Entrance Test.
11.
Candidates who have appeared in the Entrance Test may apply on the prescribed form obtainable from the Principal, Shri Krishana Govt. Ayurvedic College, Kurukshetra, as per advertisement, to be got published by the College separately."
It was also provided that the admission to the course will be made "strictly on the basis of merit as obtained in the Entrance Test......".
3.
In accordance with the stipulation in Clause 11 as reproduced above, the College issued an advertisement which appeared in the daily Tribune of August 8, 1094.
It invited applications for admission to the Course from the candidates who had appeared in the Entrance Test.
It was further provided that the last date of receipt of application along with attested copies of the certificates, is August 26, 1994, upto 5 P.M. in the office of the Principal.
The candidates were to be interviewed on August 31, 1994.
Besides the advertisement, the College also issued a prospectus.
The stipulations therein were similar to those in the advertisement.
It was further provided as under :-  "3.
Admission will be made on the basis of merit of BAMS Entrance Test to be conducted by the Kurukshetra University, Kurukshetra for the Session 1994-1995. xx xx xx 5.
The rules given herein are only provisional.
They may be changed or modified by the University without prior notice.
Candidates cannot claim on the basis of information given in the prospectus.
6.
A candidate can be admitted to BAMS Course up to 30 days after the last date of admission, with the prior permission of the Vice-Chancellor."
The petitioners aver that they a appeared in the entrance test and also submitted duly completed forms to the College by the prescribed date.
A list indicating the inter se merit of the candidates who had submitted their application forms on or before August 26, 1994 was displayed on the notice board by the College.
The names of the petitioners appeared in this list.
However, subsequently, the respondent-authorities "in order to adjust their own persons or under some political pressure started entertaining the forms of the candidates in violation of the terms and conditions of the prospectus and the advertisement, who had not applied within the stipulated period and were not in the list displayed by the college-respondent......" On September 1, 1994 a selection list was displayed by the College in which the names of the petitioners did not figure and instead the names of those candidates who had not applied by the prescribed date and whose names had not even appeared in the merit list displayed by the College were included.
These persons have been impleaded as respondents Nos. 4 to 18 in the writ petition.
The petitioners allege that this action of the respondent-authorities is wholly illegal.
4.
In response to the notice issued by the Bench, the respondent-University has filed a written statement through its Registrar.
In this written statement, it has been inter alia averred that the result of the Entrance Test was declared "on or about 24th August, 1994".
Some students "got to know about their results on 25/26th August, 1994".
However, on account of heavy rains, transport facilities were not easily available.
As a result, the candidates could not reach the destination in time and submit the applications by the prescribed date.
In this situation, after examination of the matter, the Vice-Chancellor in exercise of his power under section 11(5) of the Kurukshetra University Act, 1986, extended the last date for submission of application forms till the date of interview viz. August 31, 1994.
This was done to promote merit and not on account of any political pressure or other considerations.
5.
A civil misc. application under Order 1 Rule 10 of the Code of Civil Procedure was also filed by the two applicants for being impleaded as respondents.
Along with this another application was filed for vacation of the interim order passed by the Bench on September 8, 1994, by which it was directed that admission shall not be made fill further orders.
In this application, it has been inter alia averred that the result of the entrance test was declared on August 25, 1994 and it was received by the applicants by post on August 30 and 31, 1994, respectively.
Immediate they submitted their applications.
It has been further pointed out that a number of candidates had approached the Vice-Chancellor with the request that the result of the entrance test having been declared on August 25, 1994, and the candidates having not come to know of it by August 26, 1994, they should be permitted to apply and be considered in accordance with their merit for admission to the Course.
6.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties.
On behalf of the petitioners, it has been contended that according to the terms of the advertisement and the prospectus issued by the College, only such candidates as have submitted their applications utpo 5 P.M. on August 26, 1994, are eligible to be considered.
No other candidate can be considered.
On the other hand, learned counsel appearing for the University as also the applicants who wish to be impleaded have contended that the admission had to be made on the basis of the merit as obtained by the candidates in the entrance test.
Consequently, the action of the University in entertaining the applications of the candidates for admission up to the date of interview is legal and valid.
Learned counsel for the University also produced before us the original file.
7.
The position that emerges from a persusal of the pleadings of the parties and the record is that when a candidate submits his application for permission to take the entrance test, he notifies the concerned authorities that he wishes to be considered for admission to the Course.
It is further clear that according to the stipulation in the advertisement, the admission had to be made by the Admission Committee of the College "strictly on the basis of merit as obtained in the English Test......".
It is no doubt true that according to Clause 11 (supra), a candidate who had a appeared in the test was required to apply to the college for admission and in accordance with the stipulation in the advertisement, the application had to be submitted by 5 P.M. on August 26, 1994.
But, we cannot lose sight of the fact that the test was conducted by the University for determining the inter-se-merit of the candidates and that those who acquired the requisite grade did not have the option to join one or the other College.
Therefore, in the context of the facts of the present case, when all the candidates were competing for admission to one College, it is clear that the submission of the application was a mere reiteration of the candidature.
It did not serve any other purpose.
Atleast none has been disclosed either in the petition or at the time of arguments.
Consequently, in the facts and circumstances of this case, we are inclined to read down this condition and hold that failure to apply by the stipulated date did not result in withdrawal of candidature by a person who had already appeared in the entrance test.
8.
Furthermore, it is the admitted case that the admission had to be made on the basis of the merit obtained by a candidate in the Entrance Test.
The date of submission of application was really of no consequence.
He had to appear at the time of interview and show his certificates.
Till the candidates knew their result of the entrance examination, the submission of the applications to the College would have really served no purpose.
Admittedly, the result was declared on August 24, 1994.
It was sent to the candidates by post.
In the normal course, people who were staying at places away from Kurukshetra could not have got it on or before August 26, 1994.
It is also clear from the official record that due to heavy rains, the transport services were disrupted in the State of Haryana and, therefore, the candidates could not have easily reached Kurukshetra in time to submit their application forms.
Keeping in view these facts, the Vice-Chancellor appears to have passed a general order that all applications received up to the date of interview may be entertained.
In the facts and circumstances of this case, we are satisfied that the order was just and fair.
It helped the college to select the more meritorious candidates.
We find no reason to interfere with it.
9.
Learned counsel for the petitioners were at pains to contend that the provision in the prospectus has to be strictly complied with and the College or the University had no jurisdiction to deviate therefrom.
Assuming it to be so, we find that under Clause 10 of the Prospectus, it was incumbent on the University to 'publish the merit list of the candidates who appeared in the Entrance Test'.
This provision serves a salutary purpose.
Whenever a person appears in a test or examination, or competes for a post, he is genuinely desirous of knowing the outcome of his effort and we are of the considered view that it is only fair that it should be made known to all concerned.
The number of seats in Educational Institutions and jobs in public organisations is limited.
The number of candidates is generally large.
For obvious reasons, a majority of the candidates face disappointment.
What adds to their misery is the fact that even the complete result is not made known to the candidates.
In fact very often, it is alleged that the Selection Boards keep the result as a closely guarded secret.
The candidates go from pillar to post just trying to know the result.
Mostly, it is stated that the result was displayed on the notice board.
Such a method is not very satisfactory.
It is no way of publishing the result.
We think it is unfair.
It must end.
A provision like Clause 10 must apply to every test and selection.
The complete result should not only be published in the Press or in the form of a Gazette but as far as possible also conveyed to everyone so that each candidate not only knows where he stands but also his weak and strong points.
It may involve expense.
But, this expense can be legitimately recovered from the candidates.
However, we think that the result of every selection should be duly published.
10.
What is the position in the present case ?
It has not been clearly shown that the result was pubfished or made known to all candidates at any time before August 26, 1994.
Consequently, there was no compliance with the provision contained in Clause 10.
In such a situation, insistence on literal compliance with the other provisions would be difficult.
11.
It is well to remember that merely by submitting an application, the petitioners have not got any vested right.
Selection of persons with higher merit is in the larger interest of the society.
It is proper that candidates with higher merit are preferred to those with lower percentage of marks.
This has been the precise result of the order passed by the Vice-Chancellor and admittedly persons higher in merit than the petitioners have been admitted.
12.
Even otherwise, as noticed above, the college prospectus clearly postulated that the conditions contained therein could be varied by the Vice-Chancellor.
The rules were provisional.
They could be changed or modified by the University without prior notice.
A candidate could be admitted to the course even after 30 days from the last date of admission.
In this situation, we find no infirmity in the order.
Accordingly, we answer the question posed at the outset in the negative and hold that on the facts and circumstances of this case, no illegality can be said to have been committed by the respondents.
These writ petitions are dismissed in limine.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.