RP Sethi, J - Praying for declaring Rule 14(2)(b) of the Punjab Public Works Department (Irrigation Branch), Circles' Clerical State Service, Class-III Rules, 1955, the petitioner has sought is suance of a direction for quashing Annexures P4 and P6 by which respondent Nos. 5 and 6 were promoted to the post of Accounts Clerk.
It is submitted that in the joint seniority list circulated by the Chief Engineer, the petitioner was shown senior at No. 813 whereas respondent Ashok Kumar was shown at serial No. 1045 and respondent Mohinder Singh was not shown in the said seniority.
It is contended that as a joint seniority list of all Circles was circulated to all, the persons mentioned therein formed one cadre and could be promoted only on the basis of their number in the seniority list.
2.
In their reply, the respondents have submitted that the promotion of respondents 5 and 6 has been made strictly in accordance with the aforesaid rules which are applicable circle-wise.
It is submitted that the petitioner was working in a different circle who could not prefer his claim of promotion to the post of Accounts Clerk as admittedly, no such vacancy had occurred in the circle where he was working.
3.
Heard the learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
4.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has challenged the vires of Rule 14(2)(b) on the ground that the same did not provide any guidelines and left it to the caprice and whims of the Chief Engineer to transfer at any time any member of the Service mentioned in clause (a) of sub-rule (2) of Rule 14 from one circle to another if he desires to do so.
The main grievance projected is that by transferring Mohincrer Singh, respondent, the right of the petitioner for promotion to the post of Accounts Clerk has been taken away.
The submission of the learned counsel is hypothetical in the instance case.
The action of the Chief Engineer forming part of Annexure P5 has not at all been challenged in this petition.
Mohinder Singh respondent was transferred to the Circle where the petitioner is serving on 10.5.1981 vide Annexure P5 whereas he stood promoted on 4.4.1977 vide Annexure P6 in view of this, there is no necessity of determining the Constitutionality of Rule 14(2)(b) as the same is not attracted nor has it adversely affected the interests of the petitioner.
"Service" under the rules has been defined.
"2(j) "Service" means the Punjab Public Works Department (Irrigation Branch), Circles' Clerical State Service, Class-III."
Under Rule 8, a provision is made that all appointments to the posts of Accounts Clerks shall be made by the Superintending Engineer and by Rule 16, the posts of Accounts Clerks are required to be filled up by promotion from amongst Sub-Division Clerks, A combined reading of Rules 2(j), 8 and 10 would show that promotions were required to be made circler-wise and the joint seniority list even issued by the Chief Engineer did not change the position of law as the seniority list could not be a substitute of the rules framed by the Governor in exercise in exercise of powers conferred upon him under Article 309 of the Constitution of India.
No legal right of the petitioner appears to have been violated, requiring interference.
The petition deserves dismissal.
5.
However, before parting with this judgment, it is observed in view of the peculiar circumstances of the case that if the petitioner makes a representation for the redressal of his grievances, the respondents may consider and dispose of such representation and see the desirability of providing him relief particularly in view of his submission that Mohinder Singh, respondent who was junior to him was promoted in the other circle and brought back to his circle vide order Annexure P6.
Petition' dismissed.