NK Sodhi, J - By an advertisement issued in July 1989 Kanya Maha Vidyalaya (Regd.
), Fatehpur - Pundri (Kurukshetra) through its General Secretary (hereinafter called 'the Management') invited applications on a prescribed form for the post of a full-time lady lecturer in Political Science.
It was stipulated in the advertisement that the post was against a leave vacancy but the same was likely to be made permanent.
The petitioner applied for this post and was called to appear for interview before a Selection Committee on August 9, 1989.
The Selection Committee recommended her name for appointment and she was accordingly offered the post.
This offer was subject to the condition that her appointment was to be on temporary basis against a leave vacancy upto July 25, 1990 but was likely to be made permanent.
It was also subject to the approval of the Kurukshetra University, to which the College stood affiliated.
It is not disputed that the appointment of the petitioner was approved by the University as per letter dated September 8, 1989.
The petitioner joined as Lecturer in Political Science and the period of her appointment was subsequently extended upto December 31, 1990.
It may be pointed out that the post of a full time lady Lecturer in Political Science had fallen vacant because one Smt. Jagroop Kaur who was a permanent lecturer had proceeded on long leave and, thereafter, resigned her job.
While the petitioner was still working, the Management wrote a letter on March 19, 1991 to the Director, Higher Education, Haryana, informing him that Smt. Jagroop Kaur, who had proceeded on extraordinary leave, had resigned and query was made whether the petitioner who was appointed against her leave vacancy was to be relieved or could she be allowed to continue.
There is nothing on the record to show as to whether any reply to this letter was received by the Management.
It is the admitted case of the parties that the petitioner continued to work as a Lecturer till March 30, 1991, when she was relieved from service by an order of the Principal of the College, a copy of which has been attached an Annexure R3/1 with the written statement filed on behalf of the Management.
It was at this stage that the petitioner filed the present petition challenging the action of the Principal in terminating her services.
The letter dated October 29, 1990 (Annexure P6 with the writ petition whereby the petitioner was informed that she was not entitled to the salary for the period from April 1990 to July 1990 and was, therefore, required to deposit an amount of Rs. 12,960/-, was also impugned in the writ petition.
2.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the Management the aforementioned facts have not been disputed.
The action of the Principal in terminating the services of the petitioner is, however, sought to be justified on the basis of instructions dated April 8, 1991 issued by the Director, Higher Education, Haryana, Chandigarh, to the Kurukshetra University in regard to the appointment of Lecturers in non-Government Colleges particularly those appointed against leave vacancies.
Copy of these instructions has been attached as Annexure R3/2 with the written statement.
According to these instructions if in a non-Government College a Lecturer is appointed against a leave vacancy through a Selection Committee for a regular post, then the appointment would be considered against a leave vacancy and if such a post falls vacant permanently, then it would be advertised and the appointment would be made by a Selection Committee for the regular post after re-advertisement.
Respondent No. 2 has also filed her written statement, though respondents 1 and 2 are not directly concerned with the order of termination.
3.
I have heard counsel for the petitioner at length, who has also taken me through the written statements filed by the respondents.
The first contention raised on behalf of the petitioner is that having been appointed for about two years against a leave vacancy, which was likely to be made permanent and through a properly constituted Selection Committee, she ought to have been made permanent in terms of the Government instructions dated May 4, 1988 issued to the Kurukshetra University in regard to the appointment of teaching staff in the non-Government affiliated colleges.
I find force in this submission.
It is not disputed that the petitioner was selected for the post of a Lecturer in August 1989 and she was appointed upto July 25, 1990, which period was later extended upto December 31, 1990.
Her appointment was also approved by the University and she had been selected through a regularly constituted Selection Committee.
The Government instructions (Annexure P8 with the writ petition), as were then in force when the services of the petitioner were terminated in March, 1991, provided that a teacher appointed in a leave vacancy in a non-Government affiliated College through a properly constituted Selection Committee was to be allowed to continue on regular basis if the post fell vacant due to the resignation of the permanent incumbent.
In the present case Smt. Jagroop Kaur had resigned and the petitioner having been appointed through a properly constituted Selection Committee was entitled to be made permanent.
The management, on the other hand, has placed reliance on the instructions dated April 8, 1991, which provided that the post in such an eventuality was to be filled up on regular basis after being re-advertised.
These instructions, in my opinion, are not applicable as they were issued subsequent to the termination of the services of the petitioner and are otherwise prospective.
These instructions specifically provided that "You are requested to take action in future according to these instructions."
4.
It may be pointed out at this stage that during the pendency of this petition the parties arrived at a compromise on August 24, 1992 and the Management undertook to give fresh appointment to the petitioner in accordance with the rules.
The case was adjourned on September 21, 1992 (Annexure P with CM 2332 of 1993), whereby she was put on probation for one year from the date of her joining.
The petitioner expressed her apprehension that her services could be terminated and therefore, the writ petition was not disposed of and same was kept pending.
Her apprehensions turned out to be correct and by a letter dated April 21, 1993 the Management terminated her services as no longer required after giving her one month's salary in lieu of notice.
Obviously, the fresh appointment given to the petitioner in terms of the undertaking given by the Management and her subsequent termination was without prejudice to the rights of the parties in the writ petition.
As I have already held that the petitioner in terms of the Government instructions was entitled to be appointed on regular basis as all the conditions mentiond in those instructions stood satisfied, her subsequent appointment and termination are of no consequence so far as her continuity in service is concerned.
5.
It was then submitted by the learned counsel for the petitioner that order terminating her services was without jurisdiction inasmuch as it was passed by the Principal of the College whereas she had been appointed by the Managing Committee of the College.
There is no merit in this contention as well.
The letter by which the petitioner was selected and offered an appointment is Annexure P3 with the writ petition.
It was issued by the President of Kanya Maha Vidyalaya (Regd.)
Fatehpur Pundri (Kurukshetra) on behalf of the Management, and her services could not be terminated by the Principal, as has been done in the present case.
The order relieving her from service is Annexure R3/1, which was passed by the Principal who was not the competent authority.
On this point as well, the petition deserves to succeed.
6.
Lastly, it was contended that the petitioner having been appointed upto July 25, 1990, which period was subsequently extended upto December 31, 1991 she was entitled to her full salary for the period April 1990 to July 1990.
The Management as per its letter dated October 29, 1990 required the petitioner to deposit the salary for the said period with the Management, as according to it, the petitioner was not entitled to the same.
According to Rule 9(b) of the Rules of Service and Conduct for Employees in Non-Government Recognised Colleges, framed by the Kurukshetra University, to which the Management is affiliated, if a teacher is appointed for more than one session, against leave vacancies which are to continue after 31st July next, he/she is entitled to full Summer Vacation salary.
In the present case, the petitioner satisfied these conditions and had been appointed upto December 31, 1990, and actually worked upto March 30, 1991.
The Management was, therefore, not justified in recovering this amount which the petitioner has since deposited under its directions.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed, the order of termination passed by the Principal relieving the petitioner from service is set aside and she is held entitled to be appointed to the post of Lecturer in Political Science on regular basis.
The Management is also directed to refund to the petitioner a sum of Rs. 12,960/-, which she had deposited back with the Management as she was entitled to her salary for the period April 1990 to July 1990.
The petitioner will have her costs from the Management which are assessed at Rs. 1,000/-.
Petition allowed.