TS Doabia, J - The petitioner was allowed to join fourth year.
Later on this permission has been withdrawn.
This is the subject-matter of this petition under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India.
The petitioner is a student of JN Krishi Vishwa Vidvalaya, Gwalior.
The petitioner is seeking conferment of a degree in Bachelor of Science (Agriculture).
This course is of four years duration.
There are in all 8 semesters, i.e. two semesters in each year.
There is fresh registration every year.
This registration is governed by Academic regulations, hereinafter referred to as the regulations.
The Regulations relevant for the purpose of disposal of this writ petition are 11, 12, 31, 51, 52, 62, 63, 126, 127 and 128, these read as under :  Reg.
11 - The Academic year/session means a 12 months period during which a cycle of educational work is completed.
It shall commence on or after 1st July.
There shall be 2 semesters in an Academic year/session.
Reg.
12 - Each semester shall consist of minimum of 105 working days.
Atleast 80% of the scheduled classes must be held in a semester.
Reg.
31 - Students on roll of the Vishwa Vidyalaya must report physically to the Dean of the College and pay required fees prescribed for a semester and register the courses running in a semester on the schedule date, prescribed in the calendar.
Reg.
51 - The students admitted in the Vishwa Vidyalaya shall be required to follow the curriculum as prescribed and modified from time to time by the respective Faculties of the Vishwa.
Vidyalaya.
Reg.
52 - The "course" means a series of classes and work experience extending over a semester.
Reg.
62 - The semesters washed out on account of withdrawal, dropping by student or his own failure to register in time, use of unfair means or dropped for any reason whatever, shall not be counted towards residential requirements.
Reg.
63 - A student whose semester has been washed out for reasons stated under clause 62 shall be eligible to resume his studies in the subsequent academic year, in the semester in which withdrawal was effective provided : (a) He/She has completed a minimum residential requirement of one semester.
(b) The total period of withdrawal/gap shall not exceed 4 semesters including the semester in which he had withdrawn.
Reg.
126 - A student of first year failing in 4 or fewer courses at the end of the academic year/session shall be placed on 'Academic Probation' and shall be permitted to register courses of second year class.
The students who are on 'Academic probation' and have been allowed to register the courses of higher class and have also registered to clear the fail courses of lower class, will pay the additional examination fee as under :-  (a) Rs. 15/- upto two papers/theory or practical (b) Rs. 30/- for more than two papers/theory or practical.
Such students will be permitted to clear the courses in which he/she has failed as and when available during regular semester.
There shall be no supplementary examination.
Marks obtained while repeating the course/s shall substitute the previous marks.
(Clarification issued vide No. Acd/V/Q-45/2243 dated 2112.90) Reg.
127 - A student who is on Academic Probation in second year class shall not be permitted to register for courses of third year class unless he/she clears all courses of first year.
Similarly a student who is on 'Academic Probation' in Third year or Fourth year class as the case may be, shall not be permitted to register for courses of Fourth Year or Fifth Year class unless he/she clears all the courses of Second year or Third year class respectively.
Reg.
128 - A student in Second/third/fourth year class failing in more than 4 courses at the end of academic sessions shall have to repeat the same class to clear the failed courses and shall not be allowed to register the courses of next higher class.
(Clarification issued vide No. Acd/V/Q- 45/92, dated 8th January, 1992).
Thus : (i) Reg.
11 - defines academic year.
(ii) Reg.
12 - requires attendance of 80% of the Scheduled Class in a semester.
(iii) Reg.
31 - requires deposit of fee per semester.
(iv) Reg.
51 - The student admitted in the Vishwa Vidyalaya shall be required to follow the curriculum as prescribed and modified from time to time by the respective faculties of the Vishwa Vidyalaya.
(v) Reg.
52 - defines course and it means a serious classes and work experience extending over a semester.
(vi) Reg.
62 & 63 - deal with the concept of washing out, and  (vii) Reg.
126, 127 & 128 - deal with requirement of passing the courses and effect of failure to pass the course.
2.
A student who fails in four or fewer courses at the end of the first academic year, can register in the next academic year, but he shall be treated on academic probation.
He is as noticed above, permitted to register in the course of next class.
This registration in the next years, i.e. second, third and fourth is governed by regulations No. 127 and 128.
The academic year starts from December to December, the 2nd, 4th, 6th and 8th semesters being from 1st of July of the year.
3.
According to the Regulation No. 128, a candidate failing in more than four subjects is not be permitted to be registered in the next academic year.
It is only if a candidate who has failed in four or lesser subjects is allowed to be registered.
There is no dispute so far as this proposition is concerned.
4.
Again for getting registered in the third year, the condition is that a candidate should not have failed in total number of four courses that is of the first year and the second year.
Regarding this also, there is no dispute.
5.
So far as the third year is concerned, the condition is again that a candidate should not have failed in more than four courses.
This is, however, subject to a further rider and this rider is to the effect that candidate seeking registration in the third year must have passed all courses of the first year.
Thus, a candidate who has failed to clear two courses of second year and one course of first year, would not be eligible to be registered for the third year even though the courses in which he has failed are less than four subjects.
This is because as noticed above, requirement is that a candidate has necessarily to clear all the papers in the first year.
So far as this legal proposition is concerned, the learned counsel for the parties have also not raised any dispute.
6.
The dispute is with regard to the method and the manner in which this regulation has to be implemented.
7.
Before further dealing with this matter, the fact may also be noticed.
The petitioner Ashok Tiwari failed in two papers in the first year, i.e. academic year 1990-41.
However, on account of the provisions contained in Regulation No. 127, he was registered for the next academic year and was on academic probation.
8.
In the second year, the petitioner failed in three subjects.
He, however, cleared those subjects in which he failed in the first year.
As the petitioner had failed in less than four subjects, he was rightly allowed admission in the third academic year 1992-93.
In the academic year 1990-91, the petitioner failed in English and Agriculture Micro.
He, however, passed in these subjects in the second year, i.e. 1991-92, but failed in Genetics, Soil Sc.
and Agriculture Chemistry.
The petitioner could not join fourth academic year for the year 1993-94 because he had failed to clear one paper of second year, i.e.
Soil Science.
According to the respondents, the requirement of passing all the papers of second year is a condition precedent before admission can be granted in the fourth year.
9.
As noticed above the academic sessions begins in December.
It is also admitted position that the academic session for the year 1993-94 started in December, 1993.
This began with seventh semester, the eighth semester was to begin in July, 1994.
The petitioner was not given admission in December, 1993 session in the first semester because of the bar created by regulation No. 127.
He, however, states that he having cleared all papers of 1st and 2nd Academic year be given admission in July, 1994.
He wants to save six months.
The argument of the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner is that on account of the provisions contained in regulations No. 62 and 63, only one semester should be deemed to have been washed out and, therefore, even though he was not given admission in December, 1993, he should be allowed to admission in July, 1994.
10.
This is opposed by the learned counsel for the respondent-University.
He has argued that the term "academic year" as occurring in regulation No. 63 would mean the complete academic year, meaning thereby, the petitioner would be entitled to admission only in December, 1994.
11.
The meaning of the term semester is not to be found in the Regulations.
As per Dictionary the term means :  "One of two or three divisions of the school year".
12.
The only dispute is whether the petitioner is entitled to get admission in July, 1994 or he has to wait till December, 1994.
Regulation 63 provides that a student whose semester has been washed out for reasons stated under clause 62 shall be eligible to resume his studies in the subsequent academic year, in the semester in which withdrawal was effective.
The further conditions provided are :  (i) Fulfillment of residential requirement.
(ii) Total period of withdrawal/gap is not to exceed 4 semesters.
Had the words "in the semester in which withdrawal was effective" were not there something could have said in favour of the argument raised by the respondent's counsel.
In the absence of these words full effect had to be given to the words academic year.
In that eventuality petitioner would have got admission in December, 1994.
But this is not the position.
Full effect has to be given to all words.
The cardinal principle of interpretation of statutes is that all words are to be given their meaning and the law maker never uses as expression which is superfluous and redundant.
See State of Rajasthan v. Leela Jain, A.I.R. 1965 SC 1296.
13.
Thus, the intention is to permit the student to join a semester to which he becomes entitled to join.
This is the whole concept behind semester system.
Apart from this who gains if the petitioner remains out.
None.
The above interpretation gets some support from definition of the term course as used in Reg.
52 as well.
Thus relying on the principles that all words have to be given their meaning and giving due weight to the words "In the semester in which withdrawal was effective" it is concluded that there is merit in the contention of the petitioner.
The petitioner is eligible to join fourth academic year as the condition which debarred him is no longer there.
The eclipse is over.
The petition is allowed.
The petitioner would be permitted to continue with the course of study.
There would be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.