RS Mongia, J - This judgment will dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 15274 of 1993, 15386 of 1993, 15526 of 1993, 15586 of 1993 and 15723 of 1993 as common question of law and facts is involved in all these cases.
For narration of facts Civil Writ Petition No 15274 of 1993 is being adverted to.
2.
The petitioner joined BAMS 5 years' course with pre-Ayurveda class in the sessions 1991-92 in Shri Dhanvantri Ayurvedic College, Chandigarh, (hereinafter referred to as 'the College').
In the writ petition, at one place it is mentioned that the College was affiliated to Punjab State Faculty of Ayurveda and Unani System of Medicines (hereinafter referred to as 'the Faculty') and at some other places it is mentioned that it was affiliated to Punjabi University, Patiala.
However, it may be observed here that in the written statement filed on behalf of the College, it is averred that prior to December, 1991, the College was affiliated to the Faculty and during its affiliation with the Faculty, the regulations of Panjabi University, Patiala, had been adopted by the Faculty w.e.f.
9121991, the College had been provisionally affiliated with the Punjab University, Chandigarh.
Since Panjab University, Chandigarh, had not framed any regulations for the BAMS course, the said University had allowed the College to carry on with the regulations of the Panjabi University, Patiala, till regulations were framed by the Punjab University, Chandigarh, regarding BAMS course.
3.
The petitioner passed his pre-Ayurveda examinations held by the Faculty in December, 1991, and was admitted in the first year of BAMS 5 years' course in the year 1992-93.
He appeared in the first year annual examinations of BAMS in December, 1992, but failed in all the three subjects.
However, as provided in Ordinance 14 of the Punjabi University Ordinances governing the BAMS course of the Faculty, the petitioner was admitted provisionally to the IInd year course.
In the supplementary examination held in May, 1993, the petitioner cleared one of the three subjects of the Ist year BAMS course but got reappear in two subjects.
When the petitioner wanted to appear in the IInd year BAMS annual examinations along with re-appear papers of the Ist year, the Panjab University to which the College had since been affiliated as observed in the opening part of the judgment, refused to allow the petitioner to sit in the BAMS IInd Year Examination on the ground that the provisional admission of the petitioner in IInd year automatically stood cancelled under Ordinance 14 of the Punjabi University, which had been made applicable by the Panjab University to the College.
This was because the petitioner had failed to clear two subjects of the Ist year in the supplementary examination.
Had he got re-appear or compartment only in one paper of the Ist year, then he could have been allowed to continue his studies in the next higher class i.e. IInd year.
4.
Before adverting to the arguments of the learned counsel for the petitioner, it would be apposite to notice Ordinance 14 of the Ordinances of the Punjabi University, Patiala, which reads as under :  "14.
A failed/re-appear candidate may be allowed by the principal of the College to join the next higher class after his failure in the annual examination pending declaration of his result of the supplementary examination, but if he fails to pass in the supplementary examination, his provisional admission to the next higher class shall be cancelled.
But if he is placed under compartment or declared re-appear in one subject in the supplementary examination he may be allowed to continue his studies in the next higher class and appear for compartment subject/re-appear subject along with the next higher examination at the next annual examination.
Provided, however, that the result of such a candidate for the higher class shall be held in abeyance till he clears the compartment/re-appear paper of the lower examination within the admissible chances under the ordinance and in case he fails to clear the compartment/re-appear paper of the lower examination even in four admissible chances, his candidature for the lower as well as higher examination shall be cancelled.
Such a candidate will not be eligible for a prize or a medal."
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner argued that after the affiliation of the College to the Panjab University, Chandigarh, Ordinance 14 (supra) which was earlier applicable ceased to apply to the case of the petitioner and, therefore, the Panjab University, Chandigarh, could not refuse to allow the petitioner to appear in the IInd year annual examination, especially when the petitioner had completed his IInd year course of study in the college.
6.
It is categoric stand of the respondent-College as well as Panjab University, that after the college was affiliated to Punjab University, Chandigarh, the University had allowed the college to continue applying the earlier regulations of the Panjabi University, Patiala, which the college had earlier adopted inasmuch as the Panjab University, Chandigarh, had not framed its own rules and regulations governing BAMS course.
To a pointed question put to the petitioner's counsel that if Ordinance 14 (supra) or for that matter, the other ordinances of the Panjabi University, Patiala, which had been adopted by the Faculty (to which the college was earlier affiliated) was not applicable, then which rule or regulations would be applicable to the petitioner's case.
The learned counsel could not give any answer to this question.
The only answer was that as the Panjab University, Chandigarh, had not framed any regulations for BAMS course, it could not refuse to allow the petitioner to appear in the IInd year examination.
7.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I do not find any merit in the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
As observed in the earlier part of the judgment, the Panjab University, Chandigarh, specifically asked the College after it was affiliated with it in the absence of any rules/regulations framed by the Panjab University, Chandigarh, the ordinances of Punjabi University would keep on governing the students regarding curricula and other conditions for passing the examinations.
The Chandigarh University has brought in some change regarding the duration of the course each year but had specifically made it clear that the students who had been admitted prior to the affiliation with the Chandigarh University would keep on being at governed by the regulations etc. of the Punjabi University, which had been adopted by the Faculty.
In this view of the matter, the petitioner would be governed by Ordinance 14 (supra).
According to this ordinance, if a candidate fails to pass in the supplementary examination, his provisional admission to the next higher class shall be cancelled.
However, if a candidate gets re-appear or compartment only in one subject in the supplementary examinations, he may be allowed to continue in the next higher class but his result of the higher class would only be declared after he passes the re-appear/compartment paper.
8.
Applying the above mentioned ordinance to the case of the petitioner, it would be seen that he got re-appear/compartment in two subjects in the supplementary examination and, therefore, under Ordinance 14 quoted above, the petitioner's provisional admission in the IInd year class stood cancelled and, therefore, the University was right in declining the permission to the petitioner to appear in the IInd year examination.
It is not disputed by the learned counsel for the petitioner that if Ordinance 14 if applicable, then the petitioner could not be allowed to appear in the IInd year annual examination.
For the foregoing reasons, I find no merit in these writ petitions and hereby dismiss the same without any order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.