SK Jain, J - This judgment disposes on C.W.P.
No. 5416, 6742 and 7248 of 1992.
2.
A challenge has been made to the selection for the post of Public Health Nurses made by the Subordinate Service Selection Board, Haryana (for brevity, the Board) on identical grounds in these petitions under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
3.
The Board advertised 63 posts of Public Health Nurses vide Resolution No. 4/90 dated December 7, 1990.
The petitioners and the private respondents applied for these posts, 76 candidates were called for interview, but 73 candidates appeared.
These candidates were interviewed on September 10, 1991 from 900 am to 5 pm One candidate who could not appear on September 10, 1991 was interviewed on September 12, 1991, at Board's office.
Proper criteria was laid down for making selection.
Marks were allocated under different heads viz. qualification, higher qualifications, sports, extra curricular activities etc.
Selection was made on merits.
The names of selected candidates were displayed on the notice board of the Board's office.
Selected candidates were recommended for appointment to the requisitioning departments.
The select list was prepared strictly in accordance with the merits.
4.
The learned counsel for the petitioners at the time of hearing did not dispute the method and manner of selection.
His only grouse is that the petitioners have been working as Public Health Nurses (Tutor) for a considerable long time prior to their regular selection as such.
The period for which they worked as Public Health Nurses prior to the regular selection should be counted for determining their seniority.
5.
In exercise of the powers conferred by the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India and all other powers enabling him in this behalf, the Governor of Punjab made rules regulating the recruitment and conditions of service of persons appointed to the posts of Nursing Superintendents, Matrons, Sister Tutors/Health Nurses (Teaching), Nursing Sister, Public Health Nurses, Staff Nurses and Male Nurses.
These Rules are called the "Punjab Medical and Health Department Nursing Superintendents, Matrons, Sister Tutors/ Health Nurses (Teaching), Nursing Sister, Public Health Nurses, Staff Nurses and Male Nurses (State Service Class-III) Rules 1964 (for short, the Rules).
Clause (g) of Rule 2 of the Rule defines "Service" which means the Punjab Medical and Health Department Nursing Superintendents, Matron, Sister Tutor/ Health Nurses (Teaching), Nursing Sisters, Public Health Nurses, Staff Nurses and Male Nurses (State Service Class-III).
Rule 3 says that the Service shall comprise of posts shown in Appendix 'A' to the Rules.
The posts of Public Health Nurses (Teaching) and Public Health Nurses are mentioned in Appendix 'A'.
6.
Appointment to the Service has to be made by the Director, Health Services, which power now has to be exercised by the Board.
Rule 9 of the Rules deals with the method of appointment to the posts in the service.
Clause (d) of Rule 9 envisages that appointment to the posts of Public Health Nurses (Teaching) shall be made by direct appointment.
Rule 10 of the Rules says that person appointed to the Service shall remain on probation for a period of two years if recruited by direct appointment and one year if recruited otherwise, subject to the proviso mentioned therein.
Rule 11 relates to fixation of seniority.
It says that the seniority inter se of the members of the Service shall be determined by the dates of their continuous appointment in the Service, provided that in the case of members recruited by direct appointment, the order of merit determined by the Board shall determine the inter se seniority.
7.
In the instant cases, the petitioners and the private respondents were appointed to the Service by direct recruitment.
Their inter se seniority has to be determined in conformity with the provisions of Rule 11 of the Rules.
The seniority of the petitioners cannot be fixed in violation of Rule 11.
If they had worked as a stop gap arrangement against the posts of Public Health Nurses, that period cannot be counted for determining their inter se seniority.
The source of recruitment to the Service to which the petitioners have been appointed is by direct appointment.
The petitioners and the private respondents competed for selection and they have been selected by the Board.
The order of merit as determined by the Board will determine their inter se seniority provided for under Rule 11.
The submission of the learned counsel for the petitioners that the period for which they had worked as Public Health Nurses should be counted for determining their seniority has no merit.
8.
In fairness to the learned counsel for the petitioners, his one submission deserves to be mentioned.
He submitted that the petitioners' names had been forwarded by the Board to the requisitioning Departments for making appointments.
The requisitioning Departments have not made regular appointments.
We have no doubt that the requisitioning Departments will take steps for making regular appointments, if the vacancies exist, strictly in accordance with the rules expeditiously.
9.
For the reasons stated above, there is no merit in these writ petitions.
The same are dismissed.
Petitions dismissed.