AN Gupta, J - The petitioner was appointed as Seasonal Clerk in the UP State Food and Essential Commodities Corporation which is opposite party No. 1 to the writ petition.
The petitioner has been transferred from Hardoi to Bareilly against which this writ petition has been filed.
2.
The grievance of the petitioner is that recently there have been frequent transfer of the petitioner from place to another which causes financial burden not only for him but difficulties for his family.
3.
A counter-affidavit has been filed in this in which has been averred that opposite Party No. 1 is engaged in the business and the employees have to be sent to those places where business is available.
It has been mentioned in the counter-affidavit that previously opposite party No. 1 get a contract for selling country liquor at Lucknow and therefore, the petitioner had to be transferred to Lucknow.
Since that contract of country liquor expired, opposite party No. 1 get the work of wheat purchases at separate to sell and, therefore, he was transferred to Badaun.
Since that work has also finished the petitioner has been transferred in ordinary course to Bareilly.
In view of this it does not appear to be a case of mala fide and undue harassment.
It is not doubt true that frequent transfers of any employee, more so of a lower category results into financial hardship and inconvenience not only to the employee but to his family and creates hindrance in the education of the children of the employee but when a person is employed in a business undertaking which gets different of work for different period, the employee had to be shifted accordingly.
Learned counsel for the petitioner placed his reliance on a decision given in the case of B. Varadha Rao v. State of Karnataka, AIR 1986 SC 1955, which applies in the case of a Government employee and not of a Government Company employee.
No guideline issued, if any, by opposite party No. 1, has been placed on record and in any case the guidelines always have to be followed according to the requirement of an employer.
4.
The result is that this petition has no substance and is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.