Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - Is the selection for recruitment to the posts of Conductors and Drivers in the Haryana Roadways made on December 23/24, 1993, in conformity with the provisions of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India ?
This is the short question that arises for consideration in these two civil writ petition Nos. 1729 and 1730 of 1994.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
In the beginning of December 1993, the employees of the Transport Department, Haryana went on strike.
This strike was declared illegal.
As a result, nearly 2200 employees of the Haryana Roadways who had gone on strike were dismissed from service.
Resultantly, the transport services in the State were paralysed.
To mitigate the hardship to the travelling public and to provide some facilities of transport, it became necessary to make immediate recruitment.
In this process, various persons including the petitioners were recruited in the Jind Depot of the Haryana Roadways.
On December 20/21, 1993, the strike was called off.
The State Government decided that all the dismissed employees be reinstated.
As a result, the services of the persons recruited during the period of strike were terminated.
The services of the petitioners who had joined their respective posts on December 7, 1993, were terminated on December 21, 1993.
Consequently, the persons who had been recruited during the period of strike (about 1500) became surplus.
Their retention in service would have meant recurring extra expenditure of about Rs. 3 crore every year.
In this situation, it was decided that 330 drivers and 190 conductors should be selected and appointed out of them.
Since proper selection could not possibly have been made at the time of recruitment during the period of strike, it was considered desirable "to get all the individuals tested by a committee of senior officers."
Consequently, a selection committee under the Chairmanship of the Additional State Transport Controller (C) was constituted to interview the candidates and to select the most efficient and suitable ones from amongst them.
This committee met on December 23 and December 24, 1993.
It prepared lists of selected candidates.
Respondents Nos. 6 to 18 in CWP No. 1729 of 1994 who were selected as conductors and respondent Nos. 5 to 14 in CWP No. 1730 of 1994 who were selected as drivers, were included in these lists.
The petitioners claim that in fact no information was sent by the selection committee to the candidates.
No letters calling upon them to appear in the interview were issued.
Only such candidates as were present by chance were interviewed by the selection committee.
No criterion for determining inter se merit was laid down.
It is also alleged that persons who were close relations of a member of the selection committee viz. Mr. MS Ahlawat, Deputy Transport Controller were also selected in spite of the fact that they were not even eligible to be considered.
Accordingly, the petitioners assert that the selection is wholly violative of the provisions of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
3.
The respondents contest this.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 to 4 by the Additional State Transport Controller (C).
It has been inter alia averred that the selection committee "interviewed the candidate who had worked during the strike on the posts of conductors in Haryana Roadways, Jind depot on 23121993.
Regarding the remaining candidates, who could not be selected by the selection committee, General Manager, Haryana Roadways Jind was directed to prepare a seniority list of such persons on the basis of their joining - all the candidates were informed about the date and place of their interviews by the office of General Manager, Haryana Roadways, Jind at the time of termination of their services (emphasis supplied).
The selection was made "keeping in view their educational qualification and suitability in all respects."
It has been further averred that out of a total 218 candidates, as many as 200 had actually appeared for interview which falsifies "the contention of the petitioners that all the candidates were not informed about the date of their interview."
It has also been pointed out that even two of the petitioners had been duly interviewed.
4.
On June 1, 1994, the Motion Bench had directed the respondents to file a categorical reply to para 5 of the writ petition regarding the relationship of some of the selected candidates with a member of the selection committee and also to indicate as to how the candidates were informed about the 'interview'.
Consequently, a supplementary affidavit was filed by Mr. SK Joshi, Additional State Transport Controller, Haryana.
It has been inter alia averred that the selection committee was constituted vide order dated December 20, 1993.
Consequent upon the constitution of this committee, the General Manger, Haryana Roadways were telephonically informed about the date and place of the interviews with a further direction to intimate to all the candidates to be interviewed regarding the date and place of their interviews.
It has been further averred that "the General Manager, Haryana Roadways, and was again asked to intimate as to how the candidates were informed about the date and place of their interviews and he has intimated that candidates were informed about the date and place of their interviews through public address system available at the Bus Stands of Jind, Narwana and Safidon."
Regarding the relationship of Mr. MS Ahlawat with two of the selected candidates viz. Respondent Nos. 6 and 7, it has been stated that a query was made from the officer who has admitted the alleged relationship.
A copy of the communication received from Mr. Ahlawat has been produced as Annexure R-1 with the additional affidavit.
It has been further averred that the selection has been made on merit.
the State Transport Commissioner had ordered for the selection of 213 drivers and 191 conductors.
However, due to non-availability of suitable candidates only 148 drivers and 181 conductors were selected by the committee.
Thus, 65 posts of Drivers and 10 posts of Conductors are still lying vacant.
5.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties.
On behalf of the petitioners, it has been submitted by Mr. RK Malik that no intimation, whatsoever, was given to the candidates to appear for the interview.
Only such persons as were present at the bus stands had appeared.
Even those, who were ineligible and had not worked during this strike period were included in the list of selected candidates.
This claim has been controverted by the learned counsel for the respondents.
6.
Article 16 of the Constitution guarantees an equality of opportunity to all citizens in the matter of employment under the state.
In order to effectuate this guarantee, it is incumbent upon the state and its instrumentalities to afford an opportunity to all eligible candidates to compete for the posts.
Have the respondents done so ?
It is clear from the pleadings of the parties that the State Government had decided to make a selection from amongst the persons who had been employed during the period of strike.
Assuming that the action of the State Government in confining the selection to only those who had worked during the period of strike was valid, it was incumbent on it to give the persons who had worked during the period of strike as conductors/drivers an opportunity to appear in the interview.
This could be done by sending written communications or by a public notice in the Press or by any other reasonable method.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents by Mr. SK Joshi, it has been averred that "all the candidates were informed about the date and place of their interviews by the office of the General Manager, Haryana Roadways, Jind at the time of termination of their services."
The averments in this written statement have been verified on the basis of information derived from official record.
No record in support of this averment was produced.
Furthermore, in the supplementary statement filed by Mr. SK Joshi, it has been averred that consequent upon the constitution of the committee vide order dated December 20, 1993, all the concerned General Managers, were telephonically informed about the date and place of their interviews so as to enable them to convey it to the candidates.
It has been also stated that "the candidates were informed about the date and place of their interviews through public address systems available at the Bus Stands of Jind, Narwana and Safidon."
Besides the fact that there is a clear departure from the assertion as made in the written statement, there is nothing to support the averment made by the respondents.
We have grave reservations about the correctness of this statement.
However, even if we assume it to be correct, we are of the considered view that the candidates were not expected to remain present at the Bus Stop after the termination of their services.
The were not living there.
Consequently, even if it assumed that the method as alleged by the respondent was adopted, it was not a satisfactory method for communicating the date and place of interview to the prospective candidates.
Furthermore, it has not even been clarified as to when the General Manager had been telephonically informed about the date and place of interview and as to when through the public address system had been made.
Consequently, we hold that the basis of vague averments, it cannot be said that a reasonable opportunity had been given to the candidates to appear for the interviews :  7.
Learned counsel for the respondents submitted that the fact that 200 candidates including the two petitioners (in CWP No. 1729 of 1994) had actually appeared for the interview, was symbolic of the correctness of the assertion made on behalf of the respondents.
We are unable to accept this submission.
Firstly, it is clear that at least 18 candidates including the two petitioners (petitioner Nos. 1 and 3) in C.W.P.
No. 1729 of 1994 had not appeared for the interview.
There is nothing on the record to show that they had been informed about the date and place of interview.
Further, it has also not been shown that they were not eligible.
Consequently, the grievance of the petitioner Nos. 1 and 3 that they were not given a chance to appear for interview and compete for the posts is well founded.
They were clearly denied an opportunity to be considered for the post in question.
There is clear denial of right of the petitioners 1 and 3 for consideration under Article 16 of the Constitution of India.
Similar is the case of petitioner No. 1 (Manjit Singh) in Civil Writ Petition No. 1730 of 1994 who was a candidate for the post of Driver.
8.
It is in the background of this position that the case has to be examined.
Admittedly, petitioner Nos. 2 and 4 in CWP No. 1730 of 1994 were duly interviewed.
The persons who have been actually considered can't have a legitimate grievance.
Furthermore, it is also clear that 65 posts of Drivers and 10 posts of Conductors are still available.
In this situation, we are of the considered view that no useful purpose would be served by setting aside the entire selection.
In the circumstances of the case and keeping in view the fact that all the selected candidates are not even parties in these two petitions, we think the ends of justice would be met by directing the respondents to consider the claims of petitioner Nos. 1 and 3 in CWP 1729 of 1994 and petitioner No. 1 in CWP No. 1730 of 1994 for the posts of Conductors and Drivers respectively.
We are further of the view that the selection of respondents Nos. 6 and 7 in CWP No. 1729 of 1994 cannot be sustained in view of the fact that Mr. MS Ahlawat who is related to them had participated as a member of the selection committee.
Consequently, their selection and appointment are set aside.
The writ petitions are allowed to the extent indicated above.
The respondents are directed to consider the claims of the petitioners as mentioned above within one month after the receipt of a copy of this order.
In case, they are found suitable, they will be given appointments in accordance with law.
In the circumstances of these cases, we make no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.