VK Jhanji, J. (Oral) - This will dispose of civil writ petition Nos. 189 of 1992, 117 of 1992, 141 of 1992, 307 of 1992, 3798 of 1992, 5137 of 1992, 7428 of 1993 and 18933 of 1991 as common question of law and facts is involved therein.
Facts are taken from Civil Writ Petition No. 189 of 1992.
Initially, on 3181966 petitioner was appointed as Constable in Punjab Armed Police.
On 141969, he was sent on deputation to CID Intelligence, Punjab.
He continued to serve CID, where in the year 1973, he was promoted as Head Constable and on 1261979, he was promoted to the Post of ASI On 12121989, he was promoted as SI His promotion as Head Constable, A.SI and SI was provisional as CID Intelligence Wing has no cadre of its own and persons from the rank of Constable to that of SI are taken on deputation from various police organisations.
After petitioner had served for nearly 23 years, order dated 2671990 was passed whereby petitioner was sought to be repatriated to his parent department where he has been asked to join as Constable.
Against the order of repatriation, he made a representation and on consideration of the same, vide order dated 391990, order of repatriation was cancelled.
However, after a few days ie on 1591990, petitioner has again been repatriated and order to that effect has been passed.
The order, Annexure P/8 is being impugned in this writ petition on the ground that the respondents were bound to absorb the petitioner in CID., Intelligence as he has 23 years excellent and unblemished service record.
The challenge is also on the ground that the respondents were repatriating him as Constable to his parent department when his juniors in the parent department had been promoted and working on the posts of SI and Inspectors.
In reply to the petition, respondent Nos. 1 to 3 have stated in their written statement that the petitioner had served CID.
for more than 23 years and he was given ad hoc promotion upon the rank of SI However, they have stated that all the deputationists hold their lien in their parent units/districts for all intents and purposes and as such when the petitioner was repatriated, he was to join as a Constable.
Written statement on behalf of his parent department has been filed through Sh. S Chattopadhaya, SSP, Ludhiana, wherein it has been stated that the petitioner was sent on deputation to CID.
at his own request while serving as a constable and continues to be a Constable in the parent department.
While serving in the CID Intelligence Department, petitioner was given ad hoc promotions by the CID Intelligence but on his repatriation, he has to join as a Constable.
As regards promotion of juniors of the petitioner in the parent department, respondents have stated that the petitioner cannot be promoted from the date his juniors were promoted as for promotions to the posts of HC/ASI/S1 or Inspector, petitioner was required to pass the test as provided under the Police Rules.
Petitioner never applied for or appeared in those promotional test and, therefore, he is not entitled to promotion.
Counsel for the petitioner contended that the petitioner cannot be made to suffer for no fault of his.
Petitioner was sent on deputation to CID.
by the respondents where he served for 23 years and got three promotions and towards the fag end of his career, he cannot be sent back to his parent department as a Constable, when his record throughout remained absolutely above board and no adverse report has ever been conveyed to him.
In reply, counsel for the state, contended that on repatriation, petitioner has no other alternative but to join as Constable in his parent department.
Having heard the learned counsel for the parties at length, I am of the view that the action of the respondents in repatriating the petitioner to his parent department as a Constable cannot be justified either under the rules or on equitable considerations.
Rule 2125 of the Punjab Police Rules provides for appointment to the Criminal Investigation Department.
The relevant rule is reproduced as under :  "2125.
(1) Upper and lower subordinate posts other than those of inspectors in the Criminal Investigation Department shall be filled by the deputation of suitable men from districts for periods three years extensible by not more than two years at a time at the discretion of the Deputy Inspector General, Criminal Investigation Department.
(2) A Police Officer on deputation to the Criminal Investigation Department will retain his original position in the cadre of his district or range.
While in the Criminal Investigation Department he will be eligible for officiating promotion in that branch; on reversion from the Criminal Investigation Department he will assume his place in his original cadre.
Officiating promotion may be given in the district or range in the place of an officer deputed to the Criminal Investigation Department, such officiating post lapsing on the officer's reversion.
(3) When an officer borne on the rolls of a district or range reaches a place in seniority which would entitle him to be considered for substantive promotion if he were serving in the establishment to which he belongs permanently, he shall be informed and given the opportunity of returning to district police work.
No officer on deputation to the Criminal Investigation Department shall be substantively promoted to head constable or higher rank unless both the Deputy Inspector-General, Criminal Investigation Department and the Deputy-Inspector General of the range to which he belongs agree that he is qualified for such promotion by the prescribed standards."
Sub-rule (1) provides for filling up of upper and lower subordinate posts by way of deputation from various police organisations or districts for a period of three years which could be extended by not more than two years at a time.
Sub-rule (2) provides that a police officer while in CID.
Department would be eligible for officiating promotion in that branch but on reversion from the CID.
department, he would assume his place in his original cadre.
Sub-rule (3) provides that when an officer borne on the rolls of a district or range reaches a place in seniority which would entitle him to be considered for substantive promotion if he was serving in the establishment to which he belongs permanently, he shall be informed and given the opportunity of returning to district police work.
Under sub-rule (3), respondents were required to inform the petitioner when his immediate juniors were considered for promotion in his parent department.
Respondents, in their written statement, have nowhere stated that at any point of time, the petitioner was informed when an opportunity arose for his promotion in his parent department.
The petitioner has categorically stated that in his parent department, persons junior to him are working on the posts of Inspectors and Sub-Inspectors.
He has also given an instance of one Guru Sangat Singh who was appointed as Constable in the year 1971, is now working as Sub-Inspector in Punjab Armed Police.
Similarly, Tasvir Singh who was recruited in the year 1976 as Constable is working as Sub-Inspector and Simranjit Singh who was recruited in the year 1968 is working as Inspector.
He respondents who have failed in their statutory duty to inform the petitioner when his juniors in the parent department were considered for promotion cannot take advantage of their own wrong.
They also cannot fall back upon sub-rule (2) of Rule 2125 of the Punjab Police Rules to say that on reversion from CID., petitioner will assume his place as a Constable in his parent department.
I am of the view that if a Government servant was holding a particular post in his parent department, and was sent to another department on deputation, on his reversion from that department to his parent department, he becomes entitled not only to all the benefits which he would have secured in his parent department but also to the restoration to him of every one of the higher posts which he would have in the normal course of events occupied in his parent department had he remained there without having been deputed to another department.
The contention of learned counsel for the State that whether the petitioner would have been promoted to the post of Head Constable, SI or Inspector, was dependent on probabilities and on passing of the test provided under the Punjab Police Rules.
In the present case, this contention cannot be accepted for the reason that respondents have not brought any material on record to indicate that the record of the petitioner was not unblemished.
In the absence of misconduct, inefficiency, incompetence or the like, it is reasonable to presume that the petitioner would have risen in his parent department to the same position reached by one who was junior to him.
As regards objection that without passing of promotional tests provided under the Punjab Police Rules, petitioner cannot be promoted, I find that under the rules, sufficient powers have been given to the respondents to relax the rules for promotion.
The case in hand is the one where such power to relax the rules is required to be exercised.
Considering that the petitioner has worked sufficiently for a long time and also got ad hoc promotions in the CID Intelligence, the competent authority ought to have exercised the discretion in relaxing those rules for promotion to the petitioner from the date his immediate juniors were so promoted.
Counsel for the petitioner has also brought to my notice that in some cases, persons who were similarly situated, had made request for voluntary retirement in the CID.
where they were serving on deputation.
Their cases for voluntary retirement were considered and they were permitted to retire from the post which they were holding in the CID.
Accordingly, in the peculiar facts and circumstances of this case, the proper order that would meet the ends of justice, would be to quash the impugned order and direct the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner for voluntary retirement from the post which he was holding in the CID.
when the order of repatriation was made in case such a request is made by the petitioner within two months from the date of receipt of the order by the respondents.
In case no such request is made by the petitioner within the aforesaid period, respondents are directed to determine within two months thereafter the seniority of the petitioner in his parent department after giving him benefit of service which he had rendered in CID.
and consequently he be considered for promotion with effect from the date his immediate juniors were so promoted.
On promotion, with effect from the date his immediate juniors were so promoted.
On promotion, the petitioner shall be entitled to all consequential benefits.
No costs.
Order accordingly.