GR Majithia, J - This judgment disposes of Civil Writ Petitions No. 6191 and 4167 of 1993.
2.
A challenge has been made to the selection to the posts of Junior Engineer-II (Electrical) pursuant to the advertisement circulated vide Memo No. 218609/219959/CRA-109/165, dated November 8, 1990 addressed by the Secretary, Staff Selection Committee, Recruitment Section-I, Punjab State Electricity Board, Patiala to all the Chief Engineers, Superintending Engineers, Executive Engineers and Sub Divisional Officers in the Board.
3.
A brief reference to relevant facts is necessary for adjudication of the dispute :  The Punjab State Electricity Board, Patiala (for short, the Board) vide Office Order No. 133/ENG/BET/G-33, dated June 2, 1987, fixed the following criteria for filling up the posts of Junior Engineers-II and Sub Station Operators :  "(a) Line Supdt.
(J.E.-II) i) By Direct Recruitment from amongst Diploma Holders/Matriculate ITI pass Lineman with 5 years' experience as Lineman.
60% ii) By promotion from at least Matriculate/higher qualified Lineman on seniority-cum-merit basis subject to completion of minimum time gap already prescribed.
40% "(b) Sub Station Operator : i) By direct recruitment from amongst Diploma Holders in Elect.
Engineering with 2 years' experience on Sub Stations and Matric ITI qualified SSAs with 5 years' experience on Sub Stations.
33% ii) By promotion from Matriculate/higher qualified SSAs on seniority-cum-merit basis subject to the completion of minimum time gap already prescribed.
67% Vide office order No.15/ENG-3(34) Vol-III, dated March 9, 1989, the Board with a view to remove the under employment among the in-service Diploma/ITI qualified Lineman and Sub Station Attendants, modified the criteria laid down by office order dated June 2, 1987 and decided that the recruitment to the post of Junior Engineer-Gr.II (Electrical) and Junior Engineer Gr.II (Sub Station Operators) henceforth would be made as a temporary measure from amongst the Lineman and Sub Station Attendants, who possess the following qualifications/experience :  "(i) Candidates who are Matric ITI in the trade of Lineman/Electrician/ Wiremen and have experience of minimum 10 years as Lineman in the Board for appointment to the post of Jr.
Engineer, Gr-II and who have minimum 10 years' experience as Sub Station Attendant in the Board for the post of Sub Station Operator  (JE-II).
OR  (ii) Candidates who have 3/4 years diploma in the Electrical Engineering and have worked for at least 5 years as Lineman in the Board for the post of Jr. Engineer-II (Electrical) and who have worked for atleast 5 years as Sub Station Attendant for the post of Sub Station Operator/(Jr.Engineer-II)."
4.
Vide Memo No. 218609/219959/CRA-109/165, dated November 8, 1990,  Recruitment Circular CRA-165/90 was issued by the Board stating thus :  "Posts falling in the share of direct recruitment for the post of J.E.II/Electrical are proposed to be filled out of existing Board employees having requisite qualification/experience.
2.
In view of the above, enclosed circular be displayed on the notice board and be given wide publicity so that all eligible Board employees may be able to apply for the post."
1422 candidates applied for the posts.
Written test was conducted on February 3, 1991 for filling these posts and out of 1422 candidates, 927 candidates appeared in the written test.
Minimum 30% marks were provided for qualifying the written test.
The result of the candidates who had taken the written test was drawn merit-wise and category-wise and finalised through Computer on the same day.
The result was approved by the Staff Selection Committee and other officers of the Board.
Three panels were prepared in respect of the selected candidates.
195 candidates were brought on Panel I, 2nd lot of 84 candidates were brought on Panel II and 3rd lot of 120 candidates were brought on Panel III.
Split up of selected candidates brought on Panel I category-wise is as under :-  General : 1 to 135 SC/ST Mazbi : 1 to 7 SC/ST others : 1 to 52 XSM1 FF : 1 They were offered appointments.
In the same manner, 84 and 120 candidates brought on Panel II and Panel III respectively were offered appointments.
5.
Petitioners No. 1 to 3 in CWP No. 6191 of 1993 appeared under Roll Nos. 2359, 2032 and 2078 respectively.
They belong to General Category and obtained 36, 58 and 28 out of 200 marks respectively.
Petitioners No. 1 and 2 in C.W.P.
No. 4167 of 1993 appeared under Roll No. 2932 and 3006.
They also belong to General Category.
They obtained 49 and 22 marks out of 200 marks respectively.
They obtained less than 30% marks and, therefore, they were not brought on the Selection panels.
6.
These facts have been gathered from the pleadings of the parties and the office record produced by the Board's counsel.
7.
Learned counsel for the petitioners made the following submissions :  (i) The posts which were reserved for direct recruits could not be filled from amongst the in service candidates.
(ii) Vacancies beyond the advertised posts could not be filled.
8.
Concededly, the Board has not framed statutory rules for filling the posts of Junior Engineer-II (Electrical) and Sub Station Operators.
By an executive order, it had decided to reserve 60% posts of Junior Engineer-II meant for direct recruits for Diploma-holders and 33% posts for Sub Station Operators.
The Board decided to fill the direct recruits quota from amongst the in-service candidates with a view to remove stagnation.
The employer can prescribe the mode and method of recruitment.
The Board resolved to fill the vacant posts of direct recruits quota by holding a written test and proper criteria was laid down for the written test.
Minimum qualifying marks were prescribed.
The test was held on February 3, 1991 and the result was finalised through Computer on the same day.
It was approved and signed by the Chairman, Staff Selection Committee and other officers conducting the written test on the same day.
The record indicates that fair and proper procedure was adopted by the Board in conducting the written test and there was no possibility of outside interference.
The merit lists were prepared strictly as per the merit.
9.
The Board did not specify the number of vacancies in the circular inviting applications for the posts of Junior Engineers-II.
Learned counsel for the petitioners maintains that in the written statement on behalf of the Board in some other litigation filed by an employee the Board had specified the number of vacancies.
The Board may have specified the number of vacancies as existed on that date.
There is no bar for the Board to fill the vacancies which had existed.
This contention appears to be wholly irrelevant in these cases.
The Board did not specify the number of vacancies in the advertisement inviting applications.
The Board was within its right to fill the existing vacancies out of the merit lists prepared as a result of the written test.
We have found that the written test was conducted fairly and the result was finalised through computer.
There was no impediment for the Board to fill the vacant posts from the merit list.
10.
The petitioners had appeared in the written test.
They did not obtain the qualifying marks i.e. 30% of the total marks, for being brought on the selection panel.
They having availed the opportunity by appearing in the written test cannot be allowed to urge that the selection is vitiated on the, grounds urged by their counsel at the Bar.
Apart from the fact that the grounds of challenge being baseless, the petitioners are stopped by their conduct from challenging the selection which was made as a result of the written test in which they appeared but failed.
11.
For the reasons stated above, these writ petitions are bereft of any merit and the same are dismissed.
Petition dismissed.