Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - The petitioner, who joined Punjab Police as Constable in March, 1978 has filed this writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India for issuance of a direction to the respondents to promote him to the rank of Head Constable against 5 per cent quota reserved for sportsmen.
2.
The case of the petitioner as set up in the writ petition, is that he is an outstanding athlete as he obtained 26 Certificates, 5 Gold Medals and 1 Silver Medal including three Gold Medals at the National level in sports.
Despite that, he was not considered as a Sportsman for being deputed to Lower School Course in 1988 which alone would entitle him to be considered for promotion to the post of a Head Constable.
According to the petitioner, the Inspector General of Police issued a Circular Letter dated 2411978, copy of which is Annexure P-1 to the writ petition, to all the Senior Superintendents of Police in Punjab State providing five per cent reservation in promotion for outstanding sportsmen amongst the personnel of Police Force.
In January, 45 seats of Head Constables fell vacant, out of which two were to be kept reserved for sportsmen category.
The petitioner was also one of the contestants against these two vacancies.
Though according to the petitioner, he was eligible for being deputed to the Lower School Course, but his claim against reserved quota for sportsmen was not considered by the respondent- department for the reasons best known to it.
Rule 137 of Punjab Police Rules which lays down the procedure for promotion of Constables is reproduced for facility of reference  "137 List-B - Section for admission to promotion course for Constables at the Police Training College -  (ii) List-B in form 137 shall be maintained by each Superintendent of Police.
It will include the names of all constables selected for admission to the promotion course for Constables at the Police Training College.
Selection will be made in the month of January each year and will be limited for the year with a twenty per cent reserve.
Names will be entered in the list in order of merit determined by the Departmental Promotion Committee constituted by the Inspector General of Police on the basis of lists in Parade, General Law (Indian Penal Code, Criminal Procedure Code, Indian Evidence Act, and Local and Special Laws) Interviews and examination of records :-  (ii) All candidates -  (a) who are Middle pass and have put in few years of service; or  (b) who are at least Matriculates and have put in more than three years of service; or  (c) who obtained First Class with Credit in the Recruits Course specified in Rule 192 will be eligible to have their names entered in the aforesaid list, if they are not above thirty years of age on the first day of July in the year in which selection is made :  Provided no constable who has been awarded a major punishment within a period of three years preceding the first day of January of the year in which selection is made will be eligible for admission to this list and if any Constable whose name has been brought on this list is not sent to the Police Training College in that year, he will be required to compete again, with the new candidates if he is still eligible for admission to the said list under the Rules.
The State of Punjab has filed a detailed written statement controverting the stand, of the petitioner.
3.
I have considered the submissions of the learned counsel for the parties and on perusing the paper book, I hardly find any substance in the submissions of the learned Counsel for the petitioner.
From the perusal of the written statement, it is observed that the petitioner had achieved no distinction in the field of sports after entering into the Police Department.
All the certificates mentioned in para 2 of the writ petition relied upon by the petitioner in order to claim promotion under the sportsmen category reveal that all these distinctions were achieved by him prior to joining the Police Department.
Even the certificates mentioned at Sr. No. 18 to 26 in the aforesaid para of the written statement indicate that they were either the District Police Range level or State level.
There is no entry in the character roll of the petitioner to the effect that he had participated in All India Police Meet in the year, 1980 and achieved any outstanding distinction therein.
In accordance with proviso below sub-rule 1 of Rule 131 of the said Rules, 5% of promotion in subordinate ranks of Police are to be made from amongst the members of the Police Force who achieve outstanding distinction in the fields of sports at All India level or International level in case they are otherwise eligible for promotion.
It may be worthwhile to add that in the year 1988, 45 seats in promotion course for Constables were allotted to Ferozepur Range, out of which 13 seats were allocated to Faridkot district.
The petitioner, who belongs to Faridkot district, also competed against these seats in the test for the purpose.
The petitioner qualified the test, but he failed to obtain the requisite merit in the test, his name having been placed at Sr. No. 26 of the merit list prepared by the Departmental Promotion Committee (Annexure R-1 refers).
Though the case of the petitioner for promotion to higher rank against 5% quota reserved for the sportsmen category was considered by the DPC, but he was found not suitable for admission to promotion list 'B' because he did not achieve any outstanding distinction in the field of sports after his enlistment in the Police Department on 191978.
Therefore, I see no illegality or infirmity in declining the claim of the petitioner for bringing his name to promotion list 'B'.
4.
The other aspect of the matter is that the provision of Rule 131 for giving promotion from one rank to another to the members of the Police Force against 5% quota reserved for the sportsmen category is not mandatory.
As per provision, only those members of the Police Force, who achieve distinction in the fields of sports at All India or International level are eligible for promotion provided they fulfil the other conditions of service, viz. efficiency, seniority, honesty and merit in the B-1 test.
The object of the amendment in the rule is to encourage the Police personnel to take active part in various games and sports and to achieve distinction therein.
In the present case, the petitioner's claim for promotion was rightly rejected by the DPC as he failed to obtain the requisite merit in the test.
Moreover, one cannot claim promotion as a matter of right, he has only a right of consideration which was done by the respondent-department.
For the foregoing reasons, I find no merit in the writ petition and the same is dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.