GR Majithia, J - This judgment disposes of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 14836 of 1993 and 14837 of 1993 as common question of law arises for determination.
2.
The petitioners have challenged the orders issued by the Senior Regional Manager, Food Corporation of India placing them under suspension as disciplinary proceedings were contemplated against them.
3.
A reference to the relevant facts has been made from the pleadings in Civil Writ Petition No. 14836 of 1993.
Petitioner No. 1 was promoted to officiate as Assistant Grade-I (Depot) on purely ad hoc basis vide order No. A 7 (14)/71-CORD.ND.
Vol. II/dated November 4, 1971.
The order was issued by the Deputy Manager (Admn.)
for Zonal Manager (North).
He was directed to report for duty to the Senior Regional Manager.
The Senior Regional Manager, Regional Office, Chandigarh posted him at Amritsar vide order No. A/8(22)/71, dated November 10, 1971.
The Senior Regional Manager vide order No. VIG.
21 (RII- 12017/93/8156), dated 191193 placed him under suspension in exercise of powers conferred by para 66(i) (a) of FCI (Staff) Regulations, 1971 as disciplinary proceedings were contemplated against him.
The order of suspension was challenged on the ground that it was not issued by the competent authority.
The petitioner's counsel says that the petitioner was promoted as Officiating Assistant Grade-I (Depot) by the Zonal Manager and as such, he was competent to suspend him.
4.
In exercise of powers conferred by Section 45 of the Food Corporation Act, 1964 and with the previous sanction of the Central Government, the Food Corporation of India made regulations called the Food Corporation of India (Staff) Regulations, 1971, for short the Regulations.
Regulation No. 4 provides for recruitment, promotion, reversion and retrenchment unit.
Regulation 54 deals with minor and major penalties.
Regulation 56 provides for the disciplinary authorities.
It says that the Board or the other authority specified in Appendix 2 has the power to impose any of the penalties specified in Regulation 54 on any employee.
Appendix-1 contains the description and number of various category of posts.
The post of Assistant Grade-I falls within category-III in view of amendment made vide notification No.1-II/72-EP, dated February 1, 1977.
Appendix-B deals with the appointing authority for the various posts.
The appointing authority for the posts falling in category-III is the Senior Regional Manager/Regional Manager/Joint Manager.
The disciplinary authority in case of post under category-III is District Manager/Deputy Manager/Deputy Regional Manager/Regional/Joint Manager.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioners does not dispute that the Senior Regional Manager is the Appointing and Disciplinary Authority of all the employees failing in category-III.
He also does not dispute that the post held by the petitioners falls in category-III.
His only grouse is that petitioner No.1 was promoted as Assistant Grade-I (Depot) by the Zonal Manager and as such, he was the disciplinary authority.
He also does not dispute that the post of Deputy Zonal Manager is at par with that of Senior Regional Manager.
6.
Learned counsel for the Food Corporation of India has produced before us the minutes of the Zonal Promotion Committee held on November 1, 1975.
This committee comprised of the following :  (1) Shri PR Kashyap, Dy.
Zonal Manager Chairman,  (2) Shri H.L.
Barotra, A Manager (Estt.)
Member,  (3) Shri C.L.
Rathi, Jt.
Manager (RC) Member,  (4) Shri KC Bhasin, Sr. Dy.
Manager (P) Member Secretary.
7.
The Committee considered the cases of various employees for promotion as Assistant Grade-I and petitioner No. 1 was selected for promotion and the minutes of the meeting were signed by the Committee members including the Chairman.
The record was maintained in the Zonal Office.
It is how the office order under which petitioner No. 1 was promoted to officiate as Assistant Grade-I was issued by Zonal Manager.
The petitioners were not promoted by the Zonal Manager.
In fact, they were promoted by a Committee of which Deputy Zonal Manager was the Chairman.
The appointment was not made by the Zonal Manager but by the Committee and the order of appointment was issued by the Deputy Zonal Manager (Administration) as the record was maintained in the Zonal office.
8.
Learned counsel was not right in saying that the petitioners were promoted by the Zonal Manager.
Even otherwise, the competent authority for making appointment for the posts falling in category III is Senior Regional Manager under the rules and this authority has suspended the petitioners.
The orders of suspension have been passed by the competent authority.
9.
For the reasons stated above, we find no merit in the writ petitions and the same are dismissed with costs.
Cost is quantified as Rs. 2,000/- in each case.
Petitions dismissed.