G C Garg, J - Petitioners are the lecturers working in the Vaish Arya Kanya Mahavidyalaya, Bahadurgarh, Haryana, which college is receiving 95% aid from the Government.
The petitioners were required by letter dated August 10, 1991, Annexure P24 to make arrangement for their residence at Bahadurgarh, the place of their posting and intimate their local addresses to the Principal of the college by August 31, 1991.
The petitioners did not comply with directions contained in letter Annexure P-24.
Consequently, letters Annexures P-25 to P-31 were issued to the petitioners whereby action to terminate their services was contemplated.
Aggrieved by these orders, Annexures P-24 to P-31, the petitioners filed this writ petition seeking quashment of these letters.
They also made a grouse that they are entitled to selection grade and senior scale as per the university rules and regulations with effect from January 1, 1986 which the management has failed to grant to them, despite several reminders.
2.
Respondents No. 1 and 2 have already withdrawn the letters Annexures P-25 to P-31 and, therefore, it is not necessary to consider this matter any more.
As regards the grant of selection grade and senior scale to the petitioners, the stand as appearing in para 13 of the written statement filed by respondents No. 1 and 2 is that appropriate orders in this behalf are to be passed by the Dean, College Development Council, Maharishi Dayanand University, Rohtak and the cases of all the eligible persons/petitioners have been submitted in the prescribed proformas for necessary orders and on the receipt of the same, further action will follow.
3.
During the course of arguments, a consensus was arrived at between the counsel for the parties that this writ petition be disposed of with certain directions.
In the situation, learned counsel for the respondents withdrew letter Annexure P-24 reserving the right of the authorities to proceed afresh in accordance with law.
In the circumstances, letter Annexure P-24 is quashed leaving it Open to the authorities to proceed against the petitioners and other members of the staff in accordance with law.
As regards the grant of selection grade and senior scale to the petitioners, having regard to the respective stands in the pleadings of the parties, it is directed that respondents No. 1 and 2 will take steps to consider the case of the petitioners for grant of selection grade and senior scale with effect from the due date and recommend their cases, within two weeks in the prescribed proformas to Dean, College Development Council, Maharishi Dayanand University, Rohtak for his consideration and orders.
If the cases of the petitioners have already been recommended to the said authority for passing appropriate orders, the college authorities will issue reminder attaching therewith the earlier recommendations made in respect of the petitioners and the Dean aforesaid will thereafter consider the claim of the petitioners for grant of selection grade and senior scale and pass well reasoned orders within three weeks of the receipt by him the recommendations made by the college authorities.
Learned counsel for the petitioners has undertaken to make available a copy of this order to the Vice-Chancellor and the Dean aforesaid for their information and necessary action at their end.
4.
Respondents No. 1 and 2 on receipt of the approval if any from the Dean, will refer the matter to the Director, Higher Education Haryana, Chandigarh at once for release of funds as are permissible in law who in turn will take appropriate action within three months of the receipt by him the papers in that behalf from respondents No. 1 and 2.
5.
With the above observations and directions, this writ petition stands disposed of.
No costs.
Order accordingly.