S P Kurdukar, C.J.
(Oral) - Writ Petition is admitted.
Pleadings of the parties are complete.
By consent, writ petition placed on Board and called out for hearing.
2.
The petitioner was initially appointed as a conductor in the State Transport Department, Punjab, in the year 1985.
On the fateful evening of December 25, 1989, at about 7 pm when he was conducting a bus, a party of militants stopped it and assaulted the passengers.
Five passengers were killed and about fifteen were injured including the petitioner.
The petitioner suffered 40% disability due to the injuries.
In view of the physical disability of the petitioner, the respondents decided to adjust him as a booking clerk against a vacant post since he was unable to work as a conductor.
(See Annexure P-14, dated 1731993).
3.
However, on January 18, 1994 vide order (Annexure P-15), Divisional Manager, Ferozepur, respondent No. 3, informed the General Manager, respondent No. 4, that the petitioner was not to be given any financial benefit of the post of booking clerk as he was not posted as a clerk on promotional basis and that his pay was to be drawn in the pay scale of Conductor.
It is this communication which is sought to be challenged by the petitioner in this writ petition.
4.
Mr. Arora, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner urged that since the petitioner has been adjusted against a clear vacancy of a booking clerk, he cannot be denied the pay scale payable to the booking clerks and the financial benefit cannot be denied to him.
He urged that communication dated January 18, 1994 (Annexure P-15) is illegal and it be quashed and set aside.
5.
Mr. Amrik Singh, PCS, Divisional Manager, Punjab Roadways, Ferozepur filed written statement on behalf of respondents No. 1 to 4.
It is pleaded therein that the petitioner was simply adjusted against the post of a booking clerk and he is not entitled to any monetary benefits as a result of this posting/adjustment on compassionate grounds and further that he is not entitled to any higher scale as a result of his adjustment against the post of booking clerk.
6.
In our opinion, the stand taken by the respondents is unsustainable.
Since the petitioner has been adjusted against a clear vacancy of a booking clerk and he has been working on the said post, he is entitled to draw the pay scale of that vacancy.
The respondents cannot compel the petitioner to draw the salary of a conductor and work as a booking clerk.
7.
In the facts and circumstances of the case, we hold that the order dated January 18, 1994 (Annexure P-15) is not sustainable and cannot be upheld.
The impugned order (Annexure P-15) is quashed and set aside and the respondents are directed to give to the petitioner the pay scale of a booking clerk.
The writ petition is allowed in the above terms.
In the circumstances of the case, there would be no order as to costs.