SP Kurdukar, J (Oral) - Admitted Mr. Ashok Kumar Aggarwal, Additional AG, Punjab appears for the respondents.
By consent the writ petition placed on Board and called out for hearing.
2.
Respondents No. 1 to 3 have filed written statement.
The petitioner has also, filed the replication.
3.
The principal grievance which we are inclined to accept for the purpose of disposal of this writ petition is set out in paragraph 10 (iii) of the writ petition.
After holding the departmental enquiry, the enquiry officer submitted his enquiry report and findings to the disciplinary authority.
The disciplinary authority without furnishing a copy of the enquiry report and findings, passed the impugned order dated February 26, 1993 (Annexure P-4).
Under the impugned order, the petitioner was awarded the punishment of 'censure' and at the same time, it was ordered that he will not be entitled to any pay and allowances for the period he remained under suspension over and above the subsistence allowance already drawn for the suspension period and paid to him.
It is this order which is subject-matter of challenge in this writ petition.
4.
It is contended by Shri SK Sharma, learned counsel for the petitioner that the petitioner was neither furnished a copy of the enquiry report nor he was heard at the time of imposing penalty and as such the impugned order is vitiated.
The impugned order (Annexure P-4) is liable to be set aside.
5.
As regards the furnishing of the copy of the enquiry report and the findings, it appears that there is no dispute that the petitioner was not furnished with the enquiry officer's report and the findings.
It is also not disputed that the petitioner was not heard by the disciplinary authority before passing the impugned order.
If this be so, then, in our opinion the impugned order (Annexure P-4) cannot be sustained.
Consequently, the impugned order dated February 26, 1993 (Annexure P-4) is quashed and set aside.
It would, however, be open to the disciplinary authority to pass fresh order in accordance with law after serving a copy of the report of the enquiry officer along with his findings on the petitioner and after giving him reasonable opportunity of being heard as regards the punishment and payment for the suspension period.
In the event, the disciplinary authority wants to rely upon the comments of the Deputy Commissioner or any other authority, the same may also be furnished to the petitioner alongwith the enquiry report made by the enquiry officer.
The writ petition is allowed in the above terms.
In the circumstances, there will be no order as to costs.