Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner, an up-holsterer in the Haryana Tourism Corporation, complains that the action of the respondents in placing him in the scale of Rs. 950-1500 suffers from the vice of discrimination as those working in the same capacity in Haryana Roadways have been granted a pay scale of Rs. 1200-2040.
He consequently prays for the issue of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to place him in the scale of Rs. 1200-2040 with effect from the January 1, 1986.
2.
The respondent-Corporation contests this claim on two grounds.
Firstly, it is claimed that the pay scale of Rs. 1200-2040 has been given by the Haryana Roadways to persons who possess the qualification of Matric with ITI certificate and to the persons, like the petitioner, who have passed only the Middle Class Examination.
Secondly, it is claimed that the employers and the nature of duties being different, the petitioner is not entitled to parity of treatment and cannot thus complain of discrimination.
3.
I have heard Mr. Naresh K Nagar, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. K K Gupta, for the respondent-Corporation.
4.
A perusal of the 'extract' attached to the letter dated August 23, 1990 issued by the Finance Department shows that the pay scale of Rs. 1200-2040 was recommended for persons holding technical posts "in various departments for which minimum educational qualification prescribed is Matric with ITI Certificate/Polytechnic."
The petitioner admittedly does not possess the qualification of even matric.
For obvious reasons, he could not have qualified the ITI certificate.
This being so, it is clear that the petitioner is not in the same category as the Up-holsterer working in the Transport Department, who fulfil the qualification of Matric with ITI certificate.
5.
It also deserves to be noticed that the nature of duties assigned to persons working in the Tourism Corporation cannot be identical with that of the duties assigned to those working in the Haryana Roadways.
The bus stands or the depots where the employees of the Haryana Roadways function cannot be compared to the air-conditioned restaurants or hotels being run by the Tourism Corporation.
In this situation, nature of duties of the employees in these two Organisations are not identical.
Still further, even the employers are different.
6.
Equal pay for equal work is the normal rule.
This is, however, not an absolute rule.
Differential treatment on the basis of educational qualifications, job requirements, level of responsibility etc. is permissible.
In the present case, not only that the employers are different, but even the educational qualifications prescribed for the posts in the Corporation and the Roadways are different.
In such circumstances, the complaint of discrimination made by the petitioner is not tenable.
7.
Accordingly, there is no merit in this petition.
It is dismissed.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.