R S Mongia, J - The petitioner while working as a Sub-Divisional Engineer at Hissar in P.W.D.
(Building and Roads branch) was allotted Government accommodation.
In January, 1990, he was transferred to Rohtak.
No Government accommodation was allotted to him at Rohtak.
He kept on retaining the Government accommodation at Hissar, where his family was putting up.
It is alleged that while at Rohtak, the petitioner was not paid any House Rent Allowance.
It may be observed here that there was no permission granted by the Government to retain the house at Hissar while the petitioner remained posted at Rohtak.
In January, 1991, the petitioner was transferred back to Hissar and after his retransfer to Hissar, he applied for re-allotment of the same house which had been previously allotted to him while he was earlier posted at Hissar.
Engineer-in-Chief, Haryana, did not approve the reallotment of the said house in favour of the petitioner and further ordered to recover the penal/market rent for the period he was retaining the house unauthorisedly while posted at Rohtak.
Copy of the said order has been annexed as Annexure P/5 to the Writ Petition, which has been made a subject matter of challenge.
2.
According to the learned counsel for the petitioner, under Rule 523 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume I and Part I (as applicable to Haryana) only penal rent is chargeable for the alleged unauthorised occupation.
Market rent is not chargeable under the statutory rules.
He further argued that in similar circumstances similarly situated persons like the petitioner were charged only penal rent for their alleged unauthorised occupation of the Government accommodation.
The petitioner had been discriminated against when he was asked to pay the market rent for the alleged unauthorised occupation.
He has referred in his petition to three cases, i.e. one of Shri R B Aggarwal, Sub-Divisional Engineer, and the others of Shri Raghbir Singh, Sub Divisional Magistrate and Shri Madan Parkash, Superintendent.
3.
Rule 523(6) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume I Part I, is in the following terms :  "(e) The employees who have retired/transferred but do not vacate Government accommodation within twenty-one days of transfer or retirement, shall be required to pay the following rent :  (i) Upto one month after 21st day 20% of the pay.
(ii) For one month thereafter 30% of the pay.
(iii) After that till the employee vacates the Government accommodation 40% of the pay."
According to this rule, the employee who after transfer does not vacate the Government accommodation within 21 days of the transfer is to pay the rent as indicated in the Rule.
4.
Learned counsel on behalf of the respondents, however, submitted that the Government in the Finance Department had issued instructions on September 11, 1985, that after four months of the unauthorised occupation, market rent should be charged from the concerned officer.
These instructions were followed by another instructions issued on January 4, 1989, further providing that where the Government employee does not vacate the accommodation on his transfer, the employee shall not be paid any House Rent Allowance at the station of his new posting until and unless he vacates the Government accommodation at his previous place of posting.
It was further mentioned in the latter instructions that these instructions would be effective from the date of issue of this letter and the necessary amendment in Rule 523 of Civil Services Rules, Volume I Part I, will be issued.
5.
The Rules contained in Volume I Part I of the Punjab Civil Services Rules have been framed under Article 309 of the Constitution of India.
No order of instructions which run contrary to these rules framed under Article 309 of the Constitution can be issued or made effective.
The only way is to amend/modify the statutory rules.
Without amending the statutory rules, the instructions which run contrary to the rules, cannot be enforced or made effective.
The instructions which laid down that the market rent would be chargeable in case of unauthorised occupation of the Government accommodation clearly run contrary to the statutory rule on the subject, i.e. Rule 523 ibid.
This rule was amended by issuing Punjab Civil Services Volume I, Part I (Haryana First Amendment) Rules 1991, and the notification to that effect was published in Haryana Government Gazette on October 22, 1991.
The amendment to the rule has not been made retrospective.
I am not opining in this case whether such a rule could be made effective from a retrospective date.
In this absence of its application retrospectively, amended rules will come into operation from the date of publication in the gazette, i.e. October 22, 1991.
Prior to that Rule 523(e), which has already been quoted above, would be applicable.
In the case of the petitioner, the unamended Rule 523(e) would be applicable.
Consequently the petitioner could not be charged anything more than permissible under Rule 523(e), quoted above.
6.
From the instances given by the petitioner in his writ petition, concerning one Shri R B Aggarwal, S.D.E., who also did not vacate the Government accommodation at Sirsa for a period of more than two years on his transfer from that place, was only charged the penal rent and not the market rent, as per rules.
Shri Raghbir Singh, SDM, was also charged penal rent and not the market rent for allegedly not vacating the Government accommodation for a period of about three months.
Similarly one Shri Madan Parkash, Superintendent, who also did not vacate the Government accommodation for a period of six months on his transfer from the place, was also charged the penal rent and not the market rent under the rules.
No explanation has come forth in the written statement as to why persons mentioned above were charged only the penal rent and not the market rent in spite of the instructions dated September 11, 1985, which, according to learned counsel for the respondents, were applicable at the relevant time.
On this count also the petition is likely to succeed.
7.
For the foregoing reasons, this writ petition is allowed and the impugned order dated July 1, 1991 Annexure P/5, is hereby quashed.
It is held that for the period of unauthorised occupation of the Government accommodation by the petitioner at Hissar, the respondents are entitled to recover only the rent, as per Rule 523(e) as it stood at that time and not the market rent.
There will be no order as to costs.