Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The six petitioners in these three writ petitions Nos. 1594, 2500 and 2693 of 1994 have been ordered to be reverted from the posts of Accountant-B to those of Cashier (A/Clerk).
The orders of reversion have been passed on the ground that the respondent-Federation has abolished certain posts.
The petitioners complain that the respondent has passed the impugned orders without finalising the seniority list and in violation of the Staff Service Rules.
They further point out that number of persons junior to them have been retained on the higher posts and that even the quota rule has been clearly violated.
The respondent-Federation contests these petitions.
A brief resume of facts as apparent from Civil Writ Petition No. 1694 of 1994 to which counsel for the parties have made a reference, may be noticed.
2.
The four petitioners in this case were initially appointed as Clerks/Cashiers.
Vide order dated May 25, 1981 the petitioners were promoted as Assistant Accounts/Assistants.
A copy of this order is at Annexure P-1.
The names of the petitioners appear at Sr. Nos. 2, 6, 11 and 17 respectively.
It is averred that 50 per cent posts of Assistants are reserved for promotion from amongst the Clerks/Cashiers and the remaining 50 per cent have to be filled up by direct recruitment.
On posting of an Assistant Accounts in the field, he is described as Accountant-B, but if he is posted in the Head Office, he is designated as an Assistant & Assistant Accounts.
3.
On November 15, 1989, the respondent-Federation issued a tentative seniority list of assistants working in the Head Office.
While the names of four persons who had been promoted along with the petitioners (Sr. Nos. 5, 9, 10 and 16) were mentioned in the list.
The names of the petitioners were not included.
The petitioners aver that they submitted representations dated January 17, 1990 and January 9, 1991.
According to the petitioners, the respondents - Federation has neither decided the representations nor has any seniority list of Assistant Accounts/Accountant-B ever been circulated in the office of District/Area offices of CONFED."
4.
On December 12, 1989, the Board of Administrators of the respondent-Federation decided to review and determine the "staff strength for the various officers/establishment of CONFED.
Among other decisions, a decision was taken that 11 posts of Assistants be retained against the existing strength of 13 in the Head-office at Chandigarh.
In so far the District/Area offices were concerned, it was decided that against the present working strength of 46 posts of assistant accounts/accountant 'B' only 19 posts be retained.
This was stated to be as a measure to offset losses and allegedly streamline the surplus requirement."
While a number of persons were retrenched/reverted, however, no reversion or retrenchment was effected in the cadre of Assistant Accounts/Assistants.
After a lapse of more than four years, vide order dated January 28, 1994, the respondent-Federation took a decision to revert the petitioners.
They aver that against the 19 posts of Accountant-B the respondent had decided to retain 15 direct recruits recruited from January 3, 1975 to June 10, 1981 and four promotees who had been appointed on April 8, 1992 and belonged to the reserved categories.
The petitioners challenge the orders of reversion on various grounds including the violation of the Staff Service Rules, Articles 14 & 16 of the Constitution of India and the principles of natural justice.
5.
No written statement has been filed on behalf of the State of Haryana or the Registrar Cooperative Societies.
However, a written statement has been filed on behalf of Respondent No. 3, the Federation through its Managing Director.
It has been inter alia averred that the Federation has assessed its Staff requirement and with a view to effect economy and to streamline its functioning, a decision to abolish the services of surplus staff had been taken in the meeting of the Board of Administrators held on December 12, 1989.
This decision was approved by the Registrar Co-operative Societies, Haryana on December 13, 1989.
The consequent orders of terminations have been passed in respect of the surplus staff".
It has been further averred that one post of Accounts personnel was created in each of the Central Co-operative Consumers Stores.
At the time of creation of such posts, there was a common cadre of the employees in respect of the employees of the Federation as well as of the Central Co-operative Consumers Stores.
However, the Federation decaderrised the common cadre on 12121989.
It is incorrect that there was the post or designation of Assistant Accounts, since the creation of posts of Accountants-B in the year 1982.
It is incorrect that if an Assistant is posted in SHO, he is called Assistant Accounts whereas while working in the district, he is called Accountant-B In fact, there is a post of Accountant-B in the accounts section of HO The person who is working in the establishment section or in other branches of the Federation, such official is called the Assistant.
The employees working in the equivalent, post in the Accounts section, dealing with the accounts, is called Acountant-B" It has been further stated that at the time of the promotion of the petitioners in the year 1981, there was no post of Accountant-B Since the petitioners were working in the Stores, they were posted as Assistant Accounts in the Stores, which posts were redesignated as Accountant-B There is nothing in common between the cadres of Accountants-B and that the Assistants.
With regard to the seniority list issued on May 11, 1989 and the alleged representations dated January 17, 1990 and January 9, 1991, it has been averred.
that the officials mentioned at Sr. Nos. 5, 10 and 16 of Annexure P-1 were working in Head Office prior to their promotion and continued to so work against the posts of Assistant.
Consequently, their names were reflected in the tentative seniority list of Assistants.
With regard to Mr. OP Chuttani, whose name appeared at Sr. No. 9 in the order of promotion, it has been averred that he was working in the district office and was called to the Head Office to discharge the duties of an Assistant.
Therefore, his name was included in the tentative seniority list of Assistants.
The averment that Annexures P-3 and P-4 were representations has been denied.
Consequently, no action was taken thereon.
It is the case of the respondents that the seniority has to be determined from the date of joining in the cadre and that "there is no rota for promotees."
It has been further averred "that there is no post of Assistant Accounts.
However, the Federation has 19 posts of Accountants-B and the officials mentioned in para 10 have been retained."
According to the respondent, the quota is not required to be maintained while effecting retrenchment or ordering reversion which has to be done on the basis of 'last come first go.'
It has also been averred that the persons belonging to the reserved categories have been retained" against the roster point in view of the instructions of the State Government."
The respondent maintains that the action was in conformity with the rules and the provisions of the Constitution.
Various grounds raised by the petitioners have been controverted.
It has been highlighted that the Federation has suffered huge losses which have crossed Rs. 900 Lacs in December, 1993.
It has also been stated that the petitioners are working as Accountant-B since the year 1982 and have been ordered to be reverted as they were the juniormost in that cadre.
6.
The petitioners have filed a replication.
It has been inter alia averred that "no seniority in the cadre of Assistant Accounts/Accountant-B has either been made, decided or circulated nor the quota of direct recruits and promotees has been determined in accordance with the Rule 94(a) 4 before the impugned order of reversion of the petitioners was passed by the Respondent No.
3."
It has also been averred that "the direct recruits can have no claim of seniority in respect of the quota of posts failing to the share of promotees."
It is also pointed out that 9 persons who had been appointed as Assistant Accounts/Accountant-B by direct recruitment were declared surplus by the respondent vide order dated October 11, 1990 a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-6 with the writ petition.
However, while passing the impugned orders, all of them have been retained in contravention of the quota rule.
It has been reiterated that various persons who had been promoted along with the petitioners in the year 1981 or long thereafter and are apparently junior to them have been retained on the higher posts while the petitioners have been illegally ordered to be reverted.
The petitioners have also averred that they could not have been reverted without finalising the inter se seniority.
7.
After the admission of the writ petition, the petitioners have moved CM Application No. 2314 of 1994 for permission to place on record copies of two documents in respect of the contention that the posts of Assistants/Assistant Accounts existed even prior to their promotion in the year 1981 and that in fact, a proposal for the promotion of the petitioners in all the three cases had been prepared on November 3, 1980.
Notice of this application was given to the counsel for the respondents.
No objection was raised.
Accordingly, the application is allowed and the documents are taken on record.
8.
Mr. Anil Malhotra, learned counsel for the petitioners, has primarily contended that the provisions of the various rules have to be harmoniously construed and that the respondent-Federation was bound to prepare a seniority list in accordance with the provisions of Rule 94 (a) and Rule 13.
It is only thereafter that the Federation could proceed to retrench or revert the employees in accordance with Rule 33.
He has also contended that the petitioners belong to the cadre of assistants and that the action of Respondent No. 3 in reverting them while various persons junior to them continued to hold the higher posts either in excess of the quota or otherwise is illegal.
On the other hand, Mr. Hemant Gupta, learned counsel for the respondent-Federation, has contended that even though the petitioners had been promoted to the posts of Assistant Accounts, they were designated as Accountant-B in the year 1983 and have been treated as such ever since then.
He submits that on the abolition of posts, the juniormost persons have been ordered to be reverted.
He has further submitted that since the petitioners have not impleaded the persons, who are alleged to be junior to them, no order to their prejudice can be passed in their absence.
It has also been contended that if the plea of the petitioners that they belong to the cadre of Assistants is accepted, they can get no relief as only 11 persons who are admittedly senior to them have been retained.
9.
Admittedly, the petitioners were promoted as Assistant Accounts/Assistants on May 25, 1981.
The date of the creation of those posts, though disputed by the counsel for the petitioners, is actually of no consequence.
Thereafter, no order has been produced to show that the petitioners were actually redesignated as Accountants-B.
Even if it is assumed that they were so redesignated, it appears to be clear from the record of the case and on a perusal of the rules that the retrenchment or reversion can be ordered only on the principle of 'Last Come First Go.'
For this purpose, it is necessary for the respondent to prepare a seniority list in accordance with the rules.
While the petitioners contend that the quota rule has to be read into the rule relating to the determination of seniority, the respondent contests this.
This dispute has to be settled by the respondents after inviting objections.
This has admittedly not been done.
In fact, it has not been shown that the seniority list of the Accountants-B was ever finalised.
In CWP No. 2500/94 a copy of the tentative seniority list has been produced as Annexure R.3/1.
It has not been shown or even averred that the list was ever finalised after inviting objections thereto.
This aspect assumes importance in view of the fact that in the year 1990, the respondent-Federation itself had decided to retrench 15 Accountants-B other than the petitioners, who were working at different places.
According the petitioners, they were direct recruits.
Vide letter dated October 11, 1990, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-6 with the replication, it was given out that the Federation had sought their option for adjustment in HAFED.
This letter is a clear evidence of the fact that the respondent had initially considered the 15 persons mentioned in this letter as liable to be retrenched.
What has necessitated a change ?
Nothing has been averred or produced to answer this question.
10.
Rule 33 of the Staff services Rules of the CONFED clearly provides that "in case of retrenchment or reversion due to abolition or reduction in number of posts the employee who was the last person to be employed in that category shall be first to be retrenched or reverted..." For this purpose, it is only fair that the respondent prepares a seniority list in accordance with the rules after inviting objections.
Finally, those, who are found to be junior, can be reverted.
However, till such time as the seniority is finalised, proper implementation of the rule is impossible and the order of retrenchment becomes questionable.
This is all the more so in the context of the present case, where the petitioners are not only alleging the violation of the quota rule, but have also demonstrated that even those, who were appointed as Accountants-B almost 11 years after them have been allowed to continue.
If, these persons were members of reserved categories and have to be assigned seniority at certain reserved points, the Federation had to determine and finalise their seniority.
To illustrate, a reference to the tentative seniority list produced as Annexure R.3/1 with the written statement in C.W.P.
No. 2500 of 1994 shows that the members of the backward classes have been placed at Sr. Nos. 26 and 27 and their date of appointment to the post is later than that of the petitioners.
Similarly, members of the Scheduled Cases have been show from Sr. Nos. 36 to 39 and they were promoted almost 11 years after the petitioners.
There is no averment in the written statement that this list was ever circulated or that any objections were ever invited against it.
If objections had been invited, it could have been possible for the petitioners or various other persons to show that the tentative seniority list was not in accordance with the relevant provisions of the rules.
The respondent could have accepted or rejected their objections.
The failure to circulate the list and invite the objections has certainly prejudiced the interest of the petitioners.
In this situation, it appears to be just and fair to direct the respondents to reconsider the matter and decide it after finalising the seniority list.
11.
In Civil Writ Petitions No. 2500 and 2693 of 1994, an objection has been raised that the respective petitioners had filed civil Suits "for declaration with consequential relief of permanent injunction" and as such the present petitions are not competent.
It has not been shown that the order of reversion had been communicated to either of the petitioners before the filing of the civil suits.
In fact, a perusal of the order shows that it was issued on January 28, 1994.
If after the receipt of the orders the petitioners were advised to withdraw the suits, it cannot be said that they are debarred from challenging the order of reversion which had not been communicated to them before the filing of the suit.
It is no doubt true that the principles of res judicata are applicable to the writ proceedings.
However, in the circumstances of these cases, it would be too harsh to decline the relief to the petitioners on the hyper technical ground that they had withdrawn the suit without any express permission to file a fresh one.
Accordingly, the writ petitions are allowed.
The orders of reversion are set aside.
It would, however, be open to the respondent to pass fresh orders after finalising the seniority.
In the circumstances of these cases, there would be no order as to costs.