VK Jhanji, J - Petitioner joined police service as Constable in the State of Haryana in the year 1979.
He was detailed for six months' Drill Instructor's Course in the year 1984-85.
He having successfully passed the Drill Instructor's Course was posted and appointed as Drill Instructor at PTC Madhuban as Head Constable in the year 1988-89.
According to the petitioner, during his posting at PTC (Police Training College), Madhuban, he was awarded two commendation certificates along with Rs. 30/- cash awards.
These certificates were awarded to the petitioner for his good performance and duty at the time of passing of the parade of recruitment in the Recruit Training Centre at Madhuban.
Written test etc. were held on 23rd and 24th of October, 1992 for bringing the Constables on 'B-1' list for sending them to training to Lower School Course.
The petitioner was not selected for being brought on 'B-1' list as according to the respondents, he did not qualify the parade test.
Petitioner made a representation to the Deputy Inspector General of Police and also appeared before him personally on 11111992, but all his efforts proved futile.
He has, thus, challenged the action of the respondents by filing the present writ petition.
2.
Respondents No. 1 to 3 in their written statement have stated that the petitioner did not complete the race of 100 mtrs.
within 145 seconds and he was given 14 marks in the parade test, i.e.
Drill Duties : 3-1/2, Word of Command : 3, Class-taking : 5, Race : Nil, & Turn-out : 2-1/2 marks.
This was out of 30 marks.
He was required to obtain 15 marks and as such, he could not qualify by one mark.
Respondent No. 4, Sh. KK Sandhu, IPS, Superintendent of Police, who was the Chairman of the Departmental Promotion Committee has not filed any written statement.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner contended that it is very unlikely that a person who had been deputed and acted as a Drill Instructor in the Police Training College, Madhuban, could fail in the parade test.
According to him, he was intentionally failed in the race though he was well within merit and completed race within the specified period.
4.
Having heard learned counsel for the parties at some length, I am of the view that it is for the Authorities to see and judge as to whether the petitioner had made the grade in a particular test or not, and the Courts normally do not interfere in such like matters.
However, in the present case, petitioner has specifically alleged in para 13 (i) and (ii) of the writ petition that the petitioner had completed the race within the stipulated time but was failed intentionally as he was coming in the merit and when he objected, he was snubbed and threatened by respondent No. 4 and later on he had failed the petitioner in the test for which the petitioner is the only one who passed in the district and is imparting training to the recruits and Head Constables for Parade/Drill.
This allegation of the petitioner has gone unrebutted as respondent No. 4 has not filed any written statement to deny this specific averment of the petitioner.
In absence of denial, I have no alternative but to accept the averment made by the petitioner that he successfully completed the race within 145 seconds.
At this stage, it is also worth mentioning that when the petitioner was selected for the Drill Instructor's Course, the minimum standard fixed for 100 mtrs.
race was 1325 seconds and for 'B-1' test, the standard is 145 seconds, meaning thereby that at the time of selection for the Drill Instructor's Course, petitioner was much ahead of the prescribed standard.
Now the question which arises in these circumstances is as to what relief can be given to the petitioner.
At that time of arguments, it was brought to my notice that the petitioner subsequently passed the test which was held in January, 1993, and has been detailed to Lower School Course which commenced from 181993.
Thus, the only relief which can be given to the petitioner is that in case the petitioner successfully clears the Lower School Course, he would be given benefit of the same as was given to those candidates who had been deputed in pursuance of examination held in October, 1992.
5.
Consequently, the writ petition is disposed of in the terms indicated above.
No costs.
Order accordingly.