NK Sodhi, J - What is challenged in this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution is the action of the Punjab National Bank (hereinafter called the Bank) in not granting to the petitioner the benefit of his military service for the purpose of fixing his seniority though the said benefit has been allowed to him in regard to pay fixation.
2.
Facts giving rise to this petition are as under :-  3.
The petitioner joined the Bank as a Clerk in the year 1958 and worked as such till September 1963 when he left service and offered himself for military service in response to the Clarion call given to defend the mother-land from external aggression by the Chinese.
He joined the pre-commission training in September 1963 and was commissioned as an Officer in the Army on April 3, 1964 and thereafter he resigned from service of the Bank on June 8, 1966.
He was released from the Army on August 1, 1969 under the phased programme meant for Emergency Commissioned Officers when he was holding the rank of a Captain.
4.
Thereafter, the petitioner applied to the Bank for being re-appointed and mentioned in the application that he had to his credit military service.
The Bank again appointed him as a Clerk in the year 1973.
5.
On receipt of representation from some Nationalised Banks and from the Ex-Emergency Commissioned/Short Service Commissioned Officers employed in the Banks regarding the admissibility of benefits of service rendered in the Armed Forces on recruitment in the Banks against reserved/unreserved vacancies as were available in Central Civil Services, the Government of India refrained from taking any general decision in the matter because each Bank had its own problems.
The Banks were, thus, left free to take their own decision as to whether they wanted to give the benefits to the Ex-Army Officers and to what extent.
Some of the public sector Banks and Financial Institutions gave the benefits envisaged in the letter of October 19, 1977 addressed by the Government of India to them while others did not extend those benefits.
With a view to have uniformity in all the public sector Banks, it was decided by the Government of India that all such Banks/ Financial Institutions should allow to the ECOs/SSCOs commissioned between 1111962 and 1011968 and who joined their Organisations on release from the Armed Forces against vacancies reserved for this category seniority and pay in terms of and subject to the same terms and conditions as laid down in Rule 6 of the Released Emergency Commissioned Officers and Short Service Commissioned Officers (Reservation of vacancies) Rules 1971.
This decision was communicated to all the public sector Banks/Financial Institutions as per letter dated November 10, 1986.
At this stage, it would be relevant to re-produce the decision communicated by the Government of India to the Chairman and Managing Directors of the Nationalised Banks and other Financial Institutions;  "With a view to have uniformity in all the public sector banks etc. it has now been decided that all public sector banks/financial institutions may also allow to the ECOs/SSCOs, who were commissioned between 1111962 and 1011968 and who joined their organisations on release from the armed forces, against vacancies reserved for this category seniority and pay in terms of and subject to the same terms and conditions as laid down in para 6 of the then Cabinet Secretariat, Department of Personnel Notification No. 9/20/69-Estt.
(c) dated 26th August 1971 as amended/amplified from time to time and subject to other conditions laid down in the above notifications."
6.
As per notification of August 26, 1971, referred to in the decision of Government of India, it had notified the Released Emergency Commissioned Officers and Short Service Commissioned Officers (Reservation of Vacancies) Rules, 1971.
Para 6 of the notification which is Rule 6 of these Rules provides for seniority and pay fixation of Class - I and Class - II Officers of the Government who had been appointed against vacancies reserved for the Ex-Army Personnel under the Rules.
These rules were, however, not applicable to the Banks.
7.
The only grievance of the petitioner is that according to the decision of the Government of India quoted above, he is entitled to the benefit of military service for the purpose of seniority as well as is provided in Rule 6 of the aforesaid Rules.
8.
We have heard counsel for the parties at length and find no merit in the claim as made by the petitioner.
It will be seen from the decision of Government of India referred to above that the benefit of military service for the purpose of seniority could be claimed by an Ex-Army Personnel only if he could establish that he joined the Bank on release from the Army against a vacancy reserved for an Emergency Commissioned Officer/Short Service Commissioned Officer.
It is true that the petitioner was commissioned between 1111962 and 1011968 but on his release he was not appointed against a post reserved for this category of Officers.
The Regional Manager of the Bank has filed an affidavit stating that the petitioner was not appointed against any vacancy reserved for a Released Emergency Commissioned Officer or a Short Service Commissioned Officer.
Thus, not having been appointed against a reserved vacancy, the petitioner is clearly not entitled to the benefit of military service in the matter of fixation of his seniority.
In this view of the matter, no other question arises for determination.
Consequently, we find no merit in the petition and the same stands dismissed.
The parties will bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.