R P Sethi, J(Oral) - I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
2.
Relying upon the Government instructions Annexures P3 and P4, the petitioners, Class-IV employees of the respondents, have prayed for the issuance of directions for consideration of their case of promotion in terms of the aforesaid Annexures for the posts of Clerk/Laboratory Attendants in Class-III.
A prayer has also been made for quashing the appointment of respondents 3 to 5 who are stated to be junior than the petitioners.
Mr. Bal, learned counsel for the petitioners, has been very fair to concede that he would not press for the prayer for quashing the appointment of respondents 3 to 5 at this belated stage.
3.
Vide Annexure P3, the Government of Punjab made provisions of promotional avenues for Class-IV employees of the Education Department subject to the conditions specified in the aforesaid Annexure dated April 25, 1972.
However, vide Annexure P4 dated August 24, 1983, directions were issued that with a view to bringing about uniformity in the matter of procedure, practice and policy in all the departments for promoting Class IV employees to Class III, the following instructions be following :-  "(i) There should be a provision for filling up 10% of Class II posts by promotion from amongst Class IV employees, who possessed a minimum educational qualifications of Matriculation (with Punjabi) and have a minimum of 5 years' experience as such.
(ii) There should be a provision for a qualifying test in Punjabi Type- writing which should be equal to the one prescribed by the Subordinate Services Selection Board for such posts and it should be made essential to pass the test before a Class IV employee is considered eligible for promotion.
The test may be held by the appointing authority or any such authority to whom the owners for doing so are delegated by the appointing Authority.
(iii) The present instructions contained in the circular under reference under which the SSS Board is to be held the examination for Class IV employees are hereby withdrawn.
(iv) The service Rules of all the departments including those in which a provision for promotion of Class IV employees to Class III posts has already been made, should be amended in accordance with the aforesaid decisions."
4.
The respondents have contested the claim of the petitioners mainly on the ground that as they were not found eligible possessing requisite qualifications in terms of Annexure P4, they were not considered for promotion along with respondents 3 to 5.
It has been specifically stated that none of the petitioners had passed the requisite typewriting test in Punjabi and some of them had also not passed Matric with Physics and Chemistry.
The averments of the respondents have been vehemently denied and in the replication filed on behalf of the petitioners, it has been submitted that all the petitioners possessed the requisite qualifications and were Matric with Physics and Chemistry excepting petitioner-5.
The petitioners have given the following details of qualifications in support of their submissions :-  "Sr. No. Name of Petitioner S/Shri Qualifications Remarks.
1.
Prem Chand (Balmiki/Handicapped) Matric with Science - March 1988 Punjabi Typing 6.10.84.
2.
Amarjit Singh Matric with Physics Chemistry Sept.,82 Punjabi Typing December,1984.
3.
Gobind Lal Matric with Physics Chemistry March 82.
4.
Gurtej Singh (Ramdasia) Matric with Physics Chemistry March 82.
5.
Jagdev Singh (Ramdasia) Matric without Science March 74 Dip.
Engg./Pbi Type 1984-85.
6.
Sukhchain Singh Matric with Physics Chemistry September 83 Eng.
& Pbi Type December 1985.
7.
Maghar Singh Matric with Physics Chemistry September 83 -  8.
Bhur Singh Matric with Physics Chemistry March 74 - 9.
Khiala Ram Matric with Physics Chemistry March 85 -  5.
Learned counsel appearing for the respondents has not been in a position to show that any of the respondents 3 to 5 had passed the typing test in Punjabi in terms of Annexure P4.
From the record, it further transpires that vide Annexure R1, such of the Class-IV employees who possessed the minimum qualifications Matric with Physics and Chemistry having passed Matric with Punjabi, were entitled to be appointed as Laboratory Attendants.
Despite the fact that many of the petitioners possessed the requisite qualifications prescribed in Annexure R1.
dt. 8.4.1986 they were not considered by the respondents for which no valid reasons have been assigned.
The official respondents could not have discriminated between the petitioners and respondents 3 to 5 who were similarly situated and possessed the same qualifications.
The claim of the petitioners who were admittedly senior than respondents 3 to 5 was preferably better and had conferred a right upon them of being considered for appointment to the posts of Clerks/Laboratory Attendants in Class-III.
In the absence of any record to show that private respondents had undergone the requisite type test in Punjabi, the official respondents were not justified to ignore the case of the petitioners.
The petitioners have been discriminated without any just cause and the respondents have not been in a position to justify their action in this regard.
The petitioner are, therefore, entitled to the appropriate relief in this petition.
6.
Under the circumstances, prayer of the petitioners insofar as it relates to the quashing of appointment of respondents 3 to 5 is not accepted.
However, the respondents are directed to consider the case of the petitioners regarding their eligibility and appointment on the same analogy, terms and conditions as were applied in the case of respondents 3 to 5 and if found eligible appoint the petitioners to the posts of Clerks/Laboratory Attendants even retrospectively from the dates when the posts in the reserve category, in terms of Annexure P4, fell vacant.
In case the petitioners, upon consideration are appointed to the aforesaid posts, they shall not be entitled to back wages, but be held entitled to other benefits in the form of seniority for the purpose of promotion.
7.
Parties to bear their own costs.
Order accordingly.