VK Jhanji, J In this petition, order dated 1831987 vide which the services of the petitioner as Accountant were dispensed with, is being impugned.
2.
In brief, the facts are that in November, 1975, the petitioner was appointed as Clerk with the Municipal Committee, Sultanpur Lodhi.
Later on, he was promoted as Junior Librarian.
According to the petitioner, he successfully, passed the examination held in 1980 for the purpose of appointment as an Accountant.
The post of Accountant was advertised for regular selection.
The petitioner who was already working as Junior Librarian, applied for the post of Accountant.
He was selected and appointed as such on 9.11.1983.
Initially, the petitioner was appointed on probation for one year, but the period of probation was extended from time to time and the same expired in November, 1986.
On 1831987, the Director, Local Government, Punjab, dispensed with his services.
This order is being impugned in the present writ petition.
3.
Mr. SP Jain, Advocate, counsel for the petitioner, contended that the maximum period of probation was three years which expired on 9111986 and on the expiry of maximum period of probation, petitioner automatically stood confirmed and, therefore, his services could not be dispensed with, without any enquiry.
In support of his arguments, he relied upon judgments reported as Senior Regional Manager, Pb.
Region, Food Corporation of India and another v. Labh Singh and others, 1986(3) S.L.R.275 and Raj Kumari v. National Textile Corporation and another, 1987(1) S.L.R.
474.
4.
Having heard learned counsel for the parties at some length, I am of the view that there is no merit in the writ petition.
The petitioner was appointed on probation for a period of one year which could be extended for a maximum period of three years.
According to Rule 10 of the Punjab Municipal Services (Recruitment and Conditions of Service) Rules, 1975, (in short 'the 1975 Rules'), a person appointed to a service is to remain on probation for a period of one year, if appointed by direct recruitment and for six months, if appointed otherwise.
According to the proviso to this rule, the total period of probation, including extension, if any, cannot be more than three years.
Rule 10 is reproduced as under :-  "10 Probation.
(1) A person appointed to a service shall remain on probation for a period of one year if appointed by direct recruitment and for six months if appointed otherwise;  Provided that on officiating appointment in a service shall be reckoned as a period spent on probation.
(2) If the work or conduct of a person appointed to a service during the period of his probation is, in the opinion of appointing authority, not satisfactory, it may- (a) if appointed by direct recruitment, dispense with his service; (b) if appointed otherwise (i) revert him to his former post; or (ii) deal with him in such a manner as the term and conditions of his previous appointment permit; (c) omitted.
(3) On the completion of the period of probation of a person, the appointing authority may- (a) if his work and conduct have, in its opinion, been satisfactory- (i) confirm such person from the date of his appointment, if appointed against a permanent vacancy; or (ii) confirm such person from the date from which a permanent vacancy exists, if appointed against a temporary vacancy; or (iii) declare that he has completed his probation satisfactorily, if there is no permanent vacancy; or (b) if his work or conduct has not been, in its opinion, satisfactory- (i) dispense with his services, if appointed by direct recruitment or if appointed otherwise, revert him to his former post or deal with him in such other manner as the terms and conditions of his previous appointment may permit; or (ii) extend his period of probation and thereafter pass such orders as it could have passed on the expiry of first period of probation : Provided that the total period of probation including extensions, if any, shall not exceed three years."
Sub-rule(3) of Rule 10 of the 1975 Rules further provides that on completion of period of probation, the appointing Authority may confirm such person from the date of his appointment, if appointed against a permanent vacancy, if it finds that his work and conduct has been satisfactory.
It may confirm such person from the date from which a permanent vacancy exists, if appointed against a temporary vacancy or declare that he was completed his probation satisfactorily, if there is no permanent vacancy.
In the event of finding the work and conduct to be not satisfactory, the appointing authority can dispense with his services, if appointed by direct recruitment or if appointed otherwise, revert the person to his former post or deal with him in such other manner as the terms and conditions of his previous appointment may permit.
The reading of the Rule makes it quite clear that on expiry of period of probation, the appointing Authority on consideration of work an conduct of an employee, is required to pass an order either confirming the employee or dispensing with his services.
The question, thus, arisen as to whether on the expiry of period of probation, the employee automatically stands confirmed, if no order is passed in that regard.
In my view, the answer is in the negative because where a person is appointed as probationer in any post and his period of probation is specified, it does not mean that at the end of the period of probation, he obtains confirmation automatically even if no order is passed in that behalf.
Unless the terms of appointment clearly indicate that confirmation would automatically follow at the end of the specified period or there is a specific rule to that effect, the expiration of probation period does not necessarily lead to confirmation.
At the end of the period of probation, an order confirming an employee is required to be passed within a reasonable period.
In the present case, the period of probation after extension expired on 9111986.
The impugned order was passed on 1831987, i.e. almost after four months.
The impugned order explains as to why the delay took place in passing the order.
The reason given therein is that the latest reports about the work and conduct of the petitioner had not been received by the appointing Authority.
The appointing Authority, vide Communication dated 6111986, informed the Executive Officer of the Municipal Committee where the petitioner and the other two employees were posted as Accountants, to bring to the notice of concerned employees that their cases after expiry of period of probation were still under consideration and that the delay caused in taking final decision in their cases after completion of period of probation of three years would not confer on them the right of regular appointment.
It was, thus, to the knowledge of the petitioner that on completion of period of probation, his case was under consideration.
The appointing authority on receipt of annual Confidential Reports of the petitioner was satisfied that his work and conduct during the period of probation was not satisfactory and for that matter, his services were dispensed with.
The appointing Authority was also alive of the situation that before the petitionr was appointed as an Accountant he was working as Clerk in the Municipal Committee, and in order to protect his interest, the appointing authority, in the impugned order, gave a direction that he would be taken back to his substantive post by the Municipal Committee concerned.
In my view, the respondents have not only satisfactorily explained the delay which took place in passing the order, but it has also come on record that the petitioner was informed that his case for confirmation was under consideration.
The judgments in Labh Singh's case (Supra) and Raj Kumari's case (supra), cited by the counsel for the petitioner, have no application to the facts of the present case because in Labh Singh's case (supra), the order of termination of employees therein was struck down because it was found to be penal in nature.
It was also established in that case that the orders were passed on the basis of alleged misconduct or inefficiency of the private respondents.
In Raj Kumari's case (supra), the rule under consideration therein provided that if the workman continued in service on the expiry of 13th month of service, he would be deemed to have been automatically confirmed in his appointment.
However, in the present case, there is no such rule, rather under the Rule, the appointing Authority is required to pass an order either confirming the employee or dispensing with his services.
The order, of course, is to be passed within a reasonable period.
For the reasons recorded above, there is no merit in the writ petition and the same is dismissed with order as to costs.
Order accordingly