GR Majithia and SK Jain, JJ.
- The petitioners have challenged the selection of Supervisors (Female) under the Women and Child Development Department made by the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana, pursuant to Advertisement No. 1 of 1993, in this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
Facts first :-  2.
Petitioners No. 1 and 2 applied for the posts of Supervisor (Female) as they fulfilled the requisite qualifications mentioned in the advertisement.
Petitioner No. 3 was not eligible to apply for the post.
She passed her graduation in April, 1993.
A challenge to the selection has been made on the following grounds :-  (i) 43 posts were advertised but the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana (for short, the Board) has selected 182 candidates; and  (ii) 85% marks have been allocated for interview, which is impermissible.
3.
Written statement on behalf of the Board has been filed by its Secretary.
A preliminary objection has been taken that the Board issued advertisement No. 1/93 dated January 7, 1993 inviting applications for the posts of Supervisors (Female) under women and Child Development Department.
It was mentioned in the advertisement that number of posts given against each category was liable to variation to any extent.
Whenever the number of posts is increased, the Board displays such additional vacancies on its notice board for information of all concerned.
In the instant case, before the selection was made, the Board received additional demand of 34 posts from the Department.
The Board made selection for 80 posts (43 original advertised and 37 for which additional requisition was received from the Department).
The selection list and the waiting list prepared by the Board will remain valid for a period of one year and thereafter the same stands automatically cancelled.
The Board has taken a decision that validity of the selection list shall not be extended beyond one year in any circumstances.
No appointment out of such list shall be made after the expiry of one year.
In the instant case, the selection process was completed within a period of seven months.
All those candidates who were eligible as on February 7, 1993 were given an opportunity to compete for the posts of Supervisors (Female) and those candidates who had become eligible after February 7, 1993 could not compete for the posts.
4.
Petitioners No. 1 and 2 were examined and interviewed.
Their overall performance was poor and they were not selected.
The Third petitioner was not eligible for the post of Supervisor (Female) as on February 7, 1993.
She has got no right to challenge the selection.
75% marks were allocated for higher qualifications, experience, sports, co-curricular activities, etc. and 25% marks were allocated for viva voce test.
Learned counsel for the petitioners made the following submissions :-  (i) The Board could not make selection for more than the posts advertised; and  (ii) 85% marks were earmarked for viva voce test.
5.
The board has explained that before completion of selection, requisition was received from the department for additional vacancies.
The information was displayed on the notice board for perusal of all the candidates concerned and the Board made the selection for 80 posts (43 originally advertised and 37 for which additional requisition was received).
This practice had been adopted on earlier occasions also.
No prejudice appears to have been caused to any of the petitioners.
Petitioners No. 1 and 2 were the candidates for the posts advertised.
They were examined and interviewed and were not selected.
Petitioner No. 3 did not fulfil the requisite qualifications as on February 7, 1993, the last date of submission of the applications and as such she cannot make any grouse.
We do not find any infirmity in the procedure adopted by the Board.
6.
The second submission of the learned counsel is factually incorrect.
The Board has allocated only 25% marks for viva voce and not 85% marks as alleged.
7.
There is no merit in the writ petition and the same is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.