RS Mongia, J - This writ petition was filed for issuing directions to the Punjab State Agricultural Marketing Board, Chandigarh (in short the Board) to consider the name of the petitioner for appointment to the post of Assistant Engineer and further for quashing the appointments of Respondent Nos. 2 to 6 as Assistant Engineers in the Board.
2.
The Board has issued an advertisement in the daily Tribune, inviting applications for the posts of Assistant Engineers (Civil).
The petitioner had applied for the post and appeared in the interview held on 4th January, 1983.
One Daljit Singh and Surjit Singh (Respondent No. 2) were appointed as Assistant Engineers on 24th June, 1983; whereas Respondents No. 3 to 6 were appointed as such on 9th August, 1983.
3.
The petitioner challenged the appointments of Respondents No. 2 to 6 by filing a writ petition, being C.W.P.
No. 3754 of 1984, in which reply was filed by the respondent-Board, Para No. 2 of the Preliminary Objections in the written statement was in the following terms :-  "Even otherwise there is no violation of the petitioner's right.
He has in fact not disclosed full facts.
The Board had advertised 'a' temporary post of Asstt.
Engr.
(Civil) in the scale of Rs. 940-1850 (with two advance increments in the time scale being "admissible to the incumbents possessing post graduate degree in Civil Engineering".
In the year 1982, a committee consisting of the Secretary, the Chief Engineer and a member of the Board was constituted to recommend suitable persons.
The committee's recommendation is at annexure R.1.
After consideration of the matter it was decided that the post may not be filled and the case for the present may be filed.
Subsequently, on a further reference from the office, the Chairman who is the appointing authority decided to appoint Mr. Daljit Singh who was at No. 1 in the list of graduates in Engineering and Mr. Surjit Singh who was at No. 2 in the list of Diploma Holders.
Accordingly, letters of appointments were issued to both of them on 24.6.1983.
So far as the petitioner is concerned, he was duly considered for the post in question.
He was interviewed.
He was however not included in list prepared by the committee.
Copy of the recommendation of the committee is already at Annexure R1.
No right of the petitioner was then violated.
The averment that he was higher than the persons appointed in order of merit is totally false and baseless.
The other appointments have been made against posts which were not a part of the advertisement in question.
These "appointments were ordered by the Chairman and thereafter the letters of appointments were issued on 9883."
4.
The petitioner withdrew that writ petition with permission to file a fresh one on the same cause of action.
Later on, the present writ petition was filed, claiming the reliefs as indicated above in the opening paragraph of the judgment.
5.
The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that it is apparent from the written statement filed by Board in the earlier writ petition filed by the petitioner (C.W.P.
No. 3754 of 1984) that only one post of Assistant Engineer has been advertised, but, in fact, six Assistant Engineers had been appointed.
He referred to the recommendations of the Selection Committee for the post of Assistant Engineer where 132 candidates had appeared in the interview for one post which had been advertised.
The committee had recommended six names in all for the single post; four of Degree holders and two of Diploma holders.
Later on, six appointments were made and only three names which find mention in the list recommending the names, i.e. Daljit Singh, Darshan Singh Son of Bachan Singh (Respondent No. 3) and Surjit Singh (Respondent No. 2) were appointed, Respondents No. 4 to 6, whose names did not find mention in the list, were also given appointments.
6.
In the reply filed by the Chairman of the Board (Shri Darshan Singh Chaudhary), it has been averred that against the single post, which had been advertised, he had considered the person, recommended by the Committee at No. 1 in order of merit (Daljit Singh) and he was appointed.
Since more posts had also become available, he had selected Respondents No. 2 to 6.
Some of these persons were even in the merit list prepared by the Selection Committee.
It has further been averred that he (Chairman) in exercise of his personal judgment, on the basis of the record put up to him had made the selection.
The petitioner's case, according to the Chairman, was also considered.
As observed above, names of Respondents No. 4 to 6 did not find mention in the list prepared by the Selection Committee.
7.
The learned counsel for the petitioner also contended that it is apparent from the recommendations of the Selection Committee that the recommendations were based on qualifications, experience and performance in the interview.
Since the Chairman later on did not hold any interview, only qualifications and experience were the criteria for selecting the candidates and the petitioner had better qualifications and experience than the persons selected by the Chairman.
8.
On behalf of the respondents, it was submitted by the learned counsel that the writ petition is highly belated as the appointments made in June/August, 1983 had been challenged in April, 1985.
Further, according to the respondents' counsel, the petitioners, case had been considered and he was not selected.
However, no record has been produced.
9.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that petitioner's case was not properly considered for appointment, as some of the respondents, who were appointed by the Chairman, were also rejected by the Selection Committee along with the petitioner.
The only material which could be there before the Chairman was the record regarding the qualifications and experience of each individual.
What weighed with the Chairman to ignore the petitioner and give preference to the respondents, cannot be deciphered in absence of the record.
The petitioner had challenged the appointment of the private respondents in the year 1984 by filing a writ petition which he withdrew with permission to file a fresh one on the same cause of action.
The present writ petition was filed in April, 1985, after the withdrawal of the earlier writ petition.
Under the circumstances I do not consider that the writ petition when filed was belated.
10.
Consequently, the writ petition is allowed and the Respondent-Board is directed to consider the case of the petitioner afresh for appointment as Assistant Engineer and in case the petitioner is found better than Respondents No. 2 to 6 on the basis of qualifications and experience, then he be also accommodated by creating supernumerary post without disturbing any of the private respondents.
In case, the petitioner is found suitable for appointment, he would not be entitled to any arrears of pay, but would be entitled to other consequential benefits that may flow from such appointment.
let these directions be carried out within three months from the receipt of the copy of this order.
There will be no order as to costs.