Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner who retired as Secretary, Market Committee, Bhiwanigarh, on March 31, 1991, claims that he has not been paid the retiral benefits as due to him under the rules and orders issued by the respondent.
A grievance has been made that the amount of money due to him on account of the release of General Provident Fund and leave encashment has not been paid in accordance with the rules.
A prayer for the payment of all the arrears along with interest 418% has been made.
2.
On behalf of the respondent it has been inter alia, averred that the amounts of money as due to the petitioner have already been paid.
As such, it is urged that the petitioner is not entitled to reliefs as claimed by him.
It has also been averred that the petitioner has an effective alternative remedy by way of a revision petition under Section 42 of the Punjab Agricultural Produce Markets Act, 1961.
The petitioner has filed a replication controverting the averments made on behalf of the respondent and reiterating his claim.
3.
I have heard Mr. AC Jai, learned counsel for the petitioner, and Mr. Rajan Gupta for the respondent.
Mr. Jain has urged that the petitioner has not been paid the amount of provident fund in accordance with the provisions of Rule 10 of the Punjab State Agricultural Marketing Board and Market Committees employees' Pension, Provident Fund and Gratuity Rules, 1987 (hereinafter referred as the Rules).
He has further urged that the petitioner has also not been paid the amount which was due to him on account of the encashment of leave.
He has consequently prayed that writ of mandamus directing the respondent to pay these amounts along with interest @ 18% should be issued.
On the other hand, Mr. Rajan Gupta has contended that the petitioner has been actually paid the amounts of money due to him.
4.
The State Govt. had originally framed the Punjab State Agricultural Marketing Board and Market Committees Employees' Pension, Provident Fund and Gratuity Rules, 1965.
These rules were promulgated under Section 43(2) of the Act.
Rule 5 inter alias, provided that every employee shall "subscribe every month to the fund one-tenth of his salary.....".
Rule 6 required the competent authority to place to the credit of each subscriber an amount equivalent to the amount subscribed by him to the provident fund.
Under rule 7, the competent authority was, inter alia, required to "open a Provident Fund Account in the name of each subscriber.... in any scheduled Bank of Cooperative Bank...".
The employee was, however, not competent to operate the account.
According to the provisions of rule 8, the total amount of subscription and contribution, together with interest thereon was payable to the employee on termination of his service or to his nominee or to the legal heirs.
Rule 12 inter alia provided for the investment of the funds to the credit of a subscriber "in such manner so as to fetch maximum interest".
5.
On December 1, 1987, the State Government promulgated the 1987 Rules.
These rules were to apply to all the employees of the Board and the Market Committee constituted under the Act, who joined the service on or after the promulgation of the rules and to such of the existing employees as may opt therefor.
The latter category of employees was required to exercise option in the prescribed form.
The employees who did not opt for these rules were to be governed by the provisions of the 1965 Rules.
Rule 4 inter alias provided that "for the payment of pension, a fund, namely, "Punjab State Agricultural Marketing Board pension Fund" and "Market Committees Pension Fund" as the case may be, shall be established.
The Board and Market Committees in respect of their employees shall make monthly contribution @ 95% of the maximum of the scale for Class III and IV employees and 115% of the maximum of the scale of Class I and II employees."
Under rule 7, general provisions relating to the grant of pension contained in the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume II were made applicable.
Rule 10 provided for the payment of the general provident fund lying deposited.
It reads as under :-  "10.
General Provident Fund.
- (i) On coming into force of the Pension Scheme, the Contributory Provident Fund established by the Board/Market Committees shall be converted into General Provident Fund and the subscription portion of the Employees Contributory Provident Fund along with interest accrued thereon shall be credited to the General Provident Fund in respect of employees who opt for these rules.
(emphasis supplied) (ii) The portion representing to (sic) the Board's/Market Committee contribution on shall be credited to the Pension Fund of the Board/Market Committee as the case may be.
(iii) The Subscribers of the Contributory Provident Fund who before the issue of these Rules, and (had) invested their balance in term deposits in accordance with the provisions of the Punjab State Agricultural Marketing Board and Market Committees Employees Provident fund and Gratuity Rules, 1965 and opt for these rules shall have to deposit the principal amount falling short of the portion representing the Board/Market Committee Contribution.
Such deposits or receipts or certificate or papers will thenceforth be given to the concerned employees for realisations maturity or otherwise.
(iv) Subject to the provisions of the Act and the rules framed thereunder the rules contained in Chapter XIII of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume II shall apply mutatis mutandis to the employees of the Board/Market Committees who opt for these rules.
(v) The employees joining the service of the Board/Market Committees on or after the date of coming into force of the Punjab State Agricultural Marketing Board and Market Committees Employees Pension, Provident Fund and Gratuity Rules, 1987, shall be governed by the General Provident Fund Rules contained in Chapter XIII of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume-II."
6.
On the basis of the above provision, Mr. Jain contends that with effect from December 1, 1987, when the pension scheme was promulgated, only the portion representing the 'contribution' of the Board/Market Committee had to be credited to the Pension Fund and the remaining amount including the interest had to be credited to the General Provident Fund of the employee.
In case, the amount had been invested in a term deposit, the employer had to deposit the amount falling short of the principal representing the 'contribution' of the Board/Market Committee.
Is it so?
7.
The expressions 'Subscription' and 'Contribution' have not been defined in 1987 Rules.
In 1965 Rules, 'subscription' had been defined to mean the amount subscribed by an employee to the provident Fund while 'contribution' had been defined to mean the amount contributed by the employer.
In the context in which these expressions appear in Rule 10, it is reasonable to assume that 'subscription' means the amount subscribed by the employee while the share of the employer can be described as its 'contribution'.
8.
On a perusal of Rule 10, it appears to be clear that the only amount that has to be credited to the General Provident Fund in respect of the employee is "the subscription portion.... along with interest accrued thereon."
The remaining amount which would be the 'contribution' of the employer and the interest thereon has to be credited to the Pension Fund.
Any other interpretation of this provision would lead to wholly inequitable result of undue enrichment of the employee and an unfair burden on the employer.
The employee's right is restricted to the 'subscription' made by him and the interest that has accrued thereon.
The remaining amount viz. 'contribution' of the employer and the interest thereon rightly belong to the employer and under the rule, has to be credited to the Pension Fund.
The provisions contained in the various clauses have to be harmoniously construed.
It has to be ensured that the interpretation may not lead to absurd or unfair results.
If the contention raised on behalf of the petitioner is accepted, it would lead to a totally unfair result.
It would mean that the employee secures not only his 'subscription' and the interest thereon but also interest on the 'contribution' of the employer.
This would be wholly unfair.
It would be against public interest.
Such an interpretation has to be avoided.
Consequently it is held that the petitioner was only entitled to his 'subscription' and the interest thereon which has already been paid to him.
The claim of the petitioner in this behalf is consequently rejected.
9.
Mr. Rajan Gupta, pointed out that in order to alleviate all doubts, the State Government had by notification dated January 11, 1993, clarified that "in Rule 10(iii) of the said rules the word 'Principal' appearing before the phrase 'amount falling short' shall be deemed to have not been added and not to have ever been added in the said rules".
This corrigendum/notification in exercise of the powers under Section 43(2), the validity whereof has not been challenged, clearly manifests the intention of the rule making authority.
10.
In view of the above, the primary claim made on behalf of the petitioner cannot be sustained.
11.
It was then claimed that the petitioner was entitled to the cash equivalent of leave for 240 days.
He was in fact paid only the cash equivalent of leave for 180 days.
The respondent claims that vide letter dated November 24, 1988, a copy of which has been produced by the petitioner as Annexure P-2 with his replication, the employees had been given an option.
Paragraphs (i) and (ii) of this letter provide as under :-  "(i) Accumulation of earned leave by an employee shall be restricted to 360 days.
The existing employees shall, however, have the option either to continue to be governed by the existing rules or by this decision, the option being exercisable within a period of four months from the date of issue of this circular letter.
(ii) Encashment of leave at the time of retirement shall be admissible up to 240 days to those employees who opt for the revised orders contained in this circular letter.
The other conditions shall remain unchanged."
On the basis of the above, learned counsel for the respondent contends that the petitioner having not exercised his option for being governed by this order within the prescribed time, his claim cannot be sustained.
The petitioner, however, explains that vide letter dated February 22, 1989, it had been clarified that "if an existing employee fails to give option within the stipulated period, it shall be deemed that he has opted to be governed by the decision contained vide (in the) letter under reference."
This has not been controverted by the respondent.
It is thus clear that even though by letter dated November 24, 1988, an employee was required to submit his option within a period of 4 months, it was later on clarified that if an employee fails to give his option "it shall be deemed that he has opted to be governed by the decision contained vide letter under reference."
Furthermore, it has not been averred in the written statement that the petitioner had not exercised his option in pursuance to the letter dated November 24, 1988.
In this view of the matter, it would be unfair to deny him the benefit admissible under this circular of the Government.
It is well know that all employees under the State are being allowed encashment of leave equal to 240 days.
It would be unfair to deny this benefit to the petitioner.
To this extent, the grievance made by the petitioner deserves to be sustained.
Since the petitioner has already been paid the cash equivalent of leave for 180 days, it is directed that the petitioner shall now be paid salary for a period of two months.
12.
It was then contended that the petitioner is also entitled to the payment of interest on account of delay caused by the respondent.
It is undoubtedly correct that retiral benefits should be released to an employee immediately after his retirement.
This enables him to settle down.
Delay in payment not only results in avoidable harassment and anxiety but also causes hardship.
Admittedly, the petitioner had retired on March 31, 1991.
The amount of General Provident Fund was released to him on June 18, 1991.
It has earned interest.
Consequently, it cannot be said that the petitioner suffered any loss on this account.
As such, he is not entitled to any interest in this behalf.
However, the arrears of gratuity and pension amounting to Rs. 1,38,585/- were paid to him on November 25, 1991.
This was almost 8 months after he had retired.
The amount should have been released within a reasonable period viz. three months.
This was not done.
No reason for delay in payment has been given.
The petitioner would, therefore, be entitled to interest at the rate of 12 per cent on this amount for a period from July 1, 1991 to November 25, 1991.
Similarly, the amount of Rs. 29,898-00 due on account of leave encashment was paid to the petitioner on January 23, 1992.
He would also be entitled to interest on this amount from July 1, 1991 to January 23, 1992.
He would also be entitled to interest on the payment of two months' dues on account of leave encashment as held above.
13.
In view of the above, it is held that the petitioner's claim regarding arrears of provident fund is misconceived and is rejected.
In respect of the arrears of leave encashment and interest, the claim is allowed in the above terms only.
The writ petition is, accordingly, disposed of.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.