VK Jhanji, J - Petitioner-Devi Dayal was appointed as Constable in Ambala District on 6121965.
He underwent recruitment training course conducted from 511966 to 15.10.1966 in which he stood first in the Police Practical Works and second in all-round performance.
Petitioner applied for Clerical Cadre in November, 1966 and he was appointed as Executive Clerk in 1967 by the D.I.G., Ambala Range.
Petitioner was subsequently promoted as Head Constable on 991970 and was posted as such in the office of Senior Superintendent of Police, Hissar.
The post of ASI Language Stenographer in C.I.D., Haryana was advertised vide Wireless Message No. 15343-50-B.3 dated 2481971.
Petitioner applied for the said post through proper channel and the Inspector General of Police (hereinafter referred to as IGP) vide letter dated 6.10.1971 directed the D.I.G./C.I.D.
to judge the suitability of the petitioner.
Petitioner qualified for the said post and as a consequence thereof he was appointed as ASI Language Stenographer.
Petitioner joined as such in the office of the D.I.G./C.1,D., Gurgaon on 2011972.
Petitioner though was paid his pay and allowances, yet he was denied Stenography allowance for which he made a number of representations and ultimately it was on 13.7.1977 that he was allowed Stenography allowance with effect from 171977.
Being dissatisfied, he again represented for the grant of Stenography allowance with effect from 2011972, the date of his joining as ASI Language Stenographer.
This request of petitioner was also accepted and he was allowed arrears with effect from 2011972 to 171977 which were paid to him on 23.2.1981.
Petitioner was also allowed to cross Efficiency Bar with effect from 111979.
Since petitioner was not being confirmed as ASI Language Stenographer to which he was otherwise entitled, after completing three years, he, per force, applied for being sent on deputation to Subsidiary Intelligence Bureau (for short S.I.B.)
but his prayer was declined and conveyed to him by the D.I.G./C.I.D., Haryana on 1721978.
On 1531979, petitioner was sent on deputation to S.I.B.
as Head Constable without his consent but he was allowed to join as JIO(I) which is equivalent to the post of ASI Petitioner submitted a number of representations to the respondent for his promotion as ASI, as according to him, person junior to him, namely, Shri Vijay Kumar Bharara, respondent No. 4 was appointed as ASI Language Stenographer in the year 1977 and was later regularised after obtaining "No Objection Certificate" from Haryana Subordinate Services Selection Board (hereinafter referred to as the Board).
Since approval is not being sought in the case of the petitioner, he has, through this writ petition, prayed that a direction be issued to the respondent to promote him with effect from the date his junior (respondent No. 4) was promoted.
Respondents No. 1 to 3, in reply to the claim of the petitioner, have stated that the appointment of ASI Language Stenographers is only made by direct recruitment as provided in Rule 12.3-A of Punjab Police Rules (for short the Rules) and no official can be appointed as ASI Language Stenographer except by way of direct recruitment.
According to the respondents, there was shortage of Language Stenographers and for that matter persons from executive cadre of the police department were taken on deputation.
Petitioner was not absorbed as ASI Language Stenographer and approval was not sought from the Board because the petitioner was only a Matriculate and was more than 27 years of age whereas the relevant rule prescribed the minimum educational qualification as "Intermediate" and the maximum age of 27 years.
Although a request had been made to the IGP for relaxation in the case of the petitioner under Rule 12.6(2) of the ibid Rules, yet the same was not done.
Regarding the allegation of appointment and promotion of person junior to the petitioner, namely, Shri Vijay Kumar Bharara, respondent No. 4, respondents No. 1 to 3 have stated that it was done on the recommendation of the Board.
Respondent No. 4 has not filed any reply.
3.
Having heard the learned counsel for the parties at some length, I am of the view that this writ petition deserves to succeed.
Petitioner was taken on deputation after he had qualified the test.
He was also found fit and allowed to cross Efficiency Bar with effect from 111979.
In the case of the petitioner, although IGP was requested to relax the condition, yet the same was not done as the respondents were of the view that approval of the Board is required for the purpose.
As a matter of fact, such an approval by the Board was not required in view of the clarification given by the Board.
Vide its letter No. 1/12/2/R-XX XXX XXX 91/2918 dated 1191991 which inter alia provided that approval of the Board is not required in the case of persons appointed as Language Stenographers from within the Department Vide order dated 12111991, 6 Language Stenographers who were taken on deputation, were regularised as ASIs.
The only condition imposed in their case was that they must qualify Intermediate School Course before their confirmation in the rank of ASI Thus, in view of the clarification, approval of the Board was not required to be obtained in the case of the petitioner.
Petitioner, who had worked for such a long time as Language Stenographer, was entitled to be regularised as ASI Language Stenographer as was done in the case of others.
4.
Resultantly, this civil writ petition is allowed and a direction is issued to the respondents to consider the case of the petitioner for regularisation as ASI Language Stenographer and for his subsequent promotion as Sub-Inspector from the date his junior was promoted.
In case relaxation is required, then the same shall be obtained from the IGP who, in the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case, shall accord the same in favour of the petitioner.
Petitioner shall be given all benefits admissible to him under the Rules but he shall not be paid any interest on arrears.
No costs.