VK Bali, J - How callously sometimes the cause of a citizen is dealt by the authorities and how casually it is decided without applying its mind on wholly frivolous and undependable grounds, would be illustrated by the facts of this case.
2.
Ex. Sepoy Chattar Singh, petitioner herein through present writ filed by him under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, seeks issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari so as to quash order dated 1261989, Annexure P-3, as also part of order dated 1381991, Annexure P-5, insofar as it runs counter to his claim and for directing the respondents to release disability pension and gratuity to him.
3.
Petitioner was recruited to the Indian Army in Jat Regiment as Sepoy with effect from 15.9.1961 and he served as such upto 4.10.1968 when he was relieved on medical grounds on account of disability which was totally attributed to the service rendered by him with the Army.
When he was relieved from the Army, Union of India granted him disability pension and the same was initially admissible to him upto 28.8.1982 subject to the medical report.
He thus enjoyed disability pension upto 28.8.1982.
In the month of September, 1982, however, he was re-examined by the Medical Board and as per the report of the Board there was improvement in his physical condition.
While accepting the said report, the Union of India held that disability of petitioner was less than 20% and, therefore, he was not entitled to the disability pension.
Aggrieved against this, petitioner preferred a statutory appeal against the decision of the Medical Board and in pursuance thereof the Medical Board was re-constituted and the petitioner was re-examined in June, 1985.
The Medical Board in June, 1985 while re-examining petitioner held that physical disability of petitioner has increased and the same was more than 20%.
The case of petitioner is that physical disability that increased in October even as per Medical Board report in 1987 is continuing and he is suffering with the same disability with same proportion or may be more till date.
In spite of the report of Medical Board reconstituted to re-examine the petitioner, when he was not granted any relief, he made a detailed representation to the Union of India on 12.8.1988.
He was informed vide letter dated 6.10.1988 that his representation/appeal had been referred to the higher authorities for decision.
Similarly, vide letter dated 1271989 he was again informed that his appeal had been referred to the Union of India for early decision.
His claim was, however, rejected on the ground that subsequent deterioration in his physical condition could not be attributed to the service rendered by him in the Military, it being a case of natural illness.
This order was passed on 1261989, Annexure P-3 and it is this order that has been challenged as mentioned above in the earlier part of the judgment.
4.
On the array of the facts, as have been given above, the only contention raised by the learned counsel for petitioner is that once petitioner had suffered disability while he was in service, the same is to be treated as if it was attributed to the military service till such time disability continues and the mere fact that he had been discharged from service and after discharge he had continued to have the same disability, it could not be said that the same was on account of natural illness and was as such not attributed to the military service.
The cause of petitioner has been opposed and in the written statement that has been filed on behalf of respondents, it is pleaded that the Medical Experts of the Ministry of Defence, Government of India, opined that the increase in the invalidating disability was due to natural causes, that is, it was a constitutional disease and had not been influenced by service factors.
Insofar as the facts, as have been noticed above, are concerned, the same have not been disputed.
5.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and going through the records of the case, I am of the considered view that the point raised by learned counsel appearing on behalf of petitioner has merit and, therefore, this petition must succeed.
It is admitted between the parties that petitioner suffered disability while he was in service and in fact it is for that reason alone that he was discharged from service.
He was to continue to get disability pension if the same was 20% or more.
It is true that he was given disability pension for quite sometime whereafter it was withdrawn when the Medical Board constituted on that behalf found that his disability had come down i.e. the same was below 20%.
Petitioner, however, successfully challenged the report given by Medical Board and orders that were passed while considering the report in the statutory appeal before the Appellate Authority.
Before, however, that was done, admittedly the Medical Board was reconstituted in the year 1985 as also in 1987 and disability had infact increased and the same was more than 20%.
It is admitted that petitioner was suffering with the same disability with same proportion or may be more till date.
The pension is, however, sought to be declined to petitioner on the solitary ground that after his discharge from Army, the disability was still continuing on account of natural causes i.e. it was a constitutional disease and was not influenced by service matters.
Once petitioner was discharged from service, increase or decrease in his disability could not possibly be influenced by service matters but could that be a ground to deny him the benefit of disability pension if he had actually suffered disability during service and which disability was admittedly attributed to Army Service.
In my considered view, the authorities concerned did not apply their mind at all and far from examining the Rules governing the field even made departure from common sense.
All that is relevant was to see that the disability was suffered during the course of service and was attributed to the Army or was aggravated due to Army service as also the extent of the same whether it was below 20% or less than 20%.
The fact that it was on account of natural cause or was constitutional disease, was wholly immaterial,  6.
As mentioned above, the authorities dealing with the case of petitioner dealt with the matter in a very casual manner which it was least expected to do as petitioner herein had after all served the cause of the Nation and had rendered himself incapable or had become disabled even though to the extent of 20% or more while so serving.
In such a case, even if the rules could be interpreted both ways, the Authorities should have learned in favour of petitioner but far from that, the rightful claim of petitioner but far from that the rightful claim of petitioner was denied on such grounds which even learned counsel appearing on behalf of respondents could not defend.
7.
For what has been said above, this petition succeeds and order, Annexure P-3.
is quashed.
The respondents are directed to release disability pension of petitioner forthwith and give him all the arrears that might have accrued by now.
In this case petitioner also deserved interest @12% per annum on the amount that might be due by now.
He also deserves the costs of this petition quantified at Rs. 3000/-.
Petition allowed