Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner, who was recruited as a Peon in the office of the Secretary, Regional Transport Authority, Ferozepur, is aggrieved by the orders dated January 30, 1980, by which he was allocated to the office of the Director, State Transport, Punjab and his consequential posting vide order dated February 2, 1980.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
On October 23, 1979, the State Government decided to bifurcate the Department of Transport into two separate wings, viz. Commercial and Non- Commercial.
The Commercial Wing was to be headed by the Director, State Transport while the State Transport Commissioner was to be the Head of the Non-Commercial Wing.
The employees were asked to submit their options within 15 days of the issue of this order.
The criteria for allocation had also been laid down by the Government.
It was inter-alia provided that "the employees shall be allocated according to their options.
If the number of posts is less than the number of optees for a particular wing, juniors persons in excess of the number of posts will be sent to the other wing."
The petitioner exercised his option.
The matter was considered by the competent authority.
Vide order dated January 30, 1980, he was informed of his allocation to the office of the Director State Transport, Punjab, Chandigarh.
Consequential posting orders were issued vide letter dated February 2, 1980.
Copies of these two orders have been appended as Annexures P6 and P.7 with the writ petition.
The petitioner impugnges his allocation to the Commerce Wing primarily on the ground that persons junior to him have been allocated to the NonCommercial Wing while he is being forced to work in the Commercial Wing.
3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been inter-alia pointed out that the petitioner was the junior-most person out of those who had opted for the non-commercial Wing and consequently he had to be allocated to the Commercial Wing.
It has been further averred that Respondents Nos. 3, 5 and 6 were senior to the petitioner and were retained in the Non-Commercial Wing in accordance with the instructions, of the Government.
With regard to Respondent No. 4 it has been averred that he was "working against leave vacancy of Sh. Swaran Singh, Peon who is senior to the petitioner," On these premises, the respondents have controverted the claim made by the petitioner.
4.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties.
It is the admitted position that the scales of pay and other conditions of service in the two Wings are identical.
Even otherwise, allocation of the personnel in one or the other wing is a purely administrative matter.
If the competent authority, after considering the options given by the various persons and examining their inter-se seniority, has allocated persons in accordance with a criteria, which had been duly laid down by the Government, its action cannot normally be challenged.
In the present case, it has not been shown that the criterion laid down by the Government for allocation of the employees, vis-a-vis seniority amongst the optees has not been followed.
The only ground raised in the petition was with regard to Respondent No. 4, which as already noticed, was an arrangement made against a leave vacancy only.
It is admitted by the learned counsel for the petitioner that Respondent No. 4 has since left service.
In such a situation, the grievance made by the petitioner is wholly misconceived.
It cannot he sustained.
Even otherwise, it deserves mention that in the matters of allocation, mathematical exactitude is normally not possible.
Even if one or the other person is allocated to one or the other wing on account of certain administrative reasons, the employees cannot complain that they have been discriminated against.
In any even, so far as the present case is concerned, no legitimate grievance can be made by the petitioner in regard to his allocation to the Commercial Wing.
5.
Mr. Anand Chhibbar, learned counsel for the petitioner, has, however, pointed out that the Motion Bench had stayed the operation of the impugned orders.
Presumably, in pursuance to the orders of the Motion Bench, the Department had vice its order dated April 11, 1980 posted the petitioner as peon in the Non-Commercial Wing.
He is stated to have continued there.
Even though I have found that the petitioner has no legitimate grievance in respect of his allocation, yet keeping in view the fact that he was continued there for the last more than 13 years, the department may consider, if it is possibly, to allow him to continue in the Non-Commercial Wing.
This should however, not adversely affect any interest of the persons, senior to the petitioner.
In the event of his transfer to the Commercial Wing, the petitioner's inter se seniority, vis-a-vis others who have been allocated to the Wing shall continue to be the same as it was prior to October 23, 1979, when the Transport Department was bifurcated into two wings.
The writ petition is disposed of in the above terms.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.