RS Mongia, J - While issuing notice of motion of the writ petition on 28th July, 1992, the Motion Bench passed the following order :  "Contends that the order Annexure P-10, pay scales of the petitioners have been ordered to be reduced without any notice having been given to them.
Notice of motion for August 11, 1992.
Summons Dasti also.
No reduction in salary be made till further orders."
Ultimately, the writ petition was admitted on 20th January, 1993, after the written statement had been filed on behalf of Respondents 2 and 3.
2.
This application has been moved by the respondent-State for vacating the stay order granted by the Motion Bench.
Notice of this application was given to the learned counsel for the writ petitioner.
3.
One of the main points raised in the writ petition is that the impugned order dated 371992 Annexure P-10) with the writ petition was passed in violation of the principles of natural justice, as no opportunity of hearing was given to the petitioner or any member of the petitioner-Association before passing an order adversely affecting the members of the petitioner- Association.
It is not disputed that no hearing was granted to the petitioner or any of its member before passing the impugned order, Annexure P-10.
In this view of the matter, I deem it proper to dispose of the main writ petition itself.
4.
It is by now well settled that no order adverse to a person can be passed which has some civil consequences, without affording an opportunity to him.
Admittedly, when Annexure P-10, which adversely affects members of the petitioner-Association, was passed without giving any opportunity of hearing.
The said order is violative of the principles of natural justice.
5.
Consequently, this writ petition is allowed and the impugned order dated 371992, Annexure P-10 is quashed.
The petitioner may in a representative capacity make an appropriate representation as to why an order of the type of Annexure P-10 to the petitioner be not passed by the respondents.
Let an appropriate representation be made to the Secretary, Department of Education, Haryana, within three weeks from today, who may decide the same himself or pass it on to any other appropriate competent authority to decide the same.
The representation will be disposed of by passing a speaking order after affording personal hearing to the representative of the petitioner, who may be named in the representation alongwith his address.
Civil Misc. application also stands disposed of.
A copy of this order may be given to the counsel for the parties Dasti on payment for compliance.