VK Bali, J - Petitioner, Krishan Lal Rinwa, who holds a degree of B.Sc.
in the subjects of Geology, Botany and Chemistry and has also diploma in Sugar Boiling Certificate Course from the National Sugar Institute at Kanpur and was earlier employed as PH recorder in Fazilka Cooperative Sugar Mills Limited, Fazilka and later as Lab.
Chemist in the said Sugar Mills, endeavoured to advance his service career when he applied for the post of Manufacturing Chemist with the Haryana Co-operative Sugar Mills Ltd respondent No. 3.
He applied in consequence to the advertisement for filling up the said post and was selected.
He joined service in June, 1988 but vide impugned order (Annexure P-11) dated September 30, 1991 he was asked to quit on the ground that he lacks qualifications for the post on which he was appointed.
It is this order depriving him of his sole source of earning bread that has been challenged in this petition filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
2.
Brief facts of the case reveal that after doing his B.Sc.
and diploma in Sugar Boiling Certificate Course from National Sugar Institute at Kanpur, petitioner was appointed as PH Recorder 'in the Fazilka Co-operative Sugar Mills Ltd, Fazilka (Punjab) in the year 1985.
He worked on the post aforesaid upto Dec 5, 1986 when he was appointed on a higher post of Lab.
Chemist in the same very Sugar Mills vide appointment letter dated December 6, 1986.
While doing the job of Lab Chemist in the Fazilka Co-operative Sugar Mills, Fazilka, an advertisement for the post of Manufacturing Chemist available with Haryana Co-operative Sugar Mills Ltd, Rohtak respondent No. 3 came to his notice.
He applied for the post and was interviewed along with other seven applicants on June 4, 1988.
The selection committee was constituted of the Chief Engineer, Chief Chemist, Managing Director and two members of the Board.
Out of seven candidates, who had applied for the post of Manufacturing Chemist, only four appeared for interview.
The other three applicants who appeared along with petitioner were Pardeep Kumar, Suresh Kumar Goel and Vinod Kumar Singh.
Insofar, as other three candidates are concerned, it is not disputed that they were having requisite qualifications which were mentioned in the advertisement itself whereas the petitioner, even though a graduate in Science, was not having the subjects that were mentioned in the advertisement i.e. Physics and Mathematics.
Instead he had passed B.Sc.
in Geology, Botany and Chemistry.
In spite of the fact that other three candidates did possess the advertised qualifications, the attention of the Selection Committee came to be ultimately focussed upon the petitioner as keeping in view his previous experience, he was found suitable and accordingly selected for the post.
He was issued appointment letter dated June 22, 1988 whereby he was to remain on probation for a period of one year.
In clause 7 it was specifically mentioned that his selection and appointment was subject to the relaxation of qualifications and approval by the Registrar, Co-operative Societies, Haryana.
It requires to be mentioned that prior to when he was issued appointment letter, an intimation was sent to him vide Annexure P-12 on June 4, 1988 that he was selected as Manufacturing Chemist on the negotiated terms and conditions and that a regular letter of appointment would be issued to him on his joining the service of the Mills.
Petitioner, in the wake of his selection and appointment resigned from his earlier post of Lab.
Chemist which he was holding in the Fazilka Cooperative Sugar Mills, Fazilka and joined his new assignment with respondent No. 3.
The case of petitioner is that the management-respondent No. 3 had assured him that relaxation in qualifications and approval from the Registrar was a mere formality and the same would be obtained in view of the fact that he was an experienced person.
In the meeting of the Establishment Committee that was held on July 20, 1988 respondent Mills considered his case and sent the same for approval to the Registrar for relaxation in the qualifications.
Respondent No. 2 vide his communication dated Sept 6, 1988 informed the respondent Mills that the post should be readvertised.
On receipt of the communication, referred to above, the management of respondent No. 3 again represented to the Registrar for according approval to the appointment of petitioner as the crushing season 1988-80 was ensuing and the Mills was in a dire need of an experienced hand.
The Registrar favourably considered the representation of the respondent Mills and accorded approval to the continuance of petitioner for the crushing season 1988-89.
The case of petitioner, however, is that he performed his duties during the crushing season 1988-89 in a very satisfactory manner and on account of excellent job done by him, Managing Director of the Mills vide communication dated May 18, 1989 informed him that he had been allowed to continue to work on his post till further orders.
Prior thereto, however, even petitioner had sent representations to the Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Haryana requesting him to relax the condition of subject combination and to accord approval to his appointment keeping in view the fact that he had resigned from his previous job and that his work and conduct had been quite satisfactory.
Petitioner pleads that he was under the bona fide impression that his representation had been accepted as it was only for that reason that he was allowed to continue till further orders vide communication dated May 18, 1989, copy whereof has been annexed as Annexure P-6.
The impression of petitioner that qualifications in his case have been relaxed further gained on account of the fact that the respondent Mills had again advertised the post of Manufacturing Chemist and even selected one Virender Singh, who was a Chemical Engineer with no experience in the Sugar Mills.
The selected candidate joined the respondent Mills but it was against another vacant post of Manufacturing Chemist.
Virender Singh resigned from the said post but petitioner was allowed to continue without any interruption.
The one year period of probation provided in the conditions of service spelled out from the appointment letter gone into by petitioner.
It is pleaded that petitioner worked with full devotion to his duties and even worked on rest days.
He was paid 29 days single wages vide order dated July 8, 1991 for working on weekly rest days.
He was also granted one special increment of Rs. 60/- vide order dated July 9, 1991.
In the meanwhile two more posts of Manufacturing Chemist fell vacant with the Mills.
The same were advertised in August, 1991 and the selection was made on September 12, 1991.
While advertising the aforesaid two posts, the post occupied by the petitioner was not advertised and no selection was made to replace him.
He was granted regular increments, apart from special increment and was allowed to complete his probation period.
He was also granted the revised pay scale as per recommendations of 3rd Wage Board like other employees of the Mill.
3.
From all the facts that have been narrated above, it is pleaded that he remained under the impression that he would be allowed to continue by relaxing the qualifications.
Upto this time, everything was going on alright.
When Shri Ashok Kumar Yadav, HCS, Managing Director joined the respondent Mill, his tale of woes started.
It is pleaded that the said Managing Director developed a disliking for the petitioner and, therefore, even though his Annual Confidential Reports for the years 1988-89, 1989-90 and 1990-91 were excellent and there was absolutely no adverse material or complaint against him or his work and conduct, the said Managing Director passed an order dated September 28, 1991 whereby the petitioner was directed to share 50% of his residential accommodation with a newly appointed Manufacturing Chemist.
This, it is pleaded would have resulted into difficult living of the petitioner and his family for various reasons inclusive of that that by sharing the accommodation, he would have lost complete privacy.
Letter aforesaid was conveyed to the petitioner at 1100 am on September 28, 1991 on receipt where of he met the Managing Director and requested him to withdraw the order as it was impossible for him to share the residential accommodation while living with his family.
Instead of considering his request, it is pleaded that the Managing Director got annoyed and directed him to comply with the orders forthwith failing which action was to be taken against him.
On the same very day i.e. 2891991, the petitioner received a charge-sheet alleging that he did not clean the Evaporator set during the off-season of 1990-91 and 25% of the tubes of each body had become dirty.
He was asked to submit his explanation within five days from the date of receipt of charge-sheet.
Before, however, five days could expire, the Managing Director on 3091991 terminated the services of the petitioner with immediate effect on the ground that he did not possess the educational qualifications for the post of Manufacturing Chemist and inasmuch as there had been no relexation in the qualifications, his services could be terminated according to clause 6 of the appointment letter.
It is this order, as referred to above, that has been challenged in the present petition.
4.
Mr. Surya Kant, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner vehemently contends that not only the impugned order has been passed by way of punishment, but on the ground that were not at all made out.
As the Managing Director was hostile to the petitioner and also that the petitioner was allowed to continue to serve for long time could not be confronted with clause 6 of the appointment letter vide which his appointment was made subject to relaxation of qualifications particularly when he had resigned from his earlier post and he was an experienced person and was preferred over and above those who answered the qualifications prescribed for the post under contention.
5.
The cause of petitioner has been opposed and in the written statement filed on behalf of respondent No. 3 Shri Ashok Kumar Yadav, Managing Director, it has been pleaded by way of preliminary objection that the petitioner was appointed to the post of Manufacturing Chemist by the then Managing Director who was not competent as per the Bye-laws of the Haryana Co-operative Sugar Mills Limited.
The power of appointment under Bye-Law 41 is vested in the Board of Directors.
The then Managing Director allowed the petitioner to continue and submitted his case to the Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Haryana who was competent to relax the qualifications as per provisions of Bye-Law 62.
The Registrar, Cooperative Societies Haryana considered the claim of petitioner for relaxing the qualifications but declined to exercise his discretion in favour of the petitioner.
On merits also, the matter has been contested basically on the ground that the petitioner did not have the requisite qualifications and his services were terminated strictly in accordance with clause 6 of the appointment letter vide which his appointment was subject to relaxation of qualifications and that the competent authorities did not think it appropriate to relax the qualifications.
6.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and going through the records of the case, I am of the considered view that the points raised by the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner have merit and, therefore, this petition must succeed.
The Selection Committee which consisted of Chief Engineer, Chief Chemist, Managing Director and two members of the Board considered the case of all the candidates inclusive of those who have the requisite qualifications.
However, it is the petitioner who was selected despite the fact that he was not having the combination of subjects in B Sc.
that were required for the post in question.
The petitioner scored over others even though others had the combination of subjects in B Sc.
that were required, for the reason that he was an experienced person.
Considering in that light, it is not difficult to conclude that clause 6 that was inserted in the appointment letter of the petitioner was only a formality and that the petitioner was actually assured that the requisite qualifications qua the subjects in B Sc.
would be relaxed by the competent authority.
In the appointment letter the said clause, however, had to be inserted otherwise the very appointment of the petitioner would have been illegal.
The matter does not end there as from the facts that have been narrated above, it is clear that qualifications in the case of petitioner were actually relaxed.
In the meeting of the Establishment Committee that was held on July 20, 1988, the respondent-Mill did consider the case and sent the same for approval to the Registrar for relaxation of the qualifications.
Respondent No. 2 vide his communication dated September 6, 1988 informed respondent-Mill that the post be readvertised.
The management, however, once again represented to the Registrar seeking approval to the appointment of petitioner as the crushing season of 1988-89 was ensuing and the Mill was in dire need of an experienced hand.
It is not disputed that the Registrar favourably considered the representation of Respondent-Mill and accorded approval to the continuance of petitioner for the crushing season of 1988-89.
When the crushing season was over, the petitioner was not relieved from his job and as per positive case made out by him.
he was allowed to continue to work till further orders.
The respondent Mill again advertised the post of Manufacturing Chemist and even selected one Virender Singh.
The selected candidate was permitted to join the Mill against another vacant post of Manufacturing Chemist.
If the qualifications of petitioner had not been relaxed, the respondent-Mill ought to have advertised two posts instead of one and asked the petitioner to quit when second person was also to be selected.
Virender Singh, however, resigned from the post but the petitioner was allowed to continue.
Meanwhile the petitioner completed his probation period which was one year.
All through he was paid his increments, increase in wages and all other dues that are paid to regular employees.
In August, 1991, the respondent-Mill with a view to select two Manufacturing Chemists advertised the said posts and even selection was made to the said vacant posts on September 12, 1991.
Again the petitioner was permitted to continue which necessarily means that condition of qualifications in the case of petitioner had since been relaxed otherwise there was no question for the respondent-Mill to have advertised only two posts and not three and asked the petitioner to quit.
In the manner aforesaid, the petitioner continued to serve for a period of more than three years.
Having resigned his earlier job as also having worked continuously for more than three years in the facts and circumstances of this case would have impelled the petitioner to believe that relaxation of qualifications has been done in his case.
I do not wish to go into the allegations of mala fide that have been alleged against the Managing Director but would still like to comment that the sequence of events that have been detailed above and in particular termination of services of petitioner by invoking clause 6 of his appointment letter when charge-sheet was issued to him and without even waiting for reply to the charge-sheet prima facie shows some hostility towards the petitioner.
Be that as it may, the petitioner who resigned his earlier job and continued to work for a period of more than three years cannot be asked to quit by invoking clause 6.
It is too late for the respondent-Mill to terminate the services of the petitioner after making him believe by various instances, facts and circumstances as have been detailed above that required qualifications have been relaxed in his case.
It will be too inequitous and hard for the petitioner if he is thrown away at this stage, particularly when he had resigned his earlier job and joined the mill with a view to enhance his service career.
7.
For the reasons stated, this petition is allowed.
Order Annexure P11 dated 3091991 vide services of the petitioner were terminated is quashed.
The petitioner would be entitled to all consequential benefits that would naturally flow in consequence of setting aside the order.
Parties are, however, left to bear their own costs.