VK Jhanji, J - This order will dispose of Civil Writ Petitions No, 10708 of 1990 and 6036 of 1991 as common question of law is involved therein.
2.
In Civil Writ Petition No. 10708 of 1990, the petitioner is impugning order dated 31.7.1990 passed by the Deputy Registrar, Co-operative Societies, Karnal, suspending resolution dated 16.7.1990 passed by the Board of Directors, Sonepat Cooperative Urban Bank Limited, Sonepat, promoting the petitioner from the post of Senior Clerk-cum-Cashier to the post of Junior Accountant.
3.
In Civil Writ Petition No. 6036 of 1991, the petitioner is challenging resolution No. 9 dated 2511991 vide which resolution No. 8 dated 16.7.1990 was revoked by the Board of Directors.
4.
In brief, the facts are that the petitioner, Babu Ram, joined as Senior Clerk with the Sonepat Cooperative Urban Bank Limited (hereinafter called as 'the Bank') somewhere in the year 1983.
Before he joined service, five other persons namely respondents No. 4 to 8 were already working as Senior Clerks in the bank.
The case of the petitioner for promotion to the post of Junior Accountant was taken up in a meeting of the Board of Directors of the Bank held on 1471989.
His case was considered without any Agenda, but no decision was taken in the meeting.
However, in the next meeting, the matter was referred to the Registrar for necessary direction.
On receipt of reference, the Assistant Registrar asked Inspector Balbir Singh to look into the matter.
Balbir Singh, with his comments, forwarded the case to the Registrar vide his letter dated 2581989.
The Registrar then asked the Assistant Registrar to give reasons on the basis of record.
A clarification was also sought from Balbir (sic) dated 2411990, reported that the petitioner already stood promoted as Junior Accountant vide resolution dated 2871989.
The Assistant Registrar on receipt of report from Balbir Singh, approved the promotion of the petitioner as Junior Accountant.
The Board of Directors in its next meeting held on 1021990, acting on the basis of approval of the Assistant Registrar, decided to promote the petitioner to the post of Junior Accountant.
Persons who were senior to the petitioner as Senior Clerks, made representations to the Deputy Registrar, who vide his order dated 3051990, directed that regular seniority list of the staff of the bank be made and after that the matter be placed before the Managing Committee and decision arrived at as per rules.
This letter/order was considered by the Board of Administrators in a meeting held on 1161990 and on consideration thereof, promotion of the employees was stayed till the approval of service rules from the Registrar and preparation of seniority list of the employees.
Against resolution dated 1161990, the petitioner made a representation which was considered by the Board of Directors in its meeting held on 16.7.1990.
Finding the representation to be genuine, the promotion allegedly made on 1021990 was approved by the Board of Directors vide resolution No. 8 dated 16.7.1990.
With regard to representation of the employees who were senior to the petitioner, in this very resolution it was resolved that their case will be taken up only after framing of service rules and seniority list.
This mode was objected to by some of the Directors, including one Inder Sain (sic) in the matter and with a prayer that resolution No. 8 dated 16.7.1990 be annulled under Section 27 of the Haryana Co-operative Societies Act (in short 'the Act').
On receipt of the application and on considering that the senior employees were ignored, the Deputy Registrar vide his order dated 20.8.1990 rescinded resolution No. 8 dated 16.7.1990.
This order is being impugned by the petitioner in Civil Writ Petition No. 10708 of 1990.
5.
In Civil Writ Petition No. 6036 of 1991, the private respondents have filed written statement, and during the course of his arguments, the counsel for these respondents has prayed that this written statement may also be read in Civil Writ Petition No. 10708 of 1990.
The official respondents have also filed written statement, in which they have taken some preliminary objections, including the one that the impugned order, being an order passed under Section 27 of the Act, is appealable under Section 114(E) of the Act and, thus, without availing of the remedy of appeal, the writ petition is not competent.
On merits, they have admitted the various resolutions passed from time to time and also the orders passed by the Registrar, Deputy Registrar and Assistant Registrar.
According to the respondents, seniority list of the employees was finalised by the bank and as per the seniority list, the petitioner being junior to the private respondents, had no right to be promoted as Junior Accountant.
Resolution passed in favour of the petitioner was based on misappreciation of facts and thus, was nonest and rightly rescinded by the Deputy Registrar.
Respondents have also stated that respondents No. 3 and 4 have been promoted as Junior Accountant as per the seniority list.
6.
Mr. Ravinder Jain, Advocate, counsel for the petitioner, contended that under Section 27 of the Act, the Deputy Registrar was not competent to rescind the resolution on the asking of the Director.
He further contended that case for promotion of private respondents was considered along with the case of the petitioner, and finding the petitioner to be more meritorious, the Board of Directors rightly resolved to promote the petitioner.
Thus, the Deputy Registrar ought not to have interfered with the decision so taken by the Board of Directors, by majority.
7.
In reply, respondents have contended that the petitioner was not entitled to be promoted, thereby ignoring the claim of the private respondents who admittedly were senior to the petitioner.
According to the counsel for the respondents, at the time of promotion of the petitioner, the case of private respondents was not considered.
8.
Having heard the learned counsel for the parties, I find no merit in the contention of learned counsel for the petitioner that the Deputy Registrar exceeded his jurisdiction in rescinding resolution on the asking of the Director.
Section 27 of the Act is reproduced as under :  "Section 27 :  Rescinding of resolutions - (1) The Registrar may by order in writing, suspend the resolution of a managing committee or of a sub-committee of a co-operative society if in his opinion the resolution is in excess of the powers conferred by this Act, rules or bye-laws or the execution of the resolution will be contrary to the interest of the society or the interest of the members thereof or is likely to cause waste or damage of the funds of the society;  (2) Where the Registrar makes any order under sub-section (1), he may after giving the committee or sub-committee, as the case may be, an opportunity of being heard, rescind such resolution or may order that such resolution may continue in force with or without modification permanently or for such period as he may think fit; provided that such resolution may be rescinded or modified even if the same could not be suspended because of its having been acted upon."
Sub-section (1) of Section 27 of the Act provides for rescinding of resolution of a managing committee or a committee of cooperative society, by the Registrar if in his opinion, "(i) the resolution is in excess or the powers conferred by the Act, rules or by-laws, (ii) execution of the resolution will be contrary to the interest of the society or the inter of the members thereof, and (iii) the resolution is likely to cause waste or damage of the funds of the society."
Section 27 nowhere provides that Registrar cannot exercise his powers under Section 27 of the Act on the asking of one of the Directors of the Board of Directors.
Any person aggrieved of the resolution can approach the Registrar, but the Registrar can rescind the resolution only if he is satisfied of the existence of conditions contained in sub-section (1) of Section 27 of the Act.
In the present case, the Deputy Registrar found that resolution No. 8 dt. 16.7.1990 was not in the interest of the bank as well as the employees.
This decision was arrived at after consideration of the fact that by promoting petitioner, Babu Ram, and depriving the senior employees of their promotion, the managing committee had misused its powers and had acted against the interest of the members as well as employees of the bank.
In terms of Section 27 of the Act, the Registrar was competent to take such a decision.
I also find no merit in the contention of learned counsel for the petitioner that at the time of making promotion, the petitioner as well as the private respondents were considered and the petitioner was found more meritorious.
The resolution vide which the petitioner was promoted, does not support the contention of the counsel for the petitioner.
As a matter of fact, proceedings of the meeting of the Board of Directors held on 16.7.1990 where resolution No. 8 was passed, reveal that only the case of the petitioner was considered, whereas cases of three employees namely Arunachalam Shastri, Pawan Kumar and Chattar Sain were deferred to be considered only after framing of the service rules and seniority list.
There was no consideration at all as far as the private respondents are concerned and, therefore, the Deputy Registrar exercising the powers of Registrar was justified in rescinding the resolution vide which the petitioner was promoted as Junior Accountant.
Consequently, both the writ petitions, i.e., Civil Writ Petition No. 10708 of 1990 and 6036 of 1991 are dismissed with no order as to costs.