RS Mongia, J (Oral) - The petitioner Kamal Kumar was appointed as an Accounts Clerk on 25121983 in Haryana Women and Weaker Sections Development Corporation Limited (hereinafter called the 'Corporation').
He was placed under suspension on 1071987 and was charge-sheeted on 1191987 for alleged absence from duty without permission or sanction of leave.
It is not disputed that Haryana Civil Service (Punishment & Appeal) Rules, 1987 (in short 'the Rules') are applicable to the employees of the Corporation.
After following the procedure under the Rules, the punishment of dismissal was imposed on the petitioner on 1811988.
However, his appeal before the Chairman was allowed on 2811989 to the extent that the punishment was reduced to stoppage of four increments with cumulative effect and further the intervening period from the date of dismissal and reinstatement was to be treated as leave without pay.
Further the petitioner was to be kept at Headquarter at Chandigarh and his work was to be observed.
2.
It is the case of the respondents that the petitioner did not mend his ways after he was reinstated by the Appellate order referred to above and he misconducted himself by remaining absent on various occasions without permission or sanction of leave.
A charge-sheet dated 1871989 was served on him under Rule 7 of the Rules in which it was alleged that petitioner had remained absent from duty on various occasions, the details of which were mentioned in the charge-sheet.
A reply was submitted by the petitioner giving explanation as to why he was absent on the alleged dates of absence.
The Managing Director (Appointing Authority) after considering the reply, passed an order on 21.9.1989 that the explanation furnished by the petitioner had not been found satisfactory and he was provisionally of the opinion that a penalty of dismissal from service be imposed upon him.
An opportunity of showing cause was given against the action proposed to be taken.
After considering the reply, another showcause notice was issued on 30101989 as to why penalty of dismissal be not imposed upon the petitioner.
The petitioner submitted reply (Annexure P-7) specifically raising the point that no regular departmental enquiry under the Rules had been held before proposing the punishment.
Thereafter, order dated 12121989 (Annexure P-8) was passed by the Managing Director dismissing the petitioner from service.
An appeal was also filed by the petitioner from service.
All appeal was also filed by the petitioner before the Chairman of the Corporation.
However, the same was also rejected and communication regarding the same was sent to the petitioner on 351990 (Annexure P-10).
Petitioner impugned the order of dismissal and rejection of his appeal by filing the present writ petition.
It may be observed here that during the pendency of the writ petition, the petitioner, unfortunately died on 19111992, and this writ petition is being pursued by his wife, who was allowed to do so vide orders in C.M.
No. 738 of 1993.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that admittedly the petitioner was proceeded under the Rules for taking disciplinary action against him and charge-sheet under Rule 7 of the Rules was served on him.
Further he has submitted that no regular enquiry was held under the Rules by the respondents before impugning the punishment and consequently the impugned orders are liable to be set aside as being violative of the procedure mentioned in the Rules and also principles of natural justice.
4.
On the other hand, the stand of the respondent is that when earlier the petitioner was reinstated by the Appellate Authority vide its order dated 28.2.1989, it was specifically mentioned that the official i.e. the petitioner had to be kept at the Headquarters at Chandigarh and his work was to be observed.
It was after the reinstatement that it was observed that the petitioner had again misconducted himself by remaining absent from duty without permission or sanction of leave.
The factum of being absent was also admitted by the petitioner, though he had given some explanation for remaining absent.
According to the learned counsel for the respondents, in these circumstances no regular enquiry was required to be held under the Rules and it was sufficient, under the circumstances, to give an opportunity to the petitioner to explain the charges levelled against him.
5.
After hearing counsel for the parties, I am of the view that writ petition deserves to be allowed.
The respondents started regular enquiry against the petitioner under Rule 7 of the Rules.
In the covering letter enclosing the charge-sheet dated 961989, it is clearly mentioned that it is proposed by the competent authority to take action against the petitioner under Rule 7 of the Punishment and Appeal Rules on the grounds set out in the enclosed statement of charges.
In other words, the procedure under the Rules for imposing punishment on the petitioner was initiated under Rule 7 by the respondents.
It had to be brought to a logical end by observing the procedure under the Rules.
Admittedly no regular enquiry against the petitioner was held.
Therefore, it follows that the order of punishment was violative of the Rules as the procedure under the Rules for imposing the punishment had not been followed.
Consequently the impugned order of dismissal is liable to be set aside so also the order of the Appellate Authority, which I hereby set aside.
6.
However, the question that arises in the present case is that after setting aside the order of dismissal on the technical ground, as mentioned above, to what relief the wife of the petitioner is entitled to?
Unfortunately the petitioner has died during the pendency of the writ petition.
He did not work for any period after the order of dismissal.
Apart from that, the conduct of the petitioner when he was imposed the previous punishment and the charge-sheet thereafter goes a long way to show as how the petitioner was conducting himself.
However, as I have set aside the order of dismissal, the petitioner would be deemed to have continued in service from the date of dismissal to the date of his death.
Considering the circumstances as noticed above, I am of the view that justice would be met if only 1/3rd of the emoluments, to which the petitioner was entitled from the date of dismissal to the date of his death, are disbursed to the petitioner's wife.
Let it be done within 3 months from the receipt of the copy of this order.
7.
Writ petition is allowed in the above terms.
No costs.
Petition allowed.