VK Jhanji, J - In this petition the petitioner is challenging the order of Punjab Public Service Commission (in short the PPSC) vide which PPSC refused to call him for interview for appointment to the post of Head of the Department/Senior Lecturer in Pharmacy.
2.
In brief, the facts are that the petitioner obtained degree in Bachelor of Pharmacy from Panjab University in the year 1981.
He obtained degree in Master of Pharmacy in Pharmaceutical Chemistry in 1988 from the same University.
He was appointed Lecturer in Pharmacy in Government Technical College, Bathinda in 1988.
On selection by the PPSC, he was regularly appointed as such in the year 1991.
PPSC vide advertisement dated 1341991, advertised three posts of Heads of the Department and Senior Lecturers.
Minimum qualification prescribed for these posts was Master of Pharmacy and 5 years' teaching experience after acquiring the minimum qualification out of which two years had to be in teaching not below the post of Lecturer.
Subsequently, PPSC issued a corrigendum changing 5 years.
Petitioner who did his Bachelor of Pharmacy and Master of Pharmacy and also possessed 5 years' teaching experience out of which two years' teaching experience on the post of Lecturer applied through proper channel for the post of Head of Department as well as Senior Lecturer as qualifications for both the posts were the same.
However, the petitioner was not called for interview by the PPSC on the ground that he had not acquired the requisite experience after acquiring the minimum qualification.
To this effect, the PPSC issued two letters dated 2671991.
Annexures P-10 and P-11 respectively which are now being impugned here in the writ petition.
3.
Mr. Amarjit Singh, Advocate, counsel for the petitioner contended that for the purpose of appointment of Head of Department/Senior Lecturer in Pharmacy, the minimum qualification is Bachelor of Pharmacy and, therefore, experience has to be reckoned from the year the petitioner passed his B Pharmacy.
He has made reference to the minimum qualification laid down for these posts by the Pharmaceutical Council of India.
4.
On the other hand, Mr. S K Bhanot, learned State counsel appearing for all the respondents, submitted that the respondents have adopted the qualification recommended by the State Board of Technical Education, Punjab, and not as recommended by the Pharmacy Council of India.
According to him, the petitioner does not possess the requisite experience as he did his M. Pharmacy in the year 1988 which according to him is the minimum qualification.
5.
Having heard the learned counsel for the parties, I find no merit in this writ petition.
The PPSC, vide Annexures P-4 and P-5, has prescribed the following qualifications for the three posts of Head of Department, Pharmacy, and one post of Senior Lecturer, Pharmacy, in the Department of Technical Education :  Head of Department (Pharmacy) :  (i) M. Pharm in Pharmaceutical Chemistry/Pharmaceutics/Pharmacognosy/Pharmacology;  (ii) 5 years' professional and/or teaching experience after acquiring the minimum qualifications, out of which two years must be in teaching not below the post of Lecturer;  (iii) Knowledge of Punjabi of Matric or equivalent standard.
Senior Lecturer (Pharmacy) :  Qualification :  (i) M. Pharm in Pharmaceutical Chemistry/Pharmaceutics/Pharmacognosy/Pharmacology;  (ii) 5 years' teaching experience after acquiring the minimum qualifications, out of which two years must be in teaching not below the post of Lecturer.
Knowledge of Punjabi of Matric or its equivalent standard.
6.
A reading of the advertisement indicates that the qualification for the post of Senior Lecturer and Head of Department is Master in Pharmacy, coupled with 5 years' teaching experience after acquiring the minimum qualification, out of which two years must be in teaching not below the post of Lecturer.
The expression 'minimum qualification' cannot be read as 'B Pharmacy' as contended by counsel for the petitioner.
The minimum qualification has to be read in context of the advertisement and cannot be read in isolation.
What is required under the advertisement is that the person applying must be Master in Pharmacy.
Secondly, he must have 5 years' teaching experience, out of which two years must be in teaching not below the post of Lecturer.
Thirdly, he must possess knowledge of Punjabi of Matric or equivalent standard.
If the contention of the petitioner is accepted, then it would mean that the person having done B Pharmacy with 5 years' teaching experience would be eligible even if he has no experience at all, of professional or teaching after doing Master in Pharmacy.
This is not what is intended to be required under the advertisement.
Five years' experience professional or teaching has to be reckoned from the date of acquiring Master's degree in Pharmacy.
The petitioner cannot derive any help from the qualification prescribed by the Pharmacy Council of India because it is the prerogative of the respondents to lay down the qualifications, which according to them, has been adopted as per the recommendations of State Board of Technical Education, Punjab, and not as provided by the Pharmacy Council of India.
It is not denied that if teaching experience of the petitioner is taken from the date of acquiring Master's degree in Pharmacy, then he was not qualified on the date when he applied for the post.
The respondent rightly did not call him for interview because at the time of application, he had not acquired the required experience which in this case was Master in Pharmacy.
7.
As a result of the above discussion, this writ petition is dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.