VK Bali, J (Oral) - Dharam Chand through present writ filed by him under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, seeks writ in the nature of mandamus directing the Director General of Police, Central Reserve Police Force-respondent No. 2 to voluntarily retire him under the Voluntary Retirement Scheme after completion of more than twenty years' service.
2.
The facts of the case reveal that petitioner was enrolled as Sepoy in the Central Reserve Police Force (hereinafter referred to as 'CRPF') on March 4, 1968.
He was promoted to the post of Lns.
Naik in the year 1981.
It is stated that he had been working with full zeal and to the entire satisfaction of his officers and in lieu thereof he was again promoted as Naik in the year 1985.
After his promotion aforesaid, he was posted at Mani Majra, Chandigarh (U.T.).
He felt pain in his head and got himself medically checked up from the General Hospital.
He remained under medical treatment for six months.
As per advice of the doctors, he was not to undertake any hard duty.
He, however, after six months joined his duty.
In the year 1986, the Battalion in which he had been working was shifted to Amritsar from where he proceeded on leave for one month.
His leave having expired, to again joined the Battalion which was shifted to Chandigarh.
He, however, developed some problem and was again admitted in Emergency at Post Graduate Institute, Chandigarh on December 6, 1986.
On December 19, 1986 he was operated upon and the doctors found him suffering from Neurocysticercosis disease.
After his treatment, he again joined his duty but as his problem aggravated, he was again admitted to P.G.I.
in December, 1988.
Since he was not improving so as to do his duties with full devotion, he was left with no choice but for to make an application for his voluntary retirement.
This request was made by him vide registered letter dated January 23, 1989.
It was mentioned therein that due to pain in brain he had to undergo an operation of head and, therefore, he was unable to continue his services.
A request was ultimately made to grant him voluntary retirement pension.
Meanwhile, respondents vide letter dated March 6, 1989 directed him to appear before the Medical Board.
On account of his medical check up and the opinion of the doctors, he was declared completely and permanently in capacitated for further service and that being so.
He was invalidated from service and was according to be paid pension.
3.
The sole grouse of petitioner is that when he had served for continuous period of more than twenty years and he had asked for voluntary retirement, even if during service he was incapacitated as opined by the doctors, respondents could not invalidate him in service and pay him pension accordingly.
An indefeasible right had accrued to him to ask for voluntary retirement after twenty years service and even through in one of the letters addressed to the respondents after he was invalidated from service, he had prayed that he may be given pensions as admittedly to a person who has been invalidated in service, it was his first request for voluntary retirement which should have been considered.
4.
The matter has been contested exclusively on the ground that petitioner had himself addressed letter, Annexure R-3, wherein he mentioned that he did not want to file any appeal against letter No. PIII-1/89-13-EC-I and that he be invalidated from service in accordance with the letter aforesaid.
5.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and going through the records of the case, I am of the considered view that the case of petitioner is meritorious and, therefore, this petition must succeed.
It is not disputed that under the Rules governing the field a person working in any of the wings of the Armed Forces has choice to ask for voluntary retirement.
This course was admittedly adopted by petitioner after completion of more than twenty years' service.
If in between some impediment was caused and he was not able enough to serve the force and for that matter even the authorities had constituted medical board, it was not the choice of respondent to invalidate him from service.
The request to invalidate him was made by petitioner only when the medical board had already conducted the medical examination and an order had already been passed invalidating him from service out of the two requests that were before the authorities, more beneficial to petitioner and which was permissible under the rules, should have been accepted.
In a welfare state, it is the request of citizen that benefits him more and is permissible under the Rules, which should have been accepted and not the one which suited more the respondents-Union of India.
6.
For the reasons mentioned above, I allow this petition.
A direction is issued to the respondents to voluntarily retire the petitioner from the date he made his request vide letter Annexure P-1 and to pay him pension that is admissible to a person who seeks voluntary retirement on completion of twenty years service.
Let the arrears of pension, if any, be paid to him within three months from today.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.