SD Agarwala, CJ and JL Gupta, J - Mohammad Sabir, respondent No. 1, was posted as an Estate Officer, Punjab Wakf Board, Amritsar.
On June 23, 1992, the Administrator of the Board ordered his transfer to Batala.The respondent challenged this order through a writ petition.
When the writ petition came up for hearing before the learned Single Judge, the solitary contention raised by the learned counsel was that under Regulation 24 of the Punjab Wakf Regulations 1966 (hereinafter referred to as 'the regulations'), only the Chairman was competent to order the transfer and posting of Class I Officers.
It was contended that the respondent was admittedly a Class I Officer and as such the order passed by the Administrator transferring him from Amritsar to Batala was violative of Regulation 24.
This contention was accepted by the learned Single Judge and the writ petition was allowed.
Aggrieved by the judgment of the learned Single Judge, the Board and its Administrator have come up in the present Letters patent Appeal.
2.
This appeal had come up for preliminary hearing before us on September 7, 1983.
We had directed the issue of notice of motion.
Notice was accepted by Mr. MM Kumar, learned counsel for the respondent.
The case was fixed for arguments on September 15, 1993.
3.
We have heard Mr. SK Pipat, learned counsel for the appellants and Mr. MM Kumar for respondent No. 1.
4.
Mr. Pipat has submitted that in accordance with the provisions of Section 64(1) of the Wakf Act, 1954 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Act'), the Board was superseded in the year 1981.
Thereafter, in accordance with the provisions of Section 64(2) of the Act, an Administrator was appointed.
Mr. Pipat has produced before us a photo copy of the Notification dated June 6, 1991 issued by the Government of India appointing Mr. SY Quraishi, an officer of the Indian Administrative Service of Haryana Cadre as Administrator, Punjab Wakf Board vice Shri Manzoor Ahmed, an officer of the Indian Police Service of the Uttar Pradesh Cadre.
He has further submitted that in accordance with the provisions of Section 64(2)(b) "all powers and duties" are exercisable by the Administrator.
Accordingly, the learned counsel submits that the order of transfer passed by the Administrator was wholly within his jurisdiction and that the view taken by the learned Single judge cannot be sustained.
5.
On the other hand, Mr. MM Kumar, learned counsel for respondent No. 1 has submitted that an order under Section 64 can only be passed by the State Government and that the Central Government has no jurisdiction in the matter.
It has been further submitted that the Notification dated June 6, 1991 does not confer on the Administrator any power to transfer a Class I employee.
6.
The Parliament enacted the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966 (Act 31 of 1966) "to provide for the reorganisation of the existing State of Punjab and for matters connected therewith."
Accordingly, the State of Punjab was reorganised on and from the appointed day viz. November 1, 1966.
In Part VII of this Act, provisions were made in respect of certain corporations.
In Section 72, it was inter alia provide that "where any body corporate constituted under a Central Act, State Act or Provincial Act for the existing State of Punjab or any part thereof serves the needs of the successor States or has, by virtue of the provisions of Part II, become on inter-State body corporate, then, the body corporate shall, on and from the appointed day, continue to function and operate in those areas in respect of which it was functioning and operating immediately before that day, subject to such directions as may from time to time be issued by the Central Government, until other provision is made by law in respect of the said body corporate.
"It is the admitted position that the Board was a Body Corporate constituted under the Wakf Act, 1954 for the existing State of Punjab with effect from November 1, 1966.
It continued to function and operate in respect of the areas in which "it was functioning and operating immediately before that day."
On and from the appointed day, it had to function in accordance with the instructions which may be issued by the Central Government from time to time.
7.
In sub-section (2) of Section 72, it was further provided that "any direction issued by the Central Government under Sub-section (1) in respect of any such body corporate may include a direction that any law by which the said body corporate is governed shall, in its application to that body corporate, have effect, subject to such exceptions and modifications as may be specified in the direction.
"In exercise of these powers, the Central Government issued a Notification dated December 30, 1975 which was published in the Gazette of India dated January 17, 1976 that so long as "the Board of Wakfs constituted under the Wakf Act, 1954 .... continues to function and operate as an Inter-State Body Corporate in the areas in respect of which it was functioning and operating immediately before the date .... .... the powers of the State Government" under the various provisions of the Act including Section 64 "shall be exercisable by the Central Government."
It is thus clear that the powers exercisable by the State Government under Section 64 of the Wakf Act came to vest in the Central Government.
Accordingly, the Central Government had issued the Notification dated June 6, 1991.
It reads as under :-  "In exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (2) of Section 64 of the Wakf Act, 1954 (29 of 1954), read with the Notification of the Government of India in the erstwhile Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs (Legislative Department).
S.O.
247, dated the 30th December, 1975, published in the Gazette of India, Part II, Section 3, Sub-Section (ii) dated the 17th January, 1976 and in partial modification of the Notification of the Government of India in the Ministry of Welfare published in the Gazette of India (Extraordinary) as S.O.
396 (E) dated the 21st May, 1990, the Central Government hereby appoints Shri SY Quraishi, an officer of the Indian Administrative Service of Haryana Cadre as Administrator, Punjab Wakf Board in additional for his existing duties under the Government of Haryana, until further orders vice Shri Manzoor Ahmed, an officer of the Indian Police Service of the Uttar Pradesh Cadre with effect from the date Shri Quraishi assumes charge and further directs that in the said Notification No. S.O.
396 (E) dated the 21st May, 1990 for the words "shall continue to be exercised and performed by Shri Manzoor Ahmed," the words "shall be exercised and performed by Shri SY Quraishi" shall be substituted with effect from the date Shri Quraishi assumes charge."
8.
A perusal of the above Notification shows that the Central Government had appointed Mr. SY Quraishi as Administrator of the Board in exercise of its powers under Section 64(2) of the Act.
In this Notification, a reference has also been made to the Notification dated December 30, 1975 which was published in the Gazette of India dated January 17, 1976.
9.
It is also apt to notice the provisions of Section 64(2).
It reads as under :-  "64(2) : Upon the publication of a Notification under sub-section (1) superseding the Board -  (a) all the members of the Board shall, as from the date of supersession, vacate their offices as such members;  (b) all the powers and duties which may, by or under the provisions of this Act, be exercised or performed by or on behalf of the Board, shall, during the period of supersession, be exercised and performed by such person or persons as the State Government may direct and  (c) all property vested in the Board shall during the period of supersession, vest in the State Government."
According to the above provision, upon the supersession of the Board, the State Government is competent to appoint "a person or persons" to perform "all the powers and duties" which could "be exercised or performed by or on behalf of the Board.... " In view of the Notification dated December 30, 1975 which had been issued in exercise of the powers conferred by Section 72 of the Punjab Reorganisation Act, the power of the State Government under Section 64 had come to vest in the Central Government.
Accordingly, it was in exercise of this power that the Central Government had appointed the Administrator to perform the functions of the Board or its authorities.
The Board having been superseded, the office of the Chairman had been vacated.
In view of the Notification dated June 6, 1991, these functions had to be performed by the person appointed by the Central Government for this purpose.
10.
Mr. Kumar, however, submits that the Notification issued by the Central Government on June 6, 1991 does not specifically confer the powers under Section 64(2) (b) on the Administrator on the other hand, Mr. Pipat has pointed out that in fact, the powers had been conferred on the Administrator.
He appears to be right.
In fact, an indication to that effect is available in the Notification (supra) where in it has been inter alia mentioned that "for the words 'shall continue to be exercised by Shri Manzoor Ahmed', the words 'shall be exercised and performed by Shri SY Quraishi' shall be substituted with effect from the date Shri Quraishi assumes charge."
Consequently, we are of the view that all powers and duties which could be exercised or performed "by or on behalf of the Board" had come to vest in the Administrator.
11.
Was the Administrator competent to transfer a Class I Officer ?
Mr. Kumar submits that under : Regulation 24, this powers has been exclusively vested in the Chairman.
He refers to the provisions of Regulation 24(3) in this behalf.
Regulation 24 primarily provides that appointments to posts under the Board shall be made by the specified authorities.
Clause (3) provides as under :-  "24(3) All orders of posting and transfers of Class I employees shall be made by the Chairman and those of Class II by the Secretary with the approval of the Chairman and of Class III by the Secretary."
These Regulations have been framed by the Board in exercise of its powers under Section 68 of the Act.
By Regulation 24, the power of appointment and transfer etc. has been delegated to different authorities of the Board.
These specified authorities while exercising such powers, act on behalf of the Board.
By virtue of the Notification issued by the Government in exercise of the powers under Section 64(2) all powers and duties which could be exercised or performed by or on behalf of the Board have come to vest in the Administrator.
This would include all those powers which had been delegated under the Regulations to the Chairman or Secretary etc.  12.
Accordingly, we are of the view that the powers exercisable by the Chairman had come to vest in the Administrator.
In exercise of those powers, he could pass the order transferring the respondent from Amritsar to Batala.
The order was within his jurisdiction.
The challenge to the order is wholly untenable.
It appears that this aspect of the matter was not pointed out to the learned Single Judge.
13.
Mr. Kumar sought to contend that the transfer had been ordered on account of certain extraneous considerations.
Even though, allegations to that effect had been made in the petition but it appears that the matter was argued 'almost exclusively on legal point' before the learned single Judge.
Normally, a new point, especially one which would require going into facts, cannot be permitted to be raised for the first time in appeal.
However on a perusal of the pleadings in the writ petition, we find that the allegations have been primarily made against Mr. SH Naqvi and Mr. Arshad Ali Khan, against respondent No3, it has only been suggested that he had set aside the order of reversion passed against Mr. Naqvi and that the petitioner is being harassed by Mr. Quraishi at the instance of M/s Naqvi and Arshad Ali Khan.
The allegations of malafide had been controverted in the written statement filed on behalf of the present appellants by the Administrator.
In our opinion, the order of transfer is not tainted by malafide and cannot as such be struck down on that ground.
14.
Accordingly, we hold that the Administrator was competent to transfer the respondent.
As a result, this appeal is allowed and the judgment of the learned Single judge is set aside.
The writ petition is dismissed.
In the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Appeal allowed.