MS Liberhan and SS Grewal, JJ.
- The petitioner was a Government servant and retired as Tehsildar in 1983.
On 25101991 he went to Delhi to attend the Bhog ceremony of his brother, where he suffered a heart attack.
Petitioner was admitted to Escorts Heart Institute & Research Centre, New Delhi.
On examination blockade in left main artery of the petitioner was found.
Resultantly, he was operated upon on 311992 in the said institute and discharged on 2011992.
The petitioner claimed reimbursement of Rs. 1,36,000/- spent by him for undergoing the by-pass surgery in the aforesaid medical institute.
2.
The respondents vide order dated 2521992 allowed reimbursement to the petitioner by calculating the expenses which he would have incurred for he same treatment, had he been admitted to the All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi which comes to around Rs55,000/-.
3.
The only defence taken by the respondents in order to deny the claim of the petitioner is that Escorts Institute is not a recognised institute for the purpose of reimbursement.
The petitioner ignored the channels of Government medical institutions, consequently he is not entitled to the reimbursement.
It is averred that there is no provision under the Medical Attendance Rules to reimburse the petitioner for his treatment from a private hospital.
4.
We cannot restrain ourselves from observing that respondent plea is not only unsustainable but is totally bereft of any plausible reason.
The plea does not merit consideration in view of the admitted fact to the effect that Escorts Heart Institute & Research Centre, New Delhi, was duly recognized for treatment of heart problems vide Annexure P-6 dated 8101991 which runs as under :-  "Policy for reimbursement of medical expenses incurred on medical treatment taken abroad and in hospitals other than those of the Government of Punjab, both within and outside the State was laid down.
However, as per the 12th item of these instructions, a list of those diseases for which specialised treatment was not available in the Government hospitals was to be prepared in addition to identifying medical instructions/hospital clinics of repute where such specialised treatment was available.
The Government has now prepared a list of those diseases for which the specialised treatment is not available in Punjab Government hospitals but it is available in certain identified private hospitals, both within and outside the State.
It has, therefore, been decided to recognise these hospitals for the treatment of the disease mentioned against them in the enclosed list for Punjab Government employees/pensioners and their dependents.
The terms and conditions contained in letter under reference will remain applicable, Government can, however, revise the list, in future."
Therefore, it has been decided to recognise those hospitals for the treatment of diseases mentioned against them in the enclosed list issued with the concurrence of the Finance Department dated 1191991 which is as under :-  "Open Heart Surgery : Escorts Heart Institute, New Delhi 
: Christian Medical College, Ludhiana 
: Appolo Hospital, Madras.
xxx xxx xx xxx"  In spite of the above, the respondent have put forth Annexure R1 for declining the relief to the petitioner.
The respondents have failed to point out, from reading of Annexure R1 issued on 2511991, though Annexure P-6 by which Escorts Heart Institute was recognised has been issued later, how and why the petitioner is not entitled to reimbursement for the expenses incurred by him particularly in view of their own instructions issued vide Annexure P- 6, referred to above.
5.
In our considered view, once an Institute is recognised and it is decided that the State Government employees can take treatment from there, the State cannot be permitted to turn back and decline the reimbursement to its employees particularly in view of the urgency for treatment like heart problems.
There is no reason nor any has been pointed out to restrict the right of the petitioner to get the best medical treatment available in the country from an Institute recognised by the State Government.
Since provision of free medical treatment or reimbursement in lieu thereof is a beneficial act of the welfare State for its employees, the rules/instructions have to be construed liberally in favour of the employees, for granting them the relief, rather than adopting a wooden attitude to deprive a person of his due.
The respondents appear to have patently used excusals in refusing full reimbursement, when the factum of treatment and the urgency for the same has been accepted by the respondents by reimbursing the petitioner the expenses incurred by him, which he would have incurred in the A.I.I.M.S.
New Delhi.
We cannot loose sight of factual situation in the A.I.I.M.S.
New Delhi, i.e. with respect to the number of patients received there for heart problems.
In such an urgency, one cannot sit at home and think in a cool and calm atmosphere for getting medical treatment at a particular hospital or wait for admission in some Government medical institute.
In such a situation, decision has to be taken forthwith by the persons or his attendants if precious life has to be saved.
6.
In our considered opinion, while deciding such matters, the State should take a liberal and humanitarian attitude.
Neither any principle nor any judgment nor anything else was shown, nor are we otherwise award of any material that could persuade us to hold that a Government employee is not entitled to the reimbursement for the expenditure incurred by him on his treatment in one of the hospitals recognised by the respondent-State.
We are fully convinced that refusing the claim of the petitioner is unreasonable, unjust and arbitrary.
The impugned order is categorically violative of Articles 14 of the Constitution of India.
The whole situation has to be judged in a common sense way.
One may ask whether the conduct of the petitioner was not that of an ordinary prudent person but was a biased act in his own favour, if it is not so, the just relief cannot be withheld.
7.
Keeping in view the facts and circumstances of this case to the effect that the petitioner did undergo bypass surgery in a recognised institute, he would be entitled for the reimbursement of the expenses claimed by him.
8.
In view of the observations made above, we do not find force in the contention raised by the respondents.
It is ridiculous to suggest that for a disease like heart trouble, particularly in the facts and circumstances of this case, the petitioner should have first appeared before the Medical Board and got their prior approval for treatment from a recognised institute.
The very defence put forth by the respondents in view of the facts is frivolous.
Taking the State's contention to its logical end, it would mean that a person who suffers a heart attack, should first get recommendation from the Medical Board by appearing before it personally i.e. before getting himself treated he should first get an approval for treatment from the Medical Board.
In such circumstances as revealed in the instant petition, the petitioner would have never made it to the Medical Board as he in all probability would have died before the medical board could meet and examine him.
In such diseases and situations timely medical aid is of permanent consideration.
9.
We are of the considered view, by reading the instructions dated 8101991 in pith and substance that the instructions do not authorise the respondents to refuse reimbursement as suggested by them.
The instructions are meant for human beings and have to be read liberally and with an object to serve the purpose and the persons for whom they are meant.
The defence taken by the respondents is nothing else but a frivolous defence which cannot be sustained in the eye of law.
The very act of the respondents is arbitrary and an attempt at defeating justice.
10.
Therefore, in our considered view, the ends of justice, will be met, by directing the respondents to reimburse the petitioner the amount he incurred on his treatment in the Escorts Heart Institute, New Delhi, with 12% compound interest from the date of the amount became due till its payment.
The writ petition is accordingly allowed with costs.
Costs are assessed at Rs. 1000/-.