Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - This order shall dispose of L.P.A. No. 299 of 1992, CWP No. 3327 of 1992 and CWP No. 4143 of 1992.
2.
Sohan Lal, respondent in this Letters Patent Appeal, prayed for the quashing the charge-sheet and the issue of a direction to respondents Nos. 1 and 2 to include his name in Register A-1 for appointment to the Pb.
Civil Service (Ex.
Br.)
as recommended by the Commissioner, Jalandhar, Division.
This claim having been accepted by the learned Single Judge for the State of Punjab has come up in this Letters Patent Appeal.
3.
Mr. JC Verma, learned counsel for the respondent states that the outset that after decision of the learned Single Judge the enquiry officer has recorded a finding exonerating the respondent.
He further states that the vacancies which had become available during the year 1989-90 have already been filled up.
Mr. Verma, however, points out that vide letter dated June 22, 1993 the State Government has notified twelve vacancies to be filled up from the Tehsildars and Naib Tehsildars.
In this situation, he prays that without setting aside the appointments already made and effecting the rights of the persons who have already been appointed, the claim of the petitioner may be considered against the vacancies which have now become available.
He further states that in case the State Government accepts this request of the respondent, he would not press either his claim as made in the writ petition and determined by the learned Single Judge out of which the present Letters Patent Appeal has arisen or the claim made in Civil Writ Petition Nos. 4143 of 1992 filed by him.
4.
Mr. Ashok Aggarwal, Additional Advocate General, Punjab counsel for the appellants, accepts this position and states that the appellants would consider the claim of the respondents against the vacancies, which have been notified vide letter dated June 22, 1993.
In case the respondent is found suitable by the Government, his name will be forwarded to the Punjab Public Service Commission along with those of the other eligible candidates for interview and for inclusion in Register A-1.
Mr. Aggarwal, however, maintains that the findings recorded by the learned Single Judge regarding the validity of the action of the respondents and interpretation of the document is not correct and may be set aside.
5.
Having heard the learned counsel for the parties and in view of statement made by the learned counsel for the respondent, we modify the directions given by the learned Single Judge and direct the appellants to consider the name of the Respondent for inclusion in Register A-1 against the vacancies which have been modified in the year 1993.
In this view of the matter it is not necessary for us to go into the correctness of the view expressed by the learned Single Judge on the merits of the charge-sheet issued to the respondent or on the question of law raised in the writ petition with regard to interpretation of the document, i.e. the agreement to sell.
It is consequently directed that the appellants would not consider the case of the respondent for inclusion in Register A-1 in accordance with rules along with that of the order eligible candidates against the vacancies for which recommendation have been sought vide letter dated June 22, 1993, a copy of which has been placed on record as Mark A The Letters Patent Appeal is disposed of accordingly.
6.
In Civil Writ Petition No. 4143 of 1992 the petitioner has prayed for issue of an appropriate writ or direction to "delete the name of respondent No. 3 from the selection list meant for PCS (Ex.
Br.)."
Mr. JC Verma, learned counsel for the petitioner states that he is not pressing his claim against the vacancies, which had arisen in the year 1989-90 and does not wish to challenge the appointment of respondent No. 3.
In this view of the matter this writ petition has become infructuous and is dismissed as such.
7.
So far as Civil Writ Petition No. 3327 of 1992 is concerned, it has been filed by Mr. Amarjit Singh Shahi (respondent No. 3 in CWP 4143 of 1992).
It has been, inter alia, prayed that the petitioner's name be entered in Register A-1 in order of the merit determined by the Commission and he be appointed to the Punjab Civil Services (Executive Branch).
It has been further claimed that the rights of the petitioner cannot be affected by the orders passed in Civil Writ Petition No. 15369 of 1991 out of which Letters Patent Appeal No. 299 of 1992 had arisen.
8.
It is the admitted position that the petitioner has already been appointed to the Punjab Civil Service.
In view of the statement made by Mr.JC Verma, learned counsel for the respondent Sohan Lal, the rights of the petitioner are not at all affected by the orders in Letters Patent Appeal No. 299 of 1992.
Mr. Verma has categorically stated that he does not wish to challenge the appointment of the petitioner.
Accordingly, the petitioner's rights will not be effected in any manner.
He will continue to post, on which he was appointed and the condition incorporated in the order of his appointment with regard to the appointment being subject to the decision in L.P.A. No. 299 of 1992 shall stand deleted.
Accordingly this writ petition has become infructuous and is disposed of accordingly.
In the peculiar circumstances, there will be no order as to costs in any of the three cases.
Order accordingly.