VK Bali, J - Petitioner seeks a writ in the nature of Quo Warranto quashing the appointment of respondent No. 4 Ramesh Chander to the post of Lecturer in Leather Chemistry as also his subsequent appointment to the post of Lecturer Practical Training on the sole ground that he lacks the requisite qualifications for the post under contention.
The facts of the case need first be noticed.
2.
Krishan Lal-petitioner was appointed in the Government Tanning Institute on 15.1.1968.
He was regularised on the post of Instructor vide orders dated 781970 with effect from 331969.
Thereafter he was promoted to the post of Foreman on 21.12.1982.
It is pleaded that in the Government Tanning Institute, there are two sections namely Footwear Section and Tanning Section.
Both are totally separate sections having different posts.
Whereas in the Footwear Section, there are three cadres known as skilled worker, Instructor and Foreman, in the Tanning Section, the hierarchy is the Laboratory Assistant Foreman, Lecturer in Leather Chemistry and Lecturer Practical Training.
In the Footwear Section, Foreman is the highest post and in the Tanning Section, Lecturer Practical Training is the highest post.
Ramesh Chander-respondent was appointed as Laboratory Assistant in the year 1973 on ad hoc basis for a period of six months.
He was again given fresh appointment on ad hoc basis for a period of six months in the year 1975.
In the year 1977, however, he was again appointed as Laboratory Assistant on the recommendations of the Subordinate Service Selection Board.
It is stated that the Government Tanning Institute conducts diploma in Leather Technology which is of three years duration.
Out of three years, two years are for academic studies and one year apprenticeship which is to be done in an approved Tannery recognised Institute.
In the year 1978, the Government Tanning Institute invited applications for three years diploma course in Leather Technology.
It was of three years duration and out of same, two years are of academic studies to be done in the Institute and one year apprenticeship to be done in the Recognised Commercial Tannery.
The minimum qualification to seek admission was Matric or equivalent and admission to the diploma course was to be purely on merit basis.
In pursuance, to the admission notice, respondent No. 4 Ramesh Chander applied for diploma in Leather Technology and simultaneously sought permission from his department to grant him study leave for doing the said diploma.
He was granted study leave on the condition that he will look after the Chemistry practical work of students in the Laboratory in addition to his own training programme.
Ramesh Chander, thus, joined the diploma course and completed two years in the Institution but he did not go for one year apprenticeship in the Commercial Tannery which was compulsory for obtaining diploma in Leather Technology.
It is stated that the Director, Industries and Industrial Training, Punjab, Chandigarh, addressed a letter to the Principal, Government Tanning Institute, Jalandhar informing him that diploma in Leather Technology course required completion of apprenticeship.
A list of persons who had not completed or even applied for diploma course was appended with the aforesaid letter.
It is stated that Ramesh Chander was one of those whose name figured in the list.
Thereafter there was a lot of correspondence between the Ministry of Education and the Government as also the Institute as to when the diploma was to be granted.
The Principal of the Government Tanning Institute asked the Director of Technical Education, Punjab, Chandigarh vide letter dated 18.6.1968 (Annexure P-10) as to when the diploma was to be granted.
In response to the aforesaid letter, the Director stated that diploma was to be granted after a candidate had successfully passed two years' training and completed one year practical training as advised by the Government of India.
He further clarified that since the practical training was part and parcel of the course, the diploma was, therefore, to be awarded only to those students who had completed their training.
Ramesh Chander, even though had not done one year apprenticeship was granted the certificate for having done diploma in Leather Technology.
3.
In the year 1982, Ramesh Chander respondent No. 4 was appointed as Lecturer in Leather Chemistry on ad hoc basis for a period of six months or till such time a regular appointee was to come from Punjab Public Service Commission.
The qualifications for the post of Lecturer in Leather Chemistry, are stated to be degree in Leather Technology or B.Sc.
with diploma in Leather Technology from recognised Tanning Institute, one year teaching/professional experience and knowledge of Punjabi of Matric or its equivalent standard.
It is stated that since Ramesh Chander did not fulfil all the qualifications required for the post of Lecturer in Leather Chemistry, he could not be appointed to the said post and that being so even his ad hoc appointment was illegal.
He, however, continued to work on ad hoc basis till 1985 when his services were regularised on the said post.
The Deputy Regional Employment Officer, it is stated, addressed a letter to the Principal of the Government Tanning Institute that Ramesh Chander had not been appointed after following due process and the Rules had not been observed while appointing him.
When all these matters were going on, it is stated that the post of Principal was re- designated as Lecturer Practical Training, Since the post of Lecturer Practical Training was lying vacant for the last several years, the charge of this post was given to the petitioner who was the senior-most person working in the Institute.
He was given the charge of the post of Principal in addition to his own duties and he continued to hold the post of Principal till the year 1986, when the charge was withdrawn from him and given to Ramesh Chander.
Being aggrieved, he made representation to the Director, Industries, and Industrial Training Punjab pleading therein that the charge had been illegally withdrawn from him as he was senior-most person in the Institute.
However, this representation was not immediately attended to and he remained without the charge of Principal till the year 1988 when the same was again given to him.
Feeling aggrieved, Ramesh Chander sought to vindicate his stand by filing a civil suit for declaration to the effect that the order dated 23.6.1988 whereby the duties of the post of Principal were given to the petitioner was illegal.
It was pleaded in the written statement that was filed by the official respondents in the said suit that the diploma possessed by Ramesh Chander was in dispute and it was still to be decided whether he holds a valid diploma or not.
It was further mentioned in the written statement that Ramesh Chander had not undergone one year apprenticeship which was necessary.
Meanwhile, Ramesh Chander was promoted to the post of Lecturer Practical Training vide orders dated 811992.
It is stated that the qualifications for the post of Lecturer Practical Training are degree in Leather Technology from recognised University/Institute or its equivalent or Graduate with diploma in Leather Technology with 50% marks from the State Board of Technical Education, Punjab/Department of Industries, and Industrial Training, Punjab or its equivalent, two years teaching/professional experience and knowledge of Punjabi of Matric or its equivalent standard.
Inasmuch as Ramesh Chander was not holding a valid diploma in Leather Chemistry Technology having not undergone apprenticeship for one year from any recognised Commercial Tannery, he was not entitled to be appointed on the post of Lecturer Practical Training.
Petitioner made a representation against the promotion of Ramesh Chander to the Secretary to Government of Punjab.
4.
On the array of facts as mentioned above, the solitary contention of learned counsel appearing for the petitioner is that Ramesh Chander having not clothed himself with the essential pre-requisites for consideration to the post under contention could not be appointed to the said post.
5.
This petition has been opposed.
Two separate written statements have been filed, one by respondent Nos. 1 to 3 and the other by respondent No. 4 i.e. Ramesh Chander.
By way of preliminary objection, it has been pleaded by the official respondents that Ramesh Chander was given admission in the year 1978 and he was given diploma in 1980.
He was appointed as Lecturer in Leather Chemistry in the year 1982 and was regularised on the said post in the year 1985.
The challenge now to his appointment after a lapse of 12 years from the date of issuance of diploma and from the date of regularisation was too late and, therefore, the petition deserves to be dismissed on the ground of laches.
On merits, it is pleaded that Ramesh Chander was working as Laboratory Assistant on regular basis.
He sought permission for admission in diploma course in Leather Technology on the assurance and undertaking that he would devote extra time towards the performance of his duties the training period.
The then Principal of the Institute strongly recommended for his admission on the contention that his training in the diploma course in Leather Technology would help him a lot in improving the standard of training of the students in the trade.
Necessary approval was given keeping in view the undertaking of Shri Ramesh Chander as also the recommendations of the Principal of the Institute.
Insofar as the correspondence that ensued between the department and the Government, reference of which has been given above while giving narration of facts, it is pleaded in the written statement that the department sought clarification in the matter from the Director, Board of Apprenticeship Training (Northern Region), Kanpur.
The Director clarified that an official being in employment as Laboratory Assistant in the scale of Rs. 400-600 could not undergo one year apprenticeship training under the Apprenticeship Act, as per Rule 3(2)(i) of the Apprenticeship Rules, 1962 which reads thus :-  "No Engineering Graduate or a Diploma Holder who had training or job experience for a period of one year or more, after the attainment of these qualifications, shall be eligible for being engaged as an apprenticeship under the Act."
It is, thus, pleaded that keeping in view the above clarification, Ramesh Chander was not required to undergo one year apprenticeship training.
Copy of the letter written by the Director and its reply have been placed on the records as Annexures R-1 and R-2 respectively.
Insofar as filing of civil suit by Ramesh Chander and the reply filed by the official respondents is concerned, it has been averred that matter regarding validity of diploma possessed by Ramesh Chander was under examination and in that context it was pleaded in the written statement filed in the suit that the diploma possessed by him is in dispute and it is still to be decided whether he holds a valid diploma or not.
6.
Ramesh Chander in the written statement filed by him has given his service particulars and compared the same with that of the petitioner in a Chart with an endeavour to show that he is far better in all respects than the petitioner.
Besides what has been mentioned in the written statement by the official respondents, it is pleaded by Ramesh Chander respondent No. 4 that the representations filed by the petitioner as well as by him staking claim for the post of Principal, the Government gave hearing to both the parties vide letter dated 21.11.1988.
The points raised by the petitioner were examined by the Government in detail.
The main grouse of the petitioner was that respondent No. 4 i.e. Ramesh Chander before promotion as Lecturer in Leather Chemistry was required to undergo one year apprenticeship training.
The matter of Apprenticeship Training was also probed into by referring the same to the Board of Apprenticeship Training sponsored by the Government of India, Ministry of Human Resources Development at Kanpur which gave its clarification vide letter dated 321990 stating that the official being already in employment as Laboratory Assistant in the scale of Rs. 400-600 is not required to undergo one year apprenticeship training under the Apprenticeship Act, 1961 read with Rule 3(2)(i) of the Apprenticeship Rules, 1962.
On the basis of the said clarification, the Directorate referred the matter to the Government vide letter dated 15.5.1990 stating that the answering respondent was not required to do any Apprenticeship Training being a candidate of the department.
After considering all the aspects of the case including qualifications and eligibility of the answering respondent, the Government asked the Directorate to issue his promotion order, being competent appointing authority in the case of class III posts.
Accordingly the Directorate office issued his promotion order and also sent copy of the said order to the Government.
He further pleads in the written statement that the petitioner who is working in the Footwear Trade in the lower grade with lower qualifications is not eligible for the post of Lecturer in Leather Chemistry as also for the post of Lecturer in Practical Training and that being so, he has no locus-standi to maintain the present writ petition disputing his promotion.
7.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and going through the records of the case, I am of the view that there is no merit in the sole contention raised by Mr. P S Patwalia, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner and, therefore, this petition must fail.
Ramesh Chander is stated to be not having the requisite qualifications for the post under contention on the ground that diploma could not be granted to him as he had not undergone apprenticeship for a period of one year.
This diploma was granted to the petitioner way back in the year 1980.
On the basis of the same very diploma, he was appointed as Lecturer in Leather Chemistry in the year 1982 and was regularised in the year 1985.
It is apparent from the array of facts as given above that when the petitioner was divested of the charge of the post of Principal, he thought of challenging the appointment of Ramesh Chander on the post of Lecturer in Leather Chemistry which post was given to him in the year 1985.
Besides the fact that it is too late for the petitioner to challenge the very grant of diploma to Ramesh Chander respondent after a lapse of 12 years, on merits as well, it cannot be said that the respondent had necessarily to go through apprenticeship for a period of one year.
It is not disputed that respondent Ramesh Chander was already in service when he sought permission to do diploma.
It may be true that for the post which the respondent is holding, one may have to do diploma of three years course in Leather Technology, two years at the Institute and one year apprenticeship in a Commercial Tannery but one year apprenticeship cannot be applied in all cases.
The attention of the Government and the Director, Industries and Industrial Training, Punjab came to be focussed on this precise issue and after a lot of deliberations and after hearing the view points of all concerned, it was held that no Engineering graduate or a diploma holder who had training or job experience for a period of one year or more, after the attainment of these qualifications, shall be eligible for being engaged as an apprentice under the Act.
This conclusion was not based on whims and fancies of anyone but was rather based on the relevant provisions of the Apprenticeship Act, 1961 and the rules framed thereunder.
A perusal of Rule 3(2)(i) as has been reproduced above clearly manifests that a diploma holder as respondent Ramesh Chander is was not even eligible for being engaged as an apprentice under the Act.
Obviously, there will be no necessity at all to do apprenticeship for those who are already in service and have experience of the job.
8.
That apart, it will be too late to deny to respondent Ramesh Chander the benefit of diploma that he had done way back in the year 1980.
The Institution concerned from where he did his diploma granted to him the certificate and if he lacked something like not having done apprenticeship, the relevant time was then to withhold the certificate.
In that case, respondent Ramesh Chander could have very easily devoted one year more and done apprenticeship but after giving him the requisite certificate in which it has been said that he has done diploma in Leather Technology, it will be too inequitous to deny him the benefit of the same.
9.
Finding no merit in this petition, the same is dismissed.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.