DP Wadhwa, J - The petitioner who was working as Chemist Grade-I was appointed as Chief Chemist on ad hoc basis by office order dated 16 June, 1989.
He was told by that order that the appointment was for a period up to 31 March 1990 or till such time the post was filled up on regular basis whichever was earlier.
Petitioner is still continuing in the post of Chief Chemist though on ad hoc basis.
He has filed this petition that since he has been working on this post of Chief Chemist on ad hoc basis continuously since then the when the normal period of probation was only two years he should be regularised on this post and respondent be restrained from appointing anyone else to the post of Chief Chemist.
This petition was filed on 22 October, 1992 and by order dated 6 November 1992 a restraint was put on the revision of the petitioner from his present post.
2.
In answer to show-cause notice on the writ petition the respondent has submitted its reply.
An application under Order 1, Rule 10 and section 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure has also been filed by Mr. Tripurari Sharma who says he has since been selected to the post of Chief Chemist and wanted to be impleaded as a respondent as the stay was operating against his interest.
There are statutory rules for appointment to the post of the Chief Chemist.
Method of recruitment is by promotion, transfer on deputation failing which by direct recruitment.
In the case of recruitment by promotion/deputation/transfer it is doned from the officers under the Central/State Govt/Public Sector Undertaking of Electricity Boards holding analogous posts or officers with 2/3 years regular service in the scale prescribed or equivalent respectively and possessing qualifications and experience prescribed for direct recruits.
The departmental Senior Chemist with five years regular service in the grade is also to be considered and if selected for appointment to the post, it was to be treated as having been filled by promotion.
However, selection on each occasion shall be made in consultation with the UPSC There is no dispute that both the petitioner and Mr. Tripurari Sharma are eligible for appointment to the post of Chief Chemist.
Regulations 5 and 12 on which some arguments have been addressed are as under :-  "5.
Whether selection post or non-selection post NA  xx xx xx xx  12.
If a DPC exists, what is its compositions NA"  3.
An advertisement was put in the newspaper by the respondent inviting applications on transfer/deputation basis as per the recruitment rules.
This matter was referred to the UPSC A letter dated 31 August, 1992 was addressed to the petitioner to appear before the UPSC on 18 September, 1992 and it was pointed out that the UPSC had desired to hold personal talk with the candidates on that date.
A.C.Rs.
of the candidates were also sent to the UPSC The petitioner was not selected to the post of Chief Chemist and he has, therefore, to relinquish the charge of this post.
4.
Petitioner has contended that he was appointed to the post of Chief Chemist by regular D.P.C.
and it was neither the non selection nor selection post.
He said when he appeared before the UPSC only one question was asked and there was on regular interview.
We are unable to agree with these submissions.
Respondent has stated that steps were being taken to fill up the post of Chief Chemist as per recruitment regulations and normally the UPSC takes time to select the candidates.
We have seen above, under regulation 12 no D.P.C.
is to be constituted and it was submitted by the respondent that on internal departmental consultation the petitioner was appointed to the post of Chief Chemist purely on ad hoc basis.
He has no right to hold on this post against this statutory regulation.
It was also pointed out that some vigilance case was also pending against the petitioner.
But we are not concerned with that.
The respondent says that after perusal of particulars of the eligible officer and experience along with character rolls, bio-data of eligible officers and holding personal talks with the candidates, the UPSC recommended another departmental candidate for appointment to the post of Chief Chemist in DESU We, therefore, do not find any merit in this petition.
It is dismissed.
Petition dismissed.