VK Jhanji, J - In this writ petition, petitioners who are lecturers, are impugning order dated 1781983 (Annexure P-4) vide which they were reverted to the post of Inspector.
They are also seeking a writ in the nature of mandamus, directing respondents No. 1 and 2 to consider the petitioners for appointment to the post of Assistant Registrar in preference to the Inspectors/Statistical Assistants who are in a lower rank to the petitioners.
2.
In brief, the facts are that petitioners joined as Sub-Inspectors in the Punjab Co-operative Department.
Both the petitioners were appointed and promoted to the post of Inspector on 8.11.1967 and 1551970 respectively.
On 411980, the Registrar, Co-operative Societies, Punjab (respondent No. 2) invited options from all the Inspectors for the post of Lecturers.
Petitioners along with three other persons gave option to be appointed as Lecturers.
The names of said three persons are Babu Singh (respondent No. 3), Avtar Singh Mahli and Sham Singh.
The options of Babu Singh and Avtar Singh Mahli were accepted, but when offered the post, they refused to join as such.
Sham Singh and petitioner No. 1 were appointed as Lecturers vide letter dated 1541980.
Petitioner No. 2 who had also given his option on the basis of letter dated 4.1.1930 (Annexure P-1) was also appointed as Lecturer w.e.f.
1551980.
In November, 1982, options were again invited for the post of Lecturer.
This time, Babu Singh, Hardial Singh and Jasbir Singh, Inspectors, sent their options.
Out of these three, Hardial Singh and Jasbir Singh were appointed to the post of Lecturer.
At the time when the petitioners were appointed as lecturers, the pay scales of the post of Inspector and Lecturer were identical.
This was because of order dated 2231980 vide which these post were given the running pay scale of Rs. 570-1080/- w.e.f.
111978.
According to the petitioners their conditions of service are governed by the rules called the Punjab Co-operative Department (State Service) Class-III, Rules, 1978 (in short 'the Class-III rules').
Under these Class-III rules, the post of Lecturer is to be filled 60% by way of promotion from amongst the Inspectors/Statistical Assistants and remaining 40% by way of direct recruitment.
On the date of enforcement of these rules, post of Lecturer carried the pay scale of Rs. 350-500/- whereas the pay scale of the post of Inspector was Rs. 200-400/-.
Since the pay scales of the post of Inspector and Lecturer were made identical, some of the Lecturers represented to the Government that the post of Lecturer is in higher cadre and under the Class- III rules, the said post is to be filled by way of promotion from amongst the Inspectors.
and for that matter, the action of the Government in bringing the pay scale of the Inspector at par with the Lecturer, is arbitrary.
The representation of the Lecturers was accepted by the Anomaly Committee by an order dated 1821983 and consequently, the pay scale of Lecturers was revised from Rs. 570-1080/- to Rs. 700-1200/- w.e.f.
111978.
Respondent No. 2 again invited options for the post of Lecturer vide letter dated 7.6.1983.
In response to this, four Inspectors namely, Babu Singh (respondent No. 3), JR Bagga (respondent No. 4), Puran Singh and Shakti Sarup, gave their options.
By an order dated 1781983, Babu Singh and JR Bagga, i.e. respondents No. 3 and 4 respectively, were appointed as Lecturers and the petitioners were ordered to be reverted to the Post of Inspector.
Petitioners are impugning the order of their reversion and appointment of respondents No. 3 and 4 to the Post of Lecturer in the present writ petition.
In addition to this, petitioners have also prayed that they were entitled to be considered for further promotion i.e. from the post of Lecturer, a Class-III post, to the post of Assistant Registrar a Class-II post.
3.
In answer to the averments made in the writ petition, Respondents No. 1 and 2 as well as private respondents No. 3 and 4 have filed their written statements.
According to the respondents the pay scales of Lecturers/Inspectors.
Statistical Assistants were identical and, therefore, there was no question of making promotion from one post to another.
According to them, the vacancies used to be filled by inviting options from Inspectors/Statistical Assistants to avoid dislocation as there was no financial benefit to those officials who opted for posting as Lecturer.
They have further stated that before 111978 the pay scale of the post of Lecturer was Rs. 350-500/- and this post used to be filled from the graduate Inspectors on the basis of seniority-cum-merit.
On the basis of recommendation of the Punjab Pay Commission Report, the pay scales of the post of Lecturer and Inspector, Co-operative Societies, were made identical i.e. Rs. 570-1080/- w.e.f.
11 1978 by the Finance Department.
Since the pay scales of both these posts were the same, the vacancies of Lecturers were filled by inviting options.
The Finance Department vide letter dated 1821983 revised the pays scale of Lecturers from Rs. 570-1080/- to Rs. 700-1200/- w.e.f.
111978 and, thus on the basis of seniority-cum-merit, respondents No. 3 and 4 were appointed as Lecturers in the pay scale of Rs. 700-1200/- withdrawing petitioners from the post of Lecturer, being very junior to respondents No. 3 and 4.
In regard to the claim of the petitioners for further promotion as Assistant Registrar, the respondents have stated that the post of the petitioners, i.e.
Lecturer, did not involve any promotion and, therefore, they were not entitled to be considered for promotion as Assistant Registrar.
4.
At the time of motion hearing, reversion of the petitioners was stayed.
Learned counsel for the parties at the time of hearing of the writ petition stated that petitioners now stand retired from service.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioners contended that petitioners after giving their options, were promoted to the post of Lecturer.
According to him, the persons, who were senior to the petitioners, when refused to give options, became disentitled to the post of Lecturer at any subsequent time.
He also contended that promotion to the post of Assistant Registrar is governed by the Punjab State Co-operative Service, Class-II, Rules, 1958, according to which recruitment to the post of Assistant Registrar is by way of direct recruitment or by transfer of a person already in service of the State.
His precise contention was that the petitioners who were Lecturers, were to be considered first for the post of Assistant Registrar in preference to the Inspectors.
6.
In reply, learned counsel for the respondents contended that petitioners being juniors were not entitled to be appointed/promoted to the post of Lecturer.
7.
In order to appreciate the respective contentions, it is necessary to notice the relevant rules applicable to the appointment to the post of Lecturer.
Rule (1) of Class-III rules provides as under :-  "9.
(1) Appointment to the posts in service shall be made in the manner indicated below :  (a) In the case of lecturers -  40% of the posts by direct recruitment  60% of posts by promotion from amongst Inspectors and Statistical Assistants who are at least graduates of a recognised University, and have an experience of working on either or both the posts of Inspectors and Statistical Assistants for a minimum period of four years."
As per admitted case of the parties, before 111978 the pay scale of the post of Lecturers was Rs. 350-500/- and this post used to be filled from amongst the graduate Inspectors on the basis of seniority-cum-merit.
Vide order dated 2221980, the pay scales of Lecturers and Inspectors/Statistical Assistants were made identical w.e.f.
111978.
This resulted in confusion as the pay scales of both these posts were made equal, and it was for that reason that instead of filling up these vacancies by way of promotion from amongst the Inspectors on the basis of seniority-cum-merit, options were invited for appointment to the post of Lecturer.
According to the respondents, common seniority list of these two posts was being maintained.
This was due to the fact that the pay scales of Lecturers and Inspectors were identical.
The resultant effect was that during the period when the grades were identical, the post of Lecturer was taken to be equivalent to the post of Inspector, and vacancies of Lecturers were filled by inviting options.
It was only on 1821983 when the pay scale of Lecturers was revised from Rs. 570-1080/- to Rs. 700-1200/-.
The persons senior to the petitioners were promoted on the basis of seniority-cum-merit and as a result of that, petitioners were reverted.
In the seniority list of Inspectors, the names of petitioners figured at serial Nos. 236 and 359 respectively, whereas the names of respondents No. 3 and 4 figured at serial Nos. 117 and 118 respectively.
Therefore, the petitioners being junior to respondents No. 3 and 4 cannot make a grievance that the action of respondents Nos. 1 and 2 was arbitrary or violative of Article 16 of the Constitution of India.
Now the question arises as to whether there was any justification to revert the petitioners when they had been promoted and appointed as Lecturers and were holding the said post for more than three years.
The answer is in negative.
Petitioners were promoted on the basis of options so invited.
Nobody else had opted except the petitioners at that time.
It is true that the pay scales of both these posts were identical and the post of Lecturer was not taken to be promotional post, but nevertheless the petitioners held the post for more than three years on regular basis and thus, could not be reverted from the said post without affording of any opportunity of hearing to them.
The other contention that the petitioner were entitled to be promoted as Assistant Registrar, cannot be accepted because promotion to the post of Assistant Registrar is made on the basis of seniority-cum-merit and the petitioners being junior to the persons appointed as Assistant Registrar were not entitled to be considered as such.
Consequently, the writ petition is allowed to the extent that part of Annexure P-4, vide which the petitioners were reverted is quashed and the other part, vide which respondents No. 3 and 4 were promoted as Lecturers, is maintained.
No order as to costs.