RS Mongia, J - The petitioner was appointed as a store-keeper in the Haryana State Small Industries and Export Corporation (hereinafter called the 'Corporation') vide letter dated 761983.
He became a permanent store-keeper in the said-Corporation with effect from 141985 services of all the employees of that wing in the Corporation where the petitioner was working were transferred to the various District Rural Development Agencies (herein-after called the 'DRDA') in the State of Haryana.
The petitioner's services were placed at the disposal of DRDA Gurgaon.
His services were terminated w.e.f.
5121986 on the ground that he had become surplus at Gurgaon.
It is this order (Copy Annexure P13) of termination of his services that has been challenged in the present writ petition.
2.
In para 12 of the writ petition, it has been averred as under :  "That the petitioner was appointed with respondent No. 1 vide his appointment letter dated 761983 (Annexure P-1) and then his services were transferred to respondent No. 3 with effect from 141985.
There are many posts of Store-Keeper vacant in the offices of D.R.D.As in different districts.
Respondent No. 3 cannot be permitted to dispense with the services of the petitioner who is a permanent employee and employ fresh hands through Employment Exchange against the said post of Store-keeper.
In the offices of respondent No. 3 there is one post of Store-Keeper against which one Sh. Lal Singh, Clerk, has been given additional charge.
More Sarda Rani, Dharam Pal, Manohar Lal, Kamal Singh and Satish all clerks who have been recruited from Employment Exchange and are ad hoc only.
The services of these clerks are hardly 6 months to two years.
They are temporary.
The petitioner at least could have been accommodated against any of these posts instead of throwing him on the road.
Especially when he has become overage."
The reply filed on behalf of respondent No. 3 i.e. Additional Deputy Commissioner-cum-Chief Executive Officer, Rural Development Agency, Gurgaon is as under :  "Para 12 of the writ petition as alleged is incorrect and the same is denied.
As submitted above that neither there was nor there is any sanctioned post of Store-Keeper in the pay scale of Rs. 525-1950/-.
As regards the posting of Sh. Lal Chand, Clerk, who has been given the additional charge of Store-Keeper, it is submitted that Sh. Lal Chand was promoted to the post of Clerk from the post of peon w.e.f.
19.2.1979 in the pay scale of Rs. 400- 660/-.
In this connection it is respectfully submitted that he is simply discharging the duties of Store-keeper apart from the duties of Diary, Despatch Clerk, which is his basic post.
As regards the posting Smt. Sharda etc. it is respectfully submitted that these are all clerks in the pay scale of Rs.
400-660."
3.
The learned counsel for the petitioner on the basis of the above mentioned averments submitted that there were/are many posts of Storekeeper lying vacant in the various other offices of DRDA in the State of Haryana and even if the post of Store-keeper had become surplus at Gurgaon the petitioner could have been adjusted in some other district in the office of DRDA According to the learned counsel for the petitioner it has been admitted that against a post of Storekeeper in the office of respondent No. 3 Shri Lal Singh was doing the work in addition to his own duties as a clerk.
It was also submitted that the petitioner could be offered a lower post of clerk for which the petitioner was qualified and against those posts ad hoc appointees were continuing.
Learned counsel for the petitioner went on to submit that respondent DRDA is an Industry under the Industrial Disputes Act (for short, the Act) and there is no denial of the fact that while terminating the services of the petitioner, the provisions of Section 25-F of the Act were not complied with.
4.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondents submitted that the petitioner could not claim as a matter of right the post of Storekeeper in any other district nor could he claim adjustment against a post of a Clerk (a post in the lower rank than the Store-keeper).
5.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties I am of the view that the respondents should have viewed the whole matter more rationally and sympathetically.
The staff of the Corporation was transferred to DRDA It was just a matter of chance that the petitioner was adjusted at Gurgaon.
After the post of Storekeeper at Gurgaon had become surplus, the respondents should have tried to adjust the petitioner against the post of Store-keeper in any other branch of DRDA if such a post was vacant.
In any case, the petitioner should have been considered for adjustment/absorption against the post of clerk for which post, according to the petitioner, he was is fully qualified especially when ad hoc appointees were working against such posts.
Technically the petitioner is also right that while retrenching him provisions of Section 25-F of the Act, should have been complied with and if this contention is accepted then the petitioner is liable to be reinstated with full back wages on this short score alone.
I do not wish to go into this technical point of violation of Section 25-F of the Act.
However, I am of the view that the petitioner was liable to be adjusted on some equivalent post at Gurgaon or on a post of Store-keeper in any other branch of DRDA and in any case, if this was not possible, he should have been considered for absorption against the lower post of a clerk or any other equivalent post against which ad hoc appointees were working.
6.
Consequently, this writ petition is allowed and the impugned order dated 5121986 (Annexure P13 is set aside.
The respondents are directed to consider the case of the petitioner for absorption/adjustment against a post of storekeeper (if any is lying vacant in any other branch of DRDA in other districts).
If this is not possible for any justifiable reasons then the petitioner's case may be considered for absorption against any other equivalent post of storekeeper if lying vacant or being held by an ad hoc appointee, for which he may have the requisite qualifications.
Failing above, the petitioner's case may be considered for absorption as a Clerk or any other equivalent post to the post of clerk for which he may be duly qualified provided any such posts are vacant or any ad hoc appointees are continuing against such posts.
It may be made clear that on his appointment/absorption, as mentioned above, the petitioner would not be entitled to any back wages but the period between termination and absorption/reinstatement may be treated for the purpose of continuity in service.
Let the directions be carried out within three months from the receipt of the copy of this order.
There will be no order as to costs.