VK Jhanji, J - In this writ petition, the petitioner is seeking a writ in the Nature of Mandamus, directing respondent No. 2, Chief of Army Staff, to release the pay of the rank of acting Major w.e.f.
931990 to 18121990, along with consequential benefits in DA, A.DA, gratuity etc.  2.
In brief, the facts are that on 931983 petitioner was commissioned in the Army.
On completion of three years of service, he was promoted to rank of Captain on 931988.
At the time when he was promoted as Captain, he was serving as Deputy Assistant Judge Advocate General at headquarters Northern Command.
He was promoted to the rank of Acting Major on 931990 and was posted to the office of the Deputy Judge Advocate General, headquarters, Western Command, Chandi Mandir (Haryana).
When the petitioner was promoted to the rank of acting Major, one Captain V Chitravanshi was also promoted to the acting rank of Major.
Thereafter, within next few months, Major MM Sood, Major NK Sharma, Major Balasubramaniam, Major CK Aggarwal, Major Rakesh, Major Gursharan Singh and Major Rajiv Mehrotra, all course mates of the petitioner, were promoted to the rank of acting Major w.e.f.
931990, i.e. the date on which the petitioner was promoted.
Petitioner, on his own request, was prematurely released from service on 18121990.
According to the petitioner, all those persons who were promoted to the rank of Acting Major along with the petitioner, had been paid the pay for the rank of Acting Major, but the petitioner has been denied the pay of the rank of Acting Major.
Even the gratuity paid to him on account of his premature release from service at his own request has been calculated and disbursed to him on the basis of his pay in the rank of Captain.
Another grievance of the petitioner is that when he was released from service, he was posted at Pune Headquarters Southern Command, Petitioner's home station is at Chandigarh and on his release from service, he was entitled to have transfer grant on permanent move from Pune to Chandigarh and also for costs of warrant for his wife who joined him at his place of duty i.e. Pune.
The petitioner has also averred that though he represented even regarding these claims, but even these have not been decided till today.
He was appended one of the representations as Annexure P-4 to the writ petition.
Petitioner, thus, claims that action of the respondents in not granting him the pay of the rank of Acting Major w.e.f.
931990 to 18121990 when he was prematurely released from service at his own request and in not paying him the allowances and gratuity on the basis of his pay in the acting rank of Major, and in not allowing compensation for permanent transfer move as also for his wife travel is illegal and unconstitutional, on the ground that he performed the duties of Major and, thus, is entitled to the pay of the said rank and all consequential benefits.
This action is also stated to be violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India, being highly discriminatory as the various persons who joined the Army in the Judge Advocate General department along with the petitioner, have been granted the pay and allowances of acting rank pay given to them.
3.
Respondents in their written statement have stated that the petitioner was not entitled to pay rank of acting Major because of his having put in less than six years of service.
For this, they relied upon the instructions issued by the Government from time to time.
According to the respondents, the gratuity paid to the petitioner was on the basis of pay of the rank of Captain.
As regards promotion to the rank of acting Major of the persons along with the petitioner, the respondents have stated that Captain V Chitravanshi, Major MM Sood and Major Rakesh were granted rank of acting Major before six years of service, but since they were found not entitled for acting promotion, the over payment in their cases was got recovered from them.
The averments of the petitioner regarding other persons were not commented upon by the respondents as their place of posting was not known or not given in the writ petition.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner contended that the petitioner once promoted to the acting rank of Major is entitled to the pay and consequential benefits admissible to such rank.
He also contended that at the time of release from service, petitioner was entitled to receive compensation on account of permanent transfer.
5.
In reply, learned counsel for the respondents contended that petitioner was not entitled to be promoted as acting Major because he had not put in six years of service which is required under the Army instructions.
6.
As per admitted case of the parties and as laid down in para 2(i) of Army Instructions No. 78/55, for promotion to the acting rank of Major, six years of minimum service is required.
The limit of six years was reflaxed to five years w.e.f.
171969, vide circular dated 2971969 issued by the Government of India.
While relaxing this limit, it was also laid down that an officer promoted as acting Major in the 6th year of his service will, however, receive pay during that year of service as admissible in accordance with para 3 of that letter, which provided that a person holding acting rank one step higher than his substantive rank, would get pay equivalent to the substantive rank plus an acting rank pay of Rs. 50/- per month.
From the 7th year of his service, a person was entitled to pay of the rank as given in Army instructions No. 4/S/65.
In case circular letter dated 2971969 had been in force, petitioner was entitled to be promoted to the rank of acting Major in relaxation of the limit.
However, this letter vide which Army Instructions No. 78/55 had been amended, was superseded by Special Army Instructions No. 1 dated 911974, meaning thereby that relexation which had been given under circular dated 19.7.1969 stood withdrawn w.e.f.
911974.
Petitioner, thus, was not entitled to be promoted as acting Major on the date he was promoted as such because the minimum service required for being promoted as acting Major was six years, which admittedly the petitioner did not possess at the time of promotion.
7.
Now the question arises as to whether the petitioner is entitled to receive pay of the rank of acting Major with effect from the date he was promoted as such till the date he was pre-maturely released from service.
The answer is in the affirmative.
One the petitioner, though not eligible, was promoted to the rank of acting Major and continued to function as such, would certainly be entitled to the pay and all consequential benefits admissible under para 3(a) of Army Instructions No. 3/S/62.
In addition to the pay and allowances, petitioner is also claiming that consequent upon his release from service, he was entitled to transfer grant on permanent move from Pune to Chandigarh, and also costs of warrant for his wife who joined him at his place of posting i.e. at Pune.
In answer to this the respondents have stated that final TA/DA claim of the petitioner, has already been admitted in audit for Rs. 4470/- and a cheque bearing No. 867046 dated 1291991 has been issued to his bankers, and in regard to the claim regarding cost of warrant of the wife of the petitioner, the same has also been admitted for Rs. 1014/- and a cheque bearing No. 877826 dated 5121991 has beenn issued to his bankers.
Therefore, this claim of the petitioner stands satisfied.
Another claim was set up by the petitioner for the first time in his replication, i.e. re transportation charges from Pune to Chandigarh on account of transportation of luggage.
As this claim was never set up by the petitioner in the writ petition, I am not prepared to go into this matter.
If the petitioner still feels that he is entitled to such charges he can make an appropriate representation to the Authorities who shall decide the same in accordance with law.
Consequently, the writ petition is allowed and the respondents are directed to release the pay and all consequential benefits, if any, to the petitioner admissible to an acting rank of Major under Army instructions No. 3/S/62.
However, there shall be no order as to costs.