HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner passed his 10 + 2 examination from the Haryana School Education Board in March, 1993.
A Common Engineering Entrance Test (CEET) was conducted by the Regional Engineering College, Kurukshetra, for admission to Chhotu Ram State College of Engineering, Murthal, Sonepat, Haryana, Engineering College, Hissar and Regional Engineering College.
In the information brochure issued by respondent No. 1 alongwith the Application Form seeking admission to sit in the CEET, the candidates were required to indicate the category under which they were seeking admission i.e. General Category, Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, Backward Classes and Sportsmen etc. etc.
The last date for submission of the applications was March 31, 1993 and the petitioner applied in the reserved category of sportsman, duly appeared for the test held on May 23, 1993 and the result whereof was declared in July, 1993.
It is the case of the petitioner that after having successfully cleared CEET, he applied to the Regional Engineering College, Kurukshetra for admission vide application Annexure P-2, annexured to the petition.
In this application, it was again specifically stated that the category must be indicated in the Application Form, itself, but was denied admission, whereas according to the petitioner, Vivek Bhandari, respondent No. 3 who had not indicated that he was applying under the sportsman category had been granted admission instead.
2.
Mr. Surya Kant, learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that as para 3 of the General Rules for the CEET published in the information brochure, it was specifically provided that incomplete applications and the applications received late would not be entertained and that respondent No. 3 who had not applied under the sportsman category in the Application Form submitted when he sought admission after having passed the CEET, could not be granted admission as such.
Respondent No. 3 has not put in appearance despite service, but a reply has been filed by the Director-Principal, Chhotu Ram, State College of Engineering Murthal (Sonepat)-respondent No. 2.
In.
the reply, it has been admitted that respondent No. 3 did not appear in the reserved category of sportsman candidate in the CEET and even the Application Form which he filed in the college, did not indicate to that effect.
It has however, been submitted that as the Sports Gradation Certificate was produced before July 23, 1993, which was the last date for the submission of applications, the respondent had been rightly entertained as a Sports category candidate.
3.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and find merit in the case of the petitioner.
In the information brochure which was made available to each candidate as the Application Form for admission to the Institution, was appended thereto, it had been specifically mentioned that incomplete applications and the applications received late would not be entertained.
I am, therefore, of the view that once respondent No. 3 had not sought admission as a sports category candidate, he could not subsequently be admitted as the Application Form which he filed, did not indicate the category.
4.
The stand of the respondent No. 2 that respondent No. 3 had been allowed to produce his sports gradation Certificate before July 23, 1993, which was the last date for submission of Application Forms, would not be relevant as the form itself did not indicate that the said respondent was seeking admission under that category.
It is also significant that respondent No. 3 did not even indicate his candidature as a sports category candidate in the Result Card which was of his CEET  5.
The question now arises is as to the relief to be given to the petitioner.
It is the admitted case that respondent No. 3 Vivek Bhandari, has a higher merit than the petitioner and as such, I would be hesitant to quash his selection.
It is also conceded before me by Mr. Surya Kant, that there were certain other candidates in the sports category who secured higher marks than the petitioner in the CEET In this situation, the ends of justice require that the case of the petitioner for admission to the course under the Sports category may also be considered but only after the candidates higher in merits have been given the option to join that course.
A direction is, therefore, issued to respondent No. 2 to inform the candidates in the sports category, who are higher in merit than the petitioner that a seat is available for admission to the course in question and in case they do not come forward, then the petitioner will be granted admission on his own merit.
The entire exercise will be completed within a period of three weeks from today.
The writ petition is disposed of in the above terms.