VK Jhanji, J - The grievance of the petitioner who is a Ferro Printer is that he has not been given the same pay scale as given to the Ferro Printers working in the office of Chief Architect, Town and Country Planning and P.W.D.
(B&R) departments of the State of Punjab though the post in all these departments carries the same function and responsibility.
2.
In brief, the facts are that the petitioner who joined the office of Chief Engineer, Public Health as Peon was promoted and confirmed against the post of Ferro Printer in the pay scale of Rs. 300-430 with effect from 1978.
Subsequently the scale of pay was revised to Rs. 400-660.
Punjab Government has now revised the pay scale of Ferro Printers in the office of Chief Architect, Town and Country Planning, PWD (B&R) to Rs. 950-1800 with effect from January 1, 1986.
The grievance of the petitioner is that though he is discharging the same function and responsibility, yet he is not being given the same scale.
In reply, respondents have admitted that the post of Ferro Printer in Public Health and Chief Architect carries same function and responsibility.
According to them the case of the petitioner was not considered because he is under matriculate.
In my view, petitioner cannot be denied the same pay scale as given to the Ferro Printers in other departments of the Punjab Government merely on the ground that he is not matriculate particularly when he is discharging the same function and responsibility.
Nothing has been brought on record to show that Ferro Printers working in other departments of the State of Punjab are matriculates or more.
3.
In this view of the matter, the petitioner is entitled to the same pay scale which was granted to Ferro Printers working in the office of Chief Architect, Town and Country Planning and P.W.D.
(B&R) departments.
Consequently, this writ petition is allowed and the respondents are directed to grant pay scale of Rs. 950-1800 to the petitioner with effect from 111986 when the same was revised.
No costs.