RS Mongia, J - The petitioner, Dr. Tejpal Singh, joined the Bachelor of Dental Surgery Course (in short " the B.D.S.")
in Mysore in the year 1969 and appeared for the B.D.S.
Part I examination held by the University of Mysore in the year 1970.
He passed the same obtaining 250 marks out of 488.
Therefore, he shifted to the Government Dental College, Patiala, and passed the B.D.S.
Parts II, III and IV from the Punjabi University, Patiala, and got the degree in May, 1974.
Thereafter, he completed the house job.
He was appointed as a Demonstrator through the Punjab Public Service Commission and he joined as such the Dental College, Patiala on 211976.
2.
While in service the petitioner applied for admission to the MDS Course in the Dental College, Amritsar, for the session 1977-78.
By this time he had acquired one years's experience as Demonstrator in the Dental College, Patiala.
The petitioner was eligible to apply for admission to the MDS Course under the eligibility clause which provides that a candidate must be a teacher in a recognised Dental College, who had been recruited on regular basis and must have held such an appointment atleast for a continuous period on one year.
It may further be observed that there are certain other categories of eligible candidates who can apply for admission to the MDS Course.
It has further been provided in the University Calendar that from amongst the various eligible categories the first preference shall be given to those having one year's teaching experience in a Dental College and holding regular appointment.
The petitioner had submitted attested copies of the certificates in proof of having passed B.D.S.
Part I to B.D.S.
Part IV examination.
The petitioner passed the MDS Course in the year 1979.
3.
Somewhere in the year 1980 a complaint was made that the petitioner had obtained admission in the MDS Course in the Session 1977-78 by producing a forged attested copy of the B.D.S.
Part I certificate of the Mysore University in which it had been shown that he had obtained 290 marks out of 488 instead of 250 marks.
The complaint was forwarded to the Director, Vigilance, Punjab, and later on the petitioner was charge-sheeted on 691982.
The charge reads as under :-  "Dr Tejpal Singh passed his first year B.D.S.
examination in the year 1970 from Manipal Dental College, Manipal, of Mysore University securing 250 marks out of 488 marks, as mentioned in the certificate issued to him by the University vide Sr. No. 24, Book No. 1.
He got admission in two years course of MDS (oral surgery) in the session 1977-78 in Medical College, Amritsar by intentionally and dishonestly producing a forged copy of the certificate of B.D.S.
(First Year), attested by his father Dr. Isher Singh, Principal of Dental College, Amritsar, wherein actual marks obtained by him were falsely shown as 290 marks, which tantamounts to grave misconduct on his part."
4.
The reply of the petitioner to the charge sheet was that he had never obtained admission by submitting any forged certificate and, in fact, the complaint seemed to have been made by the brother of one Dr. Ashok Vasudeva, who nursed a grievance against the petitioner.
It may be observed here that along with the complaint a photostat copy of the attested copy of the certificate alleged to have been furnished by the petitioner was attached by the complainant.
Further, it was the case of the petitioner that by submitting a forged certificate of B.D.S.
Part I by showing having obtained 290 marks instead of 250 marks the petitioner was not to gain anything as he was the only candidate in the first preference category and he was bound to get admission whether he had got 250 marks or 290 marks in the B.D.S.
Part I.
5.
After recording the evidence, the Enquiry Officer returned a finding that the charge that the petitioner had obtained admission in the MDS Course on the basis of a forged attested copy of B.D.S.
Part I certificate was not proved inasmuch as whether the petitioner had obtained 250 marks or 290 marks in B.D.S.
Part I, did not really matter.
Further, he returned a finding that, in fact, a forged attested copy of the certificate was submitted by the petitioner.
The enquiry report was submitted somewhere in the year 1985.
6.
The Government agreed with the enquiry report and as a result of the findings of the Enquiry Officer it was tentatively decided that the punishment of compulsory retirement be imposed on the petitioner.
The case was sent to the Punjab Public Service Commission for its advice.
The Commission did not agree with the proposal of the Government and raised certain queries which were replied to by the Government and the Commission was requested to reconsider its earlier advice.
However, the Commission again did not agree with the proposal of the Government.
The advice of the Punjab Public Service Commission was placed before the Council of Ministers for taking a decision as to whether the advice of the Commission might be ignored.
It was decided to ignore the advice of the Commission as, according to the Government, the case against the petitioner stood fully proved on the basis of the circumstantial evidence.
Accordingly, the petitioner was compulsorily retired vide order dated 13.7.1992 of the Government, a copy of which has been appended as Annexure P.8.
This order has been impugned in the present writ petition.
Just to complete the narration of facts, it may be observed that the petitioner on the basis of his having passed the MDS examination and having got the requisite experience was promoted for a period of 6 months as Assistant Professor vide order dated 23.4.1986.
However, the promotion was temporary and subject to the outcome of the enquiry.
This promotion was extended for a further period of six months or till the approval of the Punjab Public Service Commission was obtained.
7.
The learned counsel for the petitioner argued that the Enquiry Officer has held that the charge of obtaining admission on the basis of a forged attested copy of a certificate has not been proved which was in fact the charge against the petitioner.
According to the learned counsel the Enquiry Officer could not go beyond the charge sheet to hold that the petitioner had in fact submitted a forged certificate.
He went on to submit that even the finding that the petitioner had submitted a forged attested copy of the certificate is based on no evidence.
This finding has been recorded on mere conjectures and surmises.
The learned counsel submitted that no misconduct can be said to have been proved against the petitioner.
It was also argued by the learned counsel that the admission to the MDS Course was taken in year 1977; the complaint was made sometime in the year 1980; the chargesheet was served in the year 1982; the enquiry was completed in the year 1985, and the punishment was awarded in the year 1992.
During this period the petitioner also earned promotion to the rank of Assistant Professor in the year 1986.
It was submitted that no punishment should be awarded after a lapse of such a long period especially when the petition had not obtaining any advantage of the alleged forged certificate.
The petitioner, according to the learned counsel, had not usurped anybody's right for admission and he was admitted on the basis that he fell in the "first preference" category and was granted admission not on the basis of any merit in the B.D.S.
Part I but on the basis of just passing the B.D.S.
Course and having rendered one year's Government service.
It was highlighted that the Punjab Public Service Commission had twice refused to agree with the proposal of the Government to impose punishment of premature retirement on the petitioner as there was no evidence to return a finding of guilt against the petitioner.
8.
The learned counsel for the respondents, however, submitted that for proving the charge as to whether the petitioner had obtained admission on the basis of a forged certificate or not, necessarily a finding had to be recorded as to whether the petitioner had submitted a forged certificate or not.
The petitioner may not have has any advantage by submitting a forged certificate as he would have otherwise got admission but the fact remains that the petitioner, according to the finding of the Enquiry Officer, had submitted a forged certificate with an intention to get admission in the MDS Course, though, as the facts turned out later on, it may not had been necessary for the petitioner to submit any forged certificate.
According to the learned counsel, there was sufficient circumstantial evidence to record a finding that the petitioner had submitted a forged certificate and accordingly the petitioner deserved the punishment that has been awarded.
It was also submitted that the complaint was made in the year 1980 and after the preliminary enquiry the petitioner was charge sheeted in the year 1982 and it does not matter if the ultimate decision was taken in the year 1992 on the basis of the Enquiry Report submitted in the year 1985, as it took quite sometime in correspondence with the Punjab Public Service Commission during the years 1985 to 1992.
9.
Substantiating his submission, the learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that at the time the petitioner applied for admission to the MDS Course the cadre of Demonstrators consisted of only 13 persons who could have possible applied for admission to the MDS Course.
Out of these 13 candidates, 4 had already done the MDS Course, 5 had been admitted to the said Course in the year 1976 and the other had not completed one year's service by the year 1977 and under the 'first preference' category it was only the petitioner who was eligible.
Therefore, the question of submitting any forged certificate of B.D.S.
Part I did not arise as even by showing 250 marks in the B.D.S.
Part I certificate the petitioner would have got admission in the MDS Course and there was no need of tampering with the certificate to show that the petitioner had obtained 290 marks.
According to the learned counsel, the complainant had no access to the Government file and it is not understood as to from where a photo copy of the alleged forged certificate was obtained by the complainant.
It is quite possible that the signatures of the attesting authority were also photo-copied from some other document to show that was the photocopy of the certificate alleged to have been submitted by the petitioner.
The original copy of the certificate of which the photocopy was produced by the complainant has not been traced on the file.
The learned counsel submitted that the complainant must have removed that certificate.
The difference in the format of the original certificate and the photo-copy of the one produced by the complainant was also highlighted.
The learned counsel submitted that the petitioner could not have risked filing a forged certificate inasmuch as the attested copies of the certificate inasmuch as the attested copies of the certificate were already there in the service record of the petitioner showing 250 marks in the B.D.S.
Part I and further at the time of submitting fees for admission to the MDS Course the original certificates were required to be shown and were actually shown.
10.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that this petition deserves to be allowed.
It is not disputed that the petitioner had not really obtained admission on the basis of the alleged forged certificate.
Even if the certificate had shown 250 marks in the B.D.S.
Part I certificate the petitioner would have got admission as he was the only candidate in the 'first preference' category.
I do not agree with the petitioner's counsel that the Enquiry Officer has travelled beyond the charge sheet.
For finding whether the petitioner had obtained admission on the basis of a forged certificate, it had to be found out whether in fact a forged certificate was submitted by the petitioner.
However, I find that there is no evidence on the record to show that the petitioner had submitted a forged certificate.
The alleged forged attested copy of the certificate has not come on the record of the Enquiry Officer.
It is not known from where the complainant got a copy of the alleged forged certificate and where the original attested copy of the certificate has vanished.
Apart from that, on the facts of this case, I find that the petitioner could very well know that he was bound to get admission inasmuch as out of the 13 candidates eligible in the 'first preference' category he was the only one eligible in that category and could not be refused admission.
The petitioner has alleged that the complaint was made at the instance of one Dr. Ashok Vasudeva who nursed some grievance against him.
I am not going into these allegations but I am of the opinion that there is no evidence on the record to return a finding that the petitioner had submitted a forged copy of the certificate.
11.
The petitioner had got admission to the MDS Course without usurping anybody's right.
He has passed the MDS examination after getting qualifying marks.
On that basis he was also promoted in the year 1986.
The Punjab Public Service Commission did not twice agree with the proposal of the Government to compulsorily retire the petitioner.
Further, it cannot be lost sight of that the alleged incident is said to have taken place in the year 1977.
The complaint was made after the petitioner had passed the MDS examination; the enquiry finished in the year 1985; and the punishment was awarded in the year 1992.
It will be too much to punish a person for the alleged misconduct after a period of 15 years especially when in the meantime the person has got promotion on the basis of having passed the examination in which it is alleged that he obtained admission by submitting a forged certificate (However, in the present case, as noticed above, the petitioner did not get admission on the basis of the alleged forged certificate).
12.
For the foregoing reasons, this writ petition is allowed and the order dated July 13, 1992 (Annexure P.8) compulsorily retiring the petitioner is hereby quashed.
Resultantly, the petitioner be deemed to have remained in service throughout and is entitled to all consequential benefits.
I make no order as to costs.