R S Mongia, J - This judgment will dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 6911 of 1991 and 7877 of 1992.
The facts leading to filing of these petitions are in a very narrow compass and are almost identical.
For facility of reference, the facts of Civil Writ Petition No. 6911 of 1991, Zile Singh v. The State of Haryana, 1992(1) SCT 614 (P&H) are being adverted to.
2.
Petitioner, Zile Singh, was initially appointed as a Lecturer in English in H.E.S.
Class II, college cadre, on the recommendations of the Haryana Public Service Commission with effect from 191982.
His appointment was against a permanent post and at the time of his appointment, the pay scale of the post was Rs. 700-1600, which was subsequently revised to Rs. 2200-4000 with effect from 111986.
3.
Petitioner continued working on the said post and in the year 1987 be competed a post in the H.C.S.
(Executive Branch) and Allied Services.
The petitioner was selected for the post of Excise and Taxation Officer by the Haryana Public Service Commission and was appointed as such, on 24th March, 1989.
The pay scale of the said post was Rs. 2000-3500.
At the time of joining the post of Excise and Taxation Officer, the petitioner was drawing a basic pay of Rs. 2650/- per month as a Lecturer in English in H.E.S.
Class II.
The pay of petitioner as Excise and Taxation Officer was fixed by the respondents at minimum of the scale at Rs. 2000/- per month.
The petitioner filed the present Writ Petition for protection and fixation of his pay as Excise and Taxation Officer under Rule 4.5-A and Rule 44 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume I Part I, as applicable to State of Haryana which regulate the fixation of initial pay for appointment on a new post.
Rule 4.5-A and Rule 44(a) (i) are in the following terms :-  "4.5-A(1) : Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules, the following provisions shall govern the pay of a Government employee who is appointed as a probationer in another Service or cadre, and subsequently confirmed in that Service or cadre :-  (a) during the period of probation he shall draw pay at the minimum of time-scale or at the probationary stages of the time-scale of the service or post as the case may be.
Provided that if the presumptive pay of the permanent post, other than a tenure post, on which he holds a lien or would hold a lien had his lien not been suspended, should at any time be greater than the pay fixed under this clause, he shall draw the presumptive pay of the permanent post;  (b) on confirmation in the service or post after the expiry of the period of probation, the pay of the Government employee shall be fixed in the time-scale of the Service or post in accordance with the provisions of Rule 44.
"44 :- The initial substantive pay of a Government employee who is appointed substantively to a post on a time-scale of pay is regulated as follows :-  (a) If he holds a lien on a permanent post, other than a tenure post, or would hold a lien on such a post had his lien not been suspended.
(i) when appointment to the new post involves the assumption of duties or responsibilities of greater importance (as interpreted for the purposes of Rule 413) than those attaching to such permanent post, he will draw as initial pay the stage of the time-scale next above his substantive pay in respect of the old post."
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that a bare perusal of the above quoted rules makes it abundantly clear that on appointment to a new post, the pay of the incumbent during the period of probation cannot be less than the pay which the incumbent was drawing on his earlier post, on which he holds a lien or would have held a lien.
A specific reference in this regard was made by him to proviso to rule 45-A(1)(a).
He further submitted that after confirmation on the new post, the initial pay has to be fixed at a stage next above the pay drawn by the incumbent on the old post as provided under Rules 44.
(supra).
5.
Learned counsel for the respondents, on the other hand, submitted that under Rule 44 (supra) the incumbent, after confirmation on the new post, is only entitled to fixation of pay at the stage next above the pay drawn by him on the earlier post provided the new post carries duties and responsibilities of greater importance than the post earlier held by the incumbent.
Learned Counsel, however, did not seriously dispute the fixation of pay as claimed by the petitioner prior to confirmation on the new post.
6.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that as far as the question of fixation of pay prior to confirmation is concerned, it is to be governed by proviso to Rule 4.5-A (1) (a).
There is no dispute on the fact that the petitioner - Zile Singh was drawing Rs. 2650/- per month as his basic pay when he was appointed as Excise and Taxation Officer.
According to the proviso, the pay of a probationer, on a new post, has to be the same which he was drawing on his earlier post, where he holds a lien or would have held a lien.
Consequently, I hold that the basic pay of the petitioner during the period of probation as Excise and Taxation Officer could not be less than what he was drawing at that time as a Lecturer in English in H.E.S.
Class-II.
7.
As far as the pay fixation after confirmation is concerned, that is governed by Rule 44, which necessarily depends on a finding to be recorded by the appropriate authority as to whether the new post carries duties and responsibilities of greater importance than the previous post.
There is no material on the record to hold one way or the other.
Under these circumstances, I consider it just and appropriate that the concerned authority should decide this matter as to whether the post presently held by the petitioner carries duties and responsibilities of greater importance than the post earlier hold by him.
In this regard, the petitioners may make necessary representation within one month from today and the appropriate authority would decide the matter after affording an opportunity of hearing to the petitioners, if they so desire.
If any such representation is made within one month from today, the appropriate authority would decide the same within three months thereafter.
8.
Shri Amar Singh Sarot, petitioner in Civil Writ Petition No. 7877 of 1992, has made an additional prayer in the writ petition which is to the effect that his pay as a Lecturer had not been properly fixed, which had effected the fixation of his pay on the post of Excise and Taxation Officer.
The petitioner had been initially appointed as a Lecturer in H.E.S.
Class-II, college cadre, on ad hoc basis in the year 1980 and according to the allegations made in the petition his pay should have been fixed at a higher stage in the year 1988.
I am not going into the merits of this point as, according to me, the relief claimed is highly belated and cannot be granted at this stage.
Consequently, the Writ Petitions are disposed of with the directions that the petitioners' pay prior to confirmation be fixed as indicated above under proviso to Rule 4.5-A (1) (a) and further if any representation is made by the petitioners within one month from today regarding their fixation of pay after their confirmation in the Allied Services, the same shall be decided within three months after receipt of the representation, after affording an opportunity of hearing to the petitioners.
The petitioners shall be paid the arrears, as determined above, within six months from today.
There will be no order as to costs.