V K Bali, J - Lehna Singh, a driver serving in a office of General Manager, Haryana Roadways, Chandigarh, through present petition filed by him under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, seeks issuance of a writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to release his monthly salary w.e.f.
March 11, 1989 to February 1, 1991 as he was reinstated vide orders (Annexures P-1 and P-2) dated January 24, 1991 and February 6, 1991 respectively.
2.
Brief facts on which the relief aforesaid rests, reveal that the petitioner was suspended on March 11, 1989 and a charge-sheet was issued against him on March 21, 1989.
Show cause notice proposing to terminate his service and restricting his pay and allowances during the period of suspension, was issued to him on January 18, 1990.
However, vide order dated August 25, 1989, passed by the Punishing Authority, he was reinstated.
After enquiry when the report was submitted, the matter was considered by the disciplinary authority and vide orders dated February 12, 1990, his services were terminated.
It was also held that he shall not be entitled to any salary during the suspension period.
Aggrieved petitioner preferred an appeal which came up for hearing before the Transport Commissioner, Haryana on January 24, 1991 and it was held that the enquiry was not conducted properly.
Therefore, the Appellate Authority set aside the orders passed by respondent No. 2.
However, it was left upon for the Punishing Authority to proceed afresh in the matter and hold proper enquiry if it was considered necessary.
3.
The cause of petitioner has been opposed and in the written statement filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2, it has been pleaded that the case of petitioner regarding the departmental enquiry even after reinstating him as per the orders passed by the Appellate Authority, is pending before the Enquiry Officer and he cannot seek back wages till the decision of that case.
4.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and going through the records of the case, I am of the considered view that the cause of petitioner deserves to be accepted.
Vide order dated August 25, 1989, the disciplinary authority reinstated the petitioner and ever since he is in service.
The order terminating his services dated February 12, 1990 was admittedly set aside by the Appellate Authority on January 24, 1991 in an appeal carried by the petitioner before the said authority.
The order of terminating his services, in view of the fact that his appeal was accepted, shall be deemed to have not been passed and petitioner shall be deemed to be in service and that being so, he is certainly entitled for wages.
5.
The contention of Mr. Monga, learned Deputy Advocate General, Haryana, that since enquiry is still pending against him and for that reason petitioner is not entitled to back wages, is devoid of merit.
If, after the enquiry is held, the petitioner is found guilty, it shall be open to the respondents to terminate his services but he cannot be denied the pay and other allowances that are admissible to him for the period for which he is deemed to have been in service.
This petition is consequently allowed and a direction is issued to the respondents to pay all his back wages and other allowances from the date of suspension i.e. March 11, 1989 till he was reinstated on January 24, 1991.
If during the aforesaid period, on account of his reinstatement on August 25, 1989, he was paid his full salary, of course, he shall not be entitled to the same.
The petition is allowed in the manner indicated above.
However, there shall be no order as to costs.