G C Garg, J - Petitioners are the employees of the Punjab State Electricity Board (for short 'the Board').
After acquiring qualification of AMIE or degree in Electrical Engineering, they were appointed and selected by the Board against the posts of Junior Engineers-II in April 1982.
Regulation 10(9) of the Punjab State Electricity Board Service of Engineers (Electrical) Regulations, 1965 (for short 'the Regulations') provides qualifications for promotion from amongst the Junior Engineers to the post of Assistant Engineers.
This regulation in terms provides that 9% of the posts of Assistant Engineers are reserved for promotion from amongst the candidates who are graduates in Electrical/Mechanical Engineering/AMIE qualified hands and possess these qualifications at the time of their appointments.
Seven Junior Engineers who were senior to the petitioners, were promoted to the post of Assistant Engineers in October 1986 and April, 1987.
On the promotion of these seven Junior Engineers, the petitioners came at Sr. Nos. 1 to 6, in order of merit for promotion to the post of Assistant Engineers against this category as is evident from Annexures P-2 and P-3.
The case of the petitioners further is that the Board amended regulation No. 2 of the Regulations vide office order dated October 15, 1987 and prescribed a condition of passing of the Departmental Accounts Examination as a pre-requisite for promotion to the post of Assistant Engineer and having regard to this amendment, the Board promoted respondents 2 to 5 to the posts of Assistant Engineers by order dated May 27, 1988, Annexure P-5, who were from the category of the petitioners, and junior to them as is clear from Annexures P-2 and P-3.
The petitioners, aggrieved by the promotion of respondents 2 to 5, filed a representation that the condition of passing of Departmental Accounts Examination could not be imposed in respect of the posts which became available prior to the amendment effected on October 15, 1987.
In order to demonstrate that some posts of Assistant Engineers belonging to the category of petitioners were available to the petitioners, prior to the amendment of the Regulations, they placed on record order Annexure P-7 showing that nine Assistant Engineers belonging to their category were further promoted to the posts of Assistant Executive Engineers.
It is in these circumstances, the petitioners seek issuance of a writ of certiorari quashing promotion of respondents 2 to 5 and of mandamus directing the respondent-Board to promote them to the posts of Assistant Engineers in terms of the unamended Regulations against the posts which were available prior to the date of amendment, with effect from the date, the persons junior to them were promoted.
2.
At the time of motion hearing, it was contended on behalf of the petitioners that vacancies had arisen in October, 1987, prior to the amendment of the rules effected on October 15, 1987, hence the vacancies were to be filled up according to the unamended rules.
Writ petition was admitted and it was ordered that further promotion, if any, will be subject to the result of this writ petition.
3.
None of the respondents has put in appearance despite service.
Even no written statement has been filed on their behalf.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioners on the strength of uncontroverted facts submitted that the posts of Assistant Engineers relating to the quota of Junior Engineers which became available prior to the amendment of the Regulations effected on October 15, 1987, are required to be filled up by ignoring the amendment so made.
Learned counsel further pointed out that on the promotion of nine persons to the post of Assistant Executive Engineers, on October 6, 1987, nine posts of Assistant Engineers of the category of the petitioners became available for promotion from amongst the Junior Engineers under Regulation 10(9) of the Regulations.
These posts were to be filled up from amongst the petitioners by ignoring the amendment of Regulations effected on October 15, 1987, but the Board by overlooking this fact has promoted respondents 2 to 5 illegally and thus, a direction deserves to be issued to the Board to consider the petitioners' claim for promotion against the posts which were available prior to the said amendment.
5.
After hearing learned counsel for the petitioners, I find force in the submission made.
It is by now a settled proposition of law in a plethora of judgments that the posts which occurred prior to the amended rules would be governed by the old rules and not by the amended rules.
Support in that behalf may be had from Y V Rangaiah v. J Sreeniwasa Rao, A.I.R. 1983 SC 852.
In the present case it has been clearly shown by producing order dated October 6, 1987, Annexure P-7 that nine posts of Assistant Engineers were available on the aforesaid date i.e. before the amendment of the Regulations effected on October 15, 1987.
Therefore, as per the settled proposition of law, the respondent-Board was bound to consider the case of the petitioners for promotion in terms of the Regulations existing prior to the amendment.
Even otherwise, facts having not been controverted on behalf of either of the respondents, the facts as set out in the writ petition are to be taken as correct.
The petitioners could not be made ineligible in respect of the posts which were available for promotion before the amendment of the Regulations.
In the position noticed above, a direction is issued to the respondent-Board to consider the claim of the petitioners for promotion against the posts of Assistant Engineers which were available prior to the amendment of Regulations effected on October 15, 1987.
If the posts of Assistant Engineers were indeed available prior to the said date and the petitioners are found entitled to be promoted against such posts, they would be promoted forthwith from the date of persons junior to them were promoted.
While considering the petitioners' claim for promotion against the posts available prior to the amendment of Regulations noticed above, the petitioners would not be ignored for promotion on the ground that they had not passed the Departmental Accounts Examination.
Since the respondents have not put in appearance, there shall be no order as to costs.
The writ petition is allowed in the terms indicated above.