GR Majithia, J - The Punjab State Cooperative Supply and Marketing Federation Ltd, Chandigarh (the MARKFED, for brevity) has challenged the order dated August 6, 1990 passed by the Additional Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Punjab, Chandigarh (Exercising the Powers of the Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Punjab) ordering promotion of Shri Chuni Lal Gupta, respondent No. 1, as Accounts Officer with effect from November 27, 1980, in this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
Facts first :  2.
The Board of Directors of the MARKFED vide Resolution No. 118 dated November 12, 1979, created additional posts, rationalisation of designations/scales of pay of various posts in MARKFED.
One of the posts created was that of Assistant Accounts Officer.
The resolution provided that Accountants 'A' Grade would become entitled for promotion to the post of Assistant Accounts Officer if they passed the written test of prescribed standard.
On June 1, 1983, the Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Punjab, Chandigarh directed the MARKFED to review the decision of the Board of Directors taken vide its Resolution No. 118, dated November 12, 1979.
Consequently, on June 22, 1983, the Board of Directors of the MARKFED decided to abolish the test for the purpose of promotion mentioned in Resolution No. 118.
The resolution dated June 22, 1983 reads thus :-  "Resolved that officials in all cadres will get their original seniority as it stood before the tests were introduced with retrospective effect.
All past and future promotions and consequently reversions, if necessary, will take place accordingly.
In other words, the policy of scrapping the test is to be implemented retrospectively."
Respondent No. 1 Shri Chuni Lal Gupta was promoted as Assistant Accounts Officer vide order contained in Endst.
No. EST/EA-5/18130, dated May 31, 1983.
In the order it was stated that in terms of Resolution No. 5 passed by the Administrative Committee in its meeting held on May 17, 1983, the Senior Accountants/Accountants 'A' Grade were promoted as Assistant Accounts Officers in the pay scale of Rs. 750-1300 with effect from May 17, 1983.
The Board of Directors of the MARKFED vide order dated July 1, 1986 directed that respondent No1 would be deemed to have been promoted as Assistant Accounts Officer with effect from November 27, 1980.
Respondent No. 1 moved a petition before the Registrar, Co-operative Societies, Punjab purporting to be under Rule 19 of the Punjab State Supply and Marketing Cooperative Services (Common Cadre) Rules, 1967 (for short, the Rules) for a direction that he should be deemed to have been promoted as Accounts Officer from the date he was promoted as Assistant Accounts Officer.
The Registrar entrusted the petition to the Additional Registrar, Cooperative Societies for disposal.
The Additional Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Punjab vide impugned order dated August 6, 1990 directed that respondent No. 1 would be entitled to be promoted as Accounts Officer instead of Assistant Accounts Officer with effect from November 28, 1980 and he would also be entitled to consequential benefits arising therefrom.
The Additional Registrar was swayed by one consideration that the post of Assistant Accounts Officer had ceased to exist after the passing of Resolution No. 118 dated November 12, 1979 and Sarvshri Gurcharan Singh and BK Garg, who were similarly situated as the petitioner, were to be promoted as Accounts Officer instead of Assistant Accounts Officer.
Since these two officers were promoted as Accounts Officers, the petitioner should also be promoted as Accounts Officer.
3.
The learned counsel for the MARKFED submitted that there is no provision under the Rules for challenging the order of the Board of Directors before the Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Punjab.
4.
We permitted the counsel for the parties to argue the case on merits.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, we find that the order of the Additional Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Punjab, cannot be sustained.
The promotion of Sarvshri Gurcharan Singh and BK Garg is not valid.
We find no justification for promoting them as Accounts Officers.
These two officers were working as Senior Accountants/Accountants 'A' Grade and they were only eligible for promotion as Assistant Accounts Officer.
It was stated at the Bar that the pay scale permissible for the Accounts Officer and the Assistant Accounts Officer is at par.
At one stage we thought of impleading these two officers as respondents to the writ petition and quash their appointments as Accounts Officer.
However, we did not impleaded them as parties since it was brought to our notice that one of them had retired from service and the other is in service and is likely to retire within two years.
5.
Respondent No. 1 and others were promoted as Assistant Accounts Officers only to give them incentive.
The posts occupied by them were abolished and appear to have up-graded to that of Assistant Accounts Officer.
It is not disputed that the persons senior to the petitioner in the cadre of Senior Accounts/Accountants 'A' Grade have not been promoted as Accounts Officer.
Respondent No. 1 claimed promotion as Accounts Officer ignoring the claim of the officials senior to him.
Sarvshri Gurcharan Singh and BK Garg were senior to the petitioner as Accountants 'A' Grade.
If the appointment of these officials as Accounts Officers is invalid, the petitioner cannot be promoted as Accounts Officer simply on the ground that his case is identical to these two officers.
The Additional Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Punjab did not examine that the persons senior to the petitioner were still working as Senior Accountants/Assistants Grade I and he could not be promoted as Accounts Officer ignoring the claim of the officials who are senior to him.
The directions issued by the Additional Registrar is patently erroneous and cannot be sustained.
Moreover, the Additional Registrar was in error in directing that respondent No. 1 should be promoted as Accounts Officer from the date he was promoted as Assistant Accounts Officer.
The claim of respondent No. 1 for promotion as Accounts Officer has to be considered along with other similarly situated persons.
If respondent No. 1 is singled out and promoted to the higher post, it would cause lot of heart burning and would result in uncalled for litigation.
To us, it appears that respondent No. 1 was promoted as Assistant Accounts Officer only to provide him and other similarly situated employees incentive.
6.
We are not expressing any opinion on the question whether revision petition under the Rules was competent as we find that the order passed by the Additional Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Punjab is patently erroneous.
7.
For the reasons stated above the petition succeeds and the impugned order of the Additional Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Punjab, dated August 6, 1990, is quashed.
However, we make it clear that the MARKFED will consider the case of respondent No. 1 along with other similarly situated employees for promotion to the next higher post in accordance with the Rules.
However, we make no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.