RS Mongia, J - This judgment will also dispose of C.W.P.
No. 16816 of 1992, filed by Dr. Pardeep Sharma who is also the petitioner in the present case.
2.
The petitioner joined the Punjab Civil Medical Service, Class II (P.C.M.S.II) in the year 1978 and at the time of filing the writ petition, he was working on deputation in the Union Territory, Chandigarh as Surgical Specialist in the General Hospital, Section 16, Chandigarh.
3.
An advertisement for recruitment to 17 posts of Haryana Civil Medical (Group A) Service 17 posts of Haryana Health Department, was issued and the petitioner applied for one of the posts vide application dated 13th March, 1987 (Annexure P-1).
He was duly selected by the Haryana Public Service Commission.
The Secretary, Haryana Public Service Commission, informed the petitioner that his name occurred at Serial No. 4 in the merit list.
It is alleged in the petition that the petitioner received an appointment letter from Respondent No. 1, i.e. Commissioner and Secretary to Government, Haryana, Health Department, dated 22nd November, 1988, through a Special Messenger of the Haryana Government, on 15th December, 1988.
In the appointment letter, it was mentioned that he should join the post latest by 6th December, 1988.
It is further alleged that the petitioner immediately wrote back to the appointing authority on 16th December, 1988 that since he had received the letter of appointment on 15th December, 1988, he could not have possibly joined by 6th December, 1988, and, therefore, the joining time should be extended.
It is further averred in the petition that the petitioner made frequent visits to the office of Respondent No. 1 and made numerous representations.
Copies of representations alleged to have been made on 7th March, 1990, 21st September, 1990 and 26th June, 1991 have been attached as Annexures P-4 to P-6, respectively with this petition.
Nothing is mentioned in the petition as to what was the fate of the representations made by the petitioner.
The present writ petition was filed in September, 1992, with an allegation that one post was lying vacant in Sector 16 General Hospital, Chandigarh as Dr. BN Aggarwal had been sent to Faridabad as C.M.O.
(who belongs to Haryana Cadre).
It has been mentioned in the writ petition that against the quota of 40% of deputationists from Haryana in Union Territory, Chandigarh, only 2 S.M.Os' were working on deputation from Haryana as compared to 12 S.M.Os.
from Punjab on deputation with the Union Territory.
It was alleged that names of two doctors, one from Punjab who was far junior to the petitioner was being considered for appointment in place of Dr. BN Aggarwal, whereas the other name was being sought from Haryana Cadre of doctors.
The prayer made is that he should be appointed to the post of group - AHCMS, for which he already stood selected in the year 1987, and further he should be sent on deputation to Union Territory, Chandigarh, in place of Dr. BN Aggarwal.
4.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the Haryana Government, it has been averred that the candidature of the petitioner was cancelled and information to that effect was sent to him vide letter, dated 9th January, 1989 copy Annexure R-1 with the written statement, wherein it is mentioned that the petitioner was offered the appointment of HCMS (Group A), but since he had failed to report for duty within the stipulated period, his candidature was being cancelled.
It has further been mentioned in the written statement that the next candidate on the waiting list stood already appointed after the cancellation of the petitioner's candidature.
It has further been averred that apart from the representation Annexure P-3, dated 16th December, 1988 no other representation was received by the Government.
Replication was also filed by the petitioner in which it has been stated that the communication of the Government vide Annexure R-1 was never received by him.
5.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that the petitioner stood selected for the Group `A' HCMS post and the appointment letter which was sent to him was admittedly received by him after the last date for joining the post.
The petitioner had immediately asked for extension of time for joining the post, but no reply had been given, and, therefore, the petitioner is now entitled to be appointed against HCMS Group A post.
It has further been argued that after his appointment to the said post the petitioner is entitled to be considered for being sent on deputation to Union Territory, Chandigarh.
6.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondents submitted that the initial letter of appointment, dated 22nd November, 1988 was sent by registered post to the petitioner, but the same was received back from the Postal Authority with the report that the petitioner was not available in the Hospital from 24.11.1988 to 2911.
1988.
Thereafter, the letter was delivered to the petitioner on 15121988, through the special messenger.
It is submitted that no doubt at the time the letter was received by the petitioner, the joining time had already elapsed, but thereafter the petitioner's candidature was cancelled on 9th January, 1989, which was duly conveyed to him.
No steps whatsoever were taken by him thereafter regarding the fate of his selection.
In fact, after the cancellation of the petitioner's candidature, the next person on the waiting list had already been appointed and at this belated stage the petitioner cannot be offered the appointment, for which he was selected in the year 1984.
7.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that there is no merit in this petition.
The petitioner was selected for a higher post than the one on which he was working on deputation with Union Territory, Chandigarh.
It cannot be imagined that he would be content by just writing a letter that his joining time be extended and thereafter would sleep over the matter for more than three years.
It further cannot be imagined that he would not know that the post already stood filled in by the next candidate in the waiting list.
It cannot be said in this case that somebody else was interested to get the post, and therefore no appointment letter was issued to the petitioner within time.
As observed above, a registered letter was sought to be served on the petitioner, which was issued on 22nd November, 1988.
From the pleadings of the petitioner it looks that he was and is interested to stay in Chandigarh.
The petitioner is supposed to know that the post for which selection was made in the year 1987, would have been filled up within a reasonable time and it could not be imagined by him that the post would be lying vacant for a period of four years.
The respondents have denied receipt of any representation for the petitioner after 16th December, 1988.
The petitioner has no legal right at this stage to be appointed to the post for which he was selected more than five years' back.
The post already stands filled up.
8.
For the foregoing reasons, both the writ petitions are hereby dismissed.
However, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.