Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner challenges the selection of respondent No. 8 to the post of Head of the Department of Zoology at the Punjab Agriculture University, Ludhiana.
The relevant provision governing the selection to this post is contained in the Statute in Chapter IV.
Sub-clause (v) of Clause 4(1) which is relevant for the purpose of the present case provides as under :-  "The Selection Committee shall examine the research and educational contribution, academic capability and administrative ability of Professors in the Department including the existing/previous head of Department eligible on the date preceding six months of the expiry of the tenure of the present Head of Department or the date on which the position falls vacant and recommend the name of the most suitable person for appointment as Head of Department.
The selection will be made on merit."
2.
Mr. JS Khehar, learned counsel for the respondent-University, has very fairly produced before me the proceedings of the selection committee.
He has also pointed out the material which was taken into consideration by the members of the selection committee.
This has been complied in the form of a book-let which was given by the various candidates who wished to be considered for the post of Head of the Department.
In these compilations, only the list of publication as also the Journals etc. in which the papers have been published has been given.
Mr. Khehar on instructions from the representatives of the University very fairly conceded that only the book-lets and not the actual research work which consisted of the published papers etc. were examined by the members of the selection committee.
According to him, the University has been following a consistent practice of only examining the list of publications without actually having a look at the contents of the published material.
This method, learned counsel very fairly concedes, cannot form the basis of assessment of the research and education contribution or academic capability of a candidate so as to enable the selection committee to assess the respective merits of the candidates.
Mr. Khehar states that without creating a precedent and in the peculiar facts of this case, the University shall not act upon the impugned selection and shall re-constitute the selection committee and re-decide the matter.
3.
Mr. OP Goyal, learned counsel for the petitioner on the other hand submits that the petitioner has serious apprehensions about at least two members of the selection committee as it had been originally constituted.
He submits that the Vice Chancellor while re-constituting selection committee in accordance with the provisions of Statute 4(1)(iii) of Chapter IV may not include persons against whom the petitioner has levelled allegations as of mala fide and who have been impleaded as respondent Nos. 5 and 8 in the writ petition.
4.
At this stage, it is not necessary for me to make any observations on this submission.
Suffice it to say that the Vice Chancellor as the Chief Executive of the University shall take all possible steps to ensure that the constitution of the selection committee inspires confidence in the mind of all concerned including the candidates.
The aim and object of all academic bodies is to select the best person.
I have no doubt that the selection committee shall be constituted in a manner that no one has any cause for grievance.
5.
Since learned counsel for the University has stated that the impugned selection shall not be acted upon, it is not necessary to examine the controversy on merits.
The writ petition has in fact been rendered infructuous.
It is accordingly disposed of as such.
Before parting with the case, it may be mentioned that on April 30, 1993, the Division Bench had directed the "the Vice Chancellor will nominate Head of the Department to function till that date," viz. May 28, 1993.
This direction shall continue in operation till the final selection is made in accordance with the Statute of the University.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.