MR Agnihotri, J - The petitioner was born on 1st April, 1934 and was appointed in service of the erstwhile State of Punjab on 24th December 1957.
Thereafter, in the year 1962, when the Punjab State Electricity Board was constituted, he was transferred to serve under "the Board" wherefrom he has now retired on 31st March, 1992, on attaining the age of superannuation.
The present writ petition was filed by him in the year 1981 against his supersession at the time of promotion from the rank of Executive Engineer to that of Superintending Engineer.
His short grievance was, that though the petitioner was allowed to cross the Efficiency Bar and was confirmed in service, he should not have been ignored for promotion, to the rank of Superintending Engineer when his juniors were promoted.
2.
From the perusal of the record, I find that the petitioner had been awarded a number of minor punishments due to various lapses with regard to his work and conduct.
On 6th June, 1978, after considering his reply to the show-cause notice served by the Board, which was found unsatisfactory, he was awarded the punishment of 'censure'.
Thereafter, he was twice warned to be careful in future as there was certain financial irregularities in the matter of certain purchases of stores made by him.
For his unsatisfactory record of service, he was ignored for the grant of selection grade also, and it was the cumulative effect of the overall assessment of his service record, that though his claim was duly considered, but he was not found fit to be promoted.
The aforesaid factual position stated by the respondent-Board in their written statement has, in fact, been admitted in the rejoinder filed by petitioner, wherein the petitioner has made an unsuccessful attempt to dilute the adverse effect of the punishments by stating as under :  " .. the minor punishment of censure has not been awarded to the petitioner in connection with the performance of official duties but for some transactions which took place in his family ... warnings pertain to some acts of omission and commission allegedly done by the petitioner in the year 1970 and the petitioner was warned to be more careful in future ....... ".
In view of the aforesaid position, I find that even though the petitioner was senior to those officers who were promoted as Superintending Engineers, but it does not confer upon him a right to challenge his supersession.
It is not the seniority alone which is to be considered at the time of promotion to the rank of Superintending Engineer and above, but the performance of the officer in his work and unblemished conduct are the factors which have to be considered while making comparative assessment and evaluation of service record of the officers included in the zone and eligibility.
The employer is not to make a choice between "good" and "bad" but applying the principle of seniority-cum-merit, he is to select a person of ability and proven merit, by exercising his choice between "good" and "better".
Resultantly, I do not find any merit in the writ petition and the same is dismissed, with no order as to costs.