Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - This judgment will dispose of CWP Nos. 5320 of 1992 and 1335 of 1992 involving common questions of law and facts.
In this petition, the prayer is for issuance of direction to respondent Nos. 3 and 4 to sanction the posts as per the proposals sent by the respondent-Bank under the Staffing Pattern of the Cooperative Banks on 811991.
2.
Shorn of unnecessary details, the position which emerges from the record is that by an agreed order, C.W.P.
No. 5290 of 1987 was disposed of on May 17, 1990 in view of the statements of the counsel for the parties and some of the petitioners in the representative capacity and some directions to the respondents were issued.
The Registrar, Co-operative Societies, Punjab, was directed to expeditiously accord sanction to the posts of Peon-cum-Chowkidars and Gunmen for which a request was made by the Bank.
Subsequently, the Chief Executive Officer of the respondent-Bank sent a copy of the resolution dated 861991 passed by Administrator of the Moga Central Cooperative Bank Limited Moga to the Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Punjab for approval of additional posts.
A copy of this resolution is Annexure P-5 to the writ petition.
However, the Registrar, Co-operative Societies, Punjab, on 531991 vide letter copy Annexure P-6 to the writ petition had returned the Staffing pattern case of the Moga Central Co-operative Bank Ltd Moga to the Managing Director, Punjab State Cooperative Bank, Chandigarh, for appropriate action requesting that the case be sent to his office with comments.
The Managing Director, Punjab State Cooperative Bank, Ltd, Chandigarh vide its communication dated 1171991 forwarded in original the case of Staffing pattern of the Moga Central Cooperative Bank Ltd Moga to the Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Punjab with the comments that the resolution for the creation of posts is to be passed by the Board of Directors and without the same, it cannot be considered.
3.
The only obstacle in approving the Staffing Pattern case is that the same is to be approved by the Board of Directors which is not in existence.
I am of the considered view that the proposal sent by the Administrator of the Bank should be deemed to have been that of Board of Directors as at present there is no elected Board of Directors.
It will be pertinent to note here that NK Sodhi, J in C.W.P.
No. 572 of 1992 while disposing the contempt petition had directed that Registrar Cooperative Societies Punjab to accord sanction to the proposal by the Administrator of the Bank.
4.
In view of the above said discussion, the Registrar Cooperative Societies, Punjab, Chandigarh is directed to take a decision on the recommendation expeditiously preferably within three months and accord sanction to the Staffing Pattern Annexure P-5 for creation of additional posts of Peon-cum-Chowkidar taking into consideration the desirability of vacancies.
It is further directed that when additional posts are created, they shall be offered to the petitioners in CWP Nos 5320 of 1992 and 1335 of 1992 who could not be accommodated earlier.
Both the aforesaid writ petitions are disposed of in the manner indicated above.
Order accordingly.