Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - The petitioner, an Ex.
Clerk, Haryana Board of School Education in this writ petition filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India has challenged the order of his dismissal from service dated 10121985, copy of which is Annexure P-10 to the writ petition and the order dated 5-11-1986, copy Annexure P-12, vide which the rejection of the appeal filed against the order of dismissal from service, was conveyed to him.
2.
Shorn of unnecessary details, the relevant facts for adjudication are that the petitioner was placed under suspension vide order dated August 2, 1984.
He was subsequently charge-sheeted vide Memo No. 9121/Estt.
dated August 10, 1984 under Rule 7 of Punjab Civil Service (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1952 as adopted by the respondents.
The petitioner submitted reply to the said charge-sheet in which he denied all the charges levelled against him.
Shri SK Bhardwaj, Deputy Secretary of Haryana Board of School Education, was appointed as Enquiry Officer vide order dated September 28, 1984 in order to conduct a regular enquiry in respect of the charges levelled against the petitioner.
The competent authority on the consideration of the inquiry report provisionally decided to impose the penalty of removal from service upon the petitioner.
Before imposing the proposed punishment, the petitioner was served with a show cause notice vide Memo No. 9221/Admn.
dated 1671985.
He submitted his reply to the said show cause notice on 31-7-1985.
The petitioner was removed from service by the Chairman vide his order dated 10-12-1985 which was received by him on 29-1-1986.
The petitioner preferred an appeal against the said order which was placed before the Board and the same was rejected by the Board with the observations that Shri Kuldip Kumar was given a personal hearing.
He did not place any material before the Board which may warrant change in the punishment already awarded to him.
3.
Aggrieved against the orders of the Punishing Authority as well as the Appellate Authority, the petitioner filed the present writ petition.
4.
The challenge to the impugned orders is that the petitioner was charge- sheeted for leaking Govt. information and accepting bribe.
Miss Nidhi Gupta and Miss Rozy A Singh, Advocates, appearing for the petitioner, had contended that the petitioner was exonerated of one of the charges levelled against him i.e. of accepting bribe by the Inquiry Officer.
Despite that, the Punishing Authority while passing the impugned order did not take into consideration the report of the Inquiry Officer.
It was further contended that if the Authority was not agreeing with the findings of the Inquiry Officer on a charge of bribe, he should have given his own reasoning to differ with the findings recorded by the Inquiry Officer on this charge.
As such the impugned order of punishment is bad in law being violative of Service Rules.
Hence, in this case, there is total departure from the well settled principles of law.
5.
Mr. HS Hooda, Senior Advocate, while defending the action of the respondent-Department had contended that the impugned order of punishment has been passed in accordance with law.
The petitioner was removed from service in view of the gravity of the charges.
6.
On consideration of the arguments and perusal of the paper-book, I have reached the conclusion that the impugned orders, Annexures P-10 and P-12 are liable to be quashed.
7.
In the instant case, one Smt. Balbir Kaur of Primary Health Centre, Julana (Jind) filed a complaint against the petitioner levelling an allegation that he would get her son passed with 425 marks in case a sum of Rs. 500/- is paid to him.
8.
On the basis of aforesaid allegation, the following charge was framed against the petitioner:  "That Shri Kuldip Kumar Clerk, on the basis of allegations given in the enclosed statement is charged with dishonesty, disloyalty, bringing a bad name to the Board by his fraudulent actions, cheating the innocent persons and indiscipline in the discharge of his duties and liable to disciplinary proceedings under the rules."
A Departmental Enquiry was conducted against the petitioner by the Inquiry Officer.
The Inquiry Officer vide his report, copy Annexure P-3, exonerated the petitioner of the charge of illegal gratification of Rs. 500/- with the observation that no material evidence has been produced by the Presenting Officer during the course of the inquiry.
The original complaint has got no evidentiary value unless its contents/allegations are supported by material evidence.
The deposition of witnesses produced by the Presenting Officer only proves that a complaint in writing was made by Smt. Balbir Kaur on 2871984 in the Office of Deputy Secretary, Examination, against Shri Kuldip Kumar Clerk of General Branch accompanied with one communication dated 29-6-1984 written by the petitioner.
It was further observed that no inference can be drawn from the letter dated 29-6-1984 that the petitioner had either demanded or received Rs. 500/- as illegal gratification from Smt. Balbir Kaur except that the petitioner communicated the result before official declaration which he was not supposed to do being an employee of the Board.
9.
From the perusal of the Inquiry Report, Annexure P-3, it is seen that the Inquiry Officer had held the petitioner guilty of the charge that he misused his position to communicate the result to Smt. Balbir Kaur, complainant, through his communication dated 29-6-1984 before official declaration.
It is quite strange that though the Inquiry Officer did not hold the petitioner guilty of the main charge of illegal demand and receipt of Rs. 500/- from the complainant Balbir Kaur, but while imposing the penalty of removal from service upon the petitioner, the Punishing Authority i.e. Chairman of the Board in the impugned order dated 16-7-1985, Annexure P-4, addressed to the petitioner, says that he was in full agreement with the conclusions reached by the Enquiry Officer with regard to the charges levelled against the petitioner, which is contrary to the findings recorded by the Inquiry Officer.
The Inquiry Officer in his report, Annexure P-3, had returned a categorical finding that the charge of illegal gratification of Rs. 500/- does not stand proved.
Even despite that the Punishing Officer while passing the impugned order of punishment has stated that the charges against the petitioner were duly proved before the Inquiry Officer which fact is patently wrong.
It appears that the Punishing Authority before inflicting punishment on the petitioner did not go through the report of Inquiry Officer carefully.
It is well settled principle of law that if the Punishing Authority differs with the findings of the Inquiry Officer on any of the charges, the Punishing Authority is required to give reasons for the same.
In the present case, no reason, whatsoever, for differing with the findings recorded by the Inquiry Officer, has been given in the impugned order of punishment.
In the light of the foregoing position, it can be safely inferred that there was no application of mind by the Punishing Authority and the impugned order was passed in a mechanical manner.
Similarly, the Appellate Authority while rejecting the appeal of the petitioner did not take into consideration of these material facts.
10.
The other allegation levelled against the petitioner is that he had leaked the information by disclosing the result of the complainant's son before its official declaration.
A perusal of the paper-book indicates that the result of the complainant's son was officially declared on 2861984, whereas the letter alleged to have been written by the petitioner to Smt. Balbir Kaur, complainant, was dated 29-6-1984.
As such by no stretch of imagination, it can be said that the petitioner had leaked the information about the result.
The alleged letter was written after the issuance of the result notification.
Thus, I have reached the conclusion that the charges against the petitioner do not stand proved at all and the impugned orders, Annexure P-10 and P-12, cannot sustain in the eyes of law having been passed without application of mind by the Punishing Authority as well as by the Appellate Authority.
11.
It is pertinent to observe that the charge of accepting Rs. 500/- as bribe was not proved before the Inquiry Officer.
Hence the alleged motive qua charge No. 2 i.e. leaking of the result prior to its declaration falls to the ground.
12.
In view of the abovesaid discussion, the writ petition is allowed and the Impugned orders, Annexures P-10 and P-12 are quashed.
The petitioner shall be reinstated with continuity of service with immediate effect and shall be entitled to all consequential benefits.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.