VK Jhanji, J. (Oral) - Petitioner is running Nursing Training School which is recognized by the Punjab Nurses Registration Council (in short the Council).
The Council directed the petitioner to admit students only through the Common Entrance Examination.
This action of the Council was challenged by the petitioner in Civil Writ Petition No. 17189 of 1991.
The said writ petition was allowed and the conditions imposed by the Punjab Nurses Registration Council for governing the admission of the students to three years course in General Nursing and Midwifery Course only through Entrance Test to be held by it as also Clause 3(A) (III) of the notification which was under challenge, was held to be violative of the fundamental right of religious minority Institutions to manage their own Institutions as envisaged under Article 30(1) of the Constitution of India, and therefore, the same was declared to be illegal and was quashed.
In the present petition, the petitioner is seeking to challenge the action of the Council whereby they have fixed minimum qualification for the students to be admitted to the General Nursing and Midwifery Course.
This condition is contained in Notification No. 15/41/90-1 HBV/17607, dated 2761991.
At the time of motion hearing, a direction was issued to the Council to issue roll numbers to the candidates admitted by petitioner.
In pursuance of the said orders, roll numbers were issued and now, I have been informed by the counsel for the Council that the results have also been declared.
Considering that results of the candidates have already been declared.
It will be an exercise in futility to go into the question as to whether the Council is competent to frame bye-laws and to fix minimum qualification for the students to be admitted by the petitioner for General Nursing and Midwifery Course.
This question is being kept open to be decided in any other writ petition which may be filed by the person aggrieved.
As far as the present writ petition is concerned, the same has become infructuous because of declaration of result of the students by the Council.
Accordingly, this writ petition is disposed of as having become infructuous.
No costs.