VK Bali, J - Petitioner Dr. Sushma Rani seeks writ of certiorari so as to declare the Instructions as illegal, arbitrary and ultra vires of the Act and Regulations of the Central Council of Indian Medicines, keeping out of consideration the candidates who failed thrice and further to direct the respondents to admit her in the MD Course for the session 1990-91, Obviously, as the petitioner was not given any admission to the MD Ayurveda Course by declaring her ineligible in view of the Instructions, the prayer now is for admission to MD Course for the session to ensue in near future and while so considering not to deny her the admission on the sole ground that she had failed thrice while passing Bachelor of Ayurvedic Medicine and Surgery (BAMS), which she ultimately passed in the year 1987,  2.
The facts of the case reveal that the petitioner passed BAMS course from the Punjabi University, Patiala, in the year 1987 and after obtaining degree, she successfully completed her internship.
The respondent-University invited applications for admission to the Post Graduate Training and Research Course (3 years MD Ayurveda Course), on 19th July 1990.
As the petitioner was eligible and duly qualified, she submitted application in the prescribed forms before the last date for making application.
However, her application was not entertained by the respondent-University on the sole ground that as per instructions, governing admission in the MD Course, a candidate having three failure/re-appear or more in BAMS/GAMS/Ayurvedacharya Examination will not be eligible for admission to the Post Graduate Course.
The petitioner, however, sent her representation on August 5, 1990, to the respondent-University, inter alia, pleading therein that the instructions, and particularly the instruction mentioned above, which was the solitary ground for not permitting her to MD Course was ultra vires the Act known as Indian Medicines Central Council Act, 1970.
However, when her request to the admission was declined she filed the present writ petition for the relief indicated in the earlier part of this judgment.
3.
It has been pleaded and canvassed by Mr. Arun Jain, Advocate, appearing for the petitioner, that the Central Council of Indian Medicines is constituted under Section 3 of the Indian Medicines Central Council Act, 1970, and as per Section 22 of the aforesaid Act, the Central Council prescribes the minimum standards of education.
Indian Medicines required for granting recognised medical qualification by University, Board, or Medical Institutions in India.
Section 22 of the Act of 1970 reads to us :-  "The Central Council may prescribe the minimum standards of education in Indian Medicine required for granting recognised medical qualification by Universities, Board or Medical Institutions in India.
(2) copies of the draft regulations and of all subsequent amendments thereof shall be furnished by the Central Council to all State Governments and the Central Council shall, before submitting the regulations or any amendment thereof, as the case may be, to the Central Government for sanction, take into consideration the comments of any State Government received within three months from the furnishing of the copies as aforesaid.
(3) Each of the committees referred to in clauses (a), (b) and (c) of Sub Section (1) of Section 9 shall, from time to time, report to the Central Council on the efficacy of regulations and may recommend to the Central Council such amendments thereof it may think fit."
Section 36 of the Act aforesaid, empowers the Central Council to make regulations.
The same also is reproduced for ready reference :-  "Power to make regulations.
- The Central Council may, with the previous sanction of the Central Government, made regulations generally to carry out the purposes of this Act, and without prejudice to the generality of this power, such regulations may provide for -  (a) to (h) xx xx  (i) the courses and period of study and of practical training to be undertaken, the subjects of examination and the standards of proficiency therein to be obtained, in any University, Board or medical institution for the grant of recognised medical qualifications;  (j) The standards of staff, equipment, accommodation, training and other facilities for education in Indian medicines;  (k) the conduct of professional examinations qualifications of examiners and the conditions of admission to such examinations.
4.
It is in pursuance of section 36 of the Act, the Central Council of Indian Medicine framed regulations known as Central Council of Indian Medicine (Post-Graduate Education), Regulation, 1979.
Regulation 6, which prescribes criteria for admission to Post-Graduate Course reads thus :-  "Criteria for admission to Post Graduate Course.
1.
Degree in Ayurveda from a recognised Institution under a University or statutory Board or recognised by the Central Council of Indian Medicine for the purposes.
2.
There shall be an interview test of the candidates and admission will be held strictly in order of merit taking into account the marks obtained in professional examinations and in the subject concerned in which Post Graduate Course is to be conducted as well as performance during housemanship and interview test."
5.
On the strength of the provisions of the Act and Rules, quoted above, it is sought to be made out that the Central Council, which alone could prescribe the minimum standard the education required for granting recognised medical qualification by a University, Board or Medical Institution in India, has power to prescribe the conditions for professional examinations and as per Regulation 6, admission to the Post Graduate Course is admissible to those who have a degree in Ayurveda Course from a recognised institution and that being the basic qualification, admission had to be made strictly on merit, taking into account the marks obtained.
It is further contended that inasmuch as three successive failures in BAMS do not make a candidate ineligible, the instructions to the contrary that have been framed by the respondent No. 3 would be repugnant or against the criteria laid down in the Act and Regulations and to that extent the instructions would be void.
6.
This petition has been contested and two separate written statements have been filed on behalf of the respondent Nos. 1 and 2.
Regarding the crucial question, as has been referred to above, it has been pleaded that the instructions with regard to three successive failures in BAMS are not contradictory to the criteria for the admission laid down in the Ayurveda Rules and Regulations, on which reliance has been placed by the petitioner.
7.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the considered view that there is no merit in the contention that instructions containing non-eligibility for three successive failures, in any way, are repugnant or contradictory to the qualifications for admission to MD Course, laid down by the Regulations, referred above.
The eligibility criteria continues to be BAMS as has been prescribed under the Act and Regulation, quoted above.
All that respondent No. 3 - University has done is to restrict or short list the eligible persons in view of disproportionate applications as compared to the available seats and that course can be adopted by them as is settled law on the point.
Three successive failures, even otherwise, appear to be reasonable restriction with a view to short list the eligible candidates.
8.
However, during the pendency of the writ petition, an application was filed by the petitioner, inter alia, contending that irrespective of the impugned instructions, referred to above, other candidates who were similarly situated and have likewise three successive failures, have been given admission to the Course of MD This application was filed on 1751993.
Mr. Sharma, who appeared for the University, sought adjournment on 161993 and again on 871993 and the matter was, thus, adjourned but no reply was filed to this miscellaneous application.
Till today, no reply has obviously been filed.
Mr. Sharma prays for a short adjournment to file reply but I find no justification for granting further time in the matter.
It has been specifically mentioned in the application that the respondent-University in its meeting held on 551993 had allowed admission in 1992-93 session in MD (Ayurveda) Course to one Dr. Anil Vashist, who had three failures.
On the basis of uncontroverted facts, it has been argued that the respondent-University cannot discriminate between the persons equally situate.
There is considerable merit in the contention raised by Mr. Arun Jain, learned counsel for the petitioner.
The instructions debarring the petitioner on the ground that she had three failures in BAMS applies to all the candidates and inasmuch as admission to similarly situated candidate has been allowed, denial of the same to the petitioner would result in discrimination.
9.
In view of what has been stated above, it is directed that the respondent-University will consider the case of the petitioner for admission to MD (Ayurveda) in the academic session 1993-94 strictly on merits and by considering her case for admission, the failures in BAMS would not come in her way.
As mentioned above, she has to be admitted on the basis of the criteria for admission otherwise laid.
The writ petition is allowed in the manner indicated above.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.