Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioners who are employees of the Haryana State Electricity Board (hereinafter referred to as 'the Board') have a two-fold grievance.
Firstly, they claim that the differential treatment accorded by the Board in the matter of grant of special pay to the employees who had undergone the sterilisation operation prior to April 29, 1987 and those who had undergone this operation after the said date is discriminatory.
Secondly, they claim that the Board having adopted the decision of the State Government to treat the special increment as pay for all purposes cannot now refuse to do so.
A few facts relevant for the decision may be noticed.
2.
The petitioners are holding various posts in the Class-III services of the Board.
All the petitioners or their respective spouses except petitioner Nos. 20, 28 and 34 and 37 had undergone the operation prior to April 29, 1987.
The petitioners at Nos. 20, 28 and 34 to 37 had undergone this operation after April 29, 1987.
3.
The State Government vide letter dated June 20, 1981, introduced certain incentives for the employees who promoted the small family norms.
This decision of the Government was adopted by the Board and was circulated vide letter dated November 3, 1981, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-2 with the writ petition.
It was thus decided that the employees who undergo sterilisation "after having two or three surviving children may be granted a special increment in the form of personal pay not to be absorbed in future increase in pay either in the same post or (on) promotion to higher post.
The rate of personal pay would be equal to the amount of next increment due at the time of grant of concession and will remain fixed during the entire service.
In the case of persons drawing pay at the maximum the rate of personal pay would be equal to the amount of the increment last drawn."
The instructions issued by the Government were later on clarified vide letter dated November 24, 1981.
It was inter alia stated that "Special increment to be granted in the form of personal pay is to be treated as pay for all purposes except as laid down in Sr. No. 3 above."
At Sr. No. 3, it was provided that the special increment is not to be taken into account for fixation of pay on promotion.
The idea was that the benefit of personal pay should continue to be available to him at the same rate even after his promotion."
4.
In March 1987, the pay scales of the employees were revised by the Board w.e.f.
January 1, 1986.
It was provided that the amount of personal pay drawn by the employees with the pay of February 1987 shall remain frozen and shall not qualify for calculation of Dearness Allowance till a final decision is conveyed by the Board.
5.
In January 1989, the State of Haryana decided that the employees who had undergone sterilisation before April 29, 1987 and were already drawing special increment "may be granted double the rate of initial increment in the revised pay scales (made applicable w.e.f.
111986) corresponding to the pre-revised scale in which the employee was initially granted special increment.
The double amount will be admissible from the date of option for the revised pay scale.
The employees who undergo sterilisation on or after April 30, 1987 will be granted personal pay equal to the amount of the next increment due at the time of grant of concession in the revised pay scales."
This decision of the Government was adopted by the Board and circulated vide memorandum dated May 11, 1989.
The State of Haryana decided to supersede its decision of January 1989.
It circulated a letter dated May 19, 1989 and it was decided that "employees who had adopted the small family norms prior to 2941987 i.e. the date of notification of the Haryana Civil Services (Revised Pay) Rules, 1987, will continue getting the personal pay equivalent to the amount they were drawing as personal pay in the pre-revised scale + ADA (Additional Dearness Allowance) admissible on that personal pay as on 31.12.85."
It was further provided that "the employees who had undergone or will undergo sterilization on or after 29487 will get the personal pay as per the present policy contained in Haryana Govt. letter No. 6/1(8)-79-1 FRI, dated 20681."
No DA/ADA was to be admissible on this personal pay.
This decision of the State Government was adopted by the Board in its meeting held on August 25, 1989 and circulated vide memorandum dated September 8, 1989.
The Board directed that the recovery may be effected from the salaries of the employees in one instalment immediately.
Thereafter, the Board issued another clarification vide its letter dated October 27, 1989, a copy of which has been attached as Annexure P-10 with the writ petition in which it was stated that the personal pay may be counted as pay for all purposes "except Dearness Allowance/Additional Dearness Allowance and pensionary benefits subject to other conditions .........."  6.
The result of the various circulars issued by the Board was that while initially it had been decided that personal pay would be treated as pay for all purposes including the grant of Dearness Allowance and Additional Dearness Allowance, this decision was revised w.e.f.
January 1, 1986 whereafter the benefit in the revision of Dearness Allowance and Additional Dearness Allowance was not to be admissible.
Furthermore, while this pay had to be taken into account while granting pension, in pursuance to the circular issued by the Board on October 27, 1989 (Annexure P-10), this pay was also not to count for the computation of pensionary benefits.
Another consequence of the letter issued by the Government vide its circular dated May 19, 1989 (Annexure P-8) which was adopted by the Board vide its letter at Annexure P-9 was that a different treatment was accorded to the employees who had undergone sterilisation prior to the after April 29, 1987.
7.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the Board.
The issue of circulars referred to above has been admitted.
However, it has been pointed out that the employees who got themselves sterilised after January 1, 1986, cannot get the benefit of the policy initially declared by the State Government vide its letters dated June 20, 1981 (Annexure P-1) and November 24, 1981 (Annexure P-3).
It has been further averred that on the recommendation of the Pay Commission and the Committee constituted by the State Government, any amount payable to an employee as personal pay was frozen and was not paid to any employee after March 1987.
It was also decided that the amount of personal pay will not qualify for calculating of Dearness Allowance etc. till a final decision was taken in the matter.
The respondent further points out that even though initially it was decided that the amount of personal pay shall not count for the grant of Dearness Allowance/Additional Dearness Allowance as also for the purpose of pensionary benefits, the State Government had "later on decided vide its letter dated 1271991 that the amount of special increments granted to the employees on account of sterilization undertaken by them would be counted for the purpose of pensionary benefits only, but the amount of special increments, which is personal pay, shall not be counted for the purpose of dearness allowance."
It has been stated that "the personal pay allowed to the employees cannot be counted for the purpose of grant of dearness allowance."
On these premises, the impugned action has been sought to be sustained by the respondent-Board.
8.
I have heard Mr. RK Malik, learned counsel for the petitioners and Mr. MS Jain, learned counsel for the respondent.
9.
Mr. Malik, learned counsel for the petitioners has raised a two-fold contention.
Mr. Malik has contended that the action of the respondent in classifying the employees on the basis of the date of undergoing sterilisation, is discriminatory and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
He has further contended that in pursuance to the circulars issued by the Government and the Board, the petitioners had been getting the benefit of Dearness Allowance on the special pay granted to them.
However, on December 21, 1987, the Board decided to freeze the amount of personal pay as also the Dearness Allowance etc. and thereafter on September 8, 1989, the Board decided that the excess amount be recovered from the salaries of the employees in one instalment.
Mr. Malik contended that this action of the respondent was violative of the principles of natural justice inasmuch as the benefits already granted were sought to be withdrawn without the grant of any opportunity whatsoever.
It was further pointed out by the learned counsel that an executive order which adversely affects an employee can be only prospective and the Board had erred in giving a retrospective effect to its decisions.
The plea of promissory estoppel was also raised.
The claim made on behalf of the petitioners was controverted by the learned counsel for the respondent.
10.
A perusal of the sequence of events as delineated above clearly shows that in pursuance to the circulars initially issued by the Board, the various petitioners had been granted the benefit of Additional Dearness Allowance etc. on the special pay.
In pursuance to the circulars issued subsequently, not only the benefits already granted were sought to be restricted but even recovery was ordered to be effected.
As a result, the civil rights of the petitioners were adversely affected.
Even an administrative order having civil consequences has to be passed in accordance with the principles of natural justice.
These were not followed in the instant case as no opportunity of any kind whatsoever was afforded to the petitioners.
This has resulted in material miscarriage of justice.
If an opportunity had been granted, the petitioners could have shown that the executive orders issued by the Board could not be made effective retrospectively and that the petitioners were in fact entitled to the benefits which had already been drawn by them.
The action of the Board in not granting the opportunity has resulted in material mis-carriage of justice and deprived the petitioners of their right to put forth their view point before the respondent.
In this situation, it does not appear to be necessary to examine the other contentions raised on behalf of the petitioners at this stage.
It is directed that the Board shall re-decide the matter after affording an opportunity to the petitioners.
Accordingly, the writ petition is allowed.
The respondent is directed to decide the matter afresh after hearing the petitioners who would be entitled to raise all contentions available to them including those which have been raised in this writ petition.
The Board will dispose of the matter by passing a speaking order.
In the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.