Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - The petitioners, who are the members of Punjab State Subordinate Accounts (Class-III) Service, serving in various Departments of the State of Punjab have challenged the order dated 1661982 (Annexure P-2) passed by the Food and Supplies Department of the State of Punjab, whereby respondents No. 4 and 6 have been promoted as Assistant Accounts Officers in the said department and have also challenged the order dated 20.8.1982, Annexure P-3, passed by Director, Food and Supplies Department, Punjab whereby option for portion as Asstt.
Accounts Officer had been called for from the Departmental candidates who were working as Senior Auditors in the Foods and Supplies Department only.
The petitioners have also prayed for issuance of mandamus seeking direction to Respondents No. 1 and 3 not to fill up the posts of Assistant Accounts Officers sanctioned for the Punjab Food and Supplies Department from the officials of the said department, but strictly in accordance with the Punjab State Accounts Service (State Service Class-II) Rules, 1966.
2.
The case of the petitioners it that they passed the Subordinate Accounts Service Examination and are working in various Departments of the Punjab Government under the administrative control of Finance Department and their service conditions are governed by the Punjab State Subordinate Accounts (Class-III) Service Rules, 1978.
It is also the case of the petitioners that the next channel of promotion of the petitioners is to the post of Assistant Accounts Officers and then Accounts Officer which are Class-II post and are governed by the Punjab (State Accounts Service state Service Cases-II) Rules, 1966.
3.
It is also the case of the petitioners that under the policy decision dated 2251967, Annexure P-1, all the posts of SAS Superintendents/Accountants/Senior Auditors/Assistant Accounts Officers and Accounts Officers had come under the administrative control of Finance Department and that provision of the existing service rules of various departments relating to the said posts might be amended.
As per Rule 3 of Punjab State Subordinate Accounts (Class-III) Service Rules, 1978 applicable to the Punjab State Subordinate Accounts (Class-III) Service, the service shall comprise of the posts of Senior Auditors, SAS Superintendents and Accountants existing in various departments of the Government and the posts born on the service are specified in Appendix 'A' to the Punjab State Subordinate Accounts (Class-III) Service Rules, 1978.
Similarly per Punjab State Accounts Service (State Service Class-II) Rules, 1966, applicable to Class-II posts i.e. posts of Assistant Accounts Officers and Accounts Officers, all appointments have to be made by the Government in the Finance Department and no person who has not passed the SAS examination can be appointed to such posts.
The SAS examination is one which is held by the Finance Department and is open to all eligible persons in all the Departments in Punjab.
4.
As per averments in the petition, after coming into force of Punjab State Accounts Service (State Service Class-II) Rules, 1966 promotion of the members of Class-III service to higher posts of Assistant Accounts Officer (Class-II) in various Departments of the Government have invariably been made by the Government in the Finance Department on the basis of seniority in SAS (Class-III) Service.
5.
The Government sanctioned 12 posts of Assistant Accounts Officer in the Punjab Food and Supplies Department.
The said posts having been covered under Punjab State Accounts Service (State Service Class-II) Rules, 1966, could be filled up by the Finance Department in accordance with the provisions of Punjab State Accounts Services (State Service Class-II) Rules, 1966.
However, the Food and Supplies Department decided to fill up 6 sanctioned posts in accordance with Punjab State Accounts Service (State Service Class-II) Rules, 1966 and the remaining six through departmental officials.
Out of the six posts which were sought to be filled in through Departmental officials, three have already been filled in vide Annexure P-2 through Officials who do not posses even the requisite qualifications prescribed by Punjab State Accounts Service (State Service Class-II) Rules, 1966 and immediate action is being taken to fill in the three remaining posts through the departmental officials who also do not possess even the requisite qualifications prescribed under the Rules, copy of letter dated 20.8.1982 in this regard is Annexure P-3.
6.
Aggrieved against the impugned orders Annexures P-2 and P-3, the present appeal has been preferred.
7.
Upon notice of motion the official respondents caused appearance & filed their written statement.
However, none appeared for respondents No. 4 to 6 despite service.
The stand of the Respondent/Department is that the petitioners have no locus standi to challenge the promotion/appointment of the Assistant Accounts Officers made by the Department of Food and Supplies under Rule 6(1)(c) of the Punjab Government Food and Supplies (State Service Class-II) Rules, 1966 as the petitioners arc members of Punjab State Subordinate Accounts Class-III Service and governed by the Punjab, State Subordinate Accounts (Class-III) Service Rules, 1978 and their promotion to Class-II Service vice is governed by the Punjab State Accounts Service (Class-II) Rules, 1966.
The respondents have also taken shelter of decision stated to have been taken in CWP No. 2026 of 1973 CK Sahaney etc. v. State of Punjab, in which it is stated to have been held that Head of Department was competent to make the appointments under the Punjab Government Food and Supplies (State Service Class-II) Rules, 1966 and that Punjab State SAS Class-III Rules, 1965 (later on 1978) and Punjab State Accounts Service (State Service Class- II) Rules, 1966 and instructions of the Finance Department were not applicable for such appointments.
Since the Food and Supplies Department has its own service Rules, known, as Punjab Government Food and Supplies Department (State Service Class-II) Rules, 1966, the petitioners cannot be promoted against such posts.
It is also pleaded that 12 posts of Assistant Accounts Officers were created in the Food and Supplies Department after surrendering 12 posts of Accountants and 12 posts of Junior Auditors to streamline the working of the Department vide sanction, Annexure R-1, hence only the departmental candidates were entitled to be appointed against the said posts.
However, 6 posts were offered by the Department to the Finance Department for appointment of eligible persons through the Finance Department in accordance with the Punjab State Accounts Service (State Service Class-II) Rules, 1966.
8.
It is also the case of the Respondent-Department that though the posts of Assistant Accounts Officers in the Food and Supplies Department (State Service Class-II) Rules, 1966, yet there is a specific provision in the Rules for appointment of Accounts Officers.
Since the pay scale of the posts of Assistant Accounts Officers and Accounts Officers are the same i.e. Rs. 825- 1280 so the post of Assistant Accounts Officer comes under purview of the departmental Rules.
Therefore, there is no illegality in the action of the Food & Supplies Department.
9.
I have perused the paper-book and considered the arguments advanced at the Bar.
10.
The most point to be declined in this case is as to whether 12 posts of Assistant Accounts Officers sanctioned in the Food and Supplies Department would be governed by the Punjab State Accounts Services (State Service Class- II) Rules, 1966 under the control of Finance Department or would be governed by the Punjab State Food and Supplies (State Service Class-II) Rules, 1966 under the Food & Supplies Department.
11.
It is relevant to note that the official respondents neither produced the Punjab Government Food and Supplies (State Service Class-II) Rules, 1966 nor the decision in CWP No. 2026 of 1973 and simply relied upon Rule 6(1)(c) of the said Rules as reproduced in para 7 of the written statement.
12.
It is admitted case of the parties that the posts of Assistant Accounts Officers (Class-II) posts are not covered under the Punjab State Food and Supplies (State Service Class-II) Rules, 1966 as the said Rules cover only the post of Accounts Officer, but on the basis of pay scale, the post of Assistant Accounts Officers are sought to be included in the said rules by the Food and Supplies Department.
It is also not specifically denied by the official respondents in their return that Respondents No. 4 to 6 were not eligible and not possessing the requisite qualifications as required under Punjab State Accounts Service (State Service Class-II) Rules, 1966 (Para 6 of the writ petition and para 6 of the written statement refer).
There is another strong circumstance against the respondent/department when they forwarded 6 posts of Assistant Accounts Officers to the Finance Department for filling up in accordance with the Punjab State Accounts Service (State Service Class-II) Rules, 1966.
Had the posts been covered by the Food and Supplies Department Rules, there was no occasion for the Food and Supplies Department to refer six out of 22 posts to the Finance Department for filling up the same in accordance with the Punjab State Accounts Service (State Service Class-II) Rules, 1966.
13.
Rule 5 of Punjab State Accounts Service (State Service Class-II) Rules, 1966, specifically lays down that appointment to the services shall be made by the government and as per Rule 2(b), the Government means the Punjab Government in the Finance Department Treasury and Account Branch).
Rule 7 shows that the post of Accounts Officer and Assistant Account Officer are included in service.
As per Rule 7(b) for promotion to the post of Assistant Accounts Officer, the following is the eligibility criteria :  "7(b) In the case of Assistant Accounts Officer, any promotion of Superintendents, Accountants, and Senior Auditors who have passed the Subordinate Accounts Service Examination and have three year's service as such."
14.
In view of the Statutory Rules framed by the Finance Department known as Punjab State Accounts Service (State Service Class-II) Rules, 1966 and the instructions issued by the Government with reference thereto on 2251967, Annexure P-1 and there being no post of Assistant Accounts Officer in the Food and Supplies Department Rules, I have no hesitation in holding that the post of Assistant Accounts Officer available in the Food and Supplies Department will be governed by the Punjab State Accounts Service (State Service Class-II) Rules, 1900 under the administrative control of Finance Department and not by the Punjab State Food and Supplies (State Service Class-II) Rules, 1966.
15.
The equation of pay scale of the post of Assistant Accounts Officer with that of Accounts Officer would not bring the post of Assistant Accounts Officer within the of Food and Supplies Department Rules.
Similarly in the absence of decision and facts of the case of CK Sahaney, the Respondent-department cannot gain any benefit.
Further more, it appears that CK Sahaney's case (supra) might be relating to the posts covered under the Food and Supplies Department Rules which is not the situation in the instant case.
16.
This being the situation and the fact that respondents No. 1 to 6 were not members of SAS Class-III Service and were not eligible for promotion as Assistant Accounts Officers in accordance with Punjab State Accounts Service (State Service Class-II) Rules, 1966, the action of the Food and Supplies Department is not sustainable and resultantly the promotion/appointments of the departmental candidates including the promotion of respondents No. 4 and 6 and any other promotion to the post of Assistant Accounts Officer in pursuance of letter Annexure P-3 are not sustainable.
17.
Consequently, the promotion of respondents No. 4 to 6 as Assistant Accounts Officers made vide Annexure P-1 and any other promotion on that basis made in pursuance of Annexure P-2 are quashed and the official respondents in General and Respondent No. 2 in particular is directed to fill up the sanctioned posts of Assistant Accounts Officers in the Food and Supplies Department in accordance with the Punjab State Accounts Service (State Service Class-II) Rules, 1966 per eligibility and suitability of the incumbents who are eligible in terms of Rule 7(b) supra.
It is made clear that the respondents would consider all the eligible incumbents who are within the zone of consideration irrespective of the fact whether they are petitioners in the present case or not.
The aforesaid directions shall be complied with by the official respondents within a period of six months.
In the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.