GC Garg, J - The petitioner was working as Naib Tehsildar in the State of Haryana, when he was compulsorily retired from service by order of respondent No. 1 dated December 13, 1978, Annexure P-1.
By order dated May 7, 1981, Annexure P-14, the Financial Commissioner, Haryana ordered imposition of 10% cut in the pension of the petitioner vide Rule 64 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume II.
The petitioner filed this writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India for issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari quashing he order, Annexure P-14 and a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to release his retiral benefits.
On notice being issued, written statement was filed on behalf of respondent No. 2 contending that the petitioner was not entitled to most of the retiral benefits.
2.
Admittedly, during the pendency of the writ petition some of the retiral benefits have been granted to the petitioner.
3.
The writ petition was admitted to regular hearing as back as on September 14, 1980.
Now the petitioner has moved a miscellaneous application being 2579 of 1993 praying that the writ petition be disposed of by directing the respondents to pass final orders in regard to release of remaining retrial benefits to him within a specified period.
Notice of the application was given to the Advocate General, Haryana.
4.
Mr. RP Bali, learned counsel for the petitioner, points out that the case of the petitioner for crossing of efficiency bar has not so far been decided which he was entitled to crow with effect from October 1, 1964.
The counsel further submits that in case it is held that the petitioner was not entitled to cross efficiency bar on the aforesaid date, his case was required to be considered every subsequent year and he was entitled to be given all consequential benefits on his retirement.
The counsel for the petitioner further states that petitioner's claim for leave encashment has also not been decided as yet.
Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents has not been able to controvert the submissions made by the petitioner's counsel.
In the circumstances the respondents are directed to consider the claim of the petitioner in regard to crossing of efficiency bar as due on October 1, 1964 or on any subsequent date and also for grant of leave encashment, within a period of three months from the receipt by them a copy of this order.
In case the petitioner is found entitled to the aforesaid claims, the consequential benefits that might accrue to him on account of his claims being granted, will be paid to the petitioner within the next two months, but in case the respondents come to the conclusion that the petitioner is not entitled to any or both of these claims, the respondents shall pass a detailed order containing reasons therefor and communicate the order to the petitioner by registered post.
It is further directed that any such order shall be passed after affording an opportunity of being heard to the petitioner.
5.
With the directions aforesaid, the civil miscellaneous application as also the writ petition stand disposed of.
There will be no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.