Ashok Bhan, J - Petitioners were originally recruited as Male Social Workers in the Directorate of Director, Welfare of Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes, Punjab between the period December, 1959 to January, 1968.
The post Of Male Social Worker carried a pay scale offers, 60-100/-.
Tehsil Welfare Officers were on different cadres but carried the same scale of pay i.e. 60-100/-.
The posts of Male Social Worker and Tehsil Welfare Officers were inter-changeable.
In the year 1970 on the recommendations of the First Pay Commission, the cadre of Male Social Worker was abolished and the grade of Tehsil Welfare Officer was received from Rs. 60-100/- to Rs. 110-200/-.
The post of Social Male Worker was merged in the cadre of clerks.
Petitioners alongwith other Male Social Workers were given the pay scale of Rs. 110-250/- i.e. the scale of clerks.
At this particular period of time pay scale of Tehsil Welfare Officer carried a lower pay scale than that of clerks.
The pay scale of Tehsil Welfare Officers was revised from 110-200/- to Rs. 140-300/-.
Certain persons including one Shri Boota Singh, Male Social Worker was promoted to the post of Tehsil Welfare Officer being the senior most Male Social Worker.
In the year 1970 six posts of Tehsil Welfare Officers fell vacant.
Six persons from the posts of clerk were promoted as Tehsil Welfare Officers on 1481970.
In the year 1971 Naranjan Singh, Clerk who was junior to the petitioner was promoted as Tehsil Welfare Officer.
Since Naranjan Singh was junior to the petitioner representations were filed against his promotion.
2.
On May 22, 1975, the Government asked the petitioners to submit their option as to whether they would like to be promoted as Accountants/Assistants/Junior Auditors or Tehsil Welfare Officers.
A copy of this letter has been appended as Annexure P-4 to the petition.
Petitioner gave his option in writing that he would like to be appointed as Tehsil Welfare Officer.
In the month of February, 1976, four posts or Assistant/Junior Auditors fell vacant.
3.
Sohan Lal petitioner No. 1, Sawinder Singh petitioner No. 3 and Gurdev Singh petitioner No, 4 were promoted as Accountant on 4.11.1972, 8.11.1973 and 24574 respectively i.e. before 22.5.1975 when the option of the petitioners were taken.
Other petitioners were promoted as Assistant/Accountants/Junior Auditors vide orders dated 2741978, 5.12.1978, 2211979, respectively copies of these orders have been appended as Annexures p. 6 and p.7 to the petition.
On 11101979 five posts of Tehsil Welfare Officers were advertised to be filled in by direct recruitment.
In pursuance of the said advertisement no recruitment was made as the interviews were not held by the department.
Petitioner file their representations that they be promoted to the post of Tehsil Welfare Officer.
Government took the decision on 521980 (i.e. the date of issuance of letter Annexure p. 10, that all Male Social Workers who were later on merged with the cadre of clerks and who had given their options to be promoted against the post of Tehsil Welfare Officers, should be promoted immediately.
Petitioners have alleged that instead of promotion the petitioners to the post of Tehsil Welfare Officers respondent No. 2 advertised 11 posts of Tehsil Welfare Officers on 25111980 to he filled by direct recruitment copy of this advertisement has been appended as Annexure p. 11 to the petition and the same has been impugned in this writ petition inter alia on the ground that action of the respondents in advertising the posts of Tehsil Welfare Officers to be filled in by direct recruitment was violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India as they had been denied equality of opportunity inasmuch as in spite of their eligibility and entitlement, their claims arc not being considered for promotion; that the government by its own action was estopped from filling these posts by direct recruitment because of the options given by the petitioners; that the action was violative of principles of natural justice and hence without jurisdiction.
4.
In the written statement filed, it has been stated that Male Social Workers and Tehsil Welfare Officers were two different cadres but carried the same pay scales i.e., 60-100/- and the posts of Male Social Workers were not interchangeable with that of Tehsil Welfare Officers.
Allegations regarding revision of grade of these two posts of different times was admitted.
That on 2.4.1969 a decision was taken by the government that instead of filling up the posts of Tehsil Welfare Officers directly, they would be filled up from amongst the suitable/eligible Male, Social Workers and that in fact certain Male Social Workers had been absorbed as Tehsil Welfare Officers.
Taking the options from the petitioners who desired to be absorbed either as Tehsil Welfare Officers or as Assistants/Accountants and Junior Auditors was admitted.
The fact that the petitioners who were posted as clerks were given promotion as Accountants/Assistants was also admitted.
It was averred that once the petitioners accepted the promotion as Accountants/Assistants, they waived their earlier option being posted as Tehsil Welfare Officers; that the petitioners could not take double advantage i.e. first being promoted as Accountant/Assistants and later on claiming the posts of Tehsil Welfare Officers as well.
The pay scales of Male Social Workers and Tehsil Welfare Officers carry the same grade of pay.
Allegations that the order was violative of Article 16 of the Constitution of India and against the principles of natural justice and bad in law were denied.
5.
I have heard the learned counsel for the petitioners who has ably argued her case, but I am unable to agree with the pleas raised by her.
The grade of two posts i.e. Tehsil Welfare Officer and Accountant/Assistant is the same.
Petitioners No. 1, 3 and 4 had been promoted as Assistant Accountants prior to the taking of the option in May 1975.
Other petitioners were promoted in the years 1978, 1979 as Assistants/Accountants.
Petitioners did not object to their being promoted as Assistants/Accountants.
They enjoyed the benefit of promotion in a higher grade.
Later on in the year 1981 when the 11 posts of Tehsil Welfare Officers were advertised to be filled by direct recruitment, the petitioners have filed the present writ petition challenging the said advertisement.
Rules regarding the recruitment to the post of Tehsil Welfare Officer were not referred to at the time of arguments.
It was not the case of the petitioners that the posts of Tehsil Welfare Officers could not be filled by direct recruitment.
To be fair to the counsel for the petitioners, it was argued by her that the respondents in their written statement in papa 4 had accepted that Government had taken a decision on April 2, 1969 to the effect that instead of filling up of the post of Tehsil Welfare Officer directly it should be filled up from amongst the suitable/eligible Male Social Workers and, therefore, these posts could not be filled by direct recruitment because suitable/eligible Male Social Workers i.e. the petitioners, were available.
I do not find any substance in this submission either; the contents of the decision taken on April 2, 1969 have not been brought on record.
Even if such a decision was taken in the year 1969 even then it would not effect the merits of the present case.
The petitioners were promoted to the posts of Assistants/Accountants prior to in the year 1981, when posts of Tehsil Welfare Officers were advertised and after taking of the options from them in May, 1975.
It is not the case of the petitioners that Male Social Officers were available when the posts of Tehsil Welfare Officers were advertised in the year 1981 to be filled from direct recruits.
Petitioners having been promoted as Assistants/Accountants were not working as Male Social Workers, and, therefore, could not stake their claims to the posts of Tehsil Welfare Officers by promotion.
No other point was argued.
Finding no merit in the writ petition, I dismiss the same with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.