RS Mongia, J (Oral) - Petitioner obtained the qualification of Vidya Rattan from Gurukul University, Jawalapur in the year 1970.
It is not disputed and is rather admitted that Vidya Rattan qualification from the said University was recognised by Haryana Government as equivalent to Visharad examination for the purpose of admission to OT Course.
It is further admitted case of the parties that the petitioner was in possession of a certificate of having passed Language Teacher's Course (also called OT examination), which was obtained by him in July 1972 from the Education Department, Haryana.
During February, March 1973, quite a large number of teachers in Haryana went on strike.
To tide over this situation created by the strike, respondents appointed certain persons as teachers/teachresses though some of them did not possess the requisite qualifications for the posts but were suitable for other appointments.
Some persons who had Sanskrit in B.A./B.Ed.
were appointed as Sanskrit and Visharad or OT Pass were appointed as Hindi teachers.
Similarly, JBT teachers were appointed against the posts of C.B.
teachers and vice versa.
Petitioner was appointed as a Hindi teacher.
The category of teachers who were so appointed during the period of strike were known as 'stipendiary teachers.'
2.
Petitioner continued to work as 'Hindi Stipendiary Teacher' till December 1975, when his services were terminated.
The stipendiary teachers protested and as a result thereof, the Government took a policy decision which was circulated by the Director of Public Instructions vide letter dated 31st August 1976, copy of which has been appended as Annexure P-1.
In these instructions, it has been observed that cases of those stipendiary teachers whose services had been dispensed with, had again been considered for reappointment on the posts for which they possessed the requisite qualifications at the time of dispensing with their services.
The part of the instructions with which we are concerned may be reproduced below :- Should now be appointed to the posts of Sanskrit teachers.
Some time before, Visharad qualified candidates were admitted to the Course of OT training.
Therefore, OT Visharad pass 'stipendiary teachers' should not be treated as untrained Sanskrit teachers.
This relaxation is only for stipendiary teachers.
This should not be treated as a precedent."
In pursuance of these instructions, the petitioner, who had earlier been appointed as 'Hindi stipendiary teacher' was given appointment letter dated 9/10.11.1976 appointing him as a Sanskrit Teacher in the grade of Rs. 220-400 (Annexure P-2).
3.
The grievance of the petitioner is that according to the instructions Annexure P-1, dated August 31, 1976, the petitioner was not to be considered as an untrained Sanskrit Teacher, (the relevant portion reproduced above), but in spite of that the Headmaster of the school, where the petitioner had been given appointment did not release him the regular pay scale of Rs. 220-400 but only gave him the fixed pay of Rs. 200/- pm which according to the petitioner was not only against the instructions Annexure P-1 but also against the appointment letter Annexure P-2.
4.
An order dated 25.11.1982 was issued by the District Education Officer, Gurgaon, (Annexure P-4), in which it has been mentioned that in pursuance of the decision contained in Haryana Government letter No. 14/27-80-Edu.III(4) dated 171980, the ad hoc Sanskrit teachers who had completed two years' service from 1111966 to 31121979 and were in position on 31121979, were being appointed as officiating Sanskrit teachers at fixed pay of Rs. 500/- plus usual allowances.
By virtue of this letter, the petitioner was to get Rs. 500/- as fixed pay plus usual allowances.
It is the case of the petitioner that he is entitled to the running scale of Rs. 220-400 as Sanskrit teacher with effect from the date of his appointment and at the rate of Rs. 525-1050 with effect from 1.4.1979 when the pay scales were revised and is also entitled to further revision of pay scales from time to time.
He has prayed that the letter dated 25.11.1982 appointing him at a fixed pay of Rs. 500/- as officiating Sanskrit Teacher be quashed and he be treated as a regular Sanskrit Teacher on regular basis.
5.
The stand taken in the written statement on behalf of the respondents is that it was by inadvertence that in the letter of appointment dated 9/10.11.1976, Annexure P-2, the petitioner was allowed the grade of Rs. 220- 400, whereas according to his qualifications, he was entitled to the fixed pay of Rs. 150/- PM plus usual allowances in accordance with Haryana Government letter No. 1312-2E-II(r-II)69 dated 18.3.1969, copy of which has been appended as Annexure R-1 to the written statement.
6.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that this writ petition is liable to succeed.
According to the instructions, Annexure P-1, of which the relevant extract has already been reproduced above, persons having qualification of Visharad OT pass, like the petitioner, were not to be considered as untrained teachers, meaning thereby that they were to be treated as duly qualified.
Even in the letter of appointment, Annexure P-2 it was mentioned that the petitioner would get running pay scale of Rs. 220-400.
Even some other stipendiary teachers, who were appointed as such vide Annexure P-2, along with the petitioner, were given the running pay scale of Rs. 220-400.
The petitioner was appointed as stipendiary teacher under the specific instructions Annexure P-1 whereby he was to be treated as trained teacher.
In other words, he was to be treated as fully qualified teacher.
Thereafter the question of applying earlier instructions dated 18.3.1969 (Annexure-1 appended with the written statement), does not arise.
In fact, the petitioner was to be considered for appointment on regular basis in view of the Government instructions dated 171980, as he had completed more than two years' of ad hoc service and was in position on 31121979.
He was in fact, appointed on regular basis vide Annexure P-2 in the running grade and therefore, he could not be treated as untrained teacher, when order dated 25.11.1982 (Annexure P- 4) was issued.
He was entitled to be considered as regular teacher and fully qualified and given pay-scale of regular Sanskrit teacher.
Once the benefit was given to the stipendiary teachers vide Annexure P-1, Visharad/OT pass teachers were to be treated as trained Sanskrit teachers.
They could not be treated a unqualified or untrained for the purpose of pay-scale.
For the foregoing reasons, this writ petition is allowed and the respondents are directed to treat the petitioner as a regular Sanskrit teacher with effect from the date of his appointment in the pay scale of Rs. 220-400.
The petitioner will be entitled to the pay-scale as revised from time to time.
Let the arrears of pay, as observed above, be calculated and paid to the petitioner within four months of the receipt of the copy of this order failing which, the arrears, so calculated, would carry interest at the rate of 12 per cent per annum from the date the arrears became due till the date of payment.
Petition allowed.