RS Mongia, J (Oral) - In response to an advertisement issued by the Punjabi -University Patiala (in short the University) dated 25th April 1990 for one post of Professor each in the Department of Religious Studies Guru Granth Sahib Studies and Bhai Jodh Singh Chair of Sikhism.
Petitioner, Dr. Nirbhai Singh, Respondent No. 4 Shri Balkar Singh and Respondent No. 6.
Dr. Jodh Singh were selected and appointed on 26th December, 1990, as Professor of Religious Studies, Professor Guru Granth Sahib Studies and Professor of Bhai Jodh Singh Chair of Sikhism, respectively.
The dispute is regarding the determination of their seniority as Professor as it is on the basis of the seniority that the appointment of Dean of Faculty and Head of the Department depends.
2.
Statute 15 of the University Calendar 1990, Volume 1, relating to the determination of seniority may be noticed :  "15.
(i) Whenever, in accordance with these Statutes, any person is to hold an office or be a member of any Authority of the University by rotation, according to seniority, such seniority shall be determined according to the length of continuous service of such person in his grade or post as the case may be and in accordance with such other principles as the Syndicate may, from time to time, prescribe.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Registrar to prepare and maintain in respect of each class of persons to whom the provisions of this Statute apply a complete and up-to-date seniority list in accordance with the provisions of the foregoing clause.
(3) If two or more persons have equal length of continuous service in a particular grade or post, or the relative seniority of any person or persons is otherwise in doubt, the Registrar may on his motion and shall, at the request of any such person, submit the matter to the Syndicate whose decision thereon shall be final."
3.
It is the case of the petitioner that in the eventuality of the appointment of the incumbents on the same day to a particular post by way of direct recruitment, seniority has to be determined on the basis of age.
According to him, that is the only reasonable criteria and the petitioner being older in age to Respondents No. 4 and 6, he is senior to them as Professor, having been appointed on the same day as Respondents No. 4 and 6, The Registrar of the University issued an order on 9th February 1991, appointing Dr. Balkar Singh, Respondent No. 4, as the Dean of the Faculty of Humanities & Religious Studies.
According to Statute 5 of the University, Dean of the Faculty is to be appointed from amongst Professors in each Faculty by rotation according to seniority.
It had, therefore, become obvious from the issuance of the order dated 9th February, 1991, appointing Dr. Balkar Singh as Dean, Faculty of Humanities & Religious Studies that he was being treated senior to the petitioner as a Professor.
This led the petitioner to file the present writ petition.
4.
The tenure of the office of the Dean of a Faculty is two years and during the pendency of the present writ petition, the term of office of Dr. Balkar Singh as Dean of Faculty expired and in his place Dr. RD Nirakari, Respondent No. 5 was appointed as Dean of Faculty of Humanities and Religious Studies, vide order dated 23rd December, 1992 (Annexure P-9 to the amended writ petition).
By way of amendment, the petitioner challenged the appointment of Dr. RD Nirakari as Dean of Faculty of Humanities and Religious Studies, primarily on the same grounds as in the original writ petition.
5.
The learned counsel for the petitioner drew my attention to Statute 15(2) (already reproduced above) that it is the duty of the Registrar of the University to prepare and maintain in respect of each class of persons a complete and upto-date seniority list in accordance with the provisions of the Statute.
He submitted that no such seniority list was either prepared by the Registrar or in any case none was circulated to the petitioner or the other similarly situated persons.
Consequently, he could never know his position in seniority, vis-a-vis Respondents No. 4 and 6.
It was only on the appointment of Dr. Balkar Singh as the Dean of Faculty of Humanities & Religious Studies that he came to know that he was being treated junior to him as Professor, which was his apprehensions earlier.
In fact he had made more than one representations to the University Authorities that in law and fact he was senior to Respondent Dr. Balkar Singh and it is he who was entitled to be appointed as Dean of Faculty of Humanities & Religious Studies.
It is further the case of the petitioner that without deciding the seniority inter-se the petitioner and Respondents No. 4 and 6, Dr. Balkar Singh was appointed as Dean of Faculty of Humanities and Religious Studies.
The learned counsel on the basis of Statute 15(3), further submitted that if a request is made by an individual regarding the determination of seniority the matter had to be decided by the Syndicate, whose decision is final.
6.
The learned counsel for the respondents however submitted that on 10th October, 1987, the Syndicate of the University had taken a decision (copy Annexure R-1 with the written statement of the University) that in case two teachers are directly recruited on the same day, then for determination of their seniority inter-se, the length of service in the lower cadre should be taken into consideration while fixing seniority.
According to the respondents, it was on the basis of this decision of the Syndicate that the Registrar of the University had taken Respondent No. 4, Dr. Balkar Singh to be senior to the petitioner as he had longer length of service as a Reader in the University as compared to the service rendered by the petitioner as a Reader.
No specific order on any determined seniority between the parties have been brought to my notice.
7.
Statute 15(2), reproduced above, casts a duty on the Registrar to prepare and maintain a seniority list in respect of each class of persons to whom the provisions of Statute 15 apply.
Admittedly, the provisions of Statute 15 apply to the parties before me.
However, no seniority list was prepared or maintained by the Registrar as envisaged by Statute 15(2).
Further, Statute 15(3) also enjoins upon the Syndicate to determine the seniority if any request is made in that behalf to the University Authorities.
As observed earlier, a request was made by the petitioner in that behalf but the Syndicate did not determine the seniority inter-se of the parties.
The learned counsel for the petitioner also argued that in fact the decision of the Syndicate dated 10th October, 1987 (Annexure R-1 with the written statement) is not applicable to the facts of the present case or determining seniority of Professors to the Faculty of Humanities & Religious Studies as it was a decision taken only for the purposes of appointment of Dean of Faculties of Arts and Social Sciences.
He further submitted that in fact under such circumstances, the only reasonable criteria is the age which should determine the inter-se seniority as is also provided under the Punjab Civil Services Rules.
8.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and after appreciating the facts noticed above, I do not consider it proper at this stage to go into the points whether the decision of the Syndicate dated 10th October, 1987 would be applicable to the facts of the present case and whether the age should determine the seniority.
I, rather, deem it proper to relegate the petitioner to seek his remedy before the Syndicate of the University which should determine the seniority inter se of the parties is envisaged by Statute 15.
This is especially in view of the fact that no seniority list had been prepared or determined by the Registrar of the University as envisaged by Statute 15(2).
9.
For the foregoing reasons, this writ petition is allowed and the Syndicate of the University is directed to consider the representations regarding the determination of seniority, already made by the petitioner.
It will be open to the petitioner to supplement the earlier representations within one week from today, i.e. on or before 15th April, 1993 and if any such supplementary representation is made, the same shall also be taken into consideration by the Syndicate.
The petitioner would also send the copies of the representation already made alongwith the supplementary representation, if any to Respondents No. 4 and 6 as also to Dr. RD Nirakari, Respondents No. 5, who may, if so advised send their replies/counter representations to the Syndicate on or before 22nd April, 1993, with a copy to the petitioner.
The Syndicate shall decide the representations so made in its next meeting.
It will be advisable that Dr. RD Nirakari, who is Member of the Syndicate does not take part in the deliberations in the meeting of the Syndicate when this item is taken up.
It is further made clear that till the decision of the Syndicate on the matter, the appointment of Dr. RD Nirakari as Dean of Faculty of Humanities & Religious Studies vide order dated 23rd December, 1992 (Annexure P-9) would be treated as an ad hoc arrangement.
I make no order as to costs.
A copy of this order be given Dasti by 20th April, 1993 to the parties, on payment.
Petition allowed.