GR Majithia, J - The petitioner has challenged the officer order No. 2601-03/24-E, dated May 4, 1981 passed by the Superintending Engineer, Shah Nehar Circle Talwara reverting him from the post of Research Assistant to that of Silt Analyst, in this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as a Silt Analyst on purely temporary basis vide letter No. 3116-17/145-E, dated October 9, 1973 issued by the Superintending Engineer, Shah Nehar Circle, Punjab, Chandigarh.
His services were regularised with effect from April 1, 1977 vide office order No. 3010- 14/72-E1, dated April 9, 1979 issued by the Superintending Engineer, Shah Nehar Circle Talwara in pursuance of Chief Secretary to Government Punjab's C Circular letter No. (4220)6/133/78/Volume 1/16933, dated May 25, 1978 and 4426-61133/78/P.
F/17898, dated June 1, 1978.
He was promoted as Research Assistant Grade 'B' in stopgap arrangement on ad hoc basis for three months vide office order No. 915-17/24-E, dated February 3, 1978.
He continued to work as Research Assistant till May 4, 1981 when by the impugned office order dated May 4, 1981 he was reverted to his substantive post of Silt Analyst.
The order says that the petitioner could only be promoted as Research Assistant after he had completed his five years, regular service as Silt Analyst, i.e. on April 1, 1982.
It is this order which has been assailed in this petition.
3.
The writ petition came up for motion hearing on May 18, 1991.
The Bench stayed the reversion of the petitioner.
The writ petition was admitted to hearing on July 23, 1981 and the ad-interim stay order by which the petitioner's reversion has been stayed was maintained.
The resultant effect is that the petitioner is continuing as Research Assistant till today.
Since no one has put in appearance on behalf of the petitioner.
It is probable that by now he might have got his next promotion also.
4.
The order of reversion is sought to be justified on the ground that a Silt Analyst could be promoted as a Research Assistant if he has worked in the Institute or Laboratory under the control of the Institute for atleast five years and has also passed the F.Sc.
examination of a recognised University.
Rule 10(c)(i) of Chapter 721 of Manual of Administration, which has been relied upon by the respondents, reads thus :  "By promotion from amongst Analysts or Silt Analysts or other ranks already working in the Institute or Laboratories under the control of Institute, provided the official so promoted is reported to be fit for research work expected of Research Assistants and has worked in the Institute or Laboratories for at least 5 years and has also passed the F.Sc.
examination of a recognised University."
In para 2 of the short affidavit filed by Shri Santokh Singh, Superintending Engineer, Shah Nehar Circle, Talwara on behalf of respondents No. 1 to 3, viz, the State of Punjab, Chief Engineer (Project), Irrigation Works, Punjab, Chandigarh and the Superintending Engineer, Shah Nehar Circle, Talwara, it stated thus :  "As the petitioner possesses the requisite qualifications required for appointment to the post of Research Assistant, Grade-B the Respondent No. 3 considered his case and promoted him as Research Assistant Grade-B on stop gap arrangement on ad hoc basis for a period of three months vide letter No. 915-17/24-E dated 321978.
As clearly mentioned in the aforesaid letter, his promotion was purely on stop-gap arrangement for three months, and on the expiry of this period, the petitioner was supposed to have been reverted back to his substantive rank i.e. Silt Analyst."
5.
The petitioner possessed the requisite qualification for promotion as Research Assistant.
He was promoted as Research Assistant Grade 'B' although his promotion is stated to be a stopgap arrangement on ad hoc basis for a period of three months.
The order of promotion says so.
However, the petitioner continued to work as Research Assistant uninterruptedly from February 3, 1978 till May 4, 1981.
Thus, he worked as Research Assistant for more than three years.
The initial appointment was made after the authorities were satisfied that the petitioner possessed the requisite qualification for promotion as Research Assistant.
It will be presumed that the condition that a Silt Analyst could be promoted as Research Assistant if he had worked in the Institution or Laboratories for at least five years had been relaxed and the petitioner was promoted as Research Assistant Grade 'B'.
The defence taken by the respondents in the written statement that the reversion was ordered in accordance with Rule 10(c)(i) of Chapter 721 of Manual of Administration, referred to above, is an innovation and has been introduced to defendant undependable action.
The order of reversion says that the reversion was ordered since the petitioner had not completed five years, regular service as a Silt Analyst.
The defence taken in the short affidavit is that the petitioner did not have the requisite qualification for promotion as a Research Assistant as is mentioned in Rule 10(c)(i) supra.
The stand taken in the reversion order and the written statement is irreconcilable.
The respondents have not brought to my notice any statutory rule or instructions enjoining that a Silt Analyst could only be promoted as Research Assistant if he has worked in that capacity on regular basis for five years.
The respondents were aware of the deficiency in their case and it was for this reason that the plea that the petitioner did not possess the requisite qualification referred to above has been introduced.
To say the least, it is not expected from the respondents to take up a stand which cannot be justified at law.
Apart from this, I am not inclined to sustain the reversion order since the petitioner has been working as a Research Assistant since February 3, 1978 uptil today.
For the reasons stated above, the writ petition succeeds and the impugned order dated May 4, 1981 (Annexure P-4) is quashed, but with no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.