Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was enlisted as a constable in the Central Reserve Police Force on June 17, 1983.
On December 15, 1987, the petitioner proceeded on 12 days casual leave.
The bus in which he was travelling met with an accident.
He sustained serious injuries on his left leg.
Ultimately, gangrene developed as a result of which, his left had to be amputated below the knee.
On the finding of the Medical Board, he was invalided out of service with effect from December 28, 1988.
He represented to the respondents for being accommodated against one of the Group D posts such as Peon or Ward Boy etc. Vide letter dated January 9, 1989 sent by the Commandant-74 B CRPF to the Deputy Inspector General of Police, it was inter alia observed that "due to amputation of his left leg (Upto knee level) he is completely and permanently incapacitated for further service of any kind in CRPF and therefore his re-employment in any post in this force is not possible and he may apply for appointment of his wife in the post of Ward-Girl in CRPF on compassionate grounds."
(emphasis supplied).
2.
Mr. SP Pippat, learned counsel for the respondents points out that this recommendation was accepted and the petitioner was advised to ask his wife to apply for the post of Ward Girl.
3.
Another fact which may be mentioned here is that vide order dated February 8, 1989, the petitioner was paid an amount of Rs. 14,880/- towards Risk (Premia) Fund.
The petitioner avers that vide order dated May 6, 1988, the respondents had decided that a person who has been permanently incapacitated was entitled to "a lump sum grant of Rs. 25,000/- plus monthly recurring payment of Rs. 400/- PM for 20 years or until death......" He submits that he is entitled to the payment as directed by the Director General of CRPF through the above mentioned letter.
4.
On these premises, the petitioner has sought a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to give him a job in Group D or to grant him the benefits towards pension etc. as admissible to him.
5.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, the factual position has not been controverted.
However, it has been inter alia averred in paragraph 12 that the petitioner is completely and permanently incapacitated for further service of any kind of CRPF and he may apply for appointment of his wife in the post of Ward-Girl in CRPF on compassionate grounds.
It has been further averred that the petitioner is not entitled to the payment of Rs. 25,000/- or Rs. 400/- per month and that he was rightly paid the amount of Rs. 14,880/-.
The petitioner's claim to pension has been contested on the ground that his total service being less than 10 years, he was not entitled to the grant of any pension.
6.
The case had originally been taken up on January 12, 1993.
On the basis of the averments made in the written statement, it was stated by the learned counsel for the respondents that the petitioner's wife could be appointed as a Ward Girl.
The case was accordingly adjourned to enable the respondents to issue appropriate orders.
Nothing has been done so far.
In this view of the matter, it has become necessary to consider and decide the case on merits.
7.
A perusal of the discharge certificate issued by the respondents, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-1 shows that the petitioner was born on August 5, 1961.
He entered service on June 17, 1983.
He was invalided out of service on December 28, 1988.
It is thus clear that the petitioner is less than 32 years of age and had served the Reserve Police Force for a period of 5-1/2 years and has been permanently incapacitated for further service of any kind in CRPF.
It is undoubtedly a hard case.
It calls for compassion.
The respondents had advised the petitioner to apply for appointment of his wife on the post of Ward Girl.
The case had been adjourned to enable the respondents to issue appointment orders.
In spite of the fact that a considerable length of time has elapsed, these orders have not been issued.
In the circumstances of the case, it appears just and proper to direct the respondents to issue these orders immediately.
It is accordingly directed.
8.
So far as the petitioner's claim with regard to the payment of a lump sum of Rs. 25,000/- with a recurring payment of Rs. 400/- per month is concerned, it is apt to refer to the instructions issued by the Government vide letter dated June 2, 1988.
Copy of this order is not available on the file of this case.
The petitioner has only produced the Singal issued by the authorities on the basis of the instructions contained in this letter, which is not very clear.
Mr. Pipat has however, produced the letter from the original file of the Department.
A photo copy of this order has been retained on record as Mark 'A'.
A perusal of this letter shows that in paragraph 2(b), it has provided as under :  "(b) Invalidation case : When a person becomes completely incapacitated or is rendered absolutely immobile on account of disability (cases already defined under para 2(b)(i) of letter No. RF-3/81-86-Admn-II dated 11 March 1986) will be entitled to a lump sum grant of Rs. 25,000/- plus monthly recurring payment of Rs. 400/- pm for 20 years or until death of force person whichever is later.
Recurring benefits at the increased rates will also be applicable to the old cases under this category from May 1988 onwards only."
A perusal of the above shows that "when a person becomes completely incapacitated (he) will be entitled to a lump sum grant of Rs. 25,000/- plus monthly recurring payment, of Rs. 400/- pm for 20 years or until death....."  9.
A perusal of the letter dated January 9, 1989 which has been produced as Annexure R-1 with the written statement and paragraph 12 of the written statement shows that the respondents admit that the petitioner "is completely and permanently incapacitated....." His case is thus squarely covered by the above provision.
Accordingly, he was entitled to the payment of an amount of Rs. 25,000/- instead of Rs. 14,880/- as actually given to him as also to the recurring monthly payment of Rs. 400/- per month.
The instructions dated June 27, 1988 had admittedly been enforced w.e.f.
May 1988.
The petitioner was invalided out of service on December 28, 1988.
Consequently these instructions and not those issued in the year 1986 govern his case.
Accordingly, it is held that the petitioner was entitled to the benefits as claimed by him in respect of the lump sum payment as also the monthly recurring payment of Rs. 400/- pm  Accordingly, this writ petition is allowed.
It is directed that the respondents shall appoint the petitioner's wife as a Ward Girl immediately.
The respondents are further directed to pay the arrears of Rs. 10,000/- as also those on account of' the monthly recurring payment at the rate of Rs. 400/- pm w.e.f.
January 1, 1989 onwards.
This payment shall be made to the petitioner for a period of 20 years or until his death whichever is later.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to his costs which are assessed at Rs. 2000/-.
Petition allowed.