Syed Bashir-ud-Din, J. - Mr. JA Kawoosa, AAG, tenders statement that the objections filed by him may be treated as reply on behalf of respondents.
His statement is taken on record.
Considered.
Admit.
The matter can be taken up and on submission of counsel for the parties is taken up for final disposal.
Heard.
2.
Petitioner was initially appointed as Safaiwalla on consolidated pay at Govt. Dispensary Muhara Uri.
At this Primary Health Centre he worked as such safaiwalla for last over 25 years.
In December, 1996 petitioner's services as safaiwalla were regularised as graded safaiwala in the pay scale of 750-940 (annexure P1).
The respondents are superannuating the petitioner although, he has several years service yet to render in terms of the certificate given to him by Medical Supdt.
District Hospital Baramulla (annexure P2).
Petitioner belonging to inferior services is to retire at the age of 60 years in terms of Article 20 of the CSR and therefore, continues in service.
3.
Respondents in reply contend that the petitioner has retired from service on 3061998.
He has been paid and has received the consequential retiral benefits on completion of superannuating age of 60 years, worked out on recorded date of birth in the service book of the petitioner.
The petitioner's age recorded in his service record and front page of his service book is 18.6.1938.
It is recorded in the year 1962.
Same is authenticated by the petitioner under his own signatures and attested by the concerned officer.
Copy of service book annexure A on the record reveals this position.
It is denied that any further service is to be rendered by the petitioner to the department, after he has retired on superannuation on 3061998.
The temporary service rules are not applicable to this case, in so far as the petitioner has been working as sweeper on contingent basis and has been paid out of contingent grants till his services were regularised in graded post as sweeper.
Petitioner has not worked against any vacancy.
The petition is prayed to be dismissed.
4.
The petitioner's counsel is taking preliminary objection that Addl.
Advocate General Mr. JA Kawoosa is not competent to represent the respondent in absence of power of attorney.
Though Mr. Kawoosa AAG is representing respondents right from the beginning yet Mr. Khan has awakened to take the objection only at this stage when case is being finally disposed of.
However, this contention has no basis.
Mr. Kawoosa has been appearing in this case as also in other cases of Health department on behalf of the State and its Officials as standing counsel of the J&K State, and pursuant to allocation of work to the Law Officers by the Advocate General.
5.
Next Mr. Khan submits that the objections filed by the respondents may not be considered as they have not been filed within time.
Again the objection is based on misconception, insofar as the objection has been filed in the registry way back on 23111998, as even referred so in the order dated 3299 of this Court.
The contention of Mr. Khan that the order dated 4.12.1998 of a co-ordinate Bench of this court directing the respondents to allow the petitioner to discharge his normal functions is determinative of the writ is again untrue but just over simplification of the statement.
The court directed respondent No. 3 to allow the petitioner to discharge his functions after taking note of the respondents alleged at of not filing the objections.
Though, as observed in the order dated 3299 of this Court, the objections had been by then filed in the registry but possibly the same were not placed before the Hon'ble Judge on 4.12.1998.
By this very order the Hon'ble Single Bench even granted further opportunity to respondents to file the objections, which in fact had been filed by then.
Thus, considered this objection of Mr. Khan too is without any substance or legal basis.
6.
The attested copy of the service book of the petitioner annexure A, shows that the date of birth declared by him and recorded in petitioner's service book is 18.6.1938.
This age is recorded on the basis of Chowkidar's birth certificate, as attested by the medical officer Mohura.
The entry is attested by Deputy Director and District Medical Office Baramullah.
The first service entry in the record appears entered on 141964 whereas, the petitioner sweeper has been working as such sweeper since March 1954 on contingent basis and his services have been regularised on 301296.
The petitioner has not challenged the entry in the service book and his recorded Date of Birth in his service records during last over three decades till he filed the writ petition in August 1998, after he was retired on supernnauation in June 1998.
Not only so, the petitioner as per the reply of the respondents has received all the monetary retiral benefits consequential on his retirement on superannuation in June 1998.
The whole attempt of the petitioner is to get the benefit by extension of service on the claimed date of birth which he is basing on the petition on a certificate of medical superintendent District Hospital Baramulla annexure P2 issued on 12121996.
This is the photostat copy.
No basis whatsoever for the age has been given in the certificate as recorded in the certificate.
In fact it is anything but a certificate issued by a Doctor or medical Officer insofar as it does not give the basis whatsoever of the age recorded therein.
Obviously annexure P2 to the petition has been procured to make out a case for extension in service.
The certificate, if any, and the claim placed thereon is quite stale and also suffers from laches.
The Date of Birth entry in the service record annexure-A of the petitioner having been declared and entered at the time of his entry in the service is of utmost importance.
If the petitioner had declared his age at the initial stage of employment as in this case he is precluded from attempting to alter the age and get advantage after putting forth the plea of claimed correct entry to be recorded in his service records.
7.
In 1996(1) SLR 797, the Apex Court held that unreasonable delay in seeking change of the date of birth can in the circumstances of a case, suffice to reject the claim.
8.
In 1955 SC 1500 and 1996(1) SLR 797, it has been led (held ?)
by the Hon'ble Supreme Court that the claim of an employee, for correction of his date of birth entry in his service book made towards the fag end of his services with avowed object of continuing in the service beyond normal retirement period, should not be entertained.
It is also laid down that the date of birth entry in the service record made on representation/statement of an employee cannot be changed at the sweet will of an employee except in the manner permitted by the service conditions or the applicable rules.
9.
Rule 35-A of J&K CSR read with Rule 64 of J&K Financial Code Vol. Ist provides that an employee appointed to the service or post must declare his date of birth at the time of his appointment with confirmatory documentary evidence.
Once the date of birth is entered, it cannot be corrected except in case of clerical error or some mistake.
10.
In AIR 1995(2) SC 1499 their Lordship observed at page 1504 as under :-  ".....The fact that an employee of Government or its instrumentality who will be in service for over decades, with no objection whatsoever raised as to his date of birth accepted by the employer as correct when all of a sudden comes forward toward the fag end of his service career with a writ application before the High Court seeking correction of his date of birth in his Service Record, the very conduct of non-raising of an objection in the matter by the employee, in our view, should be a sufficient reason for the High Court, not to entertain such applications on grounds of acquiescence, undue delay and laches.
Moreover, discretionary jurisdiction of the High Court can never be said to have been reasonably and judicially exercised if it entertains such writ application for no employee, who had grievance as to this date of birth in the 'Service and Leave Record' could have genuinely waited till the fag end of his service career to get it corrected by availing of the extra-ordinary jurisdiction of a High Court.
Therefore, we have no hesitation in holding that ordinarily High Court should not, in exercise of his discretionary writ jurisdiction, entertain a writ application/petition filed by an employee of the Government or its instrumentality, towards the fag end of his service, seeking correction of his date of birth entered in his service and Leave Record or service Register with the avowed object of continuing in service beyond the normal period of his retirement....." Again in the case of State of Orissa and others v. Ramanath Patnaik, 1997(2) SCT 538 (SC) : AIR 1997 SC 2452, the Apex Court observed that when an entry is made in the service record and while the Government servant is in service he makes no attempt to have service record corrected, any amount of evidence produced subsequently, would be of no avail.
11.
In the result, the petition is dismissed and interim directions.
if any, also goes with the main writ petition.
Petition dismissed.