MR Agnihotri & HS Brar, JJ.
- The petitioner applied for the post of Assistant Director/Youth Coordinator, Punjab, in response to the advertisement of the Punjab Public Service Commission.
In the advertisement dated 15th February 1992, it was stated as under :-  "Applications on prescribed form are invited by 1631992."
The petitioner sent his application on 13th March, 1992, by registered post which, in all probability, should have reached by 16th March, 1992.
However, it reached on 17th March, 1992 and the same was not entertained, and the petitioner was informed about the rejection of his candidature for the first time by the impugned communication dated 19th January, 1993 Annexure P- 41 which showed the reasons for not being selected for interview' as "your application has been received late."
2.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, we find that since in the absence of any clear indication in the advertisement that applications should have reached by 16th March, 1992 the applicants are certainly entitled to have the benefit of doubt by taking the plea,that the requirement was only for despatching the applications by 16th March, 1992.
In any case, so far as the present petitioner is concerned, his application did reach on 17th March, 1992, and surely by that time, the Public Service Commission had hardly started collecting the applications received by them till the evening of 16th March, 1992.
3.
Consequently we allow this petition, quash the impugned communications dated 19th January, 1993 Annexure P41, and direct the respondents to consider the candidature of the petitioner on merits and not to reject the same on the ground of having been received late.
In future, it would be advisable if the Public Service Commission provides a specific caution in the advertisement itself, that "the applications should reach the Secretary, Punjab Public Service Commissionn, by a particular date or that the applications received after the closing date shall not be accepted."
As they generally make such a provision in the Information sheet supplied to the petitioners later on, along with the prescribed performa of application; so that the doubt about the last date of submission of applications and their reaching the office of the Public Service Commission, is removed.