AL Bahri, J (Oral) - In 1983 selection was made for Lecturers in Medical College, Rohtak.
Actual appointments were made in 1984.
In 1954 a policy of reservation for Backward Classes contemplated 2% reservation and the roster point as stated was to be at serial No. 37.
In January, 1979, this reservation was further increased to 5% and thus the roster point for Backward Classes came to be at serial No. 16.
In September 1979, the reservation was further increased to 10% and the roster point for Backward Classes came to be at serial No. 10.
Eight persons were already in service when the present selection took place.
"Hence, roster point at serial No. 10 was to be given to Backward Class candidate.
In all from the general category, nine persons were selected.
The name of the petitioner, Dr. PS Ghalaut, is stated to be at serial No. 4.
Two persons above him did not join and only one joined and thereafter respondent No. 3 Dr. Nitya Nand, who belonged to Backward Class, was placed.
This is being questioned by the petitioner in this writ petition, as according to him out of eight vacancies, which were advertised, the roster point of the Backward Class category would be at the bottom.
2.
We are not convinced with this argument.
In 1954 when 2% reservation for Backward Class was fixed and the roster point was at serial No. 37, obviously out of eight posts in the cadre 37th vacancy had not occurred.
This was also the position in January 1979 when reservation was increased to 5% and the roster point happened to be at serial No. 16.
It was only in September, 1979, that when eight posts were advertised, there was occasion for accommodating Backward Class candidate at roster point 10.
Since one person senior to the petitioner joined the service, he occupied ninth vacancy (eight persons already in service) and the 10th vacancy, was to go to the Backward Class candidate.
The petitioner, thus, could not be adjusted in the matter of seniority above respondent No. 3, who was to occupy roster point at serial No. 10.
Counsel for the petitioner has referred to Rule 13 of the Haryana Medical Education Services Rules, 1988, which provides that in case of two or more members appointed by direct recruitment, the order of merit determined by the Commission or Selection Committee shall not be disturbed in fixing the seniority.
This rule cannot be applied to the facts of the present case.
Rather inter se the direct recruits of the general category while applying the said rule, seniority cannot be disturbed as has been determined by the Selection Committee.
However, in the matter of adjusting the Backward Class candidate at a particular roster point, the rule aforesaid could not apply.
In view of the discussions aforesaid, no injustice seems to have been done to the petitioner.
This writ petition is, therefore, dismissed.
Petition dismissed.