Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner is aggrieved by the order dated August 16, 1988 by which a penalty of dismissal from service was imposed upon him.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner was working as Counter-In-charge in the Haryana Tourism Corporation.
He was posted at Kingfisher, Ambala.
A physical verification of the counter was conducted on August 26, 1987.
After that a charge-sheet was issued to him.
The following two charges were levelled against him :  "1.
That physical verification of 1-4 at Kingfisher Tourist Complex Ambala was conducted on 2681987 and a sum of Rs. 47033 was found in excess.
Thus he adopted malpractice.
2.
That three and half peg of Peter Scot whisky was found in excess during the physical verification conducted on 26.8.87."
The petitioner submitted his reply to the charge-sheet and denied the charges.
Thereafter, a regular enquiry was conducted.
The Enquiry Officer vide his report dated April 22, 1988 found that "the official had agreed that Rs. 47033p were found excess out of which Rs. 450/- were in the shape of change and Rs. 20/- were the tip of the Waiter.
The official had Rs. 500/- as imprest.
3.
He should not have kept his own money in the Cash Box of the Corporation."
Regarding charge No. 2 it was found "that due to rush in the Bar, bill for Peter Scot was issued by mistake instead of Col. Spl.
The responsibility for this mistake is of Waiter Hukam Singh (he has already died)."
The petitioner was given a show cause notice.
He submitted his reply.
It was stated that the petitioner's only mistake was that, he had used his personal money in the interest of the Corporation.
Accordingly, he prayed that he deserved no punishment.
The matter was then placed before the Managing Director.
The authority after noticing the facts has observed as under :-  "The explanation given by Sh. RS Chauhan, regarding allegation No. 1 that Rs. 450/- was kept for change and Rs. 20/- as Waiter's tip is not tenable and it amounted to mala fide practice on his part.
In the circumstances of the case, I am of the opinion that it is a fit case where a penalty of dismissal from service be imposed upon Sh. Ranjit Singh Chauhan.
I order accordingly."
A perusal of the above shows that no reason whatsoever has been given to show that the explanation given by the petitioner was untenable or that his action in using his personal money "amounted to mala fide practice on his part."
Even at the hearing today, learned counsel for the respondent has not been able to show as to what misconduct can be attributed to a person who merely uses his own money for the purposes of the Corporation.
Learned counsel only states that it is a mala fide practice.
Using the money of the Corporation for personal benefit can be considered to be bad, but using one's own money for the good of the Corporation cannot amount to misconduct.
It is not disputed that the excess amount of money found with the petitioner was not that of the Corporation.
In fact the suggestion in paragraph No. 5 of the written statement is that the petitioner' being counter incharge could not mix his own money in the cash box of the Corporation."
There is no reference to any evidence indicating a mala fide or dishonest intention.
In such a situation, the order passed by the authority appears to be absolutely arbitrary and cannot be sustained.
It is accordingly set aside.
The writ petition is allowed.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.