RS Mongia, J - Brief facts of the case are that the petitioners were promoted as Sanitary Inspectors by the Commissioner, Municipal Corporation, Ludhiana, vide order dated 1021992 and the Establishment Superintendent, on the basis of that order, issued office order of promotion on 11.2.1992, a copy of which has been attached as annexure P-1 with the writ petition.
It is not disputed that the petitioners were promoted against the sanctioned permanent posts of Sanitary Inspectors.
On 10.3.1992, the Commissioner of the Municipal Corporation revoked his previous order dated 1021992 by which the petitioner were promoted as Sanitary Inspectors.
On that basis, office order was issued by the Corporation on 1131992, a copy of which has been attached as Annexure P-6.
It is this order that has been impugned in the present writ petition.
2.
It is the case of petitioners that they were fully qualified to be promoted to the post of Sanitary Inspectors under the relevant rules i.e., Punjab Municipal Service (Recruitment and Conditions of Services) Rules, 1975, (hereinafter called the 1975 Rules), which rules according to the petitioners' counsel are in force by virtue of provisions of Section 248 of the Punjab Municipal Corporation Act, 1976 as these have not been superseded or repealed.
Learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that the petitioners were promoted after due application of mind by the Appointing Authority.
No notice was given nor any opportunity was granted to them by the Commissioner of the Corporation before passing the impugned order dated 10.3.1992 (Annexure P-6).
3.
The stand of respondent is two-fold (i) petitioners were not qualified according to the rules for promotion to the posts of Sanitary Inspectors, (ii) there were 17 sanctioned posts of Sanitary Inspectors, only three were lying vacant, one vacancy having been caused because of the incumbent having been placed under suspension and the other two posts which were lying vacant were in fact required to be filled by scheduled caste candidates and not by general category candidates.
It was on the above-said ground that the petitioners' promotion order was revoked.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioners has submitted that it is wrong on the part of the respondent to say that the petitioners were not qualified according to the rules.
He has brought to my notice appendix 'B' of the 1975 Rules, wherein requirement for promotion to the posts of Sanitary Inspectors is that incumbent has to be a municipal employee possessing, Sanitary Inspectors' certificate.
It is not denied and rather it is admitted that the petitioners have Sanitary Inspectors' diploma from a recognised institution.
Further according to the learned counsel for the petitioners, there were/are no persons belonging to the scheduled caste category, who were/are qualified for the posts of Sanitary Inspectors.
He has brought to my notice government's own instructions dated 6th of March, 1961 (Annexure P-8) that for the technical posts and for those posts requiring specialised training or qualifications, if members of scheduled caste having the requisite qualifications are not available then those posts may not be kept vacant for indefinite period and may be filled up by the candidates other than those belonging to the scheduled caste.
Further according to the learned counsel for petitioners, there were three posts lying vacant and not two, as mentioned by the respondents.
In any case, learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that orders of promotion could not be revoked till suitable candidates from the category of scheduled caste were available for promotion to the posts of Sanitary Inspectors.
5.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that this petition deserves to be allowed on the short ground that no opportunity of hearing was granted to the petitioners before passing the impugned order.
However, I find in this case that both the grounds mentioned in the written statement for revoking the orders of promotion of the petitioners are unsustainable.
As observed, while noticing the arguments of learned counsel for the petitioners, both the petitioners are duly qualified for the posts of Sanitary Inspectors.
Further in accordance with the government's own instructions if suitable candidates from the scheduled caste category are not available, the posts cannot be kept vacant for indefinite period.
These are required to be filled in from the general category candidates.
Of course, in case the suitable candidates from the scheduled caste category become available, such general category candidates who might have been promoted, would have to make room for such scheduled caste candidates.
6.
For the foregoing reasons, this writ petition is allowed and the order revoking the petitioners' promotion (Annexure P-6) is hereby quashed.
However, it is made clear that if any scheduled caste eligible candidate becomes available and is sustainable for promotion, then the petitioner(s) would make room for him/them unless in the meantime the posts of Sanitary Inspectors in the general category become available against which the petitioners would be adjusted.
The petitioners would be entitled to all consequential benefits but they would not be entitled to arrears of pay of Sanitary Inspectors from the date of impugned order till date.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.