RS Mongia, J (Oral) - This judgment will also dispose of C.W.P.
No. 14968 of 1992.
For facility of reference to facts, writ petition No. 16637 of 1992 is being adverted to.
2.
Petitioners are residents of villages Bhiwar Bhoj Nangal, Sahet Bhoj Nangal and Dharla Bhoj Nangal, Sub Tehsil Morni Hills, Tehsil Panchkula, District Ambala.
They are staking their claim for admission to Diploma in Education Course in the Government Primary Teachers Training Institute, Dharla at Morni Hills, Tehsil Panchkula, District Ambala against 5 seats reserved for the residents of villages which give either land or building to the Government for running the Institute for Diploma in Education.
In Annexure P.1 issued by the Department of Secondary Education, Haryana it has been mentioned regarding the above reserved seats as under :  "Permanent residents of the following villages where District Education Centres/Elementary Teachers Training Institutes are situated and which come under the aforesaid scheme may apply for these seats alongwith domicile certificates to be issued by the local Sub Divisional Magistrate (civil) :-  1. xx xx  2. xx xx  3. xx xx  4. xx xx  5.
Morni Hills Ambala"  3.
It is the case of the petitioners that 14 Bhoj fall in Morni Hills, one of which is Bhoj Nangal.
The Hadbast of Bhoj Nangal is 326.
Bhoj Nangal consists of 24 Bass, out of which three are, Dharla, Sahat and Bhiwar.
4.
According to the petitioners, the residents of village Dharla had donated land for the establishment of Government Primary Teachers Training Institute at Dharla, which had later been shifted to village Morni.
According to them Morni Hills is a configuration of many villages of which the Hadbast No. is 326.
Therefore, the petitioners being residents of Morni Hills are entitled to be admitted against the reserved seats for the residents of villages which have either donate land or building to the Government for running a Institute.
5.
In the written statement, the case put forth by the respondents is that the reservation was for the residents of village Morni, which is described in the record as Morni Hills.
The various Institutes located in Village Morni are mentioned to be located in village Morni Hills.
It has further been specifically averred that the village Morni is known as Morni Hills in the record of the Education Department, Haryana and other Departments which are running Institutes in Village Morni.
The Institute like Government Secondary School which is located in Village Morni is described as Government Senior Secondary School, Morni Hills.
In other words the case is that the reservation is for the residents of village Morni and not for any of the village in the configuration of Morni Hills.
6.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the Institute in which petitioners are seeking admission against the reserved seats was initially situated in Village Dharla where its residents had given land for the Institute.
The petitioners are resident of Dharla, Sahat and Bhiwar, which fall in Morni Hills and, therefore, all of them are entitled to be admitted against the reserved seats.
7.
After hearing counsel for the parties and going through the record, I am of the view that the reservation was for the residents of a particular village, which had donated land to the Government for running the Institute.
It is not disputed that at the moment the Institute is situated in village Morni.
Consequently, the residents of village Morni, which is described in the record of the respondents as Morni Hills, would be entitled to seek admission against the reserved seats.
I do not agree with the learned counsel for the petitioner that since initially the Institute was set up in village Dharla and residents of that village had donated land, the residents of the said village should be given admission against the reserved seats.
According to me, the relevant time to be seen is the time of admission where the Institute is located.
Otherwise it may mean that if any Institute is temporarily established at Place 'A', then shifted to place 'B' then the residents of place 'A' and place 'B' would be entitled to claim admission against the reserved seats.
That does not seems to be the intention of the Government.
8.
For the foregoing reasons, I do not find any merit in this petition, which is hereby dismissed without any order as to costs.
9.
It is stated by the learned counsel for the petitioner that seats are still lying vacant in the Institute.
If that is so, the respondents will be well advised to fill up those seats and offer those to the petitioners, if the same can be filled at this stage as it is not in the interest of the State that seats should go abegging.
Petition dismissed.