Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner who retired as a Senior Accountant from the service of the Punjab State Co-operative Bank Limited (hereinafter referred to as 'the Bank') on February 28, 1991, prays for the issue of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to release the retirement benefits.
2.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been pointed out that certain objections have been raised by the auditors with regard to the payments made to the employees of the Bank by way of interim relief, dearness allowance and additional dearness allowance.
3.
Mr. DS Kamra, learned counsel for the respondent-Bank further points out that these objections have been pending for the last about 12 years.
He submits that the decision in this behalf has to be given by the Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Punjab.
4.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, I find that the retirement benefits due to the petitioner cannot be withheld on account of the failure of the Registrar to take a final view on the objections raised by the auditors.
That is a matter between the Bank and the Registrar.
So far as the petitioner is concerned, he was entitled to the release of all benefits due to him on his retirement.
He had not committed any irregularity and, therefore, the amount of money due to him could not have been withheld.
It may further be noticed that Mr. RS Hundal, learned counsel for the petitioner, states that even if the objections raised by the auditors are accepted, only a paltry sum of few hundred rupees would be due from the petitioner which he undertakes to refund as and when called upon to do so in accordance with the rules.
5.
In view of the above position, it is directed that the respondent-Bank shall forthwith release the retirement benefits due to the petitioner.
Needful shall be done within three months from today.
The petitioner will also be entitled to the payment of interest on the amount found due w.e.f.
June 1, 1991 till the date of its actual payment at the rate of 12 per cent per annum.
The writ petition is, accordingly, disposed of.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition disposed of.