RS Mongia, J (Oral) - The petitioner had appeared in the MBBS final Professional examination of the Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar (in short 'the University'), in December, 1991, and got compartment in two subjects, namely, Gynaecology and Surgery.
According to the Regulations of the University, such a candidate is given further chance to clear the subjects in which he gets compartment.
The petitioner appeared in the examination held in May, 1992 in order to clear the subjects of Gynaecology and Surgery.
In July, 1992, the result was declared indicating that the petitioner was to reappear in Surgery, meaning thereby that he had passed the subject of Gynaecology.
The petitioner was also issued a detailed marks certificate, a copy of which has been attached as Annexure P-2 with the writ petition, in which it has been mentioned that he is eligible to re-appear till May, 1993 in the subject of Surgery.
2.
Petitioner reappeared in the subject of Surgery in the examination held in December, 1992.
In January, 1993, when the result was declared, it was mentioned against the petitioner's name as RL (D)", meaning thereby that his result was to be declared later as some decision was awaited regarding his case.
According to the averments made in the writ petition, the petitioner learnt from the University that in fact in July, 1992, the petitioner was wrongly shown to have passed in the subject of Gynaecology; whereas in fact he had failed and the University was going to rectify the mistake.
The petitioner filed the present writ petition on 2311993, inter alia praying that his result of the examination in the subject of Surgery, which he took in December, 1992, be declared, as also it should be declared that the petitioner had passed the subject of Gynaecology in May, 1992.
3.
In response to the notice, the University has filed written statement and two Notifications, dated 1st February, 1993, have been attached with it.
The first notification (Annexure R-2/1) supersedes the earlier notification issued in July, 1992, where in the petitioner was shown as requiring to re-appear in the subject of Surgery only.
According to the amended notification, the petitioner was required to re- appear in the subject of Gynecology and Surgery.
According to the Second notification (Annexure R-2/2), the petitioner was shown to have passed in the subject of Surgery in the examination held in December, 1992 and he was required to re-appear in the subject of Gynaecology till May, 1993.
4.
According to the written statement, a candidate to clear a compartment is required to obtain 50% marks in the subject.
The petitioner had obtained 96 marks out of 200 in the subject of Gynaecology; where he was required to get 100 marks.
He was, by mistake, shown to have passed the subject of Gynaecology in the examination held in May, 1992; whereas he should have been shown failed in both Surgery as well as Gynaecology.
Further according to the averments made in the written statement, as per Ordinance No. 1 at Page 554 of the University Calendar, Volume II, Part B (1991 Edition), the Vice-Chancellor has the power to set aside/rectify the result of a candidate after it has been declared if a mistake is found in his result.
5.
It was argued by the petitioner that undoubtedly the University has the power to rectify a mistake in the result, but such a power has to be exercised within a reasonable time after the declaration of the result and the reasonable time would be few days before the next examination is to be held.
The petitioner submitted that in the present case.
The petitioner was declared pass in Gynaecology in July, 1992.
The next examination was to be held in December, 1992, but prior to the date of result in the subject of Gynaecology had not been cancelled.
Had he been told prior to December, 1992 that he was to re-appear in the subject of Gynaecology along with the subject of Surgery, he would have appeared in both the subjects in December, 1992 and most likely would have cleared the same.
Because of the inaction on the part of the University within a reasonable time, it was estopped to exercise the powers under the Ordinance regarding the rectification of the result.
In any case, he submitted that if the petitioner was required to appear in the examination of Gynaecology now, he should get all the benefits a candidate would get who has passed the entire MBBS Final Professional in January, 1993 and the result should relate back to the date when he had cleared the subject of Surgery, i.e., in January, 1993.
6.
After hearing the petitioner and going through the paper book and the relevant Ordinances, I am inclined to agree with the second submission of the petitioner.
Though prima facie there is much to be said in favour of the petitioner on the first point also, but on the facts of the present case, I am not finally opining on that and would rather deem it appropriate to direct the University to consider the petitioner as deemingly to have passed the MBBS Course in January, 1993 for the purpose of his joining the Internship or any other course which he could have joined.
This will, however, be subject to his passing the subject of Gynaecology in as many chances as are permissible under the relevant Regulation.
These directions are being given, in the circumstances that there was no fault of the petitioner when he was declared to have passed in the subject of Gynaecology in July, 1992.
Had he been told then that he was to re-appear in the subject of Gynaecology also, he could have cleared the said subject in January, 1993, along with the subject of Surgery.
For the fault of the University, the petitioner cannot be made to suffer.
It is made clear that as and when the petitioner passes the subject of Gynaecology within the permissible chances, his result would relate back as if he had deemingly passed the same in January, 1993 and would get all the benefits flowing from having passed the MBBS Final Professional examination in January, 1993.
The writ petition is allowed in the above terms.
The petitioner would be entitled to his costs, which are assessed at Rs. 1000/-.
Petition allowed.