RS Mongia, J (Oral) - This judgment of mine will dispose of CWP Nos. 2684, 5650 and 6840 of 1986 as it is admitted that the point of law and the facts are almost identical.
However, the facts from C.W.P.
No. 2684 of 1986 are being adverted to.
2.
The petitioners joined the service of the Punjab State Electricity Board (In short 'Board') in the years 1956, 1956, 1962 and 1954 respectively, on various posts and they became regular Foremen with effect from 851973, 7.4.1973, 31.3.1973 and 2741973 respectively.
It is admitted case that the next rank in the channel of promotion is the post of Special Foreman.
3.
Respondent Nos. 3 to 6 were appointed as work-charged Foremen with effect from 131977, 131982, 151975 and 3031978 respectively, on a project of the Board, known as Anandpur Sahib Hydel Project from the very inception of the Project.
While all the respondents, excepting Surjit Singh, were working as work-charged Foremen, they were appointed as work-charged Special Foremen, with effect from 1751984, 2131977 and 1751984 respectively.
The Board vide its Office Order No. 89, dated 351985, constituted a four-Member Committee headed by the General Manager, Hydel Project, to screen the records of the work-charged and daily rated workers for regularising them on the basis of such criteria as the Committee may evolve.
The cases of respondents were considered by the said Committee and all of them were made regular Special Foremen.
The order appointing Shri Surjit Singh as Special Foreman on regular basis, dated 2nd November, 1985, has been appended as Annexure P-2 with the writ petition.
4.
The grievance of the petitioner in the present writ petition is that the petitioners were regular Foremen much prior to the date of appointment of Respondents 3 to 6 as work-charged Foremen.
Consequently, when the said respondents were being made regular Special Foremen, which is a promotional post, the petitioners who were senior to the said respondents, should have been considered first for appointment as Special Foremen on regular basis.
5.
In the separate replies filed by the Board and the private respondents, a similar stand has been taken, which is to the effect that Respondent Nos. 3 to 6 were appointed as work-charged Foremen against a particular Project, i.e. Anandpur Sahib Hydel Project, whereas the petitioners were appointed as regular employees of the Board and they are included in the joint seniority list of the Board's employees as a whole; whereas in the case of the work- charged employees, like the private respondents, the senioity is maintained Project-wise.
It is further stated in the reply that it is not necessary that the posts of Special Foremen are to be filled in by promoting regular Foremen only.
These can be filled from amongst the work-charged Foremen also depending upon the job requirement on which they are deployed, keeping in view their practical experience on construction job or on a particular Porject where they might have been employed for a particular purpose.
Further the stand is that when the private respondents other than Shri Surjit Singh were appointed as Special Foremen on work-charged basis, the above considerations were taken into account.
Similarly, when all the private respondents were made Special Foremen on regular basis by the Committee constituted on 3rd May, 1985, the above-referred to considerations weighed with the Committee and the cases of the employees like the petitioners were not required to be considered at all.
6.
There cannot be any dispute that the petitioners were regular Foremen much prior to the dates of appointment of respondents 3 to 6 as work-charged Foremen.
The question, however, is that whether there was only interse seniority between them.
As observed above, the respondents have denied that there is any interse seniority between the regular employees of the Board and those who are employed on work-charged basis on a particular Project.
Even assuming there is some sort of seniority between the two classes, i.e., regular employees and the work-charged employees, it cannot be denied that the work-charged employees will be placed below the regular employees.
However, that does not resolve the controversy.
It has been stated in the reply that respondents had got experience against a particular Project and some work- charged employees, including the respondents had to be kept for maintenance purposes even after the completion of the project.
The counsel for the respondents submitted that on peculiar facts and circumstances there is nothing wrong if only work-charged employees working against a particular Project are considered for regularisation, excluding the regular employees who may be working on other projects from consideration for promotion against the post on which the work-charged employees are sought to be regularised.
7.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that no fault can be found if consideration for regularisation is confined only to such experienced persons, though working on work-charged basis, who might have gained certain expertise on a particular project.
It is for the employer who is conversant with the technical know-how whether a regular Foreman should be considered for promotion to the post of Special Foreman or a work-charged Foreman should be considered for appointment as work-charged Special Foreman or even appointment as a regular Foreman by considering the experience of such work-charged employee on a particular project and the suitability to handle the work on a particular project.
It can well be that a work-charged Foreman is employed on a particular Project and having gained experience, may be more suitable for employment as work-charged Special Foremen than a regular Foreman working elsewhere.
In view of what has been stated above, I do not find any infirmity in the official respondents' action in not considering the cases of the petitioners for regular appointment as Special Foremen while considering the cases of the private respondents.
For the foregoing reasons, I find no merit in these petitions and the same are here dismissed, without any order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.