RK Nehru, J - The petitioner has filed this writ of mandamus directing the respondents to fix his seniority amongst the provincialised JBT teachers from the date of his appointment i.e., November 8, 1956.
2.
Admitted facts which do not raise any controversy are thus :-  3.
Before October 1, 1957, there were two categories of Schools, one administered by the District Board and the other by the Government.
The schools run by the District Board were taken over by the Government w.e.f.
October 1, 1957.
The petitioner joined the services of the District Board, Gurdaspur on 8111956 as JBT teacher in the Primary School, Chaudhriwala in Batala Block of Gurdaspur District.
By virtue of the schools managed by the District Board having been taken over by the Government, the petitioner naturally became an employee of the State Government.
The petitioner alongwith other similarly situated persons was given the same pay scales and other allowances as given to their counterpart in the employment of the State Government.
The seniority of the teachers working under the District Board and Local Bodies was fixed in the State cadre and their seniority was kept separate from those who were already on the State cadre.
4.
The grouse of the petitioner is that without any request made by him, the Circle Education Officer, Jalandhar had transferred him to Kangra District where he joined on August 31, 1964.
Again, without any request made by the petitioner, he was re-transferred by the Circle Education Officer, Jalandhar vide order dated April 30, 1965 to Jalandhar where he joined on November 16, 1965.
According to the petitioner, since the time the services of the teachers working under District Board were transferred to the State cadre, the seniority of the petitioner had not been fixed in spite of his having made repeated requests to the authorities in that behalf.
The petitioner claims his seniority to be fixed from November 8, 1956, the date of his appointment in the Provinclaized Cadre.
5.
In their written statement, the respondents pleaded that the writ petition was liable to fail on account of laches on the part of the petitioner who by filing this petition was claiming the benefit of his transfer after a lapse of 19 years which was effected vide District Education Officer.
Gurdaspur Order No. 64-11136-16328 dated April 27, 1964, the record of which had been weeded out being of temporary nature.
It was further pleaded that an employee was usually transferred from one District to other either on the basis of complaint or at his own request and if an employee was transferred on the basis of complaint administrative basis, an entry to that effect was made in his service book.
However, no such indication had been given in his service book, meaning thereby that the transfer of the petitioner to District Kangra in the year 1964 was made at his own request and according to the Punjab Educational Service Rules (Class II) (Provincialized Cadre) 1961, if a teacher of provincialized cadre a got himself transferred from one District to another at his own request, he lost his seniority in the provincialised cadre and this seniority was to be fixed in the District in the State cadre from the date of his joining that the post.
6.
Vide notification No. 907-Ed II-61/4005 dated 1321961, the Punjab Government framed certain rules called the Punjab Education Services (Provincialised Cadre) Class III Rules, 1961 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Rules') for regulating conditions of service of the teaching staff taken over by the State Government from the Local Authorities consequent upon provincialization of the schools maintained by them.
It would be of benefit to refer to some of the relevant rules.
The same are as under :-  Rule 2  These rules shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from 1st October, 1957.
2.
Definitions :- In these rules, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or context,-  (a) xx xx xx xx  (b) 'local authority' means a Municipal Committee under the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911, or a District Board under the Punjab District Board, of 1953;  (c) 'provincialized school' means a school taken over or that may hereafter be taken over by the State Government from the control and management of a local authority within the State;  (d) 'service' means the Punjab Educational (Provincialized Cadre) Class III Service;  (e) xx xx xx  (f) xx xx xx  Sub-rule (2) of Rule 3.
(1) xx xx xx  (2) All posts in the service shall be borne on a cadre post except the post of vernacular and classical Teachers, JAV or JBT junior teachers which will be on district-wise Cadre.
Explanation :  Where a teacher borne on a district cadre is transferred on his own request out of the district to the Divisional Cadre of Teachers in the 'State Cadre', he shall lose his seniority in the parent district and his seniority amongst the teachers of the Division to which he is transferred shall be refixed on the basis of the date on which he joins his new post in the Division."
Rule 9.
Seniority of Members of Service :- (1) The seniority inter se of the members of the service as on 1st October, 1957 shall be determined in the manner specified below :-  (a) (1) The posts held by the members of the service immediately before the provincialization of local authority schools shall be equated keeping in view the nature of the post and qualifications required for filling it up.
(ii) Such of the posts as are not equated shall be treated as isolated and unequated.
(b) The seniority inter se of the members of the service shall be fixed according to the length of continuous service whether temporary, officiating or permanent, on the equated posts on the 1st October, 1957 :  Provided that -  (i) where two employees joined the equated posts on the same date, the older shall be placed senior; and  (ii) where an employee, on his appointment in an institution maintained by a local authority, was given the benefit of the service rendered by him under another local authority in the post-partition period for the purpose of fixing his seniority, such service will be taken into consideration for fixing his seniority in the service to the extent to which it is covered by the equation of posts.
Explanation :  An employee who had been given the benefit of previous service by any local authority would not be deprived of it but no such benefit shall be allowed by the Government itself.
(c) The inter se seniority of any employee in the parent unit shall not be disturbed in determining his seniority in the service.
Provided that-  (i) the service rendered under the local authority in Pakistan by a displaced employee who has not been given the benefit of his pre-partition service by a local authority in the State for the purpose of seniority, shall be duly taken into consideration;  (ii) where a seniority list in the parent unit was not in existence before the date of provincialization of the local authority schools, such a last will be drawn up by Government in accordance with the rules for the determination of seniority in force in the unit concerned immediately before the provincialization and if no such rules were in existence if shall be drawn up on the basis of rules applicable to Government servants in the corresponding service at that time; and  (iii) in the case of Government teachers from the erstwhile Pepsu State, who were taken over by the local authority in the erstwhile Punjab State with effect from 1st February, 1950, consequent upon the exchange of enclaves between the erstwhile State of Punjab and Pepsu, the Service rendered by them with the Pepsu Government, local authorities and the Punjab Government will be combined for the purposes of determining their seniority.
(d) xx xx  (e) xx xx"  So far as sub-para (2) of Rules 3, of the rules ibid is concerned, the respondents cannot take any benefit to dislodge the claim of the petitioner who has specifically pleaded that he was transferred by Circle Education Officer, Jalandhar to Kangra District and from there to Jalandhar, without any request made by him for his transfer.
In the absence of any material on record, it cannot be said that the petitioner was transferred on his request much less on administrative ground by the respondents.
7.
So far as the claim of the petitioner that his seniority should be fixed from November 8, 1956, the date of his appointment in the Provincialized Cadre is concerned, that cannot be accepted because after the aforesaid notification, the seniority of the petitioner like other similarly situated teachers in the Provincialized Cadres is to be fixed in terms of Rules 9 of this rule ibid .
In the case in hand, it can well be inferred from the circumstances that laches, if any, can be on the part of the respondents in not fixing the seniority of the petitioner for such a long time.
The employees should not be made to run to the law courts for the claim, which they are entitled to as of right under the Rules or statutes, so framed by the Government itself.
By taking recourse to the principle of laches, the respondents had rather tried to shirk their responsibility to discharge the Administrative function.
This attitude on the part of the respondents deserves deprecation.
In the absence of any material against the petitioner of his having been transferred from one District to another at his own request, his seniority was required to be fixed in terms of the Rules ibid, and it hardly matters whether under the Rules ibid, the petitioner gains, or lose in the matter of his seniority in the Provincialized Cadre.
The senior officers of the Government are the backbone of the State.
They are expected to be vigilant in redressing the grievances of their employees in accordance with the procedure and the rules governing the service conditions of the employees and in that case, lot of frivolous litigation in the Courts can be avoided and precious time of the Government and the public can be saved.
8.
The stand of the respondent that the petitioner has lost his claim on account of laches on his part is not only without any merit but by taking such a plea, the respondents have tried to prove to be shirkers in the discharge of their duties because the State Government is under obligation on Administrative side to fix the seniority of the petitioner, who belonging to the provincialized Cadre, in terms of the Rules ibid .
In the light of what has been stated above, this writ petition is disposed of with the direction to the respondents to fix the seniority of the petitioner in terms of the Punjab Educational Service (Provincialized Cadre) Class III, Rules, 1961.
Petition disposed of.