GR Majithia, J - This judgment disposes of C.W.P.
No. 4563 of 1980 and 1757 of 1981.
2.
Respondent No. 1 - Director, Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh (for short, the Institute) vide office order issued vide Endst.
No.EII(2)-PGI-78/36820-95 dated November 18, 1978 sanctioned two advance increments to the Technicians (Laboratory Technicians and the Technicians working in the Departments of Radiodiagnosis and Radiotherapy) in their present pay scale with effect from October 1, 1978, who acquired B.Sc.
Medical Technology (Laboratory/X-ray) degree.
This order was not given effect to.
A mandate is sought to the respondent to give effect to this order.
This order was superseded by order dated April 18, 1981 and the benefit of two advance increments given to the Technicians possessing qualifications of B.Sc.
Medical Technology (Laboratory/X-ray) was withdrawn.
The validity of this order has been challenged in CWP No. 1757 of 1981.
3.
Written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondent No. CWP No. 4563 of 1980.
It is admitted that two advance increments were allowed to the technical staff who possessed the Degree of B.Sc.
(Medical Technology) on the analogy of Nursing Staff.
The decision to grant two advance increments was taken with the approval of the Standing Finance Committee of the Institute.
The Committee agreed to the grant of two advance increments to the Technicians who had acquired qualification of B.Sc.
(Medical Technology) degree with effect from October 1, 1978.
The advance increments were allowed without the approval of the Government of India.
The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government of India, vide its letter dated August 23, 1978 informed the respondent that the decision of grant of two advance increments could not be implemented without the approval of the Government of India.
It also recommended that the implementation of the proposal should be suspended.
The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government of India through its letter dated November 5, 1979 informed respondent No.1 that the proposal contained in respondent's letter No.EII(2)-PGI-79/1601, dated February, 1979 for grant of two advance increments to Laboratory Technicians who possess the degree of B.Sc.
(Medical Technology) could not be agreed to.
The letter reads thus :-  "I am directed to refer to the correspondence resting with this Ministry's letter No.V.
17020/76/78-ME-(PG) dated the 23rd August, 1979 on the subject mentioned above and to say that the All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi has informed this Ministry that the technicians who pass B.Sc.
(Medical Technology) and the nursing staff who acquire a degree in increments in the Institute.
As such it is regretted that your proposal contained in your letter No.EII(2)-79/1601, dated the 1st Feb, 1979 for grant of two advance increments to Laboratory Technicians who possess the degree of BSc(Medical Technology) cannot be agreed to."
On June 13, 1980, the Government of India through the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare directed the respondent that the benefit of advance increments wrongly allowed to the Technicians possessing qualification of BSc(Medical Technology) should be withdrawn.
On receipt of this communication, the respondent issued the impugned order dated April 18, 1981 superseding office order dated November 18, 1978 (the order under challenge in CWP No. 1757 of 1981).
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the respondent was competent to grant advance increments.
He placed reliance on Item No.21 of Schedule 1 (describing powers of the Governing Body, President and the Director) appointed by the Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh Regulations, 1967 (for short, the Regulations).
The same reads thus :  Sr. No.
Nature of Powers Governing Body President Director 21.
Grant of Higher initial pay on the initial appointment Full powers (except in regard to the posts which are created with the approval of the Central Government and to which appointments are made with the approval of the Central Government) Nil Nil The learned counsel construed this entry to cover the case of grant of advance increments to Class III employees after their appointment.
I am afraid the entry cannot be construed as suggested.
It only postulates that higher initial pay can be allowed to Class II or IV employees at the time of initial appointment.
It does not envisages that after the regular appointment higher initial pay can be sanctioned by the Director of the Institute.
The Director of the Institute could not allow advance increments to the Technicians/Laboratory Assistants and the Technicians working in the Departments of Radiodiagnosis and Radiotherapy.
The order was in excess of the powers vested in the Director under the Regulations.
The advance increments could be allowed only by the Governing Body of the Institute.
The order of the respondent being in exercise of the powers is invalid.
There was no bar in superseding his earlier order when it was brought to his notice that the advance increments could not have been allowed with the prior approval of the Central Government.
The Central Government's approval may not have been required, but the Governing Body of the Institute has not sanctioned the grant of advance increments to the Technicians (Laboratory Technicians and the Technicians working in the department of Radiodiagnosis and Radiotherapy) on their acquiring higher qualification of B.Sc.
(Medical Technology) degree.
No right of the petitioners has been infringed for the enforcement of which they could maintain these writ petitions.
For the reasons stated above the writ petitions, fail and are dismissed.
However, I direct that the amount of advance increments paid to them not retrieved from them.
No costs.