GR Majithia, J - The petitioners have assailed the order of the State Government dated February 22, 1980 merging the posts of Ahlmad in the Consolidation Department in the cadre strength of Clerks in that Department in this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
2.
Petitioners No. 1 to 6 are working as Senior Clerks while those at serial Nos. 7 to 12 are working as Clerks in the Consolidation Department.
Their conditions of service are governed by the Rules called the Punjab Consolidation of Holdings Class III (Ministerial Service) Rules, 1962 (for short, the Rules).
Rule 3 of the Rules postulates that the Service shall comprise the posts shown in Appendix `A' to the Rules.
The posts of Ahlmads were not included in the Service as constituted under the Rules.
The Ahlmads had nothing in common with the ministerial cadre and had their own independent channel of promotion which had been laid down by the executive instructions.
The Punjab Government appointed one man Pay Commission for the revision of scales of pay for various categories of employees.
After the receipt of report from the Pay Commission, the Government framed the Rules called the Punjab Civil Services (Revised Scales of Pay) Rules, 1979.
These Rules were made effective from January 1, 1978.
By Rule 2, the provisions were made applicable to the "Government employees holding any post mentioned in Schedule `B' or Schedule `C' if the pay scale of the post has been revised under these Rules."
These Rules also laid down the method of fixation of pay etc.
In pursuance of these provisions, petitioner Nos. 1 to 6 were granted the pay scale of Rs. 510-800, vide orders dated February 22, 1980 and July, 1980, with effect from January 1, 1978.
The State Government issued an order dated February 22, 1980, revising the pay scales of various posts in different Departments.
The Ahlmads in the Consolidation Department were placed in the scale of Rs. 400-600, while the Clerks were given the pay scales as mentioned in Schedule `B', Viz. Rs. 510-800 and Rs. 400-600.
The State Government issued an order dated November 22, 1980, restraining the Consolidation Department from granting promotions to the petitioners, Respondent No. 4 Kirpal Singh was promoted as Senior Clerk with effect from January 1, 1978.
His promotion was assailed on the ground that the claim of the petitioners that they were senior to respondent No. 4 was not considered while promoting him.
The merger of the posts of Ahlmad with the cadre strength of Clerks has been assailed on the ground that these posts are not governed by the Rules and as such, could not be merged with the Service governed by the Rules.
3.
Written statement has been filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 to 3 by the Director, Consolidation of Holdings, Punjab.
It is stated therein that the posts of Ahlmads in the Consolidation Department were merged in the cadre strength of clerks of the Department.
The Punjab Government in its letter dated September, 16, 1980, observed that the seniority of Ahlmads vis-a-vis clerks should be fixed taking into account the total service rendered by them on their respective posts.
It is not denied that the posts of Ahlmads were not included in the Rules.
Respondent No. 5 to 8 were working as Ahlmads in the Department.
Respondent No. 4 has since retired from service with effect from October 31, 1980.
The Ahlmads were brought on the cadre strength of clerks of the Head Office and their posts are shown on the Head Office strength in the "Schedule of New Expenditure" every year.
It is admitted that under Government instructions issued, vide their Memo No. 6739-B/11-60/6924, dated September 25, 1960, the Ahlmads were considered for promotion as Assistant Consolidation Officers with Inspectors and Kanungoes, because at that time the Ahlmads were appointed from amongst the officials who were Kanungoes/Inspectors and Patwaris/Sub-Inspectors.
The officials who are working at present as Ahlmads are not out of Kanungoes/Inspectors/Patwaris/Sub-Inspectors and as such they are not revenue trained and could not be promoted as Kanungoes/Assistant Consolidation Officers.
For these reasons, the posts of Ahlmads were merged with the cadre strength of clerks and a joint seniority list was prepared.
4.
Under the Government order, the posts of Ahlmads in the Consolidation Department were merged in the cadre strength of clerks of that Department.
There is no bar to the merging of the posts of Ahlmads in the cadre strength of the clerks.
The pay scales of various categories of posts in various Departments, including the Consolidation Department, were revised by the Punjab Govt. with effect from January 1, 1978.
The Ahlmads were in a higher pay scale than the clerks.
But now, under the Government orders, the posts of Ahlmads were merged in the cadre strength of clerks and a joint seniority list was ordered to be prepared.
Learned counsel for the petitioners could not even remotely suggest that the cadre strength of the members of the Service governed by the Rules could not be increased by executive order.
His only gouse is that the claim of the petitioners was not considered while granting promotion to the respondent No. 4.
The submission is devoid of any merit.
Respondent No. 4 was not promoted, but his post was re-designated on the merger of the posts of Ahlmads in the cadre strength of Clerks in the Department.
Joint seniority list of Ahlmads and clerks has been prepared tentatively and it has been circulated.
Respondent No. 4 was the senior-most Ahlmad and as such, he was re-designated as Senior Clerk with effect from January 1, 1978.
The tentative joint seniority list is not under challenge in this writ petition.
The petitioners, if so advised, ought to have filed representation against the tentative joint seniority list.
The petitioners' claim that the statutory rules could not be amended by executive instructions is ill-founded.
The statutory rules have not been amended.
Only the cadre strength of the posts of Ahlmads has been merged with that of clerks by executive order.
For the reasons stated above, this petition is devoid of any merit and is dismissed, but with no order as to costs.