SS Sodhi, J - The impugned order of March 13, 1987, Annexure P-3, terminating the services of the petitioner Usman Khan warrants no interference in writ proceedings.
2.
A reference to the record shows that on March, 23, 1983, the petitioner was appointed as Training Assistant in the Fisheries Department on an ad hoc basis.
According to his letter of appointment, Annexure P-1, this appointment was for a period of six months or till such time as a suitable candidate is recommended by the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana, whichever is earlier.
The petitioner served as such till May 8, 1986, when services were terminated upon a candidate recommended by the Subordinate Services Selection Board being appointed to the post held by him.
3.
On the next day, i.e., May 9, 1986, the petitioner was given a fresh appointment as Salesman on the same terms and conditions, as his original appointment, i.e., for a period of six months or till a suitable candidate is recommended by the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana, whichever is earlier.
On a reference being made to it, the Subordinate Services Selection Board, did not grant approval to the ad hoc appointment of the petitioner and a consequence thereof, his services stood terminated with effect from June 30, 1987.
It is the case of the petitioner now that he was, in fact, entitled to have his services regularised in terms of the policy decision of the Government Annexure P-4, which according to him provides that the persons who have completed two years service as on November 1, 1986, were entitled to regularisation of their services.
4.
The instructions of Government of February 16, 1987 (Annexure P-4) clearly do not enure for the benefit of the petitioner, as a plain reading thereof would show that they apply only with regard to ad hoc employees working against posts which have been taken out of the purview of the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana.
The post of Salesman held by the petitioner was not one such post.
It, in fact, came within the purview of the Subordinate Services Selection Board and consequently the services of the petitioner could not be regularised in terms of these instructions.
5.
Such being the situation, the petitioner is clearly not entitled to the relief claimed.
This writ petition is consequently hereby dismissed.
There will, however, be no order as to costs.