GS Singhvi, J - Aggrieved by the award dated 531997 passed by the Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court-I, Faridabad in reference No. 174 of 1994, the petitioners have invoked jurisdiction of this Court for issuance of a writ in the nature of certiorari to quash the award.
2.
Although, for the reasons best known to them, the petitioners have refrained from placing complete facts on the record of the writ petition.
Perusal of the scanty averments made in the pleadings of the parties shows that the respondent-workman who had joined the service on 1841984 as Chowkidar, was shown the doors after 9 years.
He raised an industrial dispute which was referred to the Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court-I, Faridabad under Section 10(1)(c) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (for short, `the Act').
In the statement of claim filed by him before the Labour Court, the respondent-workman pleaded that termination of his service is liable to be invalidated due to violation of Section 25-F of the Act.
The employer (petitioners herein) contested the claim of the workman by stating that he was engaged in the service as daily wager with intermittent breaks and the provisions of the Act are not attracted in his case.
3.
The Tribunal framed the following two issues :- 1.
Whether the claimant is not a workman as alleged?
2.
Whether the termination of the services of the workman is legal and justified ?
If not, to what relief he is entitled ?
The workman appeared in the witness box to support this claim and Shri SK Ranga, Section Officer appeared as witness of the employer.
4.
After analysing the evidence, the Labour Court decided issue No. 1 in the following manner :- "The management has not advanced any argument on this issue.
This issue is decided in favour of the claimant and against the management."
5.
On issue No. 2, the Labour Court observed :- "The statement of the workman is that he worked continuously from 1841984 to 3091993.
He was suggested that he had worked only for intermittent periods (as described above).
The suggestion was denied.
The management has failed to produce the record of that period when this Chowkidar according to them had not been in their employment.
Had they produced the record of the period of his absence and had they shown the entry that he was not an employee and there was somebody else who was employed, in his place, the management would have been absolved of their duty.
The non-production of the said record has given rise to a presumption that had the record been produced it would have gone against the management, inasmuch as, it would have contained the entries of the name of this claimant as Chowkidar working for that period also.
They have also failed to show the record of payment of wages whereby they could prove as to how much amount was assigned for which particular item including the item of salary/wages of a chowkidar and as to whom that amount of wages was paid.
The non-production of this record also goes against the management.
The management has placed on record Ex.M-1, it is a letter showing the sanction of posts 4 in number for Hassanpur.
The period for which the sanction was accorded is from 131993 to 2821994.
The service of the claimant had not come to an end on 2821994.
He was terminated on 3091994.
Hence the argument of the management that work was for a fixed period and it had come to an end and thereafter the services of the claimant had come to an end, is not tenable.
It is not on the record that no sanction was granted for these posts after 2821994.
It is also not on the record that there was no chowkidar now working at FCI godown at Hassanpur.
The presumption of continuity of this type of working is over.
The workman had put in service of about 10 years and he could not be thrown out in the manner, he has been done.
The ld.
A.D.A.
appearing for the management has produced Ex.M2 copy of the order dt. 1.4.1992 passed in the Writ Petition No. 4289/1992, titled as Satyawan v. Presiding Officer, Industrial Tribunal-cum-Labour Court, Rohtak .
In that case the order passed was based on the proved fact that the petitioner workman had been appointed for a certain period for accomplishing a particular job.
In the case in hand as described above, the claimant put in service for 10 years and the management failed to prove that the service was for interim periods.
The claimant was terminated from service before the period of service was over.
This authority, therefore, does not apply to the facts of this case."
6.
One of the grounds on which the impugned award has been assailed by the petitioners is that the Labour Court did not have the jurisdiction to decide the dispute because Food and Supplies Department does not fall within the ambit of the definition of term `industry' under Section 2(j) of the Act.
Learned Deputy Advocate General made valiant efforts to convince us that even though the petitioners did not challenge the maintainability of reference on the ground that the dispute raised by the respondent-workman was not an industrial dispute because he was not employed in an industry, the petitioners should be allowed to raise this plea for the first time before this Court but we are not inclined to agree with him.
The question whether or not an establishment, government department, institution or organisation falls within the definition of industry is primarily a question of fact which can be decided only after a thorough evaluation of evidence which the parties adduce before an appropriate adjudicatory forum and certainly the High Court is not one such forum.
If the employer seeks ouster of the jurisdiction of the Labour Court or Tribunal on the ground that the dispute referred by the appropriate government is not an industrial dispute or that the employee was not working in an industry, then the onus to plead and prove the relevant facts is always on the employer and where such plea has not been raised before the Labour Court etc., the employer cannot be permitted to raise the same before the High Court for the first time.
In this case the petitioners did not raise the question of maintainability of the reference before the Labour Court by stating that Food and Supplies Department does not fall within the definition of `industry'.
This, in our view, is sufficient to disentitle the petitioners from raising the same before the High Court because it is one of the settled principles of law that even the issue of jurisdiction, the adjudication of which depends on the investigation into disputed facts cannot be allowed to be raised before the High Court in exercise of the jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
We are also of the opinion that by not raising this issue before the Labour Court, the petitioners will be deemed to have waived their right to raise the same.
7.
The learned Deputy Advocate General made a half-hearted attempt to persuade us to hold that the finding recorded by the Labour Court on the nature of employment of the workman should be declared perverse.
We have carefully gone through the award.
In our opinion, it is not possible to accept his submission because no documentary evidence was produced by the petitioners before the Labour Court to prove that the workman was engaged for a specified period and his services came to an end automatically due to cessation of the work.
The burden to prove that the case of a workman is not covered by the definition of `retrenchment' under section 2(oo) of the Act is always upon the petitioners because it is the employer who wants to non-suit the petitioners by raising such plea.
Therefore, it was for the employer to produce evidence to substantiate their plea that the case of the workman falls outside the ambit of term `retrenchment' or that his case is covered by one of the exceptions contained in Clauses (a), (b) (bb) or (c) of Section 2(oo) of the Act.
Since that has not been established in this case, we are not inclined to interfere with the exercise of discretion by the Tribunal which has awarded reinstatement to the respondent-workman with only half of the back wages.
8.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is dismissed.
For having forced an unnecessary litigation on a low paid workman, we impose costs of Rs. 5000/- on the petitioners.
The government is, however, given liberty to recover the amount of arrears of wages from the salary of the officer of the department, who terminated the service of the workman.
The Government shall also be free to recover the amount of costs from the salary of the officer who may be found responsible for having instituted wholly unnecessary petition.
Petition dismissed.