Eswara Prasad, J - Held that out of the nine charges framed against the petitioner, three charges viz., charge Nos. 1, 2 and 7 were held not proved.
Charge No. 3 is of very trivial nature, relating to expenditure of Rs. 27/-, spent for "Warehousing Week Celebration".
Charge No. 4 relates to non- disclosure of a criminal case filed against the petitioner for his involvement under Section 324, IPC, where the petitioner's daughter was teased by some unruly elements.
The case ended in acquittal and is of no consequence.
Under charge No. 5, carelessness and negligence in the performance of his duties are alleged, against the petitioner.
The, charge is very vague and it was held that the functioning of Food Corporation of India was not affected.
Similarly, the charge No. 6 alleging carelessness and negligence in the performance of duties of the petitioner, is also vague and the gravity of the finding is that the petitioner failed to submit "loss and gain report" in respect of wheat stocks.
No loss to the respondent-corporation was made out.
The finding on charge No. 8 is vague.
As per charge No. 9, the petitioner failed to act with prudence and that he did not properly place the available man-power and allocate the work amongst the staff members.
There is no definite finding on this charge also, except stating that the petitioner's over-dependence on a few individuals resulted in bringing up group politics.
2.
From the charges held proved against the petitioner, it cannot be said that the petitioner was guilty of grave mis-conduct requiring major punishment.
Regulation 17 of Central Warchousing Corporation Staff Regulations, provides for imposition of penalties and it is as follows :  "(1) Where an employee is found guilty of breach of any of these regulations or of any negligence, inefficiency or indulgence in the performance of his duties, or of knowingly doing anything detrimental to the interest of the Corporation or in conflict with any of its instructions, or of committing a breach of discipline, or of any other act of misconduct or misdemeanour, of where such employee is convicted of a criminal offence, or for any other good and sufficient reasons, one or more of the following penalties may be imposed on him, namely :-  (i) Censure;  (ii) Withholding of increments or promotion;  (iii) Recovery from pay of the whole or part of any pecuniary loss caused to the Corporation;  (iv) Reduction to a lower service, grade or post, or to a lower time scale, or to a lower stage it a time scale of pay;  (v) Compulsory retirement;  (vi) Removal from service;  (vii) Dismissal from service which shall ordinarily be disqualification for future employment in the Corporation."
Explanation II to the said Regulation is as follows :  "Penalties specified at (i) to (ii) will be termed as `minor penalties' and those specified at (iv) to (vii) will be termed as `major penalties'.
It is therefore obligatory on the part of the disciplinary authority and appellate authority to come to a conclusion whether the delinquent Officer should be punished with the major penalty or minor penalty.
Neither the disciplinary authority nor the appellate authority applied its mind to the nature of misconduct and as to whether minor penalty or major penalty should be imposed.
3.
Having regard to the acts of misconduct specified in Explanation III, the misconduct held proved against the petitioner, can by no stretch of imagination be held to be grave misconduct, warranting the imposition of major penalty.
The imposition of extreme penalty is highly arbitrary and is violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
The penalty imposed must be commensurate with the gravity of the misconduct and in the present case, the penalty is disproportionate to the gravity of misconduct.
The vastly disproportionate penalty imposed against the petitioner, has to be quashed, and a minor penalty commensurate with the type of misconduct committed by him, has to be imposed in the circumstances of the case.
I consider it appropriate to hold that the penalty imposed against the petitioner is "withholding of increment or promotion", which is minor penalty No. 2 under Regulation 17(1).
Petition partly allowed.