Sivaraman Nair, J - Held that I am at a loss to understand this submission (Petitioner was working as a Reader in the University.
He was transferred in the exigencies of service in 1987, as Reader in charge of the PG Centre at Mirzapur.
He was continuing in that post till he was promoted in 1989.
Petitioner claims that he had foregone that promotion for being considered under the UGC merit promotion scheme on completion of eight years of service.
He asserts that the post which was upgraded in accordance with that scheme was the only one available in the University College of Science and that he shall be posted in that vacancy and one other.
Even assuming this submission is correct, petitioner is bound to be posted in any constituent colleges in the exigencies of service.
It is not as if the post is unalterably attached to the University and cannot be utilised to maintain academic standards in any of the other constituent colleges.
Petitioner may be entitled to promotion, but upgradation of the post, salary attached to it and other conditions of service under the University Grants Commission Scheme of Merit Promotion, do not enable the petitioner to assert that he shall choose the place where he shall be posted.
I do not therefore find any substance in the submission that he shall be posted only in the earmarked post in the University College of Science and that neither the post nor incumbent shall be transferred to any of the constituent colleges except in accordance with the choice of the incumbent.)
(The objection of the petitioner that the Head of the Department is not competent to propose transfer of the petitioner to Nizam College and it should have been done only by a Selection Committee or the Registrar is unsustainable in view of clause 15 in Statute- XXI dealing with duties and powers of the Registrar, to the effect that the Registrar may delegate any of his powers and duties to any member of the staff with the approval of the Vice-Chancellor.)
Order accordingly.