GR Majithia, J - The petitioner has impugned the order contained in memo No. 8345-2/38159 E.A.
(1) dated 25th September, 1979 from the Director Public Instructions(S) Punjab to the District Education Officer, Hoshiarpur in this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
The facts :-  2.
The petitioner passed her matriculation examination in 2nd Division under Roll No. 92432 in March, 1966; that she passed examination for Certificate Course in Library Science conducted by State Central Library, Ambala Cantt (Haryana) in June 1972, in Second Division; that her name was sponsored for the post of Librarian by Employment Exchange, Talwara Township to the Principal, Government Higher Secondary School, Tanda Urmar and she was selected and appointed on September 7, 1972; that the posts of Junior Librarians were advertised by Punjab Subordinate Services Selection Board.
The petitioner applied for the same and was selected for regular appointment and her name was forwarded to the Director Public Instructions Punjab (Schools) for appointment as Junior Librarian; that the petitioner's appointment was kept in abeyance in view of the Presidential order dated 351977 providing for regularisation of services of those employees who had completed one year service on 31st March, 1977 and who had been appointed through the Employment Exchange; the petitioner's case was forwarded to the District Education Officer for regularisation of her services but was rejected on the plea that the Certificate in Library Science issued by State Central Library, Ambala Cantt had not been approved by the Punjab Government.
The petitioner impugned the action refusing to regularise her services in this petition.
3.
Written statement has been filed on behalf of District Education Officer, Hoshiarpur, the only defence taken is that the Certificate Course in Library Science conducted by State Central Liberary, Ambala Cantt has not been recognised by the Punjab Government.
4.
Mr. Chatrath learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the State of Punjab framed the Rules called The Punjab Education Department (Subordinate Offices, Clerical Service Rules, 1941.
Rule 3 relate to the appointment to the service and it specified that for the posts of Librarian, Label Writer and Ticket Seller, Central Museum, Lahore, a candidate must possess qualification as required in the case of Junior Clerk.
A proviso has also been added to this Rule that in special circumstances the rigor of the Rule requiring minimum qualification can be dispensed with.
The qualification prescribed for recruitment as a Junior Clerk is S.L.C.
examination or Matriculation or Post-Matriculation of 1st and Second Division.
The petitioner passed her Matriculation Examination in Second Division as is averred by her in para 2 of the Writ Petition and the facts have not been controverted by the respondent.
She was eligible for appointment as a Junior Clerk and thus she possessed the qualification required for appointment as a Librarian.
In addition, she has passed examination for Certificate Course in Library Science conducted by State Central Library, Ambala Cantt.
This was an additional qualification possessed by her.
The petitioner had the requisite qualification for appointment as Librarian as prescribed by statutory Rules and the respondents were in error in observing that she did not possess the requisite qualification.
Apart from this the order of the Governor dated 28th October, 1980 was issued in supersession of the earlier order dated 2nd May, 1980.
Para 2 of the order reads thus :-  "The cases of such ad hoc employees who have already completed three years service on 30th September, 1980 and have satisfactory record of service but who do not fulfil the prescribed conditions with regard to qualification, age or mode of their initial recruitment will also be considered for regularisation in relaxation of these conditions if the Departmental Service Rules applicable to those employees provide for relaxation of these conditions of recruitment."
5.
A bare perusal of the same indicates that an ad hoc employee who has completed three years of service on 30th September, 1980, his/her service should be regularised irrespective of the fact that he/she did not possess the minimum qualification for recruitment on the date of the appointment.
This clause envisages that regularisation may be granted if minimum qualification of three years service on 3091980, is fulfilled.
The petitioner was selected and appointed on 7th September, 1972 and she still is continuing in service.
She had completed three years continuous service on 30th September, 1980 and her case would fall within the ambit of Para 2 of the said order.
6.
The order of the Director Public Instructions (Schools) Punjab contained in memo No. 8345-2/38159 E.A.
(1) dated 25th September, 1979 cannot be sustained.
7.
For the reasons stated above the order dated 25th September, 1979 is quashed and a direction is issued to the respondents to regularise the services of the petitioners in terms of the Governor's order dated 28th October, 1980.
No order as to costs.
Petition Allowed.