RS Mongia, J (Oral) - Brief facts giving rise to the present writ petition may be noticed :-  There are 8 posts of Technical Supervisors in the Punjab Khadi and Village Industries Board, Chandigarh (hereinafter called the `Board').
These 8 posts are in different disciplines and the qualifications for the same are mentioned in Annexure P-3, which are reproduced below :-  "Post Qualifications 1.
Technical Supervisor (Leather) Two Posts Matric with Three years Diploma in Leather Chemistry and Technology with 5 years experience in trade.
Preference to persons possessing higher educational qualifications.
2.
Technical Supervisor (Fibre) one post Graduate; Diploma in Fibre Industry from some Institution.
3.
Technical Supervisor (C.W.D.)
One post Graduate; Diploma in Mechanical/Production Engineering; Five years experience in the Trade in some organisation of repute.
4.
Technical Supervisor (Pottery) one post Graduate; trained in Pottery industry; Training from Central Regional Institution or Central Khadi and VI Commission.
5.
Technical Supervisor (Soap) One post B.Sc.
Chemistry with Training in Soap Industry.
6.
Technical Supervisor (Lime) One post B.Sc.
in Lime Industry; Training in Lime Industry from the recognised Institution of KVIC/State Govt.
Minimum Three years experience.
7.
Technical Supervisor (PCPI) One post Graduate; Training in HCPI from Khadi Commission Vidyalaya or holding any Diploma in the Industry.
Person with 5 years experience be preferred.
8 to 24 xx xx xxx xxxx."
2.
Prior to 111978 the posts of Technical Supervisors carried different pay scales.
However, on the recommendations of the IInd Pay Commission, which were made effective from 111978, all the posts of Technical Supervisors were put in the same pay scale of Rs. 700-1200/-.
The petitioner was appointed as Technical Supervisor (Soap) in the year 1979 in the pay scale of Rs. 700-1200/-.
The said scale for all the posts of Technical Supervisors continued upto 1986.
After the recommendations of the IIIrd Pay Commission, Respondent No. 1, for purposes of revision of pay scales of the employees of the Board and other Public Sector Undertakings, constituted a committee.
This Committee recommended the revision of pay scales of various posts including Technical Supervisors with effect from 111986.
The Notification to that effect dated 11.7.1979 has been appended as Annexure P-2 to this writ petition.
The petitioner has been placed in the pay scale of Rs. 1350-2040/- This writ petition has been filed for giving directions to the respondents to fix the pay of the petitioner, as Technical Supervisor (Soap), in the pay scale of Rs. 1500-2640/-, instead of Rs. 1350-2400/- with effect from 111986.
3.
The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that in the recommendations of the Committee constituted to consider the revision of pay scales, it was not made clear as to which out of the 8 posts of Technical Supervisors, 5 would be in the pay scale of Rs. 1500-2640 and which other three in the pay scale of Rs. 1350-2400/-.
He further submitted that the Board had placed one post of Technical Supervisor (Leather) (out of two posts of Technical Supervisors (Leather), one post of Technical Supervisor (PCPI) and one post of Technical Supervisor (Soap) in the lower pay scale of Rs. 1350-2400/- and the rest of the five posts of Technical Supervisors were kept in the higher pay scale of Rs. 1500-2640/-.
He highlighted the duties assigned to all the Technical Supervisors, which have been enumerated in Annexure P-3 and submitted that all the Technical Supervisors were and are performing the same duties and it was because of this reason that on the recommendations of the IInd Punjab Pay Commission, the pay scale of all the Technical Supervisors was made equal.
To point out an anamoly in the decision of the Board, he submitted that out of the two posts of Technical Supervisors (Leather) which have the same qualifications and duties, one post has been kept in the lower pay scale, while the other in the higher pay scale.
He went on to submit that once the pay scales of two posts are equated, then the State Government/Board must give some reasons as to why on the revision of pay scales, one post is kept in the lower pay scale while higher pay scale is given to the other post.
Learned counsel submitted that no reasons have been given to place the post of Technical Supervisor (Soap) in the lower pay scale.
4.
To highlight that all the Technical Supervisors were and are performing the same duties, the learned counsel referred to averments made in Para 10 of the petition, which are as under :-  "That the qualifications and nature and extent of duties of all the Technical Supervisors continued to be the same as before and there had not been even the slightest change in any way.
The qualifications of the Technical Supervisors are as given in Annexure P.3 and it would be seen that the Technical Supervisor (Soap) as the petitioner is at least as much qualified as any Technical Supervisors in other trades.
As regards the duties assigned to the Technical Supervisors, the same are reproduced in Annexure P4.
These duties of all the Technical Supervisors are identical and there is absolutely nothing from it may be spelt that the petitioner as Technical Supervisor (Soap) is in any way, performing lighter or less important duties."
5.
In the written statement, filed on behalf of the State Government, it has just been mentioned that the same pertains to Respondent No. 2, i.e., the Board and the Board has replied Para 10 of the writ petition as under :-  "In reply to this para, it is stated that the posts and pay scales attached to the same are sanctioned by the Govt.
In the matter of revision, the corresponding pay scales are invariably taken into account notwithstanding the qualifications prescribed and duties attached/assigned."
6.
On the basis of the written statement it was argued by the learned counsel for the respondent that prior to the revision of pay scale, in pursuance of the recommendations of the IInd Punjab Pay Commission, the posts of Technical Supervisors were in different pay scales.
Three posts of Technical Supervisors, including the post of Technical Supervisor (Soap), were in the lower pay scale of Rs. 160-400/- whereas the other five posts of Technical Supervisors were in the pay scale of Rs. 225-500/-.
If now again three posts as Technical Supervisors, including the post of Technical Supervisor (Soap) were kept in the lower pay scale of Rs. 1350-2400/- as compared to the higher pay scale of Rs. 1500-2640/- for the other five posts of Technical Supervisors, there was nothing wrong in the same.
The learned counsel, however, admitted that after the recommendations of the IInd Pay Commission, all the posts of Technical Supervisors were placed in the same pay scale of Rs. 700-1200/-.
7.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that the petition is liable to succeed.
It is not disputed that all the Technical Supervisors were and are doing the same duties as would be clear from the averments made in Para 10 of the petition and the reply filed thereto by Respondent No. 2 (Board).
It has no where been denied that the qualifications and duties of Technical Supervisor (Soap) are in any way inferior or lesser than the duties of other Technical Supervisors.
It is no ground that once they were treated in- equal, they must now again be treated as inequal.
It cannot be lost sight of that in pursuance of the recommendation of the 2nd Punjab Pay Commission, the pay scales of all the Technical Supervisors were revised with effect from 111978 and they were all placed in the same pay scale of Rs. 700-1200.
No reasons are forthcoming as to why out of eight, three posts of Technical Supervisors were kept in lower pay scale when all of them were doing similar duties and were enjoying the same pay scale prior to the revision.
Since no reasons are forthcoming as to why the post of Technical Supervisor (Soap) was being treated as a lower post for the purpose of pay scale than the other Technical Supervisors, I have no option but to hold that the post of Technical Supervisor (Soap) was being treated as a lower post for the purpose of pay scale than the other Technical Superviosors, I have no option but to hold that the post of Technical Supervisor (Soap) would carry the same pay scale as that of other Technical Supervisors.
8.
For the foregoing reasons, this writ petition is allowed and the respondents are directed to give the same pay scale to the post of Technical Supervisor (Soap) held by the petitioner, as given to other Technical Supervisors (Rs. 1500-2640 as revised from time to time) w.e.f.
111986.
Let the arrears of pay of the petitioner be calculated and paid within four months from the date of the receipt of the copy of the judgment.
No costs.
Petition allowed.