BA Khan, J - A mix up in the Roll Numbers of two candidates has caused the present controversy.
Petitioner claims to have appeared in the Matriculations Examination in November, 1987 under Roll No. 54390.
Her result was announced in 2211988 and she was declared to have passed.
Subsequently, she was declared to have failed vide notification dated 1431989.
She has challenged this notification as being violative of principles of natural justice and the Board Regulations 61 and 66.
2.
The Board offered an interesting justification in the counter-affidavit.
It says that two candidates of same name (petitioner and respondent No. 2) appeared in the examination as regular students sponsored by H.S.S.
(Boys) Paddar.
Petitioner was allotted Roll No. 54388 and respondent No.
Roll No. 54390 on the Enrolment Register submitted by the Principal of the school.
However, while transcribing the Roll numbers from Enrolment Register to the Admission Forms, a mistake crept in leading to inter change of Roll numbers.
In petitioner's Admission Form, it was recorded 54390 and in case of respondent No. 2 as 54388.
When the result was prepared petitioner was declared to have passed on the basis of Roll No. 54390.
However, on a complaint made by respondent No. 2, the error was detected leading to cancellation of petitioners' result.
3.
Even if the Board's story is accepted the action would still not sustain as the Board is incompetent to amend the result of a candidate affected by an error after expiry of six months from the date of its publication in terms of Regulation 66.
Relevant Regulation reads thus :-  "66(2).
In any case where it is found that the result of an examination has been affected by an error, malpractice, fraud, improper conduct of other matter of whatsoever nature, the Board shall have power to amend such result in such manner as shall be in accord with the true position and to make such declaration as the Board shall consider necessary in that behalf-,  Provided that, but subject to the Regulation immediately following no result shall be amended after the expiration of six months from the date of publication."
4.
A perusal of the regulation shows that Board can amend the result if it has been affected by an error etc. within six months from the date of its publication in the present case, petitioner's result was declared on 2211988 and it could be amended within six months from the date of publication.
It was not so amended for more than one year and thus could not be amended thereafter.
5.
There is also nothing on record to show that Board had conducted any inquiry into the matter or that petitioner was afforded any opportunity of being heard.
All that is stated in this regard it that she was called through the concerned Principal, but she failed to extend any co-operation.
It is not anybody's case that any notice of show-cause was given to her or that she was informed about the discovery of error.
Everything appears to have been done at her back.
6.
It need hardly be emphasised that a valuable right had accrued to her after she was declared to have passed.
It could not be taken away arbitrarily and at her back.
She has been condemned at her back and the action impugned being violative of Board Regulations and Principles of natural justice cannot be allowed to stand.
I consequently allow this petition and quash notification dated 1431989.
Petition allowed.