MR Agnihotri, J - The petitioners are graduates and have been working as Clerks in the office of Director of Prosecution, Haryana, for the last more than five years ie petitioner No. 1 since 14th December, 1984 and petitioner No. 2 since 17th May, 1985.
Earlier they were appointed on ad hoc basis, but later on, their writ petitions for regularisation of their services were allowed.
Though, as a result thereof, the services of the petitioners were to be regularised, yet only with regard to petitioner No. 2 orders of regularisation have been issued and regarding petitioner No. 1 the same have not been formally issued so far.
2.
The petitioners are aggrieved of the appointment of respondent No. 3, 4 and 5 who were working as Clerks in other departments of the State Government but have been brought on promotion as Assistants by way of transfer.
According to the petitioners, their claims have not been considered for the posts of Assistant even though they were eligible to be promoted as such from amongst the Clerks working in the department possessing five years experience as Clerks.
3.
In reply, the respondents have pleaded that the petitioners were not eligible to be considered for promotion as the posts of Assistant had to be filled in accordance with the Haryana State Prosecution Group C (Clerical Headquarters) Service Rules, 1980, which required five years experience as Clerk, therefore, resort to appointment by transfer had to be made by bringing employees from other departments of the State Government.
4.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, we find that as both the petitioners did possess five years experience as Clerks in this very department, they were very much eligible and entitled to be considered for promotion to the posts of Assistant.
The requirement of the statutory provision in appendix B to the Rules is "Five years experience as Clerk" which obviously means practical acquaintance with the duties of a Clerk, gained by discharging the same for a period of five years.
For acquiring this proficiency it does not necessitate the holding of a permanent post of a Clerk in a substantive or regular capacity.
Emphasis of the legislative intention is on "experience" and not on "service" as a clerk, muchless in a regular capacity.
Therefore, the petitioners could not be treated as ineligible for consideration only due to the temporariness of their tenure as a Clerk.
In this view of the matter, the non-consideration of the claims of the petitioners for promotion to the post of Assistant being based on non-existent and irrelevant data, the decision to ignore them stands vitiated in law.
This has denied to them the equality of opportunity in matter of employment enshrined by Article 16 of the Constitution  5.
On another ground also the appointment of respondent Nos. 3 to 5 is bad in law as Rule 9 of the Rule permits "recruitment by transfer or deputation of an official already in Service."
Under this provision, appointment to the post of Assistant could be made by transfer only from amongst the Assistants working in other departments, and not by promoting the clerks working in other departments.
The element of "transfer" presupposes transfer of employees, from one department or organisation to another, who are more or less in the equivalent pay scale or rank.
If the power of promoting employees of one department against the higher posts of other department is to be exercised in the manner in which it has been done in the instant case, then on parity of reasoning, a peon working in one department can also be given promotion and appointed by transfer as Assistant in another department.
This will be a colourable exercise of jurisdiction, which is neither intended nor envisaged by the Statutory rules.
6.
Consequently, we allow this petition and quash and appointment by transfer of respondent Nos. 3, 4 and 5 and direct the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 consider the petitioners as eligible and possessing the requisites experience or promotion as Assistant.
The respondents shall now go ahead with process of filling the posts of Assistants in accordance with the rules.
Petition allowed.