Bhaskar Rao, J - At the outset, we have to point out that para-8 of G.O.
Ms. No. 1792, dated 23.9.1970, provides the break-up percentage of reservation to Backward Class-A, B, C and D Groups as under :  Group-A 07%  Group-B 10%  Group-C 01%  Group-D 07%  According to para 9 of G.O.
Ms. No. 1792, in cases where no suitable candidate is available in a particular group to allot him the seat reserved for, that seat should go to the next group in the order of rotation.
Thus, if two seats in Group-A are available and remaining unfilled, they should go to the next group, namely, Group-B This position was amended by G.O.
Ms. No. 996, dated 111175, by stating that the unfilled seats may be filled up by suitable candidates in any other group as per merit.
This position covered by item 3 of para 3 of G.O.
Ms. No. 996 was again substituted by Memo dated 1151989 whereunder the unfilled seats reserved for Backward Class-A, will go to Backward Class-B, Backward Class-C or Backward Class-D in the order of merit in each group.
It is in regard to interpretation of this substituted portion that the contentions as noted were raised by the learned counsel for both sides.
The contention of Mr. Vedantha Rao, as analysed, is that to fill up the unfilled seats reserved for Backward Class-A group, lists of merit candidates in each group, namely Group-B, C and D, should be prepared and among them the most meritorious should be allotted the seats.
We find sufficient force in this contention.
The language employed in the substituted rule reflects that where there are unfilled seats in Group-A for want of suitable candidates, they will got for being filled up to Backward Class-B, Backward Class-C or Backward Class-D group, no doubt, in the order of merit in each group.
Merely because the words "in the order of merit in each group" are employed, it cannot be said that the first preference will go to the candidates in Group-B, in the absence of whom, next to those in Group-C, and in their absence, lastly to Group-D That will be violating the very spirit of the policy in the matter of providing reservations inasmuch as it basically overlooks merit inter se the backward class candidates in Group-B, C and D Testing the issue in a different angle, it is to be seen that the appointment of the seats as per the given percentages among Groups-A to D in consonance with Article 15(4) of the Constitution of India.
Further the substituted rule also emphasises the importance of merit and puts it as the basis by saying "in the order of merit".
If the theory of preferential order advanced by the learned standing Counsel is accepted, it would result in ignoring merit inasmuch as the turn would necessarily have its confinement to the candidates in Backward Class Group-B alone since it is the first preferential group overriding the claims of more meritorious candidates in other Groups and thereby boosting up the percentage of reservation in respect of Group-B culminating in interference with the reserved percentage as per Article 15(4) of the Constitution of India.
The contention of the learned standing counsel that needs to be referred to at this juncture is that if merit among all the remaining three Groups is the criterion to fill up the unfilled seat and if that is the intention of the rule-making authority there is no need to substitute item-3 of para-3 of G.O.
Ms. No. 996, which would sufficiently reflect the interpretation presently sought to be made.
True, the earlier position covered by item-3 of para-3 envisages filling-up of the unfilled seats in any of the Groups by the candidates in the remaining Groups as per merit.
That contemplates unfilled seats in respect of all the four Groups.
But the present rule as substituted provides only for unfiled seats in respect of Group-A only.
Merely because the language of the rule is moulded slightly different, it cannot be said that the rule-making authority intended to ignore merit inter se the candidates in Backward Class.
Even taking that a particular rule is capable of being interpreted in two ways, the settled principle of law in the light of interpretation of statutes is to tilt in favour of one that is nearer to reasonableness.
In the present case the percentage reserved for Backward Class-C group, to which the appellant belongs, is 1%.
The number of seats in each of the four colleges, with which alone we are concerned in these proceedings, is `25'.
Inasmuch as 1% of these `25' seats works out to less `0.5' it has to be ignored, as held by the learned single Judge, in accordance with rule 5(3) of G.O.
Ms. No. 759, dated 25101984.
Consequently not even one seat is available to candidates in Backward Class-C Group, though the percentage reserved is 1%.
If the preferential theory as advanced is accepted, it would amount to adding fuel to fire, since the unfilled seat in BC-A Group as per that theory has to be filled up by the merited candidate in Backward Class-B group only, thereby denying opportunity to the more meritorious candidate in Group-C Therefore the concept of reasonableness also warrants tilting the balance more in favour of the contention advanced by Mr. Vedantha Rao.
2.
It is not disputed before us that the candidate in Backward Class-B group to whom the seat was allotted consequent upon availability of a seat in Backward Class A group, has secured marks lesser than the petitioner, and, therefore, without going into the other contentions in the view we have taken, we direct the respondents to allot one seat to the appellant in the First Year of BSc, Nursing Course.
3.
In the result, the writ appeal is allowed and the order of the learned single Judge is set aside, with the direction noted supra.
The reliefs sought for in the writ petition accordingly stand granted.
No costs.
Petition allowed.