RS Mongia, J (Oral) - Petitioner had obtained a degree of MA in Psychology in IInd Division in the year 1979 from Guru Nanak Dev University.
Thereafter she obtained a degree of Bachelor of Education in April, 1980 in IInd Division and Master of Education in April, 1982 in 1st Division from the same University.
In the year 1990, name of the petitioner was sponsored by the Employment Exchange to respondent No. 3 (The Chairman, Border District Selection "Committee (Teachers) Gurdaspur) for being considered for appointment as a Social Studies Teacher, for which the basic qualification was BA B.Ed  2.
It is not disputed that the Government had laid down a criteria to prepare merit list by giving due weightage to academic qualifications and extra curricular activities.
The item of the criteria, which was issued on 22121989, with which we are concerned in this case, relates to the weightage given to the additional qualifications.
Under the head "additional qualifications", 5 marks were to be given for Post Graduation degree in 1st Division, 3 marks for Second Division and 2 marks for Third Division Post Graduate Degree.
3.
Petitioner was not selected, which led her to the filing of the present writ petition.
The primary grievance of the petitioner is that though she has been given 3 marks for her Post-Graduate Degree, i.e. MA in Psychology in Second Division, yet 5 marks were not awarded to her for having obtained M.Ed.
Degree in 1st Division.
According to the petitioner, if 5 marks had been awarded to her for having obtained M.Ed Degree in First Division, then her name would have certainly found place in the merit list.
4.
In the reply filed on behalf of the respondents, the factual matrix has not been disputed.
The stand taken is that degree of M.Ed.
is not Post- Graduate Degree and, therefore, no marks could be awarded to the petitioner for having obtained M.Ed Degree in 1st Division.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner argued that the basic degree of graduation in Education is Bachelor of Education and M.Ed.
degree is certainly a Post Graduate Degree, which is obtained after graduating in Education i.e., B.Ed.
He went on to illustrate that degree of MA is considered as Post- Graduate Degree, because this is obtained after graduating in Arts i.e. BA Similarly, according to the learned counsel, a degree of LL.B.
may be the basic degree or Graduation in Law, whereas LL.M.
would be a Post Graduate Degree in Law.
On the basis of these illustrations, he submitted that Degree of M.Ed is a Post-Graduate Degree.
6.
Learned counsel for the respondents could not successfully argue to substantiate the stand taken in the written statement as to why M.Ed.
Degree is not considered as a Post Graduate Degree.
He could not give me the basis as to why M.Ed Degree which is obtained after Graduation in Education i.e. B.Ed should not be considered as a Post-Graducate Degree.
Learned counsel further argued that even if M.Ed.
Degree is taken to be a Post Graduate Degree, but since this is a professional degree and has no relevance to the qualifications which are required for Social Studies Teachres, no benefit could be given to the petitioner for her M.Ed.
Degree.
7.
After hearing counsel for the parties, I am of the view that the petitioner must succeed.
M.Ed.
Degree which is a Master's Degree in Education is obtained after Graduating in Education i.e., after obtaining a B.Ed.
Degree.
Consequently, Master's Degree in Education is a Post Graduate Degree which is obtained after Graduation in Education.
I do not find any merit in the submission of the learned counsel for the respondent that M.Ed.
Degree being a professional Degree, cannot be considered as a Post-Graduate degree.
A Post Graduate Degree can also be a professional degree.
For instance, a person who obtains a degree of MBBS and thereafter does MD, or MS would be held to have obtained a Post Graduate Degree in Medicine, though it is still a professional Degree.
Moreover, it is not the requirement of the criteria for giving weightage that the Post Graduate Degree has to have some connection with the basic qualifications.
In fact the respondents themselves have granted 3 marks to the petitioner for having obtained a Degree in MA Psychology.
Psychology subject has nothing to do with the basic qualifications of Social Studies Mistress.
Accordingly, I hold that the petitioner was entitled to the grant of 5 marks for having obtained M.Ed.
Degree in 1st Division.
For the foregoing reasons, this writ petition is allowed and the respondents are directed to reckon the merit of the petitioner by awarding her 5 additional marks on the basis of her having obtained M.Ed.
Degree in 1st Division and in case her name comes in the merit list, she should be given appointment forthwith which for the purpose of seniority would be reckoned from the day she would have been appointed, had these marks been awarded to her.
These directions be carried out within a fortnight from the receipt of this order.
I make no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.