Syed Shah Mohammed Quadri, J - The petitioner was appointed as Rakshak (subsequently designated as constable) in the South Central Railway Protection Force of Vijaywada Division in 1962.
On the allegation of theft of 41 `bogi shackle used pins' on 31.10.1979, diciplinary proceedings were initiated against him and he was removed from service by the Assistant Security Officer on 14101983.
He unsuccessfully appealed to the Security Officer.
His appeal was dismissed on 19.9.1984.
Then he filed a Second Appeal before the Deputy Inspector General of R.P.F., South Central Railway, the Ist respondent herein.
That appeal was also dismissed by the 1st respondent on 411985.
The petitioner challenges the validity of the said order of the 1st respondent by praying for a writ of mandamus to declare that order as illegal and without jurisdiction and for a further direction to reinstate the petitioner with all consequential and incidental benefits.
2.
The petitioner submits that the Railway Board by proceedings dated 1591983 withdrew the powers of the Assistant Security Officer to impose punishment of removal from service on A Rakshak (constable) and conferred the said power on the Security Officer.
Thereafter, the order passed by the Assistant Security Officer, removing the petitioner from service was wholly without jurisdiction.
The 2nd respondent filed a counter-affidavit for the respondents.
The particulars of the petitioner and the proceedings relating to imposition of penalty of removal, are not disputed.
It is admitted that the schedule of powers was revised by the Railway Board which was communicated through the letter dated 1591983, pursuant to which the Assistant Security Officer is not competent to impose punishment of removal from service on a Rakshak.
But it is contended that the said circular was received by the Assistant Security Officer after issuing the final orders of removal.
The Railway Board order was received in the office of the Divisional Security Officer on 1121983, whereas the order of removal was passed on 14101983.
As the Assistant Security Officer did not receive the circular, his power to impose the penalty was not affected and, therefore, there is no illegality in the order of removal passed by the Assistant Security Officer as confirmed by the Security Officer and the 1st respondent.
In the circumstances it is prayed that the Writ Petition may be dismissed.
3.
Held that it is admitted case of both the parties that on 1591983 the Railway Board revised the Schedule of powers, so consequently the 3rd respondent (Assistant Security Officer) ceased to be the competent authority to impose punishment of removal from service of a Rakshak.
But that circular was not received by the 3rd respondent before the impugned order was passed by him.
He received the circular only on 1121983, after 1-1/2 months of passing of the impugned order.
So it follows that on the date the impugned order of removal of the petitioner from service was passed by the 3rd respondent on 14101983, the 3rd respondent did not have the power to impose the penalty of removal from service on Rakshak (Constable).
The first respondent noted, in the impugned order, that in view of the letter of the Railway Board dated 1591983, The Assistant Security Officer was not competent to impose punishment of removal from service on a Rakshak.
However, he upheld the order of the 3rd respondent on the ground that the 3rd respondent received the Railway Board letter after the order of termination was passed by him and consequently there was no failure of natural justice.
In my view, the fact that on the date of initiation of disciplinary proceedings the 3rd respondent has power to pass order of removal is immaterial and as on the date when the impugned order or removal was passed by the 3rd respondent, his power to impose the punishment of removal from service on a Rakshak admittedly stood withdrawn, the order is clearly without jurisdiction.
Therefore the impugned order cannot be sustained.
Order accordingly.