RS Mongia, J - For the view I am taking in the matter, it is not necessary to advert to the facts in any detail.
Suffice it to mention that vide office order dated 17101992 (Annexure P/5), the Director-Principal of C.R State College of Engineering, Murthal respondent No. 2, informed the petitioner and others concerned that in the terms of MD University, Rohtak letter dated 16101992, migration of the petitioner was being made from Priyadarshni College of Engineering, Nagpur to CR State College of Engineering, Murthal on provisional basis in BE 2nd year in Electronics & Communication Engineering Branch subject to her submitting migration certificate from the University of Nagpur within 20 days from the date of issue of the order and further the petitioner was directed to deposit fee with the cashier.
The petitioner in pursuance the said order, deposited fee on 19101992.
She was allotted Roll Number and was also given a seat in the hostel.
2.
It is the case of the petitioner that she obtained migration certificate from the University of Nagpur on 20101992, but before it could be submitted to the authorities concerned, the Principal on 21101992 (Annexure P/10) Tote to her on the basis of a letter of the Commissioner-cum-Secretary to Government Haryana dated 20101992 that the provisional approval regarding migration granted vide letter dated 17101992 (Annexure P/5) was being withdrawn and also the provisional admission in BE 2nd year Electronics & Communication Engineering to the collage stands cancelled.
The present writ petition challenging order dated 21101992 (Annexure P/10) was filed on 24101992, which came up for hearing on 28.10.1992 when notice of motion was issued and ultimately it was admitted on 13111992.
It was ordered by way of interim arrangement that the petitioner would pursue her studies at CR State College of Engineering at her own risk, which would be subject to the decision of the writ petition.
3.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has raised the following points to assail communication of withdrawal of approval of migration dated 21101992 (Annexure P/10);  1) Before approval to migrate was granted the petitioner had placed before the respondent all the facts and had not concealed any fact from the authorities and in any case the authorities knew all the facts before granting approval for the migration.
Consequently the doctrine of promissory estoppel would come into play against the respondents and they cannot now withdraw the approval.
The approval had been granted only subject to her submitting the migration certificate from the Nagpur University, which the petitioner had obtained on 20101992;  2) The impugned order entails civil consequences inasmuch as the petitioner got her admission cancelled from Nagpur University and if the impughned order is allowed to stand, she would neither get admission in the Nagpur University nor in CR State College of Engineering, Murthal.
According to the counsel, such an order could not have been passed without affording any opportunity of hearing to the petitioner;  3) The order withdrawing the approval regardmg migration does not disclose any reasons whatsoever.
It being a non-speaking order is liable to be quashed;  4) The MD University has not withdrawn the approval regarding migration granted vide letter dated 15101992 (Annexure P/3) and consequently, respondent Nos. 1 & 2 had no jurisdiction to withdraw the approval.
4.
Without adverting to the arguments on all these points of the counsel for the parties, I am of the opinion that this case deserves to be allowed on point No. 2 referred to above.
Admittedly before withdrawing the approval regarding the migration, the Board of Governors of respondent No. 2 i.e. CR State College of Engineering had not given any show cause notice or any opportunity of hearing to the petitioner.
The facts which have been brought before me and the points raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner have not been considered by the Board of Governors.
It would have been in the fitness of the things that before any order was passed against the petitioner regard withdrawal of the approval of migration, she had been given an opportunity of being heard.
The impugned order is violative of the principles of natural justice.
5.
Consequently, without going into other points, the writ petition is allowed and the impugned order Annexure P/10 is hereby quashed with the following directions :  (i) The Board of Governors of the College would meet on 3121992 at 11 am in the office of the Chairman in Haryana Secretariat, Chandigarh on which date the petitioner would present herself for being personally heard.
She may give written submission, if she so desires.
The petitioner may be accompanied by her parents or any male member of the family.
(ii) If on the said date for any reason, the quorum of Board of Governors is not complete, then irrespective of that the Chairman and as many members, who may be present, would form the quorum for the purpose of this case and the petitioner would raise no objection at any time regarding the strength of the quorum.
(iii) The Board of Governors would pass a speaking order within one week of 3121992.
It is made clear that the petitioner would not attend classes from now onwards till the Board of Governors passes orders as stipulated above.
In case, the Board of Governors passes orders in favour of the petitioner then the petitioner would be deemed to have continued the classes and no objection would be taken at any stage of her having fallen short of lectures/practicals for the purpose of her appearing in the University examinations.
Let a copy of this order, attested by my Reader, be given Dasti to the counsel for the parties for compliance.
I make no order as to costs.