Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - This order may be read in continuation of the order dated July 29, 1992.
Mr. Jaswant Singh, learned counsel for the respondents has obtained instructions from the Department.
He very candidly states that the petitioner was not offered any opportunity of hearing before the passing of the order dated August 17, 1988.
He, however, contends that if at all an opportunity is required to be given, it is only to the employee concerned and not to his heirs.
2.
As already noticed in the order dated July 29, 1992 Prem Sagar had remained under suspension for an unduly long period from November 4, 1968 to February 20, 1978.
It is admitted before me that in spite of the elapse of more than 9 long years, the inquiry proceedings were not completed and no finding at all was recorded against Prem Sagar.
Mr. Prem Sagar died while the inquiry was still pending.
Admittedly, during the period of suspension, he was paid only the subsistence allowance.
After his death, the order regarding the payment of salary etc. for the period of suspension has to be passed.
It is bound to affect the interest of the heirs of the deceased employee.
Consequently, I am of the view that the person whose interests were likely to be affected, had a righ to be heard.
The petitioner is that person.
She had a right to be heard.
No opportunity of hearing having been granted to her, the order dated August 17, 1988 by which the period of suspension was directed to be treated as `leave of the kind due' cannot be sustained.
It is, as such, quashed.
3.
The appropriate authority will now proceed to decide the matter afresh after hearing the petitioner.
Thereafter, the authority would pay to the petitioner such amount of money as may be found due.
Appropriate orders regarding the payment of family pension shall also be passed in the light of the order which may be passed by the appropriate authority after hearing the petitioner.
The needful shall be done within four months form the date of the receipt of a copy of this order.
If the payment is not made in accordance with the order that may be passed within the time mentioned above, the petitioner shall be entitled to the payment of interest on the amount due from the date it fell due till the date of actual payment at the rate of 12 per cent per annum.
Keeping in view the fact that the petition has been presented through the Legal Aid Cell, I make no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.