GC Garg, J - The question that requires determination in this appeal is, whether, the respondents who are working as Steno.
Typists in the Punjab State Planning Board, (for Short `the Board') are entitled to promotion as Junior Scale Stenographers.
2.
The respondent who possessed the prescribed academic qualifications besides having a diploma in Punjabi Shorthand, were appointed as Steno-typists in the Board in the year 1987.
They were denied appointment by way of promotion to the post of Junior Scale Stenographers.
This writ petition was allowed by the learned Singh Judge.
Hence, this appeal by the Government of Punjab.
3.
After appointment of the respondent as Steno-typists, the Rules called "The Punjab State Planning Board (Class III) Service Rules, 1988" (for short `the Rules') were notified.
These Rules amongst others, provide for appointment to the post of Junior Scale Stenographers.
The method of appointment and qualifications therefore have been laid down in rule 8, which inter alia, provides that appointments shall be made in the manner specified in Appendix `B'.
The relevant entry in Appendix `B' to the Rules reads as under :-  Sr. No./
Designation of post % for appointment Qualification and experience for appointment by Promotion Direct Rec.
Direct Recruitment Promotion 1 to 3 XXX XXX XXX XXX 4.
Junior Scale Stenographers 60% 40% i) From amongst the Steno-typists who have an experience of working as such for a minimum period on one year; and i) Should be Graduate or 2nd Class Intermediate of a recongnised University or 1st Class Matriculate or its equivalent and, ii) Should qualify test in Stenography both in Punjabi and English languages to be conducted by Head of Department at such speed as may be specified from time to time ii) Should qualify test in Stenography both in Punjabi and English languages to be conducted by the recruiting authority at such speed as may be specified from time to time.
5.
Steno-typists 40% 60% i) From amongst the Clerks/Typists who have an experience of working as such for a minimum period of one year; and i) Should be Graduate Class Intermediate of a recongnised University or First Class Matriculate or its equivalent; and,  ii) Should qualify test in Stenography both in English & Punjabi languages to be conducted by the Head of the Deptt.
at such speed as may be specified from time to time.
ii) Should qualify test in Stenography both in Punjabi and English languages to be conducted by the recruiting authority at such speed as may be qualified from time to time.
4.
It will be apt to notice rule 18 of the Rules as well at this stage, which reads as under :  "18.
Power to relax :- Where the Government is of opinion that it is necessary or expedient so to do, it may by order, for reasons to be recorded, in writing, relax any of the provisions of these rules with respect to any class or category of person;  Provided that the provisions relating to educational qualifications and experience shall not be relaxed."
5.
The appellants, perhaps having regard to the instructions contained in Annexure P-1, issued by the State Government, decided to fill up two posts of Junior Scale Stenographers lying vacant in the office of the Board from amongst the Steno-typists by holding departmental test.
Letter dated May 7/10,1991 is indicative to that effect.
A detailed procedure was indicated in this letter for clearing the test in Punjabi Shorthand.
It was further provided that the candidates successfully clearing the test in Punjabi Shorthand will be promoted and they will be required to clear the test in English Shorthand within one year in the terms indicted therein.
The Steno-typists who had one year's regular service under the Board, were made eligible to sit in the test.
6.
A reference to the Rules and the letter dated May 7/10, 1991 would show that the conditions laid down for promotion from Steno-typists to the post of Junior Scale Stenographers are precisely the same except that the Rules require qualifying the test in Shorthand in English before promotion whereas the letter provides qualifying the test in Shorthand in English in three chances within one year, after promotion.
7.
In pursuance of letter dated May 7/10, 1991 the respondents appeared in the departmental test in Shorthand in Punjabi and qualified the same.
They were, however, not promoted and their representation in that behalf was rejected.
8.
Learned Additional Advocate General, Punjab appearing for the appellants laid great emphasis to contend that the respondents had rightly been not promoted as they had not qualified the Shorthand test in English and the learned Single Judge erred in law in allowing the writ petition and directing the appellants to consider the claim of the respondents for promotion to the post of Junior Scale Stenographers.
The contention has no merit.
The power of the State Government under rule 18 to relax the Rules is not in doubt.
Reference to Annexure P-1 reveals that the conditions to qualify the departmental test in Shorthand in English was relaxed in case of promotions from the post of Steno-typists to the post of Junior Scale Stenographers in the Board and permitted the promotee Stenotypists to qualify this test in three chances within one year after the date of promotion.
This is precisely what was provided by letter dated May 7/10,1991 in terms of which the respondents took the test and qualified the same.
The respondents having qualified the test for promotion to the post of Junior Scale Stenographers, the appellants could not deny them promotion by taking shelter under the Rules, which Rules, as already noticed, stood relaxed to the extent indicated above.
Letter dated May 7/10,1991 could not have been issued but for the relaxation granted vide Annexure P-1.
It is difficult to comprehend and agree with the learned Additional Advocate General that such relaxation could not be given by the State Government under Rule 18 of the Rules.
9.
The contention of Mr. Riar, the Additional Advocate General, Punjab that relaxation, if any, stood withdrawn by the issuance of clarificatory order by the Government on August 21,1991, the respondents lost their right to promotion thereafter even if they had any, again has no force.
Once the respondents qualified the departmental test before the issuance of clarificatory order, they acquired a right to be considered for promotion in terms of letter dated May 7/10,1991 and promoted, if they fulfilled all other conditions to which there is not dispute.
The relaxation is only to the extent that the respondents will have to pass departmental Stenography test in English within one year of their promotion and they would get three chances therefor.
In case they fail to qualify the test, they will stand reverted as per the relaxation which clearly provides to that effect.
10.
In any case, having regard to the above discussion and without going into further details, as the present situation affects only the two respondents, the relaxation having been withdrawn through the calrificatory order shortly after they qualified the test, no occasion is provided to set aside the judgment of the learned Single Judge and directions issued therein.
For the foregoing reasons, the appeal fails and is dismissed.
The parties shall bear their own costs.