Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - 210 petitioners in this case are working as Clerks/Senior Clerks/Steno-typists/Senior Steno-typists at the Punjab Agriculture University, Ludhiana.
Some of them even claim to have been promoted to higher posts.
They claim parity of treatment in the matter of pay scale with the persons working as Store-keepers.
This claim is based on the ground that the posts held by the petitioners are inter-changeable with those of Store-Keepers.
For this purpose reliance has been placed on the copies of four orders produced by the petitioners, as Annexures P-8 to P-11 with this petition.
2.
A perusal of the order dated June 18, 1985 (Annexure P-8) shows that one Mrs. Prabha Rani, clerk in the office of Director Food Technology, Processing and Marketing was transferred to the Department of Veterinary Bacteriology and Virology "against the post of Store-keeper provided in the scheme NP(C) Vety.
I."
By the order dated April 1, 1986 (Annexure P-9) one Mr. DK Chadha, Senior StoreKeeper was directed to "hand over the charge of Electrical Store to Shri BK Sharma, Sr.
Clerk instead of Shri Lakhbir Singh, Storemate."
By the order dated February 17,1987 (Annexure P-10) a senior clerk in the office of Incharge, Vegetable Research Station, Jalandhar, was transferred to the Department of Forestry against a vacant post of store- keeper.
By the order dated 2011986 duties were assigned to one Shri Sahib Singh, senior clerk.
He was directed to deal with handling of stores (consumable and non-consumable) of the department.
On the basis of these instances, the petitioners contend that the posts borne on the ministerial establishment viz. those of clerks, etc. were interchangeable with those of store-keepers.
On this basis the petitioners who are working in the scale of Rs. 400-600 and Rs. 510-800 claim that they should be placed in the pay scale of Rs. 510-940 and Rs. 600-1100 as had been granted to the storekeepers.
3.
I have heard Mr. RK Chopra, learned counsel for the petitioners.
4.
On a perusal of the four orders relied upon by the petitioners, it is apparent that these are stray instances of persons working as clerks, etc being posted against a vacant post of Store-Keeper, etc. For example, it may be noticed that Mrs. Prabha Rani was transferred from the office of Director Food Technology, Processing and Marketing to the Department of Veterinary Bacteriology and Virology against the post of store-keeper.
Thereafter vide order dated January 20, 1986 she was assigned the duties of diary, despatch, records and `bills of the Department other than the contingencies'.
It is thus apparent that even though she was posted against the post of storekeeper she was actually performing the ministerial duties and was dealing with diary and despatch work, etc.
Similarly Mr. DK Chadha who had been initially asked to hand over the charge of store to Lakhbir Singh was directed to hand over the charge to a Senior Clerk.
These are purely stray instances where temporary arrangements appear to have been made.
These cannot be interpreted to mean that the University was considering the posts of senior clerks, etc. being interchangeable with those of storekeepers.
Mr. Chopra further contends that Mr. Sahib Singh, a senior Clerk was called upon to handle the stores.
The relevant entry in order, Annexure P-11, reads as under :  XX XX XX XX XX  2.
Sh. Sahib Singh, Sr.
Clerk, Handling of stores (consumable and non- consumable) of the contingencies and maintenance of cash.
xx xx xxxx xxx  Sd/- Prof-cum-Head."
This order had been passed by the Professor-cum-Head of the Department of Veterinary Bacteriology and Virology.
It appears that for certain administrative reasons a senior Clerk was asked to take charge of the seat relating to handling of stores, etc.
I am unable to read this order to mean that Shri Sahib Singh was appointed as a storekeeper.
Even otherwise such stray instances cannot lead to the conclusion that the posts had been declared as interchangeable or even as equivalent.
5.
The claim for equal pay can only be sustained when it is proved that the persons claiming equal pay are doing equal work.
For this purpose it is necessary to show that the qualifications, job-requirements, nature of duties and the extent of responsibility etc. are identical, or at least similar.
There is no evidence to that effect in this case.
Mr. Chopra, appearing for the petitioners, has not been able to point out that the store-keepers and the clerks perform identical duties nor has he been able to establish that their responsibility is identical.
It is common knowledge that persons who are in charge of stores are burdened with great responsibility and in a case of any shortages they have to make good the loss.
Such is usually not the case in respect of the posts of clerks, etc.  6.
Accordingly, it is not possible to accept the contention that the posts held by the petitioners and those of store-keepers are equal in rank and responsibility.
Therefore, there is no ground for this granting parity of treatment in the matter of pay.
Accordingly this petition has no merit.
It is dismissed.
Keeping in view the fact that nobody has appeared on behalf of the University, I pass no order as to costs.