JL Gupta, J. (Oral) - On July 20, 1981, the State of Haryana issued instructions granting special incentives to such Government employee "who undergo sterilisation after having two or three surviving children ......" The circular provided for the grant of a special increment.
It inter alia provided that the concession would be admissible only "to Government employees who undergo the sterilisation operation on or after the date of issue of these orders" The petitioners claim that they had underdone the operation prior to July, 1981, and that the condition that the benefit would be admissible only to such employees as have undergone the operation on or after this order is discriminatory and violates Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
2.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondent, it has been inter alia averred that the State Government is competent to fix a cut- off date for giving incentives/concessions to its employees in the form of special increment.
It is further submitted that the petitioners, who got themselves sterilised prior to issue of the letter dated July 20,1981, are not eligible to claim the benefits in the letter.
3.
I have heard Mr. JS Maanipur for the petitioner and Mr. Jaswant Singh for the respondents.
A perusal of the letter dated July 20, 1981 shows that provision of grant of special increment was made for the purpose of "further incentive to promote the small family norms among the Haryana Government employees ....." Certain specific conditions were also laid down.
It was inter alia provided that the employee concerned must be within a certain age group and that he should have two or three living children.
It has been further provided that the sterilisation operation must have been conducted and a certificate should have been issued "by a Government hospital."
However, a further condition was also imposed that the benefit shall be admissible only to such persons, who undergo the sterilisation operation after the date of issue of these orders.
It is only that part of the order, which is being impugned in this petition.
4.
All the persons, who have either themselves undergone the sterilisation operation or whose spouses have undergone the surgery, contribute to promote the objective of the State Government.
They form one class.
The condition based on the date of undergoing the sterilisation operation does not provide any basis for rational classification in the present case.
Consequently, it appears fair that all the persons, who had undergone sterilisation operation and fulfilled each one of the conditions laid down in sub-paras (i) to (v) of the circular, should be eligible for the grant of special increment.
Since this writ petition has been filed almost eight years after the issue of the circular, it would not be fair to grant arrears of pay to the petitioner or more than 38 months prior to the date of filing of the writ petition.
Accordingly, it is directed that the respondents shall consider the cases of the petitioners.
If it is found that they fulfil the conditions, except the one mentioned at Sr. No. (v) in the letter dated July 20,1981, then the respondent shall re-fix the pay of the petitioners by granting them an increment with effect from the date of issue of the letter.
After re-fixing the pay, the payment of arrears of salary shall be for only 38 months prior to the date of filing of the petition.
The respondents shall pass an appropriate order within six months from the date of receipt of the copy of this order.
In the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.