Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) -The petitioners, who are working as Secretaries and Assistant Secretaries in the Zila Sainik Boards in the State of Haryana, claim parity of treatment in the matter of pay scales with the Class-I Officers, including the members of the Haryana Civil Services (Executive Branch).
This claim is founded basically on two grounds.
Firstly, it is claimed that according to the pay scales prevalent in the year 1971, the petitioners, as also the members of other Class-I service, including the members of H.C.S., were placed in the scale of Rs. 400-1250.
The petitioners claim that once they have been placed in an identical scale of pay, they have a right to parity of treatment on all subsequent occasions.
Secondly, it has been averred that one Capt.
Parmvir Singh, who was working as an Assistant Secretary in the Rajya Sainik Board has now been posted as Deputy Secretary, Rajya Sainik Board in the pay scale of Rs. 3000-4500.
]'his has been done by upgrading the post of Assistant Secretary to that of Deputy Secretary.
The petitioners claim that even they should be placed in the same scale of pay.
It has been further averred that at the Secretaries and the Assistant Secretaries working in the zila Sainik Boards constitute a very small cadre of 25 Officers and the revision of their pay scales will not entail any heavy financial burden to the State Govt. especially when 50% of the expense is to be borne by the Onion of India.
2.
The claim as made in the writ petition has been controverted by the respondents by way of filing a written statement.
It has been inter alia averred that the pay scales of one category of employees in the department has no relevance to the pay scale given to employees of another category of other departments.
On this premises, it is stated that all Class-I Officers cannot be held entitled to the grant of a particular scale of pay.
With regard to the case of Mr. Parmvir Singh, it has been pointed out that the post of Assistant Secretary Rajya Sainik Board was upgraded to that of Deputy Secretary Rajya Sainik Board and the pay scale of that post was only revised.
On these premises, the claim made by the petitioners has been controverted.
3.
I have heard Mr. HS Hooda, learned counsel for the petitioners and Mr. Jaswant Singh, learned counsel for the respondent.
4.
Mr. Hooda has filed a comparative statement of pay scales sanctioned by the Government from time to time.
It is placed on record as `Mark-A'.
A perusal of this statement shows that even in the year 1971, different pay scales had been prescribed for various Class-I posts.
By way of illustration, it may be mentioned that even in the case of the post of Secretary, Zila Sainik Board and the H.C.S.
(Executive Branch) while there was a parity in the initial pay scale, viz. Rs. 400-1250, there was a selection grade of Rs. 1300-1500 for the members of the H.C.S.
(Executive Branch).
It was not allowed to the persons, like the petitioners, working in the Zila Sainik Boards.
This disparity which existed initially in the year 1971 has continued since then at the time of the revisions of scales of pay.
5.
In the very nature of things there cannot be a uniformity in the scales of pay with regard to all officers in Class-I service.
The fixation of scales of pay is dependent on a variety of considerations, like the qualifications, the job requirements, the level of responsibility, the nature of duties and various other relevant factors.
These are matters of policy to be decided by the Government.
Courts have neither the expertise nor the competence to delve into these matters.
These are matters to be dealt with by experts.
It is only in cases of extreme arbitrariness that the Courts intervene.
In the present case, there is nothing to indicate that the petitioners have been treated arbitrarily or that there is any apparent case of unfairness.
6.
Mr. Hooda contends that Mr. Parmvir Singh who was working as Assistant Secretary, like some of the petitioners, has been granted the pay scale of Rs. 3000-4500.
Accordingly, he contends that even the petitioners are entitled to the grant of the same scale of pay.
7.
A perusal of the averments in the petition itself indicates that Capt.
Parmvir Singh was working as Assistant Secretary in the Rajya Sainik Board and not in the Zila Sainik Board.
There is no averment in the petition that the posts in the Rajya Sainik Board and the Zila Sainik Boards are borne on the same cadre.
It has also not been suggested that they were initially in an identical scale of pay.
In any event, it is apparent that the Government had decided to upgrade the post of Assistant Secretary in the Rajya Sainik Board only to that of Deputy Secretary.
It is on account of the upgradation of the post that Capt.
Parmvir Singh, was holding that he has been granted the higher scale of pay.
Since the posts in the cadre of Assistant Secretaries and the Secretaries, Zila Sainik Boards have not been upgraded, the question of the grant of parity of pay scales between the petitioners and Capt.
Parmvir Singh does not arise.
It is also relevant to notice that the petitioners have not challenged the order passed in favour of Capt.
Parmvir Singh nor they have impleaded him as a party.
Consequently, the claim on this basis cannot be sustained.
8.
Lastly, it has been contended that the petitioners constitute a small cadre and the revision of their scales of pay will not entail any heavy financial burden to the State Government.
This argument has no merit.
Grant of pay scales, as already observed, is the prerogative of the State Government.
Financial implications are not normally the concern of the Courts.
These are matters of policy and the Courts normally interfere only when a case of violation of some provisions of law is made out.
9.
In any event, the petitioners on their own showing have admitted that 50% of the burden has to be borne by the Union of India.
The Union of India is not even a party to this petition.
10.
Accordingly, I find no merit in this petition.
It is dismissed.
In the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.