HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - This judgment shall dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 1442, 1782 and 2146 of 1980 as common questions of law and fact arise in these petitions.
The facts are being taken from C.W.P.
No. 1442 of 1990.
2.
The petitioners at the time of filing the writ petition were working as Social Education and Panchayat Officers on ad hoc basis.
It has been averred that for regulating the recruitment to the posts of Social Education & Panchayat Officers.
the Government had prescribed a quota of 50% for direct recruitment and 50% by way of promotion from the posts of Gram Sewaks (now Gram Sachivs).
Vide Annexure P2 the respondents published an advertisement seeking to fill up 30 posts of Social Education and Panchayat Officer by direct recruitment.
Apprehending that they would suffer reversion if the direct recruits joined, the petitioners have filed the present writ petition.
These petitions were admitted on 28th May, 1980 and the stay of reversion of the petitioners was ordered.
3.
The case of the petitioners is that the quota of direct recruitment to the post of Social Education & Panchayat Officers has already exceeded at the time when the advertisement Annexure P2 was published and as such fresh direct recruitment could not be made.
In reply to the petition, a number of affidavits have been filed by the respondents which has added more confusion to the case as it is not clear from them as to how many posts are held by the direct recruits and how many by the promotees.
However, the Deputy Advocate General, Haryana, Mr. Suresh Monga has produced before me a copy of the provisional seniority list of the Department of Rural Development & Panchayats in which the promotees including the petitioners have been shown as being senior to the direct recruits.
It has also been pointed out by Shri Monga on the basis of the para 5 of the supplementary reply of Shri ID Kaushik, Director Development and Panchayats, Haryana, dated 23rd July, 1992, that all the petitioners excluding those who have already retired, have since been promoted to the higher post in the hierarchy i.e. BD & PO  4.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that as the petitioners have been shown senior to the direct recruits in pursuance to Annexure P2 and the petitioners have already been promoted to the higher posts, there is no cause of action left and the writ petitions are rendered infructuous.
Mr. Goel could not controvert this argument.
He, however, urged that the question of quota between the promotees and direct recruits would still remain and the controversy unresolved.
In view of the facts stated above, I am of the view that in the present petition no further action is called for as the petitioners suffer no prejudice and as and when fresh challenge is made on the basis of the quota, the matter can be decided afresh in those proceedings.
5.
For the reasons stated above, the petitions are dismissed as infructuous with no order as to costs.
Petitions dismissed