JS Sekhon, J - Heard.
The Central Board of Secondary Education (hereinafter called as `CBSE') in collaboration with Life Insurance Corporation of India(LIC) decided to introduce a Vocational course in Life Insurance at the plus+2 stage in the selected schools all over the country from the academic year, 1980-90.
In this scheme, it is admitted case of the parties that 80 seats are available in the CBSE Schools at Chandigarh for this course.
The Chandigarh Administration in collaboration with the LIC had decided that 60% of these seats i.e. 48 seats shall be reserved for the students who had passed their qualifying examination in the schools located in Union Territory, Chandigarh but the remaining 40% seats shall go to the students who had passed the qualifying examination from the schools other than Chandigarh.
It is also admitted case of the parties that the students of 60% quota compete within themselves for determination of their merit inter se while the students of the 40% quota are category apart and they compete themselves for determination of their merit.
It is further provided that out of these seats 15% would go to the Scheduled Caste and 7-1/2% the Scheduled Tribes.
In the academic session 1992-93, all 48 seats including the one reserved for Scheduled Caste has been filled up while out of the 32 seats meant for 40% quota one seat meant for Scheduled Caste and two seats for Scheduled Tribes are still lying vacant.
Petitioners Seema Rani and Sheilka Bansal contend that as per the prospectus vacant seats lying in 40% quota should be given to the general category and they be given to the general category and they should be given the admission as they figure at Sr.Nos.
2 and 4 of the waiting list in the general category.
2.
The stand of the respondents in the return on the other hand is that in order to fulfil the rerements of the Constitution, the vacant seats of 40 ^ quota reserved for Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribes candidates should be given to the candidates of these two categories which are available in 60% quota.
3.
Thus the only legal controversy involved in this writ petition is whether the policy or scheme framed under the provisions of Article 16(4) of the Constitution shall prevail in the matter of reservation of post for Scheduled Caste and Backward Tribes or that the internal arrangement between LIC and the Chandigarh Administration qua reservation of 60% for the students other than local should have over-riding effect.
4.
Article 16 of the Constitution provides equal opportunity in the matters of public appointments to all the citizens of this country.
The only exception has been made in clause (3) of this Article empowering the Parliament to make any law providing for enrollment to a class or lasses of employment.
The criteria of domicile in a particular state as well as in clause (4) of this Article allowing the state to make any provision for the reservation in appointments to posts in favour of any backward class of citizen which in the opinion of the state is not adequately represented in the services under the state.
It is not disputed by the learned counsel for the parties that in the case in hand 15% reservation was made in favour of the scheduled Caste while 7-1/2 in the case of Scheduled Tribes.
Obviously the wording of the state to make reservation in the services in favour of any backward class of citizen.
Thus, the policy or law framed by a particular state qua reservation of seats in the educational institutions or in the service matters for Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribes would have over riding effect over any internal arrangement of division of seats between the students who had passed the qualifying examination in local schools of Chandigarh or from the schools other than Chandigarh.
If is so than the seats reserved for Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribes in 40% quota shall also go to the candidates belonging to Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribes available in 60% quota although it will upset the balance of 60% and 40% quota as contained in the above referred policy Annexure P-6, except to the qualification that admission of students to their two categories shall not exceed 15% of the total seats in case of Scheduled Caste 7-1/2 case of Scheduled Tribes.
Moreover, the policy Annexure P-6 provided for the above said reservation of seats for Scheduled Caste and Backward Tribes in the total number of seats and not for seats of a particular category.
5.
Under these circumstances, the petitioners who belong to general category had no right to be considered for admission against the reserved seats in the quota of their category i.e. 40%.
Thus, there being no merit in this writ petition.
It is ordered to be dismissed without any order as to casts.