L.P.A. No. 156 of 1991 connected with L.P.A. No. 716 of 1991.
M. Rama Jois, CJ and HS Bedi, J - These two appeals have been presented against the judgment rendered in Civil Writ Petition No. 12805 of 1989.
The brief facts of this case are these :  The appellant was a commandant/officer in the Army during the period commencing from 2171960 to 15th of April, 1968.
After release from the Army he was appointed as Assistant Deputy Director, National Cadet Corps Directorate, Shilling on 10.6.1968 and shortly thereafter as Assistant Commandant of Central Reserve Police Force on 7th of December, 1968.
On 29th of September, 1974, he was promoted as Commandant and he retired from service on attaining the age of 55 years on 27th of June, 1985.
He claimed pension and gratuity for the 17 years of service put in by him in the Central Reserve Police Force.
2.
The contention of the petitioner in the Writ Petition was that in view of Rule 107(2) of the Central Reserve Police Force Rules, he was entitled to pension as was made available to Central Govt. Employees in temporary service.
He has relied upon Rule 10(1-B) of the Central Civil Services (Temporary Services) Rules, 1965, for short Rules, in support of his claim for pension.
3.
On behalf of the Central Govt. it has been contended that as the appellant was re-employed for an initial period of one year and it was extended by mutual consent by a year on each time, the service rendered by him was not pensionable.
It was also contended that the Rule 10(1-B) which provided for pension to even temporary Govt. servants who had not put in less than 10 years service was inserted into the Rules only on 22nd of February, 1989, and therefore, the appellant who retired four years earlier cannot claim benefit under the said Rules.
The learned Judge accepted the plea of the Central Govt. that Rule 10(1-B) cannot be invoked by the appellant and consequently rejected his claim for pension.
But as far as gratuity is concerned, the learned Judge held that in view of the specific provisions contained in Rule 107(2) referred to above, as the services of the petitioner were to be treated as temporary service for all purposes, he was entitled to the benefit of Rule 10(1) and therefore he was entitled to gratuity at the rate of one month's pay for each completed year of his service subject to a maximum of 15 months' pay or fifteen thousand rupees whichever is less.
Accordingly, the writ petition was partly allowed in favour of the petitioner.
It is against the said order that both the petitioner and the Union of India have presented the two appeals.
4.
As far as appeal No. 156 of 1991 presented by the appellant is concerned, the learned counsel for the appellant submitted that while it was true that rule providing for pension came into force in the year 1989, the persons retired earlier could not be denied of the said benefit and any such classification would be discriminatory and therefore violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
We are unable to agree.
The Rule 10 as it stood prior to the amendment applied to all persons situated like the appellant.
The pension claim itself was made applicable only from the date on which the rule was made applicable in the year 1989.
Therefore, no discrimination has been brought about.
It is also not possible for us to direct that the Rule which came into force in the year 1989, should be extended to the appellant who retired in the year 1985.
Therefore, appeal No. 156 of 1991 is liable to be dismissed.
5.
On behalf of Union of India, the appellant in the connected appeal, the contention raised is that as the re-employment of the appellant was year to year, the question of claiming relief on the basis of total number of years of service put in by the appellant does not arise.
We are unable to agree.
The rule 10(1) is very clear.
According to that, one month's pay for each completed year of service subject to a maximum of 15 months' pay or fifteen thousand rupees, whichever is less has to be paid.
In the present case, the appellant has been in continuous employment for a period of 17 years.
Apart from that the order dated 1st of May, 1985 by which the appellant was retired, gives the clear-cut indication that the appellant was treated as in continuous employment and retired on attaining 55 years.
That order reads :  "Consequent on completion of re-employment period and on attaining age of retirement of 55 years, Major (Retd.)
MS Aulakh, Commandant/Assistant Director 5/III.C.R.P.F.
would relinquish charge of post on the afternoon 27.6.1985."
Therefore, contention of the appellant is unacceptable.
6.
Before concluding, it is necessary for us to state that the appellant had put in nearly 8 years of service in the Army and we are told that in view of that he did not get any pension for Military Service and he had put in 17 years of service in the Central Govt. still does not get pension on account of there being no rule providing pension at all.
In fact, if, rule 10(B) had been introduced prior to the date of retirement of the appellant in the year 1985, he would have got the benefit of pension.
Therefore, we are of the view that if the appellant were to make a representation to the Union of India praying for grant of pension his case should be considered sympathetically by relaxing the rules, on grounds of hardship.
In the result, we make the following order :-  Both the appeals are dismissed leaving liberty for the writ petitioner to make, a representation to the Union of India.
Petition dismissed.