HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner joined as a Field Inspector with respondent No. 2 in the year 1972 and was thereafter promoted to the rank of Field Officer vide Annexure P-1 dated 1711979.
Vide resolution dated 2591981 the Administrative Committee of respondent No. 2 selected the petitioner for appointment on the ex-Cadre post of Senior Sales Officer and, in pursuance thereof, the petitioner actually joined that post on 19101981 as per letter of appointment Annexure P-2.
It was clarified in the aforementioned order that the appointment would be on an ad hoc basis or till the appointment of some regular officer.
It appears that, the petitioner represented to the respondent-authorities for the grant of a higher pay scale in the rank of Senior Sales Officer which was also granted to him.
It was at a later stage represented by him that as the post of Senior Sales Officer that he was holding had the same pay scale as that of Manager A Grade, this post should also be re-designated as such.
The matter was put before the Administrative Committee of respondent No. 2 (as detailed in the Agenda Note, Annexure P-5) which accepted the representation and decided that as the petitioner fulfilled all the qualifications for appointment to the post of Manager A-Grade, he was entitled to that post.
The petitioner was accordingly appointed as Manager A Grade vide Annexure P-6 dated 172-1983 and it was stipulated therein that the Administrative Committee had converted the post of Senior Sales Officer held by the petitioner to that of Manager A Grade.
It appears that certain officers who were senior to the petitioner as Field officers were deeply affected by this change (as one of the sources for promotion to the post of District Manager A Grade was from that of Field Officer) and they filed a representation before the authorities against the action taken.
This matter was considered again by respondent No. 2 and finding substance in the representation, a show cause notice was issued to the petitioner and the impugned order Annexure P-12 was thereafter passed wherein it was directed that the transfer of the petitioner from the cadre of Senior Sale Officer to that of Manager A Grade was not in order and could not be sustained.
The petitioner has impugned Annexure P-12 by way of this petition.
2.
The positive stand of the petitioner in the writ petition as also at the time of arguments has been that the private respondents, who were impleaded on an application filed by them, were junior to the petitioner in the rank of Field Officer and, as such, were not affected by his change of cadre.
It has also been urged that there was no justifiable reason in the stand taken by respondent No. 2, whereby a right that had been created in favour of the petitioner had been taken away.
3.
Elaborate replies have been filed on behalf of the respondents.
It has been pleaded that the petitioner was junior to the private respondents in the rank of Field Officer and on the change of cadre he had jumped the queue and become senior to the private respondents as District Manager A Grade.
It has also been asserted that as per Rule 23 of the Haryana State Supply and Marketing Co-operative Service (Common Cadre) Rules, 1969 (hereinafter called the `Rules') promotion/appointment to the post of Manager A Grade would only be by way of direct recruitment, or by transfer of a person on deputation from any department to Government or any institution and by promotion from category 6 of Annexure I and the petitioner who was holding an ex cadre post of Senior Sales Officer, not falling in any of these three categories, was not entitled to seek promotion as Manager A Grade.
4.
After hearing counsel for the parties, I find no merit in the petition.
It has been specifically mentioned in para 2 of the reply filed by respondent No. 2 that the petitioner was junior to 12 persons and as such could not ask for promotion to the post of District Manager A Grade.
The effect of change of cadre of the petitioner has been that he has become senior as Manger A Grade to the private respondents who were admittedly senior to him in the rank of Field Officer.
I am of the view that the necessary change, if at all permissible under the Rules, could not have been made without at least affording an opportunity of a' hearing to the private respondents.
It also appears to me that respondent No. 2 having itself realised that a mistake had been committed in redesignating the post of Senior Sales Officer as Manager A Grade merely rectified a wrong because from a reading of rule 23 ibid it is clear that the petitioner was not entitled to be inducted as Manager A Grade from the Ex-Cadre post as it was neither a case of direct recruitment nor by transfer on deputation from any department of Government or any institution nor by promotion from Category 6 of Annexure 1.
It is to be noted that Category 6 alluded to above provides that promotion can be made from the following categories :-  i) Managers of B Grade Societies;  ii) Field Officer  iii) Senior Accountant  iv) Assistants (Selection Grade as required)  v) Accountants of A Grade Societies  vi) PA. to Secretary."
Admittedly, the petitioner did not belong to any of them at the relevant time.
5.
The final argument of Mr. Singla, learned counsel for the petitioner, was that the change had been made in the cadre of the petitioner vide Annexure P-6 as far back as in the year 1976 and the private respondents having represented for the first time in the year 1988 were not entitled to any relief from the Department on the ground of laches.
Contravening this argument, Mr. RK Malik, learned counsel for the private-respondents, has referred to para 4 of the written statement filed by the private respondents wherein they have specifically stated that they came to know about the change of cadre of the petitioner for the first time in the year 1988 itself.
I am further of the opinion that the authorities themselves had rectified an injustice perpetrated on the private-respondents and they were fully justified in doing so.
The rules did not permit the entry of the petitioner into the cadre of Manager A Grade in the manner in which it has been done, the ground of delay even if at all available, loses its significance.
6.
For the reasons recorded above, the present petition is dismissed but with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.