JL Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner, who was working as an Accounts Officer in the Haryana State Electricity Board and has since retired from service has a two fold grievance.
Firstly he is aggrieved by the order dated September 30, 1986, by which the punishment of stoppage of one increment with cumulative effect was imposed on him.
Secondly, the petitioner claims that he was due for promotion to the post of Senior Accounts Officer w.e.f.
September 1, 1985 when a person junior to him was actually promoted.
According to the petitioner, his claim was illegally ignored on the ground that the charge-sheet was pending against him.
It is averred that the order of punishment being wholly illegal, the action of the respondents in ignoring him for promotion cannot be sustained.
2.
The petitioner avers that on receipt of a show cause notice vide letter dated January 10, 1986, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P.3, the petitioner had requested the Board to show him certain records so that he could furnish his reply.
A copy of this letter has been produced by the petitioner as Annexure P4.
It is averred that he had not received any reply thereto.
On the contrary, the impugned order dated September 30, 1986 was passed, by which the proposed punishment of stoppage of one increment with cumulative effect was infected on him.
Even his appeal against this order was summarily rejected vide order dated August 14, 1987.
The petitioner submits that both the impugned orders are cryptic and have been passed without any application of mind.
It is further claimed that the action of the respondent in ignoring the petitioner only on account of the pendency of a case against him was wholly illegal.
On these premises, even the order dated November 7, 1990 by which it was directed that the period of suspension shall be treated as `non-duty period for all intents and purposes' is also challenged.
3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondent, it has been inter alia averred that the petitioner was served with a charge-sheet dated May 7, 1985.
After the petitioner had inspected the record on June 26, 1985 and after the receipt of his reply, he was given an opportunity by way of a show-cause notice dated January 10, 1986 for "inflicting minor punishment.
Originally, there were six charges against the petitioner vide charge-sheet dated 7585 (p.2), but after considering his reply and the material available on record, the petitioner was served with show cause notice in respect of three charges only.
It is amply clear that the competent authority has fully taken into account all material available on record including the reply of the petitioner while issuing the show cause notice.
The charges as levelled in the show cause notice were found fully proved on record...." On this premises, the order of stoppage of one increment with cumulative effect is sought to be supported.
Further, it has been averred that the petitioner's appeal against this order has been rejected.
In view of this position, it has been averred that "the petitioner has been rightly ignored for further promotion to the post of Senior-Accounts Officer, at the relevant time.
However, on the availability of next post, the petitioner was considered and was promoted accordingly.
4.
I have heard Mr. Anil Kheterpal, Advocate for the petitioner and Mr. Adish Gupta for the respondent.
5.
It is apt to notice the order dated September 30 1986.
It reads as under :-  The reply furnished by Shri SK Malhotra, Accounts Officer to the show cause notice, served upon him vide this office Memo No. Ch.
55/EBG-995 dated 10186, has been examined at length and has not been found satisfactory Accordingly, it has been decided to inflict the proposed punishment of stoppage of one increment with cumulative effect.
Hence the next annual increment of Shri SK Malhotra, Accounts Officer is hereby stopped with cummulative affect."
A perusal of the above order shows that the punishment has been imposed on the petitioner on the ground that the reply furnished by him to the show cause notice has not found to be satisfactory.
It has been contended vehemently that in fact the petitioner had not submitted any reply.
In the written statement there is no clear averment that the petitioner had actually submitted any reply to the show cause notice dated January 10 1986.
Further more, this order does not indicate as to how and on what basis the petitioner's reply was found to be unsatisfactory.
It does not disclose any process of reasoning.
It is highly cryptic and laconic.
On this short ground alone, the order deserves to be set aside.
Further when the petitioner filed an appeal, he specifically made a grievance that the order does not assign any reason.
He also made a grievance of the fact that no enquiry was in fact held into the allegations.
This was presumably in view of the settled position of law that the order of stoppage of increment with cumulative effect does not constitute a minor, but a major penalty.
Such an order could be passed only after holding a regular enquiry.
Even this appeal submitted by the petitioner was rejected without assigning any reason.
6.
Accordingly, it appears that the orders dated September 30, 1986 and August 14, 1987 have been passed in violation of the principles of natural justice.
These are cryptic.
The orders are consequently set aside.
7.
It is an admitted position that the petitioner was ignored for promotion only on account of the pendency of the case.
This case had culminated in passing of the orders dated September 30, 1986 and August 14, 1987.
In view of the fact that these orders have been set aside, the cause for ignoring him has ceased to exist.
The respondent shall now consider the petitioner's claim for promotion w.e.f.
September 1, 1985 when a person junior to him was considered and promoted to the post of Senior Accounts Officer.
Even the order regarding the regularisation of the period of suspension will have to be reviewed in the light of the changed situation.
8.
Accordingly, this writ petition is allowed.
The orders dated September 30, 1986 and August 14, 1987 are set aside.
The respondents are directed to consider the petitioner's claim for promotion.
They will also review the matter regarding the regularisation of the period of suspension.
Consequential reliefs shall follow.
The needful shall be done within 3 months from today.
In the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.