M Rama Jois, CJ and MS Bedi J. - In all these writ petitions, the petitioners are employees of the Punjab State Electricity Board, have sought for issuance of a writ of mandamus directing the respondents-Board to continue to pay house rent allowance which have been wrongly withheld.
2.
The brief facts of the case are these :-  All the petitioners are employees of the respondent-Electricity Board.
On 1031989, the Board substituted the provisions relating to the grant of house rent allowance to its employees :-  "In continuation to its office order No. 142/FIN/PRC 1988 dated 731989, the Punjab State Electricity Board is pleased to substitute sub-para (iii) of para-I of the above order with effect from 191988 as under :  (iii) The House Rent Allowance of the employees shall also be admissible at the places falling within 8 kms radius of the periphery Municipal/Outer limits of the classified cities/towns."
3.
The language of the above provision is very clear.
All those employees who are working at places falling within 8 kms radius of the periphery of the Municipality of the classified cities and towns are entitled to House Rent Allowance.
4.
The grievance of the petitioners is that instead of calculating the distance from the periphery or outer limits of the classified cities or town, the distance has been calculated from Octroi Post and consequently, though the employees were eligible for the House Rent Allowance.
They were denied of the benefit.
In support of his submission, the learned counsel relied upon annexure R-4 produced by the respondents which is a certificate issued by the Deputy Commissioner, Ludhiana It is seen from the said annexure that the Deputy Commission has calculated the distance from the Octroi Post and has specified the distance from the Octroi Post concerned.
5.
The learned counsel for the Board submitted that the octroi posts are generally situated on the periphery of the town concerned, therefore, the distance calculated from that point is correct.
The learned counsel for the petitioners, however, contended that the octroi posts in many cities are situated in the middle of the town or cities, as the case may be, and therefore, in accordance with the order dated 10th of May, 1989, the distance is to be calculated only from the peripheri of the classified cities or the town.
6.
The question, as to whether the octroi posts itself are located in peripheri or not, is a matter to be got verified physically.
However, it should be stated if the peripheri of the classified town or cities is beyond the octroi posts then the distance has to be calculated from the peripheri and not from the octroi post.
In the result, we allow the petitions and make the following order :-  A direction shall issue to the respondent-Board to calculate the distance of each of the place where the employee working from the periphery of the classified cities or town and then on that basis to decide as to whether the' concerned employees are entitled to the House Rent Allowance.
After ascertaining the distance, if all or any of the petitioners are entitled to the payment of the House Rent Allowance, it shall be paid to each of the petitioners and the arrears payable from the date of entitlement shall also be paid.
Amount already paid in pursuance of the interim order shall be adjusted.
The time for compliance is six months.