M N Rao and P. Venkatarama Reddy, JJ.
- The petitioner is a Lecturer in Civil Engineering in the Andhra University having been appointed to that post in the year 1980.
The Government of India formulated a scheme known as "Quality Improvement Programme (QIP), under which the Universities in India are asked to sponsor qualified and deserving candidates for doing PhD programme in different IITs.
in the country.
The petitioner was sponsored for PhD programme on 1451984 in Civil Engineering branch at the I.I.T.
Kanpur for a period of three years.
During the three years period of deputation the Q.I.P.
Scheme envisages that the university should pay the salary of the sponsored candidate and also extra remuneration to meet certain contingencies.
The learned counsel for the University says that a monthly allowance of Rs. 600/- and an annual allowance of Rs. 1,000/- are fixed by the university under the Scheme.
2.
A bond dated 21.12.1984 was obtained by the university from the petitioner to the effect that in the event of his failing to comply with the terms recited in the bond, he will return the amount received from the University during the period of deputation.
According to the petitioner, after he completed the academic curriculum part of the PhD programme, he developed severe cold and allergy to Kanpur weather.
He, therefore, on medical grounds, requested the head of the Department of the IIT Kanpur to permit him to withdraw from the PhD Programme.
and permission was accordingly accorded on 231986.
Even before that, he addressed a letter to the Andhra University on 8.4.1986. for permitting him to rejoin as a lecturer, but as no reply was received he joined the Department of Civil Engineering at the Andhra University on 651986.
Alleging that discontinuance of the QIP Programme at the I.I.T.
Kanpur entails liability to refund the amounts paid to him, the syndicate of the Andhra University passed a resolution on 18-71-986 resolving to recover from the petitioner the salary paid to him during the period of deputation and the resolution was communicated by the Registrar to the petitioner on 2471986.
The petitioner submitted a representation to the University requesting for reconsideration of the resolution and he also brought to the notice of the University a precedent relating to one Sri M Sreenivasa Rao, a Reader in Civil Engineering of the Andhra University, who had been permitted to terminate the QIP Programme in the middle and rejoin duty without monetary commitments.
The University while rejecting the representation of the petitioner modified its earlier resolution by its order dated 2941987 granting half pay for a period of four months and twenty-seven days from 21.12.1984 to 16.5.1985 to the petitioner and seeking recovery of a sum of Rs. 30,638-09 in monthly installments of Rs. 500/- each commencing from 151987.
Although the petitioner has not challenged the modified resolution, he filed the present writ petition questioning the legality of the original resolution dated 1871986 by which the University sought to recover the salary from him for the deputation period.
3.
Sri C.V. Nagarjuna Reddy, learned counsel for the petitioner, contends that the bond obtained by the University from the petitioner does not authorise the University to recover the salary paid to the petitioner for the deputation period when he had not obtained the PhD and did not complete the required period of programme.
In opposition to this the learned Standing Counsel for the University argues that from the bond obtained from the petitioner an implied obligation can be culled out by which the petitioner is bound to reimburse the expenses incurred by the University on him for the deputation period.
4.
The relevant portion on the bond dated 21.12.1984 executed by the petitioner with two sureties in favour of the University reads as follows :-  "Now the condition of the above-written obligation is such that if in the event of Thirdly bounded obliger Budharaju Satyanarayana Raju failing to return to duty after expiry or termination of the period of training or resigning from service or termination from service in accordance with the Rules that may be in force at the time of passing the orders at any time within a period of three years from the date rejoining for any kind of misconduct during the prescribed period or failing to serve the University for a period of three years immediately followed after the completion of the PhD Programme, the obliger and sureties shall forthwith refund to the University on demand the full salary and all allowances including the allowances mentioned in Government of India's letter No. 22.11/68-T4 dated June 15, 1970 received during the period of study under Quality Improvement Programme on account of the obliger having been placed on deputation as aforesaid together with interest thereon from the date of demand at the University rates for the time being in force on the University loans."
5.
From a reading of the above recitals of the bond, it will be noticed that in the event of the six contingencies only, the obligation of the petitioner and the sureties to refund the salary and allowances to the University will arise.
The first five contingencies are irrelevant.
The sixth contingency is "failure to serve the University for a period of three years immediately followed after the completion of the PhD Programme."
This clearly imposes an obligation on the part of the petitioner to serve the University for a period of three years immediately followed after the completion of the PhD Programme.
No inference follows from the above-recitals that if the petitioner has failed to obtain the PhD Degree or discontinued the Programme, still he is liable to return the salary and allowances to the University.
We are therefore unable to agree with the learned Standing Counsel for the University that there is an implied obligation flowing from the recitals of the bond fastening financial liability on the petitioner even in the event of discontinuance of the PhD Programme.
We must also mention in this context that recovery of any amount from the salary will arise only if there are any rules/regulations governing the same or in case of any agreement between the master and the servant.
No rule or regulation covering this aspect has been brought to our notice and the entire debate is only confined to the aforesaid bond executed by the petitioner.
We therefore hold that the case of the petitioner is not governed by the terms of the bond and so the University has no power to recover any amount from the petitioner.
As the petitioner has not challenged the modified resolution to the extent it covers the deputation period into of half pay leave and earned leave, we are not inclined to interfere with that part of the order of the University.
6.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed with a direction to the respondent not to recover the sum of Rs. 30,638-09 from the petitioner pursuant to the resolution of the Syndicate dated 1871986 and the proceedings of the Vice-Chancellor dated 2941987.
There will be no order as to costs.
7.
It is stated by the learned counsel for the petitioner that because of the pendency of this writ petition the increments earned by the petitioner were not released.
If that be so, the respondent shall release the increments said to have been withheld.
Petition allowed.