RS Mongia.
J (Oral) - The petitioners were recruited as Surveyors in the Soil Conservation Wing of the Department of Agricultural, Punjab.
They were confirmed as such on these posts.
Subsequently, they were promoted to the posts of Sectional Officers in the year 1977, purely on ad hoc basic.
Vide Memo dated 30th January, 1981 (Copy Annexure P-5) the Punjab Government decided that in future 20% of the total number of posts sanctioned for Agriculture Inspectors/Soil Conservation Inspector/Sectional Officer will be filled up by promotion from amongst the Surveyors/Agriculture Sub-Inspectors on the basis of 10% from each category.
In this memo, it was also mentioned that the Surveyors/Agriculture Sub Inspectors must have the following qualifications for being considered for promotion :  "(1) The Surveyors who are Matriculate hold Surveyor's Trade Certificate of at least two years duration from a recognized ITI and have more than ten years experience in the department will be eligible for promotion; and  (2) The Agriculture Sub-Inspectors who are Matriculate and have passed the Agriculture Sub Inspector's Certificate Course, received 5-1/2 months training in Soil Conservation and have more than 10 years experience in the department will be eligible for promotion.
2.
When initially the writ petition was filed by the petitioners, they had sought a Writ in the nature of mandamus, directing the respondents to regularise the services of the petitioners as Sectional Officers with effect from their date of promotion.
During the pendency of the writ petition, the respondents issued an order dated 7th November, 1990, regularising the services of the petitioners with effect from the dates of their joining as Sectional Officers.
However, in the order, two conditions were imposed, which are as follows :-  "1.
That within 2 years of the appointment they would pass the departmental examination.
In case they fail to do so then third increment after regular appointment would be withheld till the time they do not pass the departmental examination.
2.
That their appointment is also subject to their passing the Soil Conservation Course sponsored by The Central Government/Departmental Training Institute within three years."
The petitioners amended the writ petition and challenged the imposition of the above-said two conditions in the order regularising their services as Sectional Officers.
The order has been attached as Annexure P-8 to the amended writ petition.
3.
Before dealing with the respective arguments of the learned counsel for the parties, I may observe that vide Memo.
dated 27th April, 1951, issued by the Deputy Secretary to Government, Punjab, Development Department to the Director of Agriculture, Punjab, it was mentioned that the designation of `Agricultural Assistant' and `Mukaddam' posted on District work had been changed to `Agricultural Inspector' and `Agriculture Sub-Inspector' respectively.
4.
The learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that there are no Rules or Instructions, which require that promoted Sectional Officer has to comply with the two conditions mentioned in the impugned order.
There being no legal sanctity in imposing these conditions, according to the learned counsel, these are null and void and have to be quashed.
5.
On the other hand, the learned counsel for the respondents, drew my attention to Para 9(a) of the written statement, in which, inter alia, it has been pleaded that class III employees of the Soil Conservation and Engineering Department, Punjab, including the petitioners and the Agriculture Sub Inspectors promoted to the post of Sectional Officer in the year 1981, are governed by Punjab Subordinate Agricultural Service Rules, 1933.
It has further been pleaded that in Rules 8 and 12 of the said Rules, it has been laid down that every person appointed as Agricultural Inspector/Soil Conservation Inspector/Sectional Officer (all identical posts) is required to pass departmental examination in Accounts/undergo such period of training as may be prescribed in this regard.
Rule 8(relevant extract) and Rule 12 of the 1933 Rules are reproduced below :-  "8.
Departmental and Language Examination |-  Unless exempted by the Director, every person appointed to the post of :  (i) Agricultural Assistant (`A' Class or Demonstrator or Agricultural Assistant `B' Class or Insectory Keeper shall be required to pass.
(a) the departmental examination in Accounts prescribed for the particular class of Appointment.
(b) A Departmental test in Riding, and  (c) If he is not an inhabitant of the Punjab, an examination in Urdu to be held by the Director."
12.
Training - Every Person recruited direct :-  (i) to the post of Agricultural Assistant `A Class;  Demonstrator Agricultural Assistant `B' class or Insectory Keeper, shall after appointment to a post, be required to undergo such period of training as may be prescribed in this regard by the Director.
(ii) to the post of Mukaddam or to any of the technical posts mentioned in the appendix shall after appointment to a post, be required to undergo such period of training as may be prescribed in this regard by the Head of office under whom he is employed."
It was also submitted by the learned counsel for the respondents that the petitioners had in fact taken the departmental examination as envisaged under Rule 8, but they failed to clear the same and it is only thereafter that they have challenged the imposition of such conditions.
He went on say that one of the petitioners has even completed the training as envisaged under Rule 12 of the said Rules.
The argument proceeded that the petitioners are estopped from challenging the imposition of these conditions as they themselves have acquiesced to the conditions laid down in the order regularising their services as Sectional Officers.
6.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I find considerable force in the arguments of the learned counsel for the petitioners.
As far as Rule 12 is concerned, it will be seen from the opening lines of the same that the said Rule applies only to the direct recruits and not to the promotees.
Admittedly, the petitioners were not directly recruited as Sectional Officers, and, therefore, the questions of imposing any condition under Rule 12 does not arise.
Coming to Rule 8, it will be seen that a person who is appointed to the post of Agricultural Assistant `A' Class or Demonstrator or Agricultural Assistant `B' class or Insectory Keeper is required to pass certain departmental examination.
As observed earlier, the Agricultural Assistant has been redesignated as Agricultural Inspector.
Agricultural Inspector is not the same as Sectional Officer, though they may be equivalent posts and may be filled in by promotion from amongst the Surveyors.
Rule 8(i) (a) envisages a departmental examination in accounts for the particular class of appointment (emphasis supplied).
This particular class means that whatever examination is provided for `A' Class Agricultural Assistant or (on the change of designation to Agricultural inspector) shall be required to be passed by the promotee.
This, however, does not mean that all promotees who are promoted to posts equivalent to Agricultural Inspector are also required to pass the test.
Rules or instructions could have been issued to that effect.
Consequently, I am of the considered view that Rules 8 and 12 do not envisage imposition of any conditions, which have been imposed in the impugned order.
7.
Now coming to the argument of the learned counsel for the respondents that the petitioners are estopped from challenging the imposition of conditions as they have acquiesced to the conditions by appearing in a departmental test (though failed) and one of the petitioners has even completed the training.
It may be observed that there can never be an estoppel against a Statue.
The respondents must show that these conditions have been imposed by virtue of any Statutory Rule or Instructions.
As observed above, the Rules do not envisage any such condition.
8.
For the forgoing reasons, this writ petition is allowed and the conditions imposed in the impugned order, dated 7th November, 1990 are hereby quashed.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.