Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - This order will dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 9004 and 8036 of 1991.
The facts as stated in Civil Writ Petition No. 9004 of 1991 may be briefly noticed.
2.
The four petitioners herein are working as Mates in the Construction Division, Patiala on work-charged basis.
The petitioners claim that they are entitled to the grant of the pay scale of Rs. 950-1800 w.e.f.
January 1, 1986 which has been granted to the Mates working in the B&R and Public Health Branches of the Public Works Department.
Invoking the principles of `Equal Pay for Equal Work', the petitioners claim that the action of the respondents is arbitrary and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
3.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents.
It has been averred that "the nature of work/duties of Mates working in Irrigation Department are quite different than those of - duties of Mates (Morter Mates) working in public Health and B&R Departments."
It has been further pointed out that the minimum qualification of Mates in the Departments of Public Health and Buildings and Roads, is second division Matric or above and they are entrusted with the duties of supervision of execution of works "which is of technical nature."
As against this, the Mates "working in Irrigation Department do supervise the work of maintenance done by the Beldars where no technicality is involved and most of the Mates are under Matric .....".
It has been further mentioned the Mates in the Public Health and B & R Departments were originally working in the pay scale of Rs. 400-600 which has been revised to Rs. 950-1800.
As against this, the Mates belonging to the categories of petitioners were working in the pay scale of Rs. 300-430 which has since been revised and raised to Rs. 750-1350.
On these premises, the claim made by the petitioners has been controverted.
4.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties.
A perusal of the pleadings of the parties shows that the qualification and the nature of duties of Mates working in the Irrigation Department are different from those of the Mates working in the Public Health and Buildings and Roads Department.
Still further, the distinction has not been brought about by the recent revision of pay scales but has existed even prior thereto inasmuch as the Mates like the petitioners were originally placed in the pay scale of Rs. 300-430 while those in the Departments of Public Health and B&R, were placed in the pay scale of Rs. 400-600.
The distinction which had existed prior to 111986 has been continuing even thereafter.
Accordingly, it appears that the Mates working in the Irrigation Department and those working in the two other Departments have always formed distinct classes which have continued for the last many years.
However, even the nature of duties have continued to be different.
In view of the above, the principle of `Equal Pay for Equal Work' does not appear to have been violated in the present case.
5.
Mr. TP Singh, the learned counsel for the petitioner contends that the State Government has published a common Schedule of Rates in the year 1986.
A common rate has been prescribed for the Irrigation, Buildings and Roads and Public Health Branches of the Public Works Department.
In this behalf, reference has been made to Annexure P-6 produced by the petitioners alongwith the replication.
On this premises, it is claimed that the petitioners are entitled to parity of treatment even in the matter of pay scales.
6.
The Schedule of Rates relates to the execution of works by the contractors who may be employed to do the work assigned to them.
This Schedule of Rates has nothing to do with the pay scales.
The mere fact that the State Government has prescribed identical rates for execution of works in the three branches of the Public Works Department viz. Irrigation, Buildings and Roads and Public Health, does not mean that even the salaries have to be given at identical rates or that the nature of duties are also identical.
Mr. TP Singh then refers to an extract from the Chapter relating to the `Monthly Wages' to contend that the work Munshis and Morter Mates in all the three branches are entitled to a uniform scale of pay.
The entry as produced by the petitioners with their affidavit reads as under :  "Sr. No. Name of Post Grade of pay 246 Work Munshi/Mortar Mate (Under Matric) 400-600/325-495".
7.
A perusal of the above entry indicates that the work Munshis and Mortar Mates who are under Matric are placed in two different scales of pay of Rs. 400-600 and Rs. 325-495.
It does not show that all Mates are placed in an identical scale of pay.
The distinction as brought out in the above extract appears to have continued even in the revision of pay scales inasmuch as two different pay scales viz. Rs. 750-1350 and Rs. 950-1800.
8.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has then referred to a Notification dated October 29, 1990 issued by the Department of Labour and Employment which was published in the Punjab Government Gazette dated October 13, 1990 to show that a minimum daily wage of Rs. 41.78 and a monthly wage of Rs. 108628 has been fixed by the appropriate authority w.e.f.
November 1, 1990 under the provisions of the Minimum Wages Act, 1948.
On this premises, it is claimed that Mates in all the Departments of the Government are entitled to parity of treatment.
9.
No such plea having been raised in the writ petition, the respondents did not have any chance to file a reply in this behalf.
However, it is not necessary to reject this plea on his technical ground.
The appropriate authority has fixed a minimum wage under the provisions of the Central Act.
It is not the claim of the petitioners that they are not being paid the wages accordingly.
In case, it be so, they would have their remedy before the authority under the relevant statute.
In this petition, the only claim made by the petitioners is that they are entitled to the pay scale of Rs. 950-1800.
In view of the facts as noticed above, they are not entitled to the pay scale of Rs. 950-1800.
10.
The learned counsel for the petitioners then contends that vide letter dated October 26, 1988 a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-7, the State Government has accepted the recommendation of the Third Pay Commission in regard to the rationalisation of qualifications, mode of recruitment etc. of the skilled and semi-skilled staff working in various Departments of the State Government.
The learned counsel submits that the petitioners belong to the category of semi-skilled workers and that the Government is bound to consider and decide their claim.
11.
There is nothing before me to indicate that the petitioner belong to the category of semi-skilled employees.
However, if the petitioners belong to that category, they may make a representation to the appropriate authority in that behalf.
So far as the present petition is concerned, no case for the grant of any relief as claimed has been made out.
12.
Accordingly, I find no merit in this petition.
It is dismissed.
In the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.