RS Mongia, J (Oral) - The petitioner was working as a Lower Division Clerk with the Haryana State Electricity Board, Panchkula (hereinafter called the `Board'), when he was put under suspension on 19th March, 1981, as an enquiry under the Haryana State Electricity Board Employees (Punishment and Appeal) Regulations, 1965, was contemplated against him.
On 21st December, 1981, the petitioner was served with a charge-sheet, a copy of which has been attached as Annexure P-5 with the amended writ petition.
The charges were :  "(i) That Shri Pyare Lal, was suspended vide CE (P&C) 0/0/ No. Ch-23 dated 18179 and he approached the Hon'ble I.P.M.
on 13381 direct for regularisation of his suspension period, which is an act of indiscipline.
(ii) That Shri Pyare Lal, in the course of interview with Hon'ble I.P.M.
in connection with regularisation of his suspension period, referred to in charge-I above, addressed the Hon'ble Minister (Irrigation & Power) in the language highly objectionable of a Government employee, which is an act of insubordination and mis-conduct."
The petitioner was reinstated on 4th February, 1982.
He had asked for the supply of the alleged report, which may have been made by the Minister, for giving reply to the charge-sheet, but the same was refused vide letter dated 19th February, 1982, informing the petitioner that it was not feasible to show the original report of the Minister.
The petitioner filed a reply to the charge-sheet on 24th March, 1982, denying the allegations made in the charge sheet.
The reply filed by the petitioner was found not satisfactory and a notice was issued to him on 5th July, 1982 to show cause as to why punishment of stoppage of one annual increment with cumulative effect be not imposed upon him.
In the reply filed by the petitioner to the show cause notice he had submitted that in fact he had never met the Irrigation and Power Minister in connection with the regularisation of his suspension period and that his brother had met the Minister and since the Minister had asked the petitioner's brother for some donation to the Congress party before doing the job requested for the brother of the petitioner might have said something to the Minister.
Finding no force in the reply of the petitioner, an order dated 4th April, 1983 was passed by the Secretary of the Board, by which punishment of stoppage of one increment with cumulative effect was imposed upon the petitioner.
It is this order that has been impugned in the present writ petition.
The petitioner has also prayed in the writ petition that the suspension was wholly uncalled for and he was only paid 50% of the subsistence allowance during the period of suspension, and, in fact, he was entitled to full pay for that period and in any case after six months of his suspension, he was entitled to enhanced subsistence allowance under the Rules.
He was only paid 50% of his pay; whereas after six months he was entitled to 75% of the pay as subsistence allowance.
2.
The petitioner, who has appeared in person, has argued that the punishment imposed upon him is not a minor punishment, but is rather a major punishment under the Regulations and without holding regular departmental enquiry as envisaged by the Regulations, a major punishment could not have been imposed.
He further submitted that the findings of the Authority regarding his guilt are based on no evidence at all and on this short ground, the whole proceedings culminating into punishment are liable to be set aside.
He further argued that his suspension was wholly uncalled for under the circumstances, and consequently, he is entitled to full pay for the suspension period.
3.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondents, submitted that it is a case of a minor punishment, and, therefore under the Regulations, no departmental enquiry was required to be held and further since there was a charge of serious misconduct against the petitioner, he was rightly placed under suspension.
As far as the question of enhanced subsistence allowance after period of six months from the date of his suspension is concerned, he submitted that since the petitioner was himself to be blamed for the delay in concluding the proceedings.
He was not entitled to any enhancement in the substance allowance.
4.
After hearing the petitioner and the counsel for the respondents, I am of the view that there is considerable force in the arguments of the petitioner.
For the view I am taking on the second submission of the petitioner, it is not necessary for me in this case to go into the fact whether under the Regulations, the punishment which was imposed on the petitioner was a minor or a major punishment.
The petitioner's case was of complete denial regarding the allegations made against him.
There is no evidence on the record and atleast none has been referred to in the order on the basis of which it could be said that the petitioner had approached the Irrigation and Power Minister and had used some objectionable language.
Even the report alleged to have been made by the Minister, was not put to the petitioner nor the same was even shown to him so that he could reasonably rebut the same by producing some evidence.
No person from the office of the Minister was produced nor any other material was put to the petitioner to bring home the charges against him.
The defence taken by the petitioner in the reply to the show cause notice has not at all been discussed as to why the same is being found unsatisfactory.
I am of the considered view that there was no evidence with the respondents to sustain the charges against the petitioner.
Consequently, the order of punishment cannot be upheld and has to be quashed.
5.
I am further of the view that on the facts and circumstances of this case, the suspension of the petitioner was wholly uncalled for especially in view of the fact that the order of punishment is not sustainable in law.
Even before imposing the punishment, the petitioner was reinstated, which is also one of the considerations to hold that the suspension was wholly uncalled for.
6.
The petitioner has also prayed in the writ that adverse remarks conveyed to him on 16th August, 1979 for the period 1st April, 1978 to 5th July, 1978 and 6th July, 1978 to 16th February, 1979 be expunged.
According to him, he had made a representation against those adverse remarks, but the same had not been decided.
In the written statement, it has been stated that no representation had been received from the petitioner against the adverse remarks, which is alleged to have been made on 26th May, 1980 and the one which was made on 15th February, 1989, was wholly time-barred.
7.
Since the remarks were conveyed to the petitioner as far back as 1979 and further from the fact that it has been stated by the respondents that no representation was received by them, I do not consider that any case has been made out to interfere in the adverse remarks conveyed in the year 1979.
For the foregoing reasons, this writ petition is accepted to the extent that the order of punishment, dated 4th April, 1983 (Annexure P-9) is quashed and further that the suspension being wholly uncalled for the petitioner would be entitled to full pay and allowances for the said period.
Needless to mention that the petitioner would be entitled to all consequential benefits arising out of the reliefs granted to the petitioner.
Let the consequential benefits flowing from the above be calculated and granted to the petitioner within a period of three months from the receipt of this order.
I make no order as to costs.