TS Doabia, J - For the offences having been committed under Section 10(a), 10(e) and 10(m) of the Central Reserve Police Force Act of 1949, the petitioner was convicted by the Deputy Commandant, 20 Bn, CRPF at Manipur.
The above officer was also exercising the powers of Ist Class Magistrate.
The order of conviction was recorded on 10th Dec '92.
It was alleged that the petitioner was in a state of intoxication while on duty.
He was also charged with acts of insubordination and his behavior was found to be insolent.
Later on, he was found to be absent also.
All these matters were subject matter of criminal trial.
Witnesses were examined.
The petitioner was allowed to cross- examine them.
After this exercise was completed, an order of conviction came to be recorded.
This, as indicated above, was passed on 10th Dec'92.
After the aforementioned order was passed, another order came to be issued.
This was on the departmental side.
Taking into consideration the conduct which led to the conviction of the petitioner, the services of the petitioner were terminated.
The power was said to have been exercised in terms of Rule 27 of the Rules framed under the Act.
This order was further amended on 31st Jan '93.
The amendment was incorporated in the original order.
It was observed that instead of treating the termination as having been passed in terms of R 27, the order should be deemed to have been passed under Section 12(1) of the Act 1949.
Thus, the petitioner came to be dismissed from service.
It is this order which is the subject matter of challenge in this petition.
The learned counsel appearing for the petitioner submits that the order of dismissal is bad as no enquiry was held in the matter.
It is also urged that before passing the aforementioned order, show-cause notice was also not issued.
It is accordingly submitted that the order of dismissal is liable to be quashed.
Respondents have filed objections.
The stand taken is that on account of the conduct which led to his conviction, the petitioner came to be dismissed from service.
It is stated that once a person is convicted, then it is not necessary to hold a regular enquiry.
The gravity of the lapse which led to his conviction was thus taken note of and the order was passed.
In these circumstances, it is stated that it was not necessary to issue any show-cause notice.
There can be no dispute with the proposition that once conviction is recorded, then on the basis of order of conviction, the departmental authorities can proceed further.
The conduct which led to an order of conviction being recorded, can be taken note of.
This aspect of the matter was considered by a Full Bench of Punjab and Haryana High Court in the case reported as Om Parkash v. Director Postal Services, Punjab Circle and Ors. AIR 1973 Punjab and Haryana 1.
After taking note of the relevant service rules, in para 21 of the judgment, it was concluded that the departmental punishment of removal or dismissal from service is not an essential and automatic consequence of conviction on a criminal charge.
At the same time, it was observed that the liability to be departmentally punished for conduct which led to the conviction remains.
In the above case, a further question which was being considered was as to the effect of a person being let off on probation.
It was observed that when a convict is given the benefit of Probation of Offenders Act, even then, the disqualification arising out of conviction is not wiped.
The conclusions arrived at by the Full Bench are relevant and are being noticed below :-  "i) The departmental punishment of removal or dismissal from Government service is not an essential and automatic consequence of conviction on a criminal charge; ii) The authority competent to take disciplinary action under Rule 19(i) of the 1965 Rules against a Central Government servant convicted on a criminal charge has to consider all the circumstances of the case and then to decide (a) whether the conduct of the delinquent official which led to his conviction is such as to render his further retention in public service undesirable; (b) if so, whether to dismiss him or to remove him from service, or to compulsorily retire him; and (c) if the said conduct of the official is not such which renders his further retention in service undesirable, whether the minor punishment, if any, should be inflicted on him; iii) to be punished departmentally for misconduct is not a disqualification within the meaning of Section 12 of the Act, but is a liability under the relevant service rules; iv) to be retained in Government service or to remain in service is not a qualification, but a right in certain circumstances subject to the relevant constitutional provisions and service rules; v) the liability to be departmentally punished for conduct which has led to the conviction of the employee does not attach to the conviction, but attaches to the original conduct (misconduct) which constituted the offence of which the official has been convicted; vi) the difference in the procedure prescribed for imposing any of the three major penalties for misconduct of a Government servant who has not been convicted by a Criminal Court for that conduct on the one hand and the procedure to be followed for imposing one of those penalties on an official who has been so convicted on the other, lies only in this that the purview of Article 311(2) and the provisions of Rules 14 to 18 of the 1965 Rules apply to the first case, but do not apply to the second.
Rule 19 does not contain any disqualification in the same sense as Rules 14 to 18 do not contain any qualification; vii) whereas in the case of a conviction, the application of the purview of Article 311(2) is excluded by proviso (a) to that provision and the application of Rules 14 to 18 of the 1965 Rules is excluded by Rule 19(i) of those Rules, the application of the principles of natural justice is excluded by the proviso to Article 311(2) read with the purview of Article 310 and by the operation of Rule 19 in view of the fact that the concerned Government servant must naturally have had full opportunity to defend himself in the Criminal Court where the conviction can be recorded only after returning a finding of guilt on the basis of a much higher standard of proof than that which is enough for punishing a person in departmental proceedings; viii) Section 12 of the Act does not wash away or obliterate the conduct of the employee which has led to his conviction, and does not, therefore, give him any immunity against departmental proceedings, nor exonerates him from his liability to departmental punishment for such conduct if it amounts to misconduct under the relevant service rules; ix) the original misconduct of a Government servant does not merge with his conviction so as to become non-existent after conviction; x) Kehar Singh's case 1967 Sev Lr 527 (Punjab and Haryana) (supra) insofar as it relates to the interpretation of Section 12 of the Act has not been correctly decided; xi) the view of the Madras High Court, the Andhra Pradesh High Court and the Madhya Pradesh High Court regarding the meaning and effect of Section 12 of the Act appears to be more correct than that of the High Court of Delhi; xii) an order of dismissal or removal or for compulsory retirement can be passed under Rule 19(i) (without conforming to the procedure prescribed in Rules 14 to 18) not on the basis of the conviction, but only if the competent authority finds that the relevant misconduct of the concerned Government servant renders his further retention in public service undesirable; and xiii) an order imposing a punishment on a Government servant simply because of his conviction on a Criminal charge without reference to the conduct which led to the conviction cannot be sustained."
The aforementioned judgment was approved by the Supreme Court of India in the case reported as AIR 1975 SC 2216 The Divisional Personnel Officer Southern Railway and Anr. v. TR Challappan.
Thus, in view of the above mentioned pronouncement, it can be said that the respondent authorities were not bound to hold a departmental enquiry.
The fact, however, remains that before passing the office order by which the action was initially sought to be taken in terms of R 27 of the Rules and which order came to be modified later on, and the order by which the termination was converted into one of the dismissal, the petitioner was not given any opportunity to showcause.
To this extent, the petitioner is right in his submission that had an opportunity been given to him, he would have shown that the punishment which was initially imposed on him, was not deserved by him.
He would have also shown that there was no justification to dismiss him from service.
As a matter of fact, if the order of conviction is taken note of, then it becomes apparent that the Convicting Authority has recorded a finding that for the acts committed by the petitioner there were certain contributory factors on the part of the authorities as well.
These acts, as per the officer convicting the petitioner, had aggravated the issue to such magnitude.
What was said in paragraph 8 of the order of conviction is relevant and is being noticed below:  "The charges framed against him are proved beyond any shadow of doubt.
Thus the accused is guilty of the offence so alleged and I hold him guilty of having committed an offence u/s 10(a), 10(e) and 10(m) of CRPF Act, 1949.
However, at the same time it is felt and established that certain contributory factors on the part of his authorities/administration have aggravated the issue to such magnitude, and it may reasonably be conjectured that but for these contributory factors, situation perhaps either would not have occurred or if occurred would have been of lesser proportion...." In the face of what was said by the officer regarding order of conviction and in view of the fact that the petitioner was not afforded opportunity of hearing before the order of termination was passed and again he was not afforded opportunity of hearing when the order of termination was converted into one of the dismissal, it would be apt to direct the respondent authorities to afford opportunity of hearing now.
Post-decisional hearing in terms of the judgment of the Supreme Court reported as AIR 1994 SC 1074 : 1994(1) SCT 319 (SC), Managing Director, ECIL, Hyderabad v. B Karunakar, be now afforded to the petitioner.
The assertion of the petitioner that the punishment which has been awarded to him is not commensurate with lapse attributed to him and that extreme punishment of termination/dismissal was not justified be taken note of.
The petitioner be made available the copy of the order of conviction.
This is because the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner made a statement at bar that this copy was not made available to him.
It is, however, made clear that it is not necessary now to issue any show cause notice.
This is because by now the petitioner is aware of the cause he is supposed to meet.
This petition is accordingly disposed of with the following directions :-  i) That the petitioner be made available the copy of the order of conviction; ii) the petitioner, if makes a prayer for personal hearing, be afforded personal hearing also; iii) a fresh order be passed after affording opportunity of hearing; iv) in case some relief is to be granted to the petitioner, then the question as to how the intervening period is to be decided, is left to be decided by the respondent authorities; v) let hearing be given and the matter be decided within a period of six months, which period shall begin from the date the copy of the order passed by this court today, is made available to the respondent authorities by the petitioner.
Disposed of accordingly.