SS Sodhi, A.C.J.
- The challenge here is to the termination of the appointment of respondent Neeraj Bali as Graduate Technical Apprentice on the ground that he had been appointed to one such post, reserved for backward classes in the erroneous belief that he was a member of a backward class, when in fact he was not so.
2.
It was in pursuance of an advertisement published on July 2, 1987, that respondent Neeraj Bali was offered an appointment as a Graduate Technical Apprentice by the Haryana State Electricity Board on April 25, 1988.
Just about one and a half month thereafter on June 9, 1988 by the order Annexure P-5, his appointment as such was terminated.
3.
A reference to the return filed on behalf of the Haryana State Electricity Board reveals that the termination of the appointment of Neeraj Bali as Graduate Technical Apprentice was on the ground that he had been given this appointment on the basis of the certificate Annexure R1, given to him by the Chandigarh Administration on October 16, 1985 to the effect that he belongs to the caste Swarankar which had been declared as backward class by the Chandigarh Administration.
4.
Before proceeding further, it deserves mention here that there is no dispute between the parties that the caste known as Swarankar in Chandigarh is synonymous with the caste Sunar in Haryana and the caste `Sunar' in Haryana is admittedly amongst the category of backward classes there.
5.
Neeraj Bali being a member of the `Swarankar' caste in Chandigarh is what is contested by the Haryana State Electricity Board particularly on the basis of the two letters of the Deputy Commissioner, Chandigarh, to the Haryana State Electricity Board of September 29, 1988 and January 2, 1989 Annexures R.4 and R.7, tending to suggest that the notification of the Chandigarh Administration declaring the caste `Swarankar' to be a backward class, had not been approved by the Government of India.
6.
Be that as it may, the impugned order terminating the appointment of Neeraj Bali cannot be sustained, having regard to the fact that no notice of the action proposed to be taken against Neeraj Bali was given to him, nor was he afforded any other opportunity of being heard with regard to it before his appointment came to be terminated.
Violation of the rules of natural justice thus stands writ large.
7.
In the situation as it now emerges, we modify the judgment of the learned single judge to the extent that while hereby quashing the impugned order Annexure P.5 we leave it open to the Haryana State Electricity Board, if so advised, to proceed against the petitioner afresh for the termination of his appointment, if it is of opinion that Neeraj Bali had obtained such appointment on the basis of being a member of backward class when, in fact, he did not belong to it.
Before any action is, however, taken due opportunity of being heard must be afforded to him.
This appeal is thus disposed of in these terms.
There will be no order as to costs.