RS Mongia, J (Oral) - The petitioner was appointed as a temporary Civil Overseer (SO) on 3rd August, 1964 by the then Superintending Engineer Transmission, Construction Circle No. 2, Punjab State Electricity Board, Hisar.
This temporary appointment was approved by the Chief Engineer vide letter dated 12101964 with effect from 681964.
A copy of letter has been attached as annexure P-2 to the writ petition.
In this letter, it has been mentioned that the petitioner may be instructed to apply to the Subordinate Staff Selection Committee of the Punjab State Electricity Board for selection after obtaining prescribed form from the Secretary.
Subsequently, the petitioner was also selected by the Subordinate Staff Selection Committee and he was appointed as SO on regular basis vide order dated 971965 (Annexure R-2 with the written statement).
The order reads as under :-  "The following appointment and posting is hereby ordered in the interest of public service with immediate effect :  Sh. Vishan Dass Offg.
SO (Civil) on purely temporary basis Rs. 120/- per month in the scale of Rs. 100-300 TLSC Division, Hisar, Offg.
SO regular basis Rs. 120/- per month in the scale of Rs. 100-300 TLSC Division, Hisar The petitioner's service book was not available and his name was not included in the seniority list circulated by the Chief Engineer and the petitioner wrote to the Chief Engineer that as he had been appointed as SO in the Board on 2681965 and, therefore, his name should be included in the seniority list.
A consolidated seniority list of the Civil Overseers for the period ending 30.6.1972, (copy Annexure P-3) was prepared in which the petitioner was shown at serial No. 60 and his date of joining the Board was given as 26th August, 1965.
2.
In the year 1979, one Shri Varinder Singh Rawat who had earlier been appointed as a Line Superintendent on ad hoc basis, was regularised in service and his entire ad hoc service was counted towards seniority.
The petitioner also submitted his claim that since he had been appointed on officiating temporary basis as SO on 681964 his temporary service should also be counted towards seniority.
This was not acceded to by the respondents which led the petitioner to file the present writ petition.
3.
The counsel for the petitioner primarily argued that the service rendered by the petitioner on officiating temporary basis from 681964 is on a much better footing than ad hoc service which was rendered by Shri Varinder Singh Rawat and if his service could be counted for purposes of seniority, there was no reason to deny the same benefit to the petitioner.
He also submitted that the petitioner's temporary appointment had been approved by the Chief Engineer and if there was any procedure required for appointment, i.e., that there should be a selection by the Staff Selection Committee, even that procedure had also been undergone and the petitioner was duly selected and according to the learned counsel, in this eventuality, the petitioner's appointment should date back to his original officiating temporary appointment.
4.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the Board has argued that the petitioner's appointment was purely ad hoc and the ad hoc service cannot be counted towards seniority.
In support of this submission, he cited Sohan Lal v. State of Haryana and others, 1992(4) SLR 190 : 1992(3) SCT 378.
5.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner must prevail.
No doubt, the petitioner himself had given his date of appointment as 26th August, 1965 but that was in the absence of the record and without taking into consideration his officiating temporary service.
In fact, as per the record which had been found later on even the regular appointment had been ordered on 9th July, 1965.
So, the mentioning of the date of appointment by the petitioner in these circumstances would not bind him.
From the appointment letter, it is apparent that the petitioner was appointed on officiating temporary basis and not on ad hoc basis.
There is a difference in ad hoc service and temporary service.
Apart from that, I find that a similarly situated person like Varinder Singh Rawat was treated differently inasmuch as even his entire ad hoc service was counted for purposes of seniority.
The plea of the respondent that Shri Rawat was given the benefit of the ad hoc service by virtue of some policy decision would rather strengthen the case of the petitioner.
Even in 1979, under same policy decision of the Board, the ad hoc service was to be counted for purposes of seniority.
The petitioner who had joined on temporary basis in the year 1964 could not be denied the same benefit of counting his temporary service for purposes of seniority.
The authority cited by the respondent that ad hoc service cannot be counted for purposes of seniority after a person is appointed on regular basis, clearly does not apply to the facts of the present case.
For the foregoing reasons, this writ petition is allowed and seniority list extract of which is annexure P-3) which depicted the position of Civil Overseers as on 30th June, 1972 is hereby quashed and it is held that the petitioner is entitled to be shown in that seniority list by treating him to have been appointed in the Board as Civil Overseer on 681964 instead of 2681965.
Needless to mention that by giving the petitioner the date of appointment for purposes of seniority as Civil Overseer as 6th August, 1964, he would be entitled to all consequential benefits.
There shall be no order as to costs.