SS Sodhi, J - The controversy here is with regard to the inter-se seniority of two Associate Professors in the Department of Sociology of the Haryana Agricultural University.
The contestants being the petitioner Dr. TM Dak, who after serving in the department for a couple of years on foreign service, was later permanently absorbed and the respondent Dr. RK Punia who, while the petitioner was on foreign service, was directly appointed to the post.
2.
To give the relevant factual background the petitioner Dr. TM Dak was appointed Lecturer in the Extension Education Institute at Nilokheri on February 9, 1966.
Later in December 1976, he was promoted as Vice-Principal of this institute.
On December 26, 1980, he was transferred on foreign service to the Haryana Agricultural University as Rural Sociologist/Assistant Professor in the department of Sociology for a period of two years.
He joined this post on March 17, 1981.
The period of foreign service was subsequently extended until the Haryana Agricultural University decided to permanently absorb him with effect from September 18, 1986.
In the meanwhile or December 16, 1982, Dr. RK Punia was appointed Associate Professor in the same department.
In 1987 Dr. RK Punia was selected to officiate as Head of the department of Sociology treating him to be the senior of the two.
It is this that led to the filing of this writ petition.
3.
The rule regarding seniority is contained in clauses 3 and 9 Chapter VII Part B of the relevant University Regulations.
The relevant extract thereof reads as under :-  "3.
Teachers of the University including teachers of the Agriculture and Animal Husbandry Departments transferred to the University on foreign service and other teachers on foreign service with the University shall be governed by the conditions of service laid down in the succeeding clause.
xx xx xx xx xx  Seniority 9.
The rules prescribed under clause 8 to Para 'A' of this Statute shall apply to the teachers also" The relevant Clause 8 to Part 'A' of Chapter VI of the Statutes is reproduced hereunder :-  Seniority of members of the service.
8.
The seniority of the employee shall be determined by the dates of their continuous appointment to the post : Provided that in the case of employees appointed directly the order of merit, determined by the selecting authority shall not be disturbed and persons appointed as a result of an earlier selection on the same post shall be senior to those appointed as a result of subsequent selections : Provided further that in the case of two or more employees appointed on the same date, their seniority shall be determined as follows :- (a) an employee recruited by direct appointment shall be senior to a member recruited otherwise;  (b) an employee recruited by promotion shall be senior to a person recruited by transfer; (c) in the case of employees recruited by promotion or transfer seniority shall be determined according to the seniority of such employees in the appointment from which they were promoted or transferred; and (d) in the case of employees recruited by transfer from different cadres, their seniority shall be determined according to pay; preference being given to a member who was drawing higher rate of pay in his previous appointment and if the rates of pay drawn are also the same then by their length of service in those appointments; and if the length of such service is the same, an older member shall be senior to a younger member.
Explanation  Service rendered by the Government employees on foreign service with the University shall count for seniority provided such employees resign Government jobs and agree to be regularly absorbed in the service of the University."
4.
The point that really emerges as the one in issue is whether the service rendered by the petitioner on foreign service with the Haryana Agricultural University i.e. from March 17, 1981 to September 18, 1986 when he was permanently absorbed by the University is to be counted for purpose of seniority ?
The answer to this clearly rests upon the interpretation of the explanation below rule 8, quoted above.
The learned single Judge held that the service rendered by the petitioner on foreign service with the University could not be counted towards seniority.
Three reasons are being set forth for this conclusion.
To begin with it was said that the petitioner, when he was on foreign service with the University, was still in the employment of the Government of India having his lien on his former post and he could not, therefore, draw any benefit from the Explanation to rule 8.
5.
Further to deny the petitioner relief claimed, reference was also made to the plea taken in the return filed by the University which reads :-  "12(ii) Petitioner continued to be the employee of the Govt. of India and took benefits from the Government.
Dr. Dak can not stake his claim to cover his case under the Explanation under Clause 8 of Chapter VI read with Clause 9 of Chapter VII of the Statutes because this provisions is for the Government employees who are taken on foreign service by the University but resign their Govt job.
As Dr. Dak has got pro-rata retirement benefits for the period he was serving this University on deputation from the Govt. of India, the period of servant put in by him in this University on deputation cannot be allowed to be counted towards seniority.
The seniority of the employee cannot be maintained at two places simultaneously as is clear from the terms and conditions of Govt. of India, vide their letter No. F. 19-157/85/A.
III dated 1911987, which says as under :- xi) Effect of Resignation  If Dr. TM Dak resigns from HAU Hissar, his resignation for purpose of these orders will be treated as resignation from Govt. service, entailing forfeiture of earlier service under Govt. and loss of pensionary benefits including gratuity under these orders.
xii) Benefits after permanent absorption.
For the period of service rendered by Dr. TM Dak in HAU, Hissar, from the date of permanent absorption he will be entitled to all the benefits admissible to the corresponding employees of the said Organisation and continue to be governed by its rules in all respects."
6.
The third and final reason, to put it in precise words of the learned single Judge being "Even otherwise, the conditions of service with regard to determination of seniority of the employees who joined service of the University by direct recruitment cannot be subjected to fluctuations and uncertainties on account of absorption in service of employees of the Government of India who had been on foreign service with the University.
Obviously, seniority has to be determined by taking into consideration the date of continuous employment of the employees in the University itself, and the employees who come on foreign service or deputation cannot be allowed to draw the benefit towards seniority by counting their past service during which they had retained their lien under the State Government and while on foreign service could leave the service of the University as and when chances of their promotion in their parent States arose."
7.
On a plain reading of the relevant Explanation, we are with respect constrained to take a contrary view.
The expression 'foreign service' in this Explanation clearly connotes service in the University of an employee other than that of the University.
Had the petitioner left service of the Government of India before joining the University he would not have been on 'foreign service'.
8.
Further, when the relevant Regulations permit the permanent absorption of person initially taken on foreign service and also provide that such foreign service shall count for seniority, the effect and benefit of such provisions cannot be denied merely because it may lead to some uncertainties and fluctuations in the seniority of other employees of the University.
Such situation being inherent in their conditions of service.
9.
Finally, in the context of the Explanation, the fact that the petitioner had been given his prorata retirement benefits by the Government of India, also for the period when he was on foreign service with the University is clearly a circumstance of no consequence to the point in controversy.
What the petitioner received from the Government of India and for what period was a matter solely between the petitioner and the Government of India.
What is relevant here is whether or not the petitioner comes within the ambit of the Explanation and this one undoubtedly does.
The plain language of the Explanation clearly renders it incumbent that the service rendered by the petitioner on foreign service must count towards his seniority.
This being so, the petitioner has inevitably to be held to be senior to respondent Dr. RK Punia and we accordingly declare him to be so and also direct the respondent-University to grant him all consequential benefits that he would be entitled to as a result thereof.
10.
The judgment of the learned single Judge is accordingly, hereby set aside and this appeal is accepted with costs.
Counsel fee Rs. 500/-.
Appeal allowed.