AL Bahri and VK Bali, JJ.
- Manjit Singh was working as Accountant when he was suspended and charge-sheeted.
He submitted reply to the charge-sheet.
He was asked to appear in person before respondent No. 2 Director of Fisheries Department under whom he was working.
He confessed his guilt and this resulted in passing of the impugned order Annexure P/8 on January 14, 1992 whereby he was reverted to the post of a Clerk.
This order is under challenge in this writ petition.
2.
The only ground urged is that under the Rules and the Guidelines, the State had decided to impose major punishment, it was necessary to hold regular inquiry.
Reference has been made to Annexure P/9 guidelines regarding procedure in disciplinary cases laid down by the State.
Para 44(b) provides that if the delinquent official admits the charge and asks for mercy it would not be necessary to hold any inquiry, if the punishing authority decides not to award any penalty.
However, if it decides to award any penalty then second show-cause notice in order to afford him an opportunity to urge against the proposed penalty is to be given.
Sub-clause (C) provides that if minor penalty is to be imposed thereafter considering the explanation furnished by the delinquent official, no further proceedings be held.
However, if it is decided to award a major punishment, then inquiry officer should be appointed to hold a regular departmental inquiry in respect of the allegations for which satisfactory explanation was not forthcoming.
Since second show-cause notice was not issued to the petitioner, he had no opportunity to furnish explanation.
The stand of the respondents is that the petitioner was still a probationer and since he had admitted his guilt, he has simply been reverted.
3.
After hearing counsel for the parties, we are of the opinion that action in the present case was being taken against the petitioner for imposing a penalty and this is not a case of simple reversion of the probation.
The allegations of embezzlement were levelled.
That being the position the procedure prescribed for imposing punishment was required to be followed.
As per guidelines referred to above, the second show cause notice proposing punishment was required to be given to the petitioner and it was subsequently on receipt of the explanation thereof that the said question could be decided whether any inquiry is to be held or not.
Since the impugned order Annexure P/8 was passed without issuing any show cause notice of the proposed punishment, the same cannot be sustained.
4.
For the reasons recorded above, this writ petition is allowed.
Order Annexure P/8 dated January 14, 1992 reverting the petitioner to the post of Clerk is quashed.
The respondents would be at liberty to proceed against the petitioner from that stage, if considered necessary.
However, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.