Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The ten petitioners herein are working as Reporters in the Punjab Vidhan Sabha Secretariat.
They are aggrieved by the promotions of respondent Nos. 4 and 5 to the posts of Superintendents Grade-I A few facts relevant for the decision of the case may be noticed.
2.
The petitioners are working as Reporters.
Two posts of Superintendent Grade-I fell vacant in August, 1990.
It is averred that petitioner Nos. 2, 3 and 9 filed representations for being considered for promotion to these posts.
It is further averred that there are a total of 12 posts of Superintendents Grade-I which have to be filled up from amongst the persons working in the General Branch, the Publication Branch and the Translation Branch in the ratio of 60%, 25% and 15% respectively.
As a result, the petitioners claim that out of the 12 posts, only seven can be filled up from amongst the persons working in the General Branch, three from amongst the persons working as Reporters in the Publication Branch and two from amongst the persons working in the Translation branch, viz. Translators.
It is further averred that vide letter dated September 12, 1957, the procedure for the selection of the officers/officials for promotion to higher posts had been laid down and that so far as the posts of Superintendents are concerned, the persons who had worked for seven years as "Assistant/Senior Translator/Reporter if otherwise eligible had a right to be considered".
The petitioners aver the inspite of their being eligible and suitable and the posts falling to their share being available, the respondent Nos. 1, 2 and 3 have illegally promoted respondent Nos. 4 and 5 and ignored the right and claim of the petitioners.
On this premises, a prayer for the issue of a writ in the nature of certiorari, quo-warranto, and mandamus for quashing the promotion of respondent Nos. 4 and 5 to the posts of Superintendents Grade-I has been made.
It has been further prayed that the respondent Nos. 1, 2 and 3 be directed to consider the claim of the petitioners.
3.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 to 3.
It has been inter-alia point out that the petitioners were originally working in the pay scale of Rs. 800-1400 with a special pay of Rs. 100/-.
On November 26, 1986, they submitted a representation for equation of their posts with those of Private Secretaries in the Punjab Civil Secretariat and the consequential revision of their scales of pay and the grant of selection grade.
In this representation, it was specifically mentioned that "we hereby surrender out right for promotion as Superintendent if the posts of the reporters are equated with the posts of the private secretaries, for all purposes, as is prevalent in the other State legislatures."
Acting on this representation of the petitioners, the pay scales of reporters were initially revised and raised to Rs. 2000-3500 with a special pay of Rs. 200/-, even though in the normal course of events, the persons working in the pay scale of Rs. 800-1400 with a special pay of Rs. 100/- were entitled to be placed in the scale of Rs. 1800-3200 only.
Thereafter, the matter was referred to the Anomalies Committee and the petitioners were placed in the pay scale equivalent to the posts of Superintendent Grade-I, viz. Rs. 2200-4000 w.e.f.
January, 1986.
They were also granted a special pay of Rs. 200/- pm The respondents aver the "all this was done because the reporters had specifically given an undertaking more than once that they will forego their claim to the post of Superintendent Grade-I, if their pay scale is revised equivalent to that of Superintendent Grade-I I has also been pointed out that the claim of the petitioners with regard to a distinguished record of service of higher degree of proficiency in Stenography is highly exaggerated.
It has been pointed out that petitioner No. 1 (who, I am informed, has since died) had not passed the shorthand test at the prescribed speed.
The factual position with regard to some of the petitioners has also been given.
It has been stated that the classification of the service in the State is under consideration and the decision of the Government in this behalf would be made applicable in the case of Reporters."
As a result, it is averred that the matter regarding placing the posts of Reporters in Class-II is still pending consideration with the Government.
It has also been averred that the Hon.
Speaker, after considering the circumstances in which the grade of Reporters has been revised and the undertaking given by them for the revision of their pay scale, has now finally decided to exclude the reporters for promotion to the post of Superintendent Grade-I as they are enjoying the same scale of pay as is being enjoyed by the Superintendent Grade-I/Private Secretary.
However, to provide further chance of promotion to the Reporters, the Hon.
Speaker has written to Government to create one post of Chief Reporter and one post of Editor of Debates in higher scales.
The matter is being pursued with the Government and is under its consideration."
The respondents further aver that "keeping in view the undertaking given by the Reporters that if their pay scale is revised equal to that of Superintendent Grade-I/Private Secretary then they would not claim promotion to the post of Superintendent Grade-I, has formulated a new policy for promotion to the post of Superintendent Grade-I in which the Reporters have been excluded."
On these premises, the claim of the petitioners has been contested.
4.
I have heard Mr. MMS Bedi, learned counsel for the petitioners and Mrs. Charu Tuli, learned Assistant Advocate General for the respondent Nos. 1, 2 and 3.
Mr. Bedi contends that the entire premises on which the respondents are denying promotion to the petitioners is wholly unfounded.
He submits that a perusal of the letter dated November 26, 1986, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure R.3 with the written statement, shows that the petitioners had agreed to surrender their right for promotion as Superintendent only "if the posts of Reporters are equated with the posts of the Private Secretaries for all purposes..." He submits that the respondents have not done this.
Consequently, he submits that the action of the respondents in denying the promotion to the petitioners to the rank of Superintendent Grade-I is wholly arbitrary and contrary to the policy decision contained in the letter dated September 12, 1957 (Annexure P.2).
He also submits that the respondents have followed a consistent practice of filling up the posts from the persons working in three different branches @ 60%, 25% and 15% respectively.
There was no warrant for making a departure from this practice at this stage.
Still further, he points out that even the proposal for the creation of the higher posts, such as Editor of Debates and a Chief Reporter, was made by the Speaker some time in the year 1990 and in spite of the fact that almost two years have elapsed, nothing whatsoever has been done by the respondents.
5.
On the other hand, Mrs. Tuli appearing forthe respondents submits that the petitioners are estopped from claiming promotion to the posts of Superintendent Grade-I in view of the fact that they had given an undertaking to surrender their right to promotion in case the were given the pay scale of the posts of Private Secretaries.
Since the petitioners have been granted the said scales they cannot be permitted to claim further promotions to the rank of Superintendent Grade-I She further submits that so far as the reclassification of the posts of Reporters as Class-II and the chances of further promotion to the posts of Editor Debates, and the Chief Reporter, the matter is under consideration with the Government.
6.
Having heard the learned counsel for the parties, I find that vide letter dated November 26, 1986, the petitioners have given only a limited undertaking that if the posts of the Reporters are equated with the posts of the Private Secretaries, for all purposes, as is prevalent in the other State Legislatures, then the petitioners would surrender their right for promotion as Superintendent.
While the petitioners have been granted the pay scale of the post of Private Secretary, they have not been given the gazetted rank or status attached to the said post.
As a result, it cannot be said that by the mere factum of the petitioners having accepted the pay scales which are equivalent to the posts of Private Secretary or Superintendent Grade-I, the petitioners have surrendered their right to be considered for promotion to the posts of Superintendent Grade-I The plea of the respondents in this behalf is consequently untenable and is rejected.
However, keeping in view the fact that the Government is already seized of the matter regarding the upgradation of the cadre of Reporters to Class-II with a gazetted status and is also considering the matter regarding, the provision of appropriate avenue of promotions, I do not consider it necessary to go into the entire matter at this stage.
7.
Accordingly, it is directed that the Government shall decide the matter expeditiously, and in any case, within three months from the date of the receipt of a copy of this order.
Writ petition is disposed of as such.
However, in the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Order accordingly.