Harjit Singh Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner at the relevant time was posted as a Clerk in the office of General Manager, Punjab Roadways, Amritsar.
On 531979 he was suspended on account of some incident that is said to have taken place on 521979.
The suspension was subsequently revoked and a statement of charges Annexure R-2 with the petition and a charge-sheet was served on the petitioner on 1641980.
It has been averred that after re-instatement of the petitioner pending enquiry promotions to the posts of Assistant/Junior Auditors for which the petitioner was also liable to be considered were made on 18101970 and 31101979, the criteria for promotion being seniority-cum-fitness.
It has also been alleged by the petitioner that though he was meritorious and ought to have been promoted, being the senior most clerk, yet his case was ignored and the private respondents 3 to 7 who were junior to the petitioner as per seniority list Annexure P-1 were in fact promoted.
The petitioner represented against this supersession but having received no satisfactory reply, filed the present petition.
2.
The case of the petitioner as set out in the petition is that his case had not been considered for promotion along with the first 11 persons promoted on 18101979 and in any case the misconduct which was one of the reasons recorded for not promoting him ought not to have been taken into consideration as the charge-sheet was served on 1641980 whereas the promotion had been made prior to that date.
3.
In the reply filed on behalf of the official respondents it has been stated in para 5 that the case of the petitioner was considered along with the Clerks at the time of making promotion to the posts of Assistant/Junior, Auditors from time to time but he was not considered fit for promotion on account of his bad service record and charges of misconduct and indiscipline.
A copy of the statement of allegations served on the petitioner along with charge-sheet dated 1641980 has also been appended as Annexure R-2 with the reply filed by respondents 1 and 2.
It had been urged by Mr. Sarwan Singh, learned counsel for the petitioner, that the charge-sheet and the statement of allegations could not be taken into consideration as admittedly on 31101979 when the promotion was made the charge-sheet had not been served upon him.
This fact has not been controverted by the counsel for the respondent-State.
4.
After giving my thoughtful consideration to the entire matter, I am of the view that though the claim of the petitioner was considered for promotion to the post of Assistant/Junior Auditors, yet the allegations of misconduct as stated in Annexure R-2 dated 1641980 were not to be considered as they were not available when the promotion took place on 31101979.
The present petition is, therefore, allowed and a direction is issued to the respondents to reconsider the case of the petitioner excluding the charge-sheet and statement of allegations Annexure R-2 to the reply.
The entire exercise will be completed within six months from today and if on consideration the petitioner is founded entitled to promotion, he will be given all his dues in terms of seniority, salary etc from the date his juniors were promoted.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.