Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - This order will dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 2384 and 4750 of 1985, 9318, 9466 and 11878 of 1989.
The facts, as stated in Civil Writ Petition No. 4750 of 1985 (as amended) may be noticed.
2.
The nine petitioners were appointed as Craft Teachers in Tailoring Centre in the year 1978-79, in district Sonepat by the District Rural Development Agency, Sonepat, respondent No. 7.
These appointments were in the pay scale of Rs. 125-5-150/5-250.
On February 16, 1985, the Commissioner and Secretary to Government Haryana conveyed the decision of the Govt. to transfer the Rural Craft Courses being run by the District Rural Development Agencies to the Panchayat Samitis with effect from April 1, 1985.
It is further stated that the Craft Teachers shall be designated as Craft Sahayikas.
Vide letter dated March 22, 1985, the Commissioner & Secretary to Govt. Haryana, inter-alia, informed the Block Development & Panchayat Officers throughout the State that "all the Craft teachers will be offered ad hoc appointment in the Panchayat Samitis and compliance report to be also sent to this office to that effect."
It is averred that the petitioners were transferred from Rural Development Agencies and posed at a consolidated pay of Rs. 525/- per month.
It is averred that the petitioners were "confirmed employees in the DRDA and the DRDA is still in existence and has kept all its employees and they had also now started again appointing the Craft Teachers and Gram Sevikas for which the petitioners are fully qualified, so the petitioners should be transferred to DRDA" It is further averred that in the Development Department in Sonepat Block various persons like Ms. Santosh Kumari, etc. who have the same qualifications as the petitioners and are doing the same job are being paid their salary in the running grade of Rs. 950-1400, whereas the petitioners are being paid only a consolidated pay Rs. 525/- per month.
On these premises, the petitioners have prayed for the grant of the regular scale of pay as they were originally drawing as also for the protection of their pay and for the issue of the writ in the nature of mandamus directing the respondents to consider the case of the petitioners for regular appointment.........."  3.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the State Govt. to the amended petition.
It has been inter-alia averred that the petitioners were originally working under the District Rural Development Agencies which are autonomous bodies and were not Govt. employees.
The Govt. found that the Craft Centres were not playing any useful role and huge amounts were being spent on these Centres every year.
Accordingly, "the State Govt. decided to do away with these Centres with effect from 1485 vide their letter No........dated 6121984.
On this the petitioners approached the State Govt. to retain them in service beyond that date.
The State Govt. told them that there is no Govt. job available for them and they can be adjusted in Panchayat Samitis on ad hoc basis at a consolidated fixed pay of Rs. 525/- per month on the post of Craft Sahayikas.
The instructions in this regard were issued on 16285 at Annexure D (it should be 'B').
Accordingly, the Block development and Panchayat Officers as Executive Officers to Panchayat Samitis appointed them on the terms and conditions mentioned above.......".
The averment that the petitioners have been transferred to Panchayat Samitis has been denied.
It has been categorically averred that their services were terminated by District Rural Development Agencies and they were adjusted only for the time being till Panchayat Samitis can afford the expenses of these posts.
The respondent has further pointed out that the petitioners were not confirmed employees of the Agencies.
It has also been averred that even though the Agency is in existence, and has employed the staff in accordance with the requirements of the scheme, yet no Craft Teachers and Gram Sewaks have been appointed or are being appointed by the District Rural Development Agencies.
With regard to the averment that Ms. Santosh Kumari etc. who are working as Craft Teachers are being paid salary in the scale of Rs. 950-1400, it has been averred that they are working as Craft Teachers against regular posts and are senior to the petitioners.
So far as the petitioners are concerned, they were "working in the District Rural Development Agencies in Panchayat Samitis afresh as Craft Sahayikas purely on ad hoc basis on a fixed wages of Rs. 525/- (Rs. 800/- with effect from 111986).
It is further stated that in such Panchayat Samitis, there exist two regular posts of Craft Teachers but the Craft Sahayikas are appointed on ad hoc basis on fixed wages."
The respondents have also pointed out that the regular scale meant for Craft Teachers cannot be given to craft Sahayikas as the Panchayat Samitis cannot afford to bear the extra burden.
It has also been stated that the action does not suffer from the vice of discrimination as the posts of Craft Teachers and Craft Sahayikas cannot be equated.
On these premises, the action is sought to be supported by the respondents.
4.
I have heard Mr. IS Balhara, learned counsel for the petitioners and Mr. Jaswant Singh for the respondents.
Mr. Balhara has raised a two-fold contention.
He firstly states that the petitioners are entitled to parity of treatment in the matter of pay with the Craft Teachers and that the action of the respondents in paying them a fixed salary of Rs. 800/- is violative of the guarantee under Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
It has been further contended that all technical posts requiring the qualification of Matric with two years' diploma from Industrial Training Institutes were placed in the scale of Rs. 950-1400 which has since been revised to Rs. 1200-2040 and that the petitioners are entitled to this scale of pay.
It has been further contended that the petitioner are entitled to the regularisation of their services as they have been in service for a long time.
The claim as made on behalf of the petitioners has been contested on behalf of the respondents.
5.
A perusal of the pleadings of the parties shows that the petitioners have been appointed initially in the District Rural Development Agencies.
It is the admitted position that the District Rural Development Agencies had been set up in each district at the instance of the Central Govt. and that the expenses were shared by the State and the Central Govt.
In the year 1984, a decision was taken to abolish the Craft Centres.
As a result, the posts of the petitioners were in the very nature of things liable to be rendered surplus and the incumbents could have lost their jobs.
In order to avoid hardship, the State Govt. directed the Block Development & Panchayat Officers to accommodate the Craft Teachers in the Panchayat Samities.
It has been categorically averred in the written statement that the petitioners were adjusted as Craft Sahayikas on fixed wages of Rs. 525/- per month which were later on revised and raised to Rs. 800/-.
It has also been stated that these appointments were made by the Block Development & Panchayat officers in their capacity as executive Officers of the Samitis.
The petitioners thus came to be the employees of the Samitis and as disclosed in the written statement, expenditure "on account of payment of salary is shared on 50-50 basis by the Panchayat Samitis and concerned Panchayat depending upon their financial position."
It is thus obvious that the petitioners are not holding civil posts under the State.
Consequently, the instructions issued by the Govt. from time to time for regularisation of ad hoc employees are per se not applicable to the persons working as Craft Sahayikas with the Panchayat Samitis.
Nothing has been produced on record to show that the Samitis had adopted these instructions.
It is thus apparent that the petitioners are not entitled to regularisation of their services.
6.
Equally untenable is the plea regarding parity in the matter of pay.
It is no doubt correct that the petitioners were initially appointed as Craft teachers by the District Rural Development Agencies.
However, on the decision of the Govt. to close the Craft Centres created under the Agencies, the petitioners were given fresh appointments as Craft Sahayikas by the respective Gram Panchayat.
Even though the Government had initially observed that the posts of Craft Teachers be redesignated as Craft Sahayikas, the petitioners were only appointed as such on fixed wages.
There is nothing on record to show that the posts of Craft Sahayikas and Crafts Teachers form one cadre or that they have a common seniority list.
In this situation, it is not possible to hold that they are holding the same posts.
The mere fact that the duties are similar does not mean that the petitioners are entitled to the same scale of pay as is being given to the craft Teachers.
Further, while the Craft Teachers constitute a regular cadre and persons like Ms. Santosh Kumari, etc., have been appointed on regular basis, the petitioners are holding purely temporary posts which were created to accommodate them so as to save a number of persons from being rendered jobless.
In this situation, the claim of the petitioners for being put at par with the regular employees working as Craft Teachers cannot be sustained.
While the State has to endeavour to ensure that equals are treated alike, one cannot be totally obvious to the fact that the resources of the Samitis being limited, the petitions have been accommodated on a fixed salary of Rs. 800/- per month.
Insistence on parity of treatment in the matter of pay may ultimately result in their being rendered jobless.
In this situation, it does not seem appropriate to direct that the petitioners be given the same scale of pay as is being given to the regular employees.
Furthermore, even similarity in duties does not entitle the petitioners to equal pay.
Besides the fact that there is nothing on record to show that the responsibilities are identical, it is not unknown that even within one cadre, the employer some times creates a higher grade to the extent of a particular percentage of posts and the senior-most persons are accommodated against those posts in the higher scale.
In service jurisprudence, it is described as 'selection grade.'
Such a provision has never been held to be violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
The present situation is almost identical.
Even if it is assumed that the petitioners are in the same cadre (though Mr. Jaswant Singh seriously disputed it and he appears to be right in doing so) the persons who have been placed in the regular scale of pay are admittedly senior to the petitioners.
Taking the totality of facts into consideration, it does not seem possible to hold that the petitioners are entitled to the same scale of pay as has been given to the Craft Teachers working on regular basis.
7.
Mr. Balhara then contends that the petitioners are holding technical posts and all persons possessing the qualification of matric with who years' Diploma of Industrial Training Institutes were granted the pay scale of Rs. 950-1400 which has since been revised to Rs. 1200-2040.
There is no such plea in the writ petition.
Further, even if it is assumed that the Govt. has sanctioned the aforesaid scales of pay for persons working on various posts under it, the petitioners are not working in a Department of the Govt.
They are working with the Samitis and they cannot claim the same scale of pay as has been granted by the Govt. to its employees.
8.
The petitions are wholly lacking in merit and are thus dismissed.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Petitions dismissed.