DP Wadhwa, J. (Oral) - Civil Writ Petition No. 706/92 :  This writ petition has been filed by employees of National Institute of Public Corporation and Child Development, respondent No. 4, a society registered under the Societies Registration Act.
Civil Writ Petition No. 708/92 :  This writ petition has been filed by the Association of certain employees and some of the employees of the New Delhi Municipal Committee constituted under the Punjab Municipal Act as extended to Delhi.
Civil Writ Petition No. 709/92 :  This writ petition is by the three employees of the Delhi Tourism & Transportation Development Corporation, a Government company, respondent No. 4.
Civil Writ Petition No. 710/92 :  This writ petition is by the association of the employees of the fourth respondent, namely, Central Social Welfare Board, a section 25 Company under the Companies Act, 1956, like any Government Company.
Civil Writ Petition No. 711/92 :  This writ petition is by seven employees of the fourth respondent, namely, Municipal Corporation of Delhi, constituted under the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act.
Civil Writ Petition No. 712/92 :  This writ petition is by the Officers' Association of Collectorate of Customs and Central Excise, Delhi Collectorate, New Delhi.
Civil Writ Petition No. 719/92 :  This writ petition is by an employee of Delhi State Mineral Development Corporation Limited, a Government company under the Delhi Administration.
Civil Writ Petition No. 722/92 :  This writ petition is by fourteen employees of the Delhi Development Authority constituted under the Delhi Development Act, 1957 :  Civil Writ Petition No. 723/92 :  This writ petition is by the 25 employees of the Delhi Development Authority constituted under the Delhi Development Act, 1957.
Civil Writ Petition No. 724/92 :  This writ petition is by the Income-tax Gazetted Officers Association serving in New Delhi area and from the office of the Chief Commissioner of Income-tax, New Delhi.
Civil Writ Petition No. 699/92 :  In this petition which is also filed by 64 employees of the Delhi Development Authority rule nisi had already been issued for today and interim orders granted in terms of order dated 13 February 1992 in Civil Writ Petition 507/92.
Civil Writ Petition No. 700/92 :  This petition is by the thirteen employees of the Delhi Administration.
In this rule nisi was issued for this date and interim orders granted in terms of order dated 13th February 1992 in Civil Writ Petition 507/92.
Civil Writ Petition No. 616/92 :  This petition is by nine employees of the Delhi Development Authority.
In this case we had already passed interim order on 13 February 1992 and this petition was connected with Civil Writ Petition 507/92.
Civil Writ Petition No. 507/92 :  This is the main writ petition in which we are passing interim orders.
Interim order dated 13th February 1992 was made in this petition.
This has been filed by the employees union of Delhi State Civil Supplies Corporation Limited, a Government company of Delhi Administration, and five of its employees.
In this case today an application seeking amendment of the writ petition has been filed copy which has earlier been given to the learned counsel for the respondents today itself.
Civil Writ Petition No. 578/92 :  This petition filed by an Association of Northern Railway Promotee Officers Association was heard along with Civil Writ Petition 507/92 wherein interim order was made on 13 February 1992.
An application seeking amendment of the writ petition has petition has been filed copy of which has been served upon the counsel for the respondents today itself.
Civil Writ Petition No. 507/92 :  In three writ petitions, namely, Civil Writ Petitions 507/92, 576/92 and 616/92, we passed interim orders on 13 February 1992.
Interim orders were made after taking only prima facie view of the matter.
This order is in continuation of that after further hearing in the matter.
Thereafter, various writ petitions have been filed in some of which we again issued show cause notices as to why rule nisi be not issued, returnable this day.
Some of the writ petitions came up for admission today itself.
Copies of all the writ petitions have already been served on the respective counsel for the respondents.
Details of these writ petitions have been mentioned in the title above.
2.
There are various types of cases before us where employees have challenged either the orders of the Chief Electoral Officer, Delhi, requiring them to report for election duty in Punjab or by the District Election Officer in various districts in Punjab asking individual employees to report for duty there in terms of section 26 of the Representation of People Act, 1951.
The categorisation may be made as under :-  (1) Employees of the Government departments like Income-tax, Central Excise and Customs, and Railways.
(2) Employees of Government companies registered under the Companies Act.
(3) Employees of Societies registered under the Societies Registration Act though under the control of the Government.
3.
We have further considered the matter.
In the earlier order we had given an interim finding that it could not be disputed that any person could be appointed by the District Election Officer to act as Presiding Officer.
We have been taken through various provisions under the RP Act, 1950, and R.P.
Act, 1951 as well as to the relevant provisions of the Constitution particularly Article 324(6).
We may also note that in some of the writ petitions in which we had issued notices applications have been filed seeking amendment of the writ petition and to challenge the orders of the District Election Officers which came about after the making of the interim order.
We are also conscious of the fact that general elections in the Punjab are going to be held day after.
In the three writ petitions mentioned in the beginning of the order we have issued Rule DB as we noted that substantial questions of law were involved.
These writ petitions are still pending.
In the affidavits filed by the Election Commission which have been noted in our earlier order it had been stated that request was in fact made by the Election Commission to the President of India for making available such staff as may be necessary for discharge of functions conferred upon the Election Commission under Clause (1) of Article 324 of the Constitution Privilege had been claimed from disclosing the documents which would show that such a request had been made.
This will be gone into at the time of hearing of the writ petitions.
Since Mr. DS Bagga, Deputy Election Commission, has filed an affidavit on oath to this effect, there is nothing on record for us not to accept his version that a request under clause (6) of Article 324 of the Constitution was made.
That being so, we cannot find any fault at this stage in the orders of the District Election Officers requiring Government staff to perform the duties as Presiding Officers.
4.
The case is, however, different in case of employees of authorities like the Delhi Development Authority, Municipal Corporation of Delhi and New Delhi Municipal Committee, though all local authorities but not within the State of Punjab.
Under section 159 of the RP Act, 1951, which also we had noticed in our earlier interim order, every local authority in a State shall, when so requested by a Regional Commissioner appointed under Clause (4) of Article 324, or the Chief Electoral Officer of the State, make available to any Returning Officers such staff as may be necessary for the performance of any duties in connection with an election.
Assuming that a local authority may be outside that particular State, the request has to come from the Regional Commissioner or the Chief Electoral Officer of the State concerned.
There is no such request and nothing has been said about it by the respondents.
A society under the Societies Registration Act, or a Government Company under the Companies Act, 1956, is certainly not a local authority under section 159 of the RP Act 1951.
To us it appears, again prima facie, that though the District Election Officer can appoint a presiding officer for each polling station, that has necessarily to be from the Government staff detailed on duty in terms of Article 324(6) of the Constitution.
Proviso to sub-section (1) of Section 26 deals with appointment of a Polling Officer by the Presiding Officer.
We have been referred to sections 27 and 28A of the RP Act 1951, and it does appear to us that a Presiding Officer necessarily has to be from the staff of the Government and if he is from outside the State then staff could be made available on a request made by the Election Commission under clause (6) of Article 324 of the Constitution Otherwise, any other interpretation would make the provision of clause (6) of Article 324 nugatory.
Since after the passing of interim order dated 13th February, 1992 orders have been received from the respective District Election Officers, that interim order has necessarily to be modified to some extent, we will, therefore, direct that in the writ petitions where the employees belong to the Delhi Development Authority, Municipal Corporation of Delhi, New Delhi Municipal Committee, Government companies and societies registered respectively under the Companies Act and the Societies Registration Act (the details of which writ petitions are mentioned in the title of this order), orders issued by the District Election Officers will not be implemented by the respondents.
In the new writ petitions listed before us today we issue notice to show cause, in all these matters as to why rule nisi be not issued, returnable on-------------.
Order accordingly.