AL Bahri, J - Vide this order two writ petitions (Nos. 9804 and 4102 of 1991) are being disposed of.
C.W.P.
No. 9804 of 1991 :  Kuldeep Singh, who is working as Under Secretary, Haryana Vidhan Sabha, Chandigarh, challenges in this writ petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution, order of appointment of respondent No. 4 Ram Narain Yadav as Deputy Secretary, Haryana Vidhan Sabha.
Copy of the order is Annexure P2.
A representation was filed against the aforesaid order-Annexure P.3, which was rejected vide order Annexure P4 dated May 9, 1991.
The aforesaid order is also under challenge.
2.
The petitioner claimed to be senior to Ram Narain Yadav, respondent No. 4 before his promotion as Deputy Secretary.
The petitioner was getting more basic pay than Ram Narain Yadav.
The appointment of Ram Narain Yadav is challenged on the ground that he was ineligible for promotion to the post of Deputy Secretary under the Rules.
He was neither Law Graduate, nor possessing requisite experience on the post of Under Secretary.
The exercise of power to relax the experience by the Speaker was on account of mix-interpretation of the Rules.
3.
The writ petition has been contested by Ram Narain Yadav respondent No. 4 as well as by the official respondents.
It is clarified that since none of the Under Secretaries working in the Vidhan Sabha was possessing the requisite experience, prior approval of the State Government was obtained for relaxing the Rule in the matter of promotion to the post of Deputy Secretary.
Ram Narain Yadav was a Law-Graduate, possessing degree issued by the Kurukshetra University, known as Bachelor in General Laws (B.G.L.)
Two years Course.
Thus, appointment of Ram Narain Yadav was in accordance with Rules.
4.
After hearing counsel for the parties, we are of the opinion that the promotion of Ram Narain Yadav as Deputy Secretary in Vidhan Sabha, Haryana, was in accordance with the Rules and he fulfilled the eligibility clause regarding Academic qualifications and with respect to the experience the Speaker of the Vidhan Sabha rightly relaxed the Rule.
5.
The services in the Haryana Vidhan Sabha are governed by the Haryana Vidhan Sabha Secretariat Service Rules (hereinafter called "the Rules").
Rule 8 of the Rules provides as under :  "No person shall be appointed to any post in service, unless he is possession of qualifications and experience, specified in column 3 of Appendix B to these Rules in case of direct recruitment and those specified in column 4 of the aforesaid Appendix in the case of recruitment other than by direct recruitment."
Appendix B column, 4, prescribes Academic Qualifications and Experience for the post of deputy Secretary, as under :-  "Deputy Secretary-Law Graduate with three years experience as Under Secretary in the Haryana Vidhan Sabha Secretariat."
While making reference to the Academic Qualifications of Ram Narain Yadav respondent No. 4 in para 4 of the Writ Petition, it was mentioned that he is MA, LL.B.
(Academic) Two years Private Course from Kurukshetra University.
In sub-clause (i) of Para 8 of the Writ Petition, it was asserted by the petitioner that Ram Narain Yadav is not Law Graduates as he has only passed LL.B.
(Academic) Two Years Private Course run by the University.
This University conducts Three Years Regular Course of LL.B.
and it does not consider LL.B.
(Academic) equivalent to LL.B.
(Professional).
Reference was made to Ordinance of the University with the heading "Bechelor of General Laws (B.G.L.)
Degree Course," as under :-  "With effect from the examination to be held in April/May, 1977, the Kurukshetra University Kurukshetra, Department of Law shall conduct a Two Years' Course leading to the Degree of Bachelor of General Laws (B.G.L.)
Degree Course.
This course is meant only for the Private Candidates.
Candidate holding this degree cannot be enrolled as Advocate under the Rules of Bar Council of India nor can be seek admission to the LL.B.
(Professional) Part III/LL.B., Part I Class of the University."
6.
The contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is based on the above data that respondent No. 4 Ram Narain Yadav does not possess degree of Graduation in Law and hence he could not be appointed as Deputy Secretary by promotion.
A person to be eligible to be promoted to the post of Deputy Secretary has to be a Law Graduate as per Rules referred to above.
The word 'Graduate' in the context would mean a person who has been conferred a Degree of Law by the University.
Chamber 20th Century Dictionary New Edition 1987 defines "Graduate" as under :  "To confer a Degree upon, to admit to a University Degree, to pass by grades, to receive a University Degree, one who has obtained a University Degree, one who has completed a course in any Educational Institution."
The word "Graduate" is derived from the word "Grade", which means a Degree or step in quality, rank, or dignity, a yearly stage in education.
Seen in this context a Law Graduate would be a person who has been conferred with the Degree of Laws by the University.
The contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that Degree in General Laws issued to Ram Narain Yadav, respondent No. 4 would not cloth him with the status of Law Graduate as he has not possessed Three Years' Law Course known as LL.B.
(Profession).
This contention cannot be accepted.
The Bachelor of Laws Degree (Professional) is required by such persons who want to enter into the profession.
It is only such degree which is recognised by the Bar Council to enroll such persons as Advocates.
The rule requiring eligibility for the post of Deputy Secretary does not provide for such a Degree i.e. LL.B.
Professional (Three Years Course Degree).
The Rules merely require a simple Degree of laws which is conferred after two years.
It may be that in one of the Universities such a Degree is known as LL.B.
whereas in some Universities particularly Kurukshetra University it is known as General Law (B.G.L.)
Degree.
Ram Narain Yadav, respondent No. 4 who possess General Laws (B.G.L.)
(Degree is eligible for the post of Deputy Secretary).
7.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has further argued that the post of Deputy Secretary being a promotional post only the Under Secretaries working in Haryana Vidhan Sabha Secretariat were eligible for promotion and they too after completing Three Years' of service.
Since Ram Narain respondent No. 4 was never appointed as Under Secretary and he did not possess any experience as Under Secretary, he was in-eligible for the post and his appointment is against the rules.
This contention again is misconceived and cannot be accepted.
The Rule 3 of the Rules reads as under :  "The service shall comprise the posts in each group shown in Appendix A to those rules and members of the Service shall draw pay in the scales of pay shown there against : Provided that nothing contained in these Rules shall affect the right of the Speaker to make addition to, or reduction in, the number of such posts or to create new posts with different designations and scales of pay either permanently or temporarily, subject to the approval of the Government."
A bare perusal of the aforesaid Rule shows that service is to consist of posts as shown in Appendix 'A'.
However, the speaker has been authorised to make additions to the number of such posts or to create new posts with different designation and scales of pay either permanently or temporarily, subject to the approval of the Government.
It is in exercise of this right that the State Government sanctioned the creation of post of Secretary to Speaker, Vidhan Sabha in the pay scale of Rs. 3000-100-3500-125-4500/- plus Rs. 400/- as special pay, by up-grading the post of Private Secretary to the Speaker, vide letter dated March 24, 1989 copy of which has been produced by the Advocate General, Haryana.
The Speaker thus created such a post after the same was sanctioned by the State Government and Ram Narain Yadav was posted as Secretary to Speaker.
It is not disputed that the pay scale and special pay of Secretary to the Speaker as sanctioned by the State Government is similar to the pay scale and special pay of the post of Under Secretary of the Haryana Vidhan Sabha.
As far as nature of work of these posts is concerned, there is not much difference.
In the process of up-grading of the post, nature of work remains the same.
Some work is allocated to the Under Secretary and some to the Secretary and the work is inter-changeable.
For all intents and purposes for the sake of promotion to the higher post of Deputy Secretary, the post of Secretary to the Speaker is to be considered equivalent to the post of Under Secretary.
Ram Narain Yadav, who had worked on the post of Secretary to the Speaker could be appointed as Deputy Secretary.
8.
Looking from another angel, the Speaker is authorised to relax the experience of three years of the post of Under Secretary after obtaining prior approval of the Government in the matter of making promotion to the post of Deputy Secretary, as per Rules referred to above.
The under Secretaries who were working at the relevant time did not have the requisite experience that a reference was made by the Speaker to the Chief Secretary, Haryana (State), copy of the letter is Annexure R1/A attached with the written statement filed by Ram Narain Yadav.
Vide this letter permission was sought to have resort to the provision under the Rules to relax the same for promotion to be made to the post of Deputy Secretary in administrative expediency.
Such a permission was granted by the State Government, as is clear from the letter of the Chief Secretary dated January 14, 1991 Annexure P.1.
There is no force in the contention of counsel for the petitioner that only an Under Secretary could be appointed by promotion to the post of Deputy Secretary.
If powers to relax the rules exist therein it includes the power to relax three years' experience as under Secretary for making promotion to the post of Deputy Secretary.
Even if Ram Narain Yadav was working on a post which was not that of Under Secretary in exercise of relaxation of the Rule contained in the Rules, the Speaker was competent to appoint any person as Deputy Secretary and the contention of the counsel for the petitioner in this respect is repelled.
9.
While making reference to Annexure P.1 with regard to relaxing the rule of experience it was mentioned that seniority of the employees will be duly kept in view while considering them for promotion.
The contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that as per seniority Rules the petitioner was to rank senior and in the matter of granting relaxation with respect to experience, the name of the petitioner could not be ignored.
Rule 11 of the Rules provides the mode of determining the seniority and the relevant extract thereof is quoted as under :  "Seniority, inter se of members of the services shall be determined by the length of continuous service on any post in the service : Provided that where there are different cadres in the service the seniority shall be determined separately for each cadre : Provided further X X X X X X Provided further that in the case of two or more members appointed on the same date their seniority shall be determined as follows : X X X X X X X  X X X X X X X  1) in the case of members appointed by transfer from different cadres, their seniority shall be determined according to pay, preference being given to a member, who was drawing a higher rate of pay in his previous appointment, and if the rates of pay drawn are also the same, then by the length of their service in the appointment and if the length of such service is also the same, the older member "shall be senior to the younger member."
10.
The contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner while making reference to the aforesaid rule is that since petitioner Kuldip Singh and respondent No. 4, Ram Narain Yadav, belong to two different posts/cadres, their seniority is not to be determined according to the principles of length of service.
Proviso (d) would be attracted and a person drawing higher rate of pay would be senior.
This contention cannot be accepted.
As already referred to above when the Speaker has created an equivalent post, the same is to be treated as equivalent for the purpose of rule 11 also.
The length of continuous service on a post in the service in the context would mean the post of equal pay scale.
The post of Secretary to the Speaker as well as Under Secretary, Haryana, Vidhan Sabha, thus, would rank on equal footing.
Ram Narain Yadav respondent No. 4 who was earlier appointed as Secretary to the Speaker would thus rank senior to the petitioner who was appointed as Under Secretary, Haryana, Vidhan Sabha afterwards.
The Rule of seniority was thus not infringed while promoting Ram Narain Yadav, respondent No. 4, as Deputy Secretary.
CWP No. 4102 of 1991 :  11.
Challenge in this writ petition is also to be order of promotion of Ram Narain Yadav on the grounds which have already been discussed in the case of Kuldip Singh as above.
Further points arisen in the present writ petition filed by Banwari Lal are being discussed hereunder.
12.
Banwari Lal was appointed as Clerk on September 3, 1956 in the Vidhan Sabha of the erstwhile State of Punjab after he was duly selected by the Punjab Subordinate Services Selection Board.
In 1966 after re-organisation he was allocated to Haryana Vidhan Sabha as Senior Scale Stenographer.
Thereafter, he was promoted and confirmed as Personal Assistant in 1967.
In 1985 he was promoted as Private Secretary and confirmed in 1988.
The order of confirmation is Annexure P.1 dated October 21, 1988.
In the gradation list of Private Secretaries-Annexure P2 he was shown at Sr. No. 1, Ram Narain Yadav at.
Sr. No. 2 and Mewa Singh at Sr. No. 3.
A post of Secretary to the Speaker was created against which Ram Narain Yadav was appointed.
Annexure P.3 is the order of appointment of Ram Narain Yadav as Secretary to the Speaker.
Apart from the grounds which have been discussed above, in order to challenge order Annexure P.3 it is further asserted by the petitioner in this writ petition that this post of Secretary to the Speaker laying down the academic qualification of Law Graduate was illegal as prior approval of the Central Government was not obtained in view of Section 82(6) of the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966.
The service conditions of the petitioner who was earlier an employee of the Punjab Government could not be challenged without prior approval of the Central Government.
The challenge in this writ petition is to the appointment of Kanwal Mohan Sood, respondent No. 4, to the post of Secretary to the Speaker (temporarily) as Ram Narain Yadav was subsequently promoted as Deputy Secretary, Haryana Vidhan Sabha, and in his place Kanwal Mohan Sood was appointed.
Representations were made by Banwari Lal petitioner against the appointments of Ram Narain Yadav as well as Kanwal Mohan Sood which were rejected and those orders are also being challenged.
The respondents have contested this writ petition controverting all the allegations of the petitioner.
13.
The present writ petition has no merit.
At the time of re-organisation the petitioner was Senior Scale Stenographer.
It was on re-organisation that he secured promotion to the posts of Personal Assistant and Private Secretary.
There was no post of Secretary to the Speaker in the Haryana Vidhan Sabha at the time of Re-organisation.
The question of promotion of the petitioner to such post would not arise as such a post did not exist when the Re-organisation took place.
The channel of promotion to the post was to be governed by the rules aforesaid.
By creating a new post, the aforesaid channel was not deviated in order to hold that there was any change in the service conditions of the petitioner on the Re-organisation that any poor approval of the Central Government was called for under section 86(2) of the Act aforesaid.
State is not debarred from creating new posts in the Haryana Vidhan Sabha Secretariat after the Re-organisation and if the State could do so under the rules, as already referred to above, the State could also prescribed necessary qualifications and experience for the same.
For the newly created post of Secretary to the Speaker, it was considered expedient and necessary to have a person of higher educational qualification i.e. a degree in law which is apparent from the letter-Annexure R.2 (attached with the written statement of respondent No. 2) written by the Speaker to the State for creation of this post.
The petitioner, who is only a Matriculate, obviously cannot be appointed to the post of Secretary to the Speaker.
14.
As already observed above, the appointments to the post of Secretaries to the Speaker were made by relaxing the rule which provided for experience of three years as Under Secretary Both in the case of Ram Narain Yadav as well as Kanwal Mohan Sood, resort was had to the relaxation of provision of the rules.
The appointments of these two persons to the posts of Secretaries to the Speaker were, thus, according to the Rules.
15.
For the reasons above, both the writ petitions are dismissed.
However, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.