Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner, as Assistant Soil Conservation Officer in the State of Punjab, claims multiple reliefs through this petition.
He is aggrieved by the order dated March 2, 1984 by which he was allowed to cross the efficiency bar in the scale of Rs. 850-30-1000/40-1200/50-1400-60-1700 at the stage of Rs. 1200/- with effect from July 1, 1981 and not with effect from July 1, 1979 when it had actually fallen due.
He also claims promotion to the post of Assistant Soil Conservation Officer with effect from the date Mr. Baldev Singh was appointed to this post i.e. April 16, 1965.
The petitioner also makes a grievance that he was entitled to the same scale of pay as has been given to the Sub Divisional Officers in the Punjab Public Works Department (B&R) and Irrigation Branches.
The last grievance made by the petitioner in this petition relates to the actual fixation of his pay.
The petitioner has filed and argued this petition in person.
2.
First grievance made by the petitioner relates to the order dated March 2, 1984 by which he was allowed to cross the efficiency bar only with effect from July 1, 1981 instead of July 1, 1979.
His grievance is that he was neither granted any opportunity nor did the authority pass a speaking order while disallowing the crossing of efficiency bar with effect from July 1, 1979.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondent it has been pointed out that the petitioner had been communicated adverse reports for the years 1978-79 & 1979-80.
It is on account of these adverse reports that the petitioner was not allowed to cross the efficiency bar with effect from July 1, 1979.
According to the respondent, he was permitted to cross the efficiency bar after he had earned another report.
Nr.
Cheema urges that his representation against these adverse reports was still pending when the Government passed the impugned order disallowing the crossing of efficiency bar with effect from July 1, 1979.
He submits that on account of the pendency of his representation against these two adverse reports, adverse remarks could not have been taken into consideration while deciding this case.
3.
A reference to the Punjab Civil Service (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970 shows that withholding of increments of pay is one of the penalties specified in Rule 5.
An explanation to this rule provides that "stoppage of a government employee at the efficiency bar in the time scale of pay on the ground of his unfitness to cross the bar" shall not amount to a penalty within the meaning of this rule.
It is thus obvious that the stoppage at the efficiency bar does not constitute a penalty under the rules.
In this situation, I am of the view that it was not incumbent on the Government to either give a notice to the petitioner or to pass a speaking order while disallowing him from crossing the efficiency bar with effect from July 1, 1979.
This does not, however, imply that the Government could have arbitrarily stopped him at the efficiency bar.
It could have done so only if he was found unfit to cross the efficiency bar.
In the present case, the petitioner had been conveyed two adverse reports for the year 1978-79 and 1979-80.
If on the perusal of these two adverse reports, the Government considered the petitioner to be unfit to cross the efficiency bar, it action cannot be described as arbitrary or unfair.
If the performance of the petitioner has been assessed as below average or he has not been found fit to discharge the duties of the post and has thus not been allowed to cross the efficiency bar, the action of the employer does not suffer from the vice of arbitrariness.
4.
Mr. Cheema submits that his representations against these adverse reports were pending when the order dated March 2, 1984 was passed by the Government.
In view of this position, he contends that these two adverse remarks could not have been taken into consideration by the Government.
Factually he has pointed out that the two representations submitted by the petitioner were rejected vide orders dated October 3, 1984 and February 8, 1985.
Photocopies of these two orders are placed on record as Mark 'A' & 'B' respectively.
In view of the fact that the representations submitted by the petitioner against the adverse reports have been finally rejected by the Government, the objection raised by the petitioner loses all significance.
Accordingly, I am of the view that the action of the respondent-State in not allowing the petitioner to cross the efficiency bar with effect from the due date was legal and valid.
5.
The next grievance made by the petitioner is that he was due for promotion to the post which now held by him on April 16, 1965.
This was the date on which Mr. Baldev Singh was appointed to the post.
The contention is based on an order dated December 7, 1977, a copy of which has been produced on record as Annexure P2.
By this order it had been declared that the post of Assistant Soil Conservation Officer is not a research post and that 66-2/3% of he posts had to be filled by promotion while 33-1/3% of the posts had to be filled by direct recruitment.
He submits that the Government had filled up the posts by direct recruitment in excess of the quota laid down in the order dated December 7, 1977.
He submits that if this quota fixed by the Govt. is applies with effect from the year 1965, the petitioner was eligible to be promoted on April 16, 1965.
6.
On consideration of the matter, I am unable to accept this contention.
Firstly, the order passed by the Government on December 7, 1977 can have only prospective effect.
In any case, the persons who are alleged to have been promoted in the year 1965 including Mr. Baldev Singh are not parties to this petition.
Retrospective promotion of the petitioner would not only affect the actual appointment of the persons who were appointed in the year 1965, but also their seniority.
It is not possible to grant any relief to the petitioner in the absence of those persons, who are likely to be adversely affected.
Still further, a claim for promotion with effect from April 16, 1965 has been made belatedly in the year 1986 by filing this petition.
Even on account of delay, the petitioner is not entitled to the grant of the relief.
The petitioner submits that he had made a representation to the Government in the year 1971.
No copy of this representation has been produced on record.
Even otherwise this representation appears to have been made six years after the appointment of Mr. Baldev Singh.
By that time the limitation for filing the civil suit had expired.
Taking the totality of circumstances into consideration, I am unable to sustain the claim of the petitioner.
7.
The third grievance made by the petitioner is based on the principle of 'equal pay' for 'equal work'.
He claims that the duties of the Sub Divisional Engineer in the Public Works Department are akin to those performed by an Assistant Soil Conservation Officer in the department of Agriculture.
On this basis, the petitioner claims that he is entitled to the same scale of pay as has been given by the Government to those holding the posts of SubDivisional Engineers.
The factual premises of this contention has been rebutted by the State in its reply.
It has been inter alia stated that there is a lot of difference between the duties performed by the Sub Divisional Officer/Engineer and the Assistant Soil Conservation Officer.
Accordingly, it is not possible for me to hold that the petitioner performs he same duties as a Sub Divisional officer/Engineer in the Public Works Department performs.
Accordingly, the claim of the petitioner for the grant of parity in the scale of pay cannot be sustained.
8.
The last grievance made by the petitioner relates to the fixation of his pay in the scale of Rs. 850-1700.
The petitioner claims that he was drawing the pay of Rs. 620 and his pay was fixed at Rs. 1160 in the scale of Rs. 850-1700 with effect from January 1, 1978.
He submits that Mr. Ranjit Singh Sandhu, another Assistant Soil Conservation Officer, junior to him, was originally drawing a pay of Rs. 500/- and even he had been granted the pay of Rs. 1160/- with effect from January 1, 1978.
Accordingly, the petitioner claims that he was entitled to the grant of one increment under the instructions and the rules issued by the Government.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondent, it has been averred that the original pay of Mr. Ranjit Singh Sandhu had been fixed at Rs. 1080/-.
However, he was given two advance increments of Rs. 40/- each in accordance with the policy of the Government on account of the fact that he possessed the qualification of MSc.
(Agriculture).
In view of this factual position, no claim for the grant of another increment to the petitioner is made out.
Accordingly, I find no merit in this petition.
It is dismissed.
Keeping in view the circumstances of the case, I make no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.