Ashok Bhan, J - This judgment shall dispose of Civil Writ Petition No. 7050 of 1991 and Civil Writ Petition No. 13434 of 1991, as common questions of law and facts are involved in both the cases.
The facts have been taken from Civil Writ Petition No. 7050 of 1991.
In this writ petition issuance of a writ of mandamus is prayed for directing the respondents to give the petitioner the benefit of marks on the basis of length of service of the purpose of admission to 3 years Post Graduate Degree Course for the academic session 1991-92 and for quashing the notification dated 11th May, 1991 (Annexure P/3) which seeks to deprive the in-service candidates of proportionate awarding of marks for at least six months over and above the complete years of service (rural and urban together) being arbitrary, illegal, unjustified and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
2.
Petitioner after doing his MBBS joined the service of the State of Punjab as PCMS Class II Doctor on 7th August, 1980 on regular basis.
The Punjab Government vide notification No. 22/19/5HB3-89/27639 dated 23111990 decided that the selection of students for admission to three years Post Graduate Course for the academic session 1991-92 in the Govt. Medical Colleges Amritsar and Patiala shall be made by holding Post Graduate Entrance Test.
The examination was to be conducted by the Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar.
It was provided in the prospectus that the admission to the Post Graduate Course shall be based on the relative merit of the candidates determined on the result of the entrance examination (80%) and the academic achievements of the candidates (20%).
Reservation to the Post Graduate courses for fresh Graduates and in-service candidates were provided in the ratio of 40% to 60%.
Out of 60% quota, Registrars/Demonstrators were to be adjusted first and the rest of the seats were to be given to PCMS doctors.
For in-service PCMS candidates, the merit was to be determined as under :-  "For in service PCMS candidates (60% quota) the merit will be determined by post-graduate entrance test equal to 80 marks and 20 marks shall be assigned as per length of service as under :- a) For rural service, two marks for one complete year and four urban service 15 marks for one complete year to the maximum of 20 marks.
The last date for calculating the benefit of length of service will be 31391."
3.
Further it was provided that eligibility of the candidates would be determined in accordance with the orders issued vide Punjab Government No. 7(2) 5HB-III-89/22763 dated 10111989 whereby three years of rural service (including ad hoc service continuous with regular service) is essential.
4.
Petitioner fulfilled all the qualifications and requirements of in service PCMS candidates and opted to sit in the entrance test for post-graduate in Medicine as first preference and qualified the same.
Thereafter, he was assigned marks as per the criteria set out in the earlier part of the judgment with respect to his length of service i.e. rural and urban.
Petitioner had rendered 4 years, 8 months and 22 days rural service and 5 years, 11 months and 1 day of urban service.
Petitioner was given benefit of marks in the following order :  Rural Service - 4 years equivalent to 8 marks  Urban Service - 5 years 7-1/2 marks  Petitioner was not given any marks either for 8 months, 22 days rural service or for 11 months and 1 day of urban service.
The cut off date for counting the total service was 31st March, 1991.
The total service rendered by the petitioner upto that date came to be 10 years.
7 months and 23 day whereas he was being given the benefit of service of 9 years only.
In this regard, petitioner immediately made a representation to the Chairman of the Selection Committee on 2nd May, 1991 inter alia stating there in that his merit which was at No. 47 was badly affected because of the arbitrary and illegal action of the respondents in not counting the service period of 19 months and 23 days (8 months and 22 days as rural service and 11 months and 1 day as urban service).
In spite of request and representations of the petitioner to the respondents, no action was taken by the respondents.
Aggrieved against the said action/non-action of the respondents, the petitioner filed the present writ petition.
After the filing of the present writ petition, respondent No. 1 issued another notification dated 11th May, 1991.
According to this notification, it was provided that if an in-service candidate puts up 12 months or more than 12 months service both rural and urban together after excluding the completed years of service, which otherwise could not be counted for while awarding marks to the in-service candidates, he will be awarded 15 marks for such service.
Total marks for such service in the case of in-service candidates will remain 20 as herebefore.
After the issuance of this notification, petitioner amended his writ petition and annexured the notification dated 11th May, 1991 as Annexure P/3 with the present amended writ petition.
5.
In the amended writ petition, the case of the petitioner is that to some extent the grievance of the petitioner which was raised in the original writ petition stood redressed, but all the same the clarification to the extent it seeks to deprive the in-service candidate of proportionate awarding of marks for at least 6 months over and above the complete years of service (rural and urban together) is arbitrary, illegal and thus violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
It was pleaded that the period of six months or above service which is not being considered as per notification Annexure P/3 amounts to depriving the said candidates of at least 75 marks, which are very valuable for their being considered in the comparative merit; that the marks are awarded in respect of the service put in by the candidates and if a substantial portion of service period is not considered, which entitles them to be given at least 75 marks, the action takes away a valuable right of a candidate like the petitioner, who had nearly 8 months of service which could be considered for the purposes of the awarding of marks; that as per notification P/3 only 10 years service would be considered for awarding of marks, thus depriving the petitioner of the benefit of the service of 7 months and 23 days.
In the written statement filed, the stand taken by the respondents is that initially only the completed years of service were to be taken into consideration while awarding marks but later on it as decided that if an in-service candidate puts up 12 months or more than 12 months service both rural and urban together after excluding the completed years, which otherwise could not be counted for while awarding marks to an in-service candidate, he will be awarded 15 marks for such service.
For awarding of marks for in-service candidates, unit was kept to be one year of completed service.
6.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties at length and do not find any merit in the petition.
For admission to the Medical Colleges, State Government is competent authority to prescribe the method and procedure by executive instructions.
Complete year is the criteria fixed by the government for awarding of the marks for determining the merits of the candidates, which is applicable universally to all the candidates.
The criteria is based on a rationale of completed year of service which is just and convenient.
If the fraction of service rendered in a year is to be taken into consideration while calculating the marks for determining the respective merits of the candidates, then it may lead to a cumbersome method of calculating the total marks.
Otherwise also a unit/measure had to be fixed for awarding of marks.
In this case the method/unit is fixed to be a year of complete service for the purposes of awarding the marks as in the case of the grant of increment, a completed year of service is taken to be the criteria for the grant of increment.
Similarly in the present case for awarding the marks a complete year of service has been taken to be the unit.
Primarily it is the State Government which is the competent authority to prescribe the method and procedure for selection laid down by the executive as well as by the (sic) selection is open to judicial review on the ground of any legal infirmity or it being unreasonable and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
The Courts have to determine whether the legislature or the executive has acted within the powers and functions assigned to it under the Constitution.
No legal infirmity was pointed out by the counsel for the petitioner in the issuance of the notification Annexure P/3.
His only contention is that the instructions Annexure P/3 are unreasonable and arbitrary.
I do not find any substance in this submission.
The rationable of fixing a complete year of service for the awarding of marks is reasonable, just and convenient which has been made universally applicable to all the candidates.
For the reasons stated above, I do not find any merit in the writ petition and the same is dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.