GC Garg, J - Ram Narain an employee of the petitioner-Company was promoted to the post of Assistant Supervisor.
Respondents 2 to 11 working as clerk in the said company, raised a demand through notice dated June 7, 1985, that the promotion of said Ram Narain was illegal and arbitrary as they were senior to him in clerical cadre and have been wrongly ignored.
This gave rise to a dispute which was referred for adjudication by the State Government to the Industrial Tribunal, Punjab, Chandigarh under Section 10 of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 and is to the following effect :  "Whether the promotion of Shri Ram Narain Junior Clerk as Assistant Supervisors is justified and in order if not, what directions are necessary in this behalf" After considering the entire matter, the Industrial Tribunal by its award dated December 17, 1990, Annexure P-9, found that the promotion of Ram Narain to the post of Assistant Supervisor was wrong.
Consequently, his promotion was set aside and the petitioner-management was directed to consider, within three months from the publication of the award, the promotion case of Ram Narain afresh in conjunction with the promotion cases of the employees senior to him working as junior or senior Clerks.
2.
The petitioner-management has challenged the award of the industrial Tribunal, dated December 17, 1990, in this writ petition, inter alia, on the ground that Ram Narain, who promotion has been set aside by the Tribunal, was not a party to the proceedings before the Tribunal and his promotion has been set aside without affording him any opportunity of hearing or making representation.
The writ petition was admitted on May 1, 1992 and the operation of the award was stayed.
3.
During the course of arguments on the application filed on behalf of the respondents 2 to 11, the employees aggrieved by the promotion of Ram Narain, for vacation of stay order dated May 1, 1992 passed by the Motion Bench, learned counsel for the parties agreed to the setting aside of the award, provided the case is remitted back to the Tribunal for deciding the mater afresh in accordance with law, with liberty to them to raise all points that may be available in law after impleading Ram Narain was one of the respondents in the reference.
4.
In view of the stand taken by the learned counsel for the both the sides, award of the Tribunal dated December 17, 1990, Annexure P-9, is set aside and the matter is remitted back to the Industrial Tribunal to decide the reference afresh in accordance with law after impleading Ram Narain as respondent and affording sufficient opportunity of being heard to the parties.
The parties through their counsel have been directed to appear before the Industrial Tribunal on July 20, 1992.
I have no doubt that the Tribunal shall dispose of the reference as expeditiously as possible.
By this order the writ petition itself stands disposed of.
The Civil Misc.
Application No. 3911 of 1992, however, stands dismissed as having been rendered infructuous.
Petition dismissed.