RS Mongia, J (Oral) - The petitioner before me is a practising Advocate at Bhatinda.
His father was a teacher in a school in the Punjab Education Department.
Unfortunately, the petitioner, while he was a minor, lost his father on 3rd July, 1976.
The petitioner is the only child of his parents.
After graduating in Law, he started his practice at Bhatinda in May, 1987.
2.
To alleviate sufferings of the unfortunate families whose bread earner happened to die while in service, the Punjab Government issued instructions in the year 1973 to give Government employment on priority basis to the dependent of the deceased depending upon his qualifications.
The instructions were clarified/modified and another set of instructions was issued on 24th April, 1986, copy of which has been attached as Annexure P-5 with this petition.
In these instructions, priority for employment has been given to various categories of persons for Government employment.
The first four categories are as under :-  "1.
A member of the family of a person killed as a result of terrorist action in the State; and a member of family, who lost their bread winner in riots in Delhi and other places in India between Oct 31 to Nov, 7, 1984 (both inclusive).
2.
Employees declared surplus on account of abolition of organisation or some other reason considered, fit by Govt. inter alia on account of assessment made by Staff Inspection Units.
3.
A disabled ex-serviceman (not infit for civil service).
4.
A member of the family of the deceased Govt. employee, or of a Government employee, who is retired from service on medical grounds."
The petitioner applied for Government employment under the above-mentioned instructions under category 4 above and according to the averments made in para 4 of the petition, the petitioner had applied for the post of Assistant District Attorney II vide application dated 17th June, 1991, which was received in the office of the Block Education Officer, Amloh, vide Diary No. E-11/91/226 dated 17th June, 1991.
Further, according to the averments made in the writ petition, the said application was followed by a reminder dated 17th July, 1991, copy of which has been attached as Annexure P-2 with this petition.
The application of the petitioner was rejected for appointment as Assistant District Attorney on the ground that he was not entitled to be considered for appointment as Assistant District Attorney in view of the Government instructions dated 18th July, 1991 (Copy Annexure R-1 with the written statement of Respondent No. 2) clarified vide instructions dated 24th September, 1991 (Annexure R-2).
The communication to the above-mentioned effect that the petitioner cannot be appointed as an Assistant District Attorney, from the Director, Prosecution and Litigation to the Director of Education Department (Schools).
Punjab, Chandigarh, dated 15th October, 1991 has been attached as Annexure R-III with the written statement.
It is mentioned in this communication that the petitioner can only be offered the post of a Clerk by the Director, Education Department (Schools) in which department the father of the petitioner was employed as a J.B.T.
teacher.
Aggrieved by the said order or rejection of the prayer of the petition for the appointment as Assistant District Attorney, the petitioner has come up in the present writ petition.
3.
The main plank of the argument of the learned counsel for the respondents for rejecting the claim of the petitioner is Annexure R-1, which are the instructions dated 18th July, 1991 (which were clarified on 24th September, 1991), according to which, after reconsideration of the matter regarding employment on priority basis of the dependents of the deceased Government employees who died in harness, it had been decided that in case of all future appointments under the above category, the dependent is to be appointed to a Class III post at least one step below the post which the deceased employee was holding at the time of his death.
It is further mentioned in these instructions that it would be proper to offer to the dependent of the deceased who was a Class III employee, an appointment to the lowest rank of the Class III post and in this view of the matter generally the first post of Class III would be that of a Clerk which should be offered to such a dependent.
However, it was clarified latter on that in no case the offer of appointment would be higher or equal in the basic pay and rank of the deceased and the dependent can be offered one rank below than the post of the deceased only in deserving cases.
While rejecting the claim of the petitioner, the instructions dated 18th July, 1991 were brought into play and since the petitioner's father was only a J.B.T.
teacher, so according to the respondents, he should not be offered a post higher thank the Clerk in Class III.
Further, it has been submitted by the learned Assistant Advocate General, appearing on behalf of the respondents, that according to the instructions of 1986, copy of which has been attached as Annexure P-5, the offer of appointment has first to be made to a dependent in the same department, in which the father of the dependent has working and died.
Since, according to the learned Assistant Advocate General, the father of the petitioner was working in the Education Department, it is that department which could offer him a post and only if that department fails to offer any appointment to the petitioner, then the case of the petitioner could be considered for appointment in any other department.
4.
The learned counsel for the petitioner, however, submitted that instructions, dated 18th July, 1991 would have no application to the case of the petitioner, inasmuch as the petitioner had made the application for appointment on compassionate grounds under the 1986 instructions prior to the issuance of the instructions on 18th July, 1991.
Moreover, it has been submitted that when the petitioner had applied for the post of Assistant District Attorney the said post was available.
As far as the argument of the learned counsel for the respondents that under the 1986 instructions, the petitioner could only be first offered an appointment in the Education Department, failing which he could be offered appointment in another department, the learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that in fact vide letter dated 25th July, 1991, the Director, Education Department (Schools), Punjab, had addressed a communication to the Director, Prosecution and Litigation-cum-Joint Secretary, Punjab Government, Chandigarh (Copy Annexure P-9) that the case of the petitioner was being forwarded for appointment under the priority scheme.
According to the learned counsel, this would go to show that it was not possible to employ the petitioner in the Education Department.
The learned counsel for the petitioner also brought to my notice the averment made in para 14 of the writ petition, wherein it is mentioned that Shri Iqbaljit Singh Kingra and Miss Poonam Pathak were appointed as Assistant District Attorneys though their fathers were working in the Education Department, when unfortunately they (fathers) had did.
The reply in the corresponding para of the written statement is that these appointments had been made in accordance with 1973 instructions and prior to the issuance of instructions dated 18th July, 1991.
5.
After considering the respective arguments of the learned counsel for the parties, I find that there is considerable force in the contentions of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
The case of the petitioner has to be decided according to the instructions, which were in force on the date when he had submitted the application.
As observed in the earlier paragraphs of the judgment, the petitioner had made the application for appointment on compassionate grounds on 17th June, 1991, which averment has not been denied.
On 17th June, 1991, the 1986 instructions without the super-imposed conditions contained in the instructions, dated 18th July, 1991, were in force.
It is not disputed on behalf of the respondents that if instructions dated 18th July, 1991 are ruled out in the case of the petitioner, his case under 1986 instructions had to be considered for appointment as Assistant District Attorney.
As far as the argument that under the 1986 instructions the petitioner had to be given appointment firstly in the Education Department, failing which he could be offered appointment in the other departments, it may be observed that it is evident from the communication of the Director, Education Department (Schools) Punjab, that the Education Department itself had referred the application of the petitioner to the Prosecution and Litigation Department, from which reasonable inference can be drawn that the petitioner could not be adjusted in the Education Department according to his qualifications.
Moreover, the instances given by the petitioner, which have been referred to above, would also lead to the conclusion that earlier on also, some persons had got appointments as Assistant District Attorneys, though their fathers were not working in that Department, but were not working in that Department, but were rather in the Education department where unfortunately they had died.
Consequently, I am of the considered view that the rejection of the claim of the petitioner in pursuance of instructions, dated 18th July, 1991, was wholly erroneous as the said instructions are not applicable to the case of the petitioner.
6.
For the foregoing reasons, this writ petition is allowed and it is held that the petitioner is entitled to be considered for appointment to the post of Assistant District Attorney under the instructions of the Punjab Government, dated 24th April, 1986 (Annexure P-5).
It is not disputed that the petitioner does not fulfil the qualifications for the post of Assistant District Attorney.
The Motion Bench had kept one post reserved.
In this view of the matter, the respondents are directed to offer appointment to the petitioner as Assistant District Attorney forthwith, unless there is any other impediment in his appointment.
I make no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.