AL Bahri, J - The question involved in this petition is as to whether the State Government in the exercise of powers under Section 69 of the Punjab Co-operative Societies Act, 1961 (hereinafter called 'the Act') entertain a revision petition against voluntary bifurcation of the two Societies and further deciding to transfer one of the employees to a particular Society.
2.
The Binpalka Co-operative Agricultural Service Society Ltd, Binpalka (hereinafter called as 'the Binpalka Society') and respondent No. 3, the Bhogpur Jadid Co-operative Agricultural Service Society Ltd, Bhogpur Jadid (hereinafter called as 'the Bhogpur Society') were amalgamated on October 1, 1978.
The amalgamated Society continued working as such till 1987.
After obtaining prior approval of the Registrar Co-operative Societies, and passing a resolution the amalgamated Society was again bifurcated into two; the petitioner Society and respondent No. 3 Society.
In the resolution passed on October 9, 1987, it was mentioned that the Secretary of the Society Shri Gurnam Singh, under suspension, on his re-instatement, shall be given employment in the Bhogpur society.
The aforesaid Gurnam Singh moved a revision petition under section 69 of the Act.
The State Government allowed the revision petition and directed that Gurnam Singh shall stand allocated to the Binpalka Society vide order dated January 12, 1989 - Annexure P-2.
Review petition was filed which is Annexure P-3.
However, it was rejected on February 14, 1991 copy of the order is Annexure P-4.
These two orders are under challenge in this writ petition, inter alia, on the ground that the State Government had no power to exercise jurisdiction under Section 69 of the Act and the Gurnam Singh had accepted the resolution aforesaid allocating him to the Bhogpur Society.
The stand of Gurnam Singh in the written statement filed is that an appeal was maintainable against the order of the Registrar bifurcating the Society into two Societies and the State Government was competent to pass the order allocating him to the Binpalka society, instead of Bhogpur Society.
The Bhogpur Society has also contested the writ petition.
3.
After hearing counsel for the parties we are of the view that the order dated January 12, 1989 - Annexure P-2 was passed without jurisdiction and is liable to be quashed.
Section 69 of the Act reads as under :-  "69.
Revision :- The State Government and the Registrar may, suo moto or on the application of a party to a reference call for and examine the record of any proceedings in which no appeal under section 68 lies to the Government or the Registrar, as the case may be, for the purpose of satisfying itself or himself as to the legality or propriety of any decision or order passed and if in any case it appears to the Government or the Registrar that any such decision or order should be modified, annulled or revised, the Government or the Registrar, as the case may be, may, after giving persons affected thereby an opportunity of being heard, pass such order thereon as it or he may deem fit."
4.
From perusal of the aforesaid provision it is apparent that any order passed on the application of a party to a reference against which no appeal was maintainable under Section 68 of the Act could be challenged qua its legality or propriety and the State Government could modify, annual or revise the same.
Learned counsel for Gurnam Singh respondent referred to Section 13 of the Act and contended that the order bifurcation of the Societies was passed thereunder which order was revisable under Section 69 of the Act.
There is no merit in his contention.
Section 13 of the Act reads as under :-  "13.
Amalgamation, transfer of assets and liabilities and division of co-operative societies :-  (1) A co-operative society may with the previous approval of the Registrar and by a resolution passed by a two-thirds majority of the members present and voting at a general meeting of the society :-  (a) transfer its assets and liabilities in whole or in part to another co-operative society provided the co-operative society to which the assets and liabilities are to be transferred also passes a resolution in the aforesaid manner to accept such assets and liabilities in whole or in part, as the case may be;  (b) divide itself into two or more co-operative societies.
(2) Any two or more co-operative societies may, with the previous approval of the Registrar and by a resolution passed by a two-thirds majority of the members present and voting at a general meeting of each such society, amalgamate themselves and form a new co-operative society.
(3) The resolution of a co-operative society under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) shall contain all particulars of the transfer, division or amalgamation, as the case may be.
(4) When a co-operative society has passed any such resolution, it shall give notice thereof in writing to all its members and creditors and notwithstanding any bye-laws or contract to the contrary, any member of creditor shall, during the period of one month of the date of service of the notice upon him, have the option of withdrawing his shares, deposits or loans, as the case may be.
(5) Any member or creditor who does not exercise his option within the period specified in sub-section (4) shall be deemed to have assented to the proposals contained in the resolution.
(6) A resolution passed by a co-operative society under this Section shall not take effect until, either -  (a) the assent thereto of all he members and creditors has been obtained; or  (b) all claims of members and creditors who exercise the option referred to in sub-section (4) within the period specified therein have been met in full.
(7) Where a resolution passed by a co-operative society under this Section involves the transfer of any assets and liabilities, the resolution shall, notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, be a sufficient conveyance to vest the assets and liabilities in the transferee without any further assurance.
(8) Where the Registrar is satisfied that it is necessary in the interest of the co-operative society or co-operative societies that :-  (i) any co-operative society be divided to form two or more co-operative societies; or  (ii) one or more co-operative societies be amalgamated to form a new co-operative society; or  (iii) two or more co-operative societies be amalgamated to form a new co-operative society, then, notwithstanding anything hereinbefore contained, the Registrar may, after consulting the financing institution, if any, provide for :-  (a) the division of that co-operative society into two or more co-operative societies; or  (b) the amalgamation of the society or societies :-  (i) With any other co-operative society, or  (ii) to form a new co-operative society,  with such constitution including representation on the committee, property rights, interest, liabilities, duties and obligations, as may be specified in the order.
(9) No order shall be made under sub-section (8) unless :-  (a) a copy of the proposed order has been sent under certificate of posting to the society or societies concerned and the creditors;  (b) the Registrar has considered the objections received from the society or societies concerned or from any member or creditor of such society or societies within such period, being not less than fifteen days from the date of posting of the proposed order, as may be specified by the Registrar in this behalf in the proposed order.
(10) The Register may, after considering the objections referred to in sub-section (9), make such modification in the proposed order as he may deem fit and the order may contain such incidental, consequential and supplemental provisions as the Registrar may deem necessary to give effect to the same.
(11) A member or creditor who had objected to the proposed order under sub-section (9) shall have the option of withdrawing his share, deposits of loans, as the case may be, on an application which shall be made to the society to which has share, deposit or loan stands allocated by virtue of the order under sub-section (8) within a period of thirty days of the date of such order.
(12) Save as provided in sub-section (11), the order passed by the Registrar under sub-section (8) shall be final and where such an order involves the transfer of any assets and liabilities the same shall, notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, be a sufficient conveyance to vest the assets and liabilities in the society in which these are vested under that the order without any further assurance."
5.
From perusal of the aforesaid provision, it is clear that a society could be bifurcated in two manners; firstly under orders of the Registrar and secondly after obtaining prior approval of the Registrar by passing resolution by the society concerned itself.
Present is a case which falls under section 13(1)(b) of the Act as aforesaid.
The bifurcation of the society was made after obtaining prior approval of the Registrar and by passing the resolution.
If that is so, such bifurcation is not under any order of the Registrar which could be revised.
Further reference was made to sub-clause (i) sub-section (8) of section 13 of the Act that the order of the Registrar could fall thereunder.
We are afraid, this contention again cannot be accepted.
This section contemplates an order to be passed by the Registrar on his satisfaction that any co-operative society be divided into two or more such co-operative societies.
As already stated above, no order under sub-section (8) of Section 13 of the Act was passed.
What has been shown during argument is an order of the Registrar dated November 2, 1987 which has been passed after noticing the fact that the society was bifurcated by passing resolution by the society itself after obtaining prior approval of the Registrar and hence the registration of the society was cancelled and on splitting the two new societies were ordered to be registered under the provisions of the Act, which is entirely different from bifurcating the registered societies as contemplated under Section 13 of the Act by the Registrar.
The State Government had no jurisdiction to pass order dated January 12, 1989-Annexure P.2 and same is void.
Accordingly order dated February 14, 1991 - Annexure P4 cannot be sustained in law.
6.
Gurnam Singh who was, no doubt, earlier to amalgamation, an employee of the Binpalka Society, however, on amalgamation his status as such ceased and for all intents and purposes he became an employee of the amalgamated society.
Thereafter this amalgamated society was bifurcated.
It was upto the society concerned to decide to which newly formulated society his service were to be allocated.
In the resolution passed on October 9, 1987 which has been reproduced in para 2 of the written statement, his services were allocated in the Bhogpur Society.
Gurmail Singh had no locus standi, as an employee, to challenge this resolution, muchless by filing revision under section 69 of the Act.
Furthermore, Gurnam Singh consented to the passing of the aforesaid resolution and accepted it.
He could not challenge it subsequently.
7.
For the reasons recorded above, this writ petition is allowed, the impugned orders Annexures P-2 and P-4 are quashed.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.