AL Bahri and VK Jhanji, JJ.
- Babu Ram, a Class IV employee working in the Social Welfare Department of the State of Haryana was promoted to Class III service on February 21, 1991, vide order Annexure P4.
He was placed on probation for one year and appointed on ad hoc basis.
He was to pass test in type-writing in English/Hindi and till he was to do so he was not to get increments.
Vide order dated May 16, 1991, communicated on June 18, 1991 (Annexure P5) he was reverted to class IV service on the ground that Matric certificate submitted by him was not recognised by the Haryana Government.
This order is under challenging in this writ petition.
It may further be pointed out that order of appointment Annexure P4 was submitted on June 10, 1991 vide Annexure P9, inserting a new condition that if at any stage the certificate produced is not found equivalent to Matriculation standard, the petitioner will be provisionally responsible for the same.
2.
Petitioner's case is that no notice or opportunity of hearing was given to him before the impugned order of reversion was passed.
At the time of promoting the petitioner, the certificate produced by him was accepted.
There was no condition at that time that the certificate should be as recognised by the State of Haryana.
Reference was also made to another order where the rules were relaxed and persons like the petitioner were continued in service of Haryana.
3.
The respondents have contested the writ petition and in the reply filed it is asserted that the certificate produced by the petitioner from an institution which was not recognised by the State of Haryana.
Reference has been made to Annexure R1, a letter from the Director, Secondary Education, Haryana to the Director, Social Welfare Department that the Matriculation examination from the institution of Adult Education, New Delhi was not equivalent to the Matriculation examination of Haryana.
4.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties we are of the view that the stand taken by the respondents cannot be accepted.
No rules or instructions of the State Government have been pointed out that at the time of promoting the petitioner, only certificates of academic qualifications from the institutions which were recognised by the State of Haryana were to be accepted.
The petitioner's Matric certificate produced was accepted by the respondents while promoting him.
It is not a case where such a certificate was alleged to be a fake one or that the institution from which the certificate was produced was not existing.
It was on that account that the respondents chose to substitute the order of appointment annexure P4 after a period of four months by passing order annexure P9, inserting therein that the academic certificate should be equivalent to the matriculation standard and that the petitioner was to be provisionally responsible for the same.
First of all, such a condition could not be introduced which is not supported by any rules or regulations on the subject subsequent to the promotion of the petitioner.
Secondly, from the condition inserted, it is not specifically mentioned as to what certificate would be equivalent to the matriculation standard and who was to prescribe such a standard.
The stand taken in Annexure R1 on the basis of which the impugned order was passed is also not clear as to whether the Matriculation certificate issued by the Board of Adult Education and Training, New Delhi was not to be considered as equivalent to the Matric certificate issued by the Board of Education, Haryana.
It is not considered necessary to refer to other points as the petition is to be allowed on the question discussed above.
5.
For the reasons recorded above, this petition is allowed.
Order annexure P5 reverting the petitioner from Class III to Class IV post is quashed.
The petitioner will get costs which are quantified at Rs. 1,000/-.
Petition allowed.