Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner herein competed for the post of Agriculture Sub-Inspector.
He was selected.
Vide order dated October 30, 1973, the petitioner was appointed as a Stipendary Agriculture Sub-Inspector in the Department of Agriculture.
On the work regarding land reclamation having been transferred to Haryana Land Reclamation and Development Corporation (hereinafter referred to as 'the Corporation'), the petitioner was transferred as Agriculture Sub-Inspector to the Corporation.
This post carried the pay scale of Rs. 110-200.
While working as such he was promoted as Store Keeper vide orders dated April 10, 1978.
The post of Store Keeper was in the pay scale of Rs. 140-300.
During the course of his service, it appears that the petitioner along with certain other persons represented to the Department of Agriculture that he having been selected by the Board for appointment in the office of Director, Agriculture, Haryana should be absorbed in the Department of Agriculture and not posted in the Corporation.
The matter, it appears, was considered and vide order dated November 26, 1981, the Director of Agriculture decided that "in view of the fact that the concerned Agriculture Inspectors were recruited specifically for appointment in the Department of Agriculture Haryana and not for Haryana Land Reclamation & Development Corporation, since a number of vacancies exist in the Department and they are experienced hands, their claims are hereby admitted subject to the condition that these orders will take effect retrospectively and no arrears of pay or deputation allowance be paid to them.
Their seniority will also be fixed according to the recommendation of the Subordinate Service Selection Board in due course.
"A copy of this order has been placed as Annexure R. 2 with the written statement.
In pursuance to this order, the Director of Agriculture, issued an order dated August 19, 1983 for the recall of the petitioner from the Corporation and for his adjustment under the Deputy Director of Agriculture, Hissar, against a vacant post.
A copy of this order has been placed on record as Annexure R. 4 with the written statement.
2.
On his repatriation to the Department of Agriculture, the petitioner continued to draw his salary which he was drawing in the Corporation as a Store Keeper.
This post originally carried the pay scale of Rs. 140-300, which was later on revised to Rs. 400-600, w.e.f.
April 1, 1979.
Accordingly the petitioner continued to draw his salary in the pay scale of Rs. 400-600.
He was even allowed to cross efficiency bar in this scale.
It appears that in the year 1986, it was noticed that the petitioner had been appointed as a Sub-Inspector in the pay scale of Rs. 110-200.
He having been appointed in the Department of Agriculture his pay in the scale of Rs. 400-600 had to be refixed on the hypothesis that he had continued to work as Sub-Inspector and not on the basis of his Store Keeper in the scale of Rs. 140-300/-.
Accordingly, an order dated October 21, 1986, fixing the petitioner's pay was issued.
Since this order had been passed without the grant of any opportunity to the petitioner, he challenged the same by way of filing C.W.P.
No. 1441 of 1986.
The writ petition was disposed of with an order that the petitioner's claim be decided after giving him an opportunity of hearing.
The order dated October 21, 1986 was quashed.
The culminated in the order dated October 3, 1988, which is impugned in the present writ petition.
3.
A perusal of this order shows that on the petitioner's reversion in the year 1983, his pay was fixed at Rs. 480/- per month in the scale of Rs. 400-600 w.e.f.
April 1, 1979 and at Rs. 490/- p.m. w.e.f.
April 2, 1979 with next date of increment as April 1, 1980.
This was done on the basis of the pay the petitioner was drawing as Store Keeper in the Corporation.
It was in this situation, that he was allowed to cross the efficiency bar.
The matter came to the notice of the department when the Audit Party raised an objection.
After consideration of the matter, it has been found that the petitioner's pay had to be fixed as Inspector and no as Store Keeper.
Accordingly, he was found entitled to a pay of Rs. 430/- w.e.f.
April 1, 1979.
His pay has been fixed accordingly.
He has been granted an annual increment w.e.f.
April 2, 1979, thus raising his pay to Rs. 440/- with April 1, 1980 as the next date of increment.
The excess amount paid to the petitioner on account of wrong fixation of his pay has been ordered to be recovered @1/3rd of his pay per month.
4.
Mr. KL Arora, learned counsel for the petitioner has not been able to point out any factual or legal error in the impugned order.
He has also not been able to refer to any rule to show that on the petitioner's reversion from the Corporation to the Department of Agriculture with retrospective effect, he was entitled to the fixation of pay on the basis of his promotion as Store Keeper.
In fact, the Department while accepting the petitioner's representation had decided to appoint him as Sub-Inspector, which post was later on redesignated as Inspector retrospectively.
That having happened, the petitioner is deemed to have been posted as a Sub-Inspector in the Department of Agriculture with effect from his initiated date of appointment viz. November 7, 1974 when he was posted in the Corporation.
If that is done, the petitioner is to be deemed to have continued as a Sub-Inspector/Inspector, unless it is shown that anyone junior to him in the Directorate of Agriculture had been promoted prior to him.
Nothing of the sort happened.
In this situation, the petitioner's pay had to be fixed on the hypothesis that he had continued to work as Sub-Inspector.
His promotion to the post of Store Keeper in the Corporation was wholly irrelevant for the fixation of his pay in the Department of Agriculture.
It is well settled that if a certain state of affairs is assumed to exist by legal fiction, then all consequences that ensure have also to be assumed to exist.
Accordingly, the petitioner's pay.
I am of the considered view, was rightly fixed.
5.
Mr. Arora suggested that he was no given a proper hearing.
The contention, in my view, has not merit.
Firstly, no mistake has been pointed out in the impugned order.
It has been not been shown that the petitioner was entiteld to anything beyond what has actually been given.
Secondly, even on facts, I am not satisfied that the petitioner was not afforded a due and a reasonable opportunity.
Admittedly, he had submitted his representation.
It has not been shown that the contention raised in the representation has not been considered in the impugned order.
In the circumstances of the case, I am of the view that no prejudice whatsoever can be said to have been caused to the petitioner.
6.
No other point has been pressed.
Accordingly, I find no merit in this petition.
It is dismissed.
Keeping in view the fact that the petitioner has to refund an amount of Rs. 4,000/- (approximately) I make no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.