RS Mongia, J - This judgment will dispose of Civil Writ Petition Nos. 32 and 31 of 1987, as common questions of law and facts arise in both the petitions.
2.
The relevant facts for the purpose of disposal of these writ petitions may be noticed from Civil Writ Petition No. 32 of 1987.
3.
In 1973, Sangrur Circle, P.W.D.
(B&R) Branch, came into existence.
Petitioner No. 1, Madan Lal, who was working as Accounts Clerk since 4th October, 1972 was transferred to Sangrur Circle by the then Chief Engineer, P.W.D.
(B&R) Patiala, on 19th May, 1973.
He joined the said circle on 23rd August, 1973 petitioner No. 2, Om Parkash, joined as a Clerk in P.W.D.
(B&R) Branch in 1956 and was promoted as Accounts Clerk in the Sangrur Circle on 20th June, 1975.
4.
Respondent No. 4, Shri Subhash Chander, was directly recruited as an Accounts Clerk by the Superintending Engineer, Patiala Circle, where he joined on 7th September, 1973.
According to the averments made in the petition.
Respondent No. 4 was temporarily allocated to Sangrur Circle on 26th August, 1975 and was retransferred from Sangrur Circle to Mechanical Circle, Patiala, on 19th July, 1978.
From Mechanical Circle, Patiala, he went on deputation to Punjab Film Corporation and afterwards he joined back his parent Circle, i.e.
Mechanical Circle, Patiala.
From Mechanical Circle, Patiala, he was transferred to Faridkot in Bhatinda Circle.
From Bhatinda Circle, he was transferred at his own request to Sangrur Circle vide order dated 28th January, 1980 (Annexure P-3) and he reported in Sangrur Circle as Accounts Clerk on 14th March, 1980.
In the transfer order, Annexure P-3, it has been mentioned that the petitioner was being transferred at his own request and no T.A./D.A.
will be allowed.
An Office Order dated 14th March, 1980 (Annexure P-4) was issued by the Superintending Engineer, Construction Circle, B&R Branch, Sangrur, which reads as under :-  "Shri Subash Chander Malik, Assistant on arrival is posted in Circle Office against Shri Hardev Singh, who stands reverted immediately and posted in construction Sub Division No. 2, Sangrur.
Shri Subash Chander, Assistant who is not borne on the cadre of Sangrur Circle will be placed as Junior-most, Accounts Clerk."
A representation was made by the petitioner for fixing his seniority in the Sangrur Circle.
The Superintending Engineer, P.W.D.
(B&R), Sangrur, vide order dated 27th April, 1984 (Annexure P.8) informed the petitioner that since it was clearly mentioned in the order that he (petitioner) was not of Sangrur Circle, as such he was to be treated as junior most Accounts Clerk.
Therefore, the seniority of the petitioner was to be considered with effect from 14th March, 1980.
5.
On 27th October, 1986, vide Annexure P-13, Chief Engineer, P.W.D., B&D Branch, Punjab, Patiala, wrote to the Superintending Engineer, Punjab, PWD, B&R, Sangrur Circle to the following effect :-  "The case of Shri Subash Chander Malik has been examined in this office thoroughly and found that he was transferred from one circle to another circle in the public interest and not on his request.
The transfer of this official from Bhatinda Circle to Sangrur Circle, however was made at his request for getting his rights.
Therefore, it has been decided that this seniority may be fixed from the date of his appointment i.e. 791973.
It is, therefore, requested that the seniority of the official may be restored accordingly under intimation to this office immediately."
The representation made by the petitioners against the assignment of seniority to Respondent No. 4 as Accounts Clerk in Sangrur Circle with effect from 7th September, 1973, was rejected vide order dated 15th December, 1986 (Copy Annexure P-16).
Aggrieved by the said action of the respondents, petitioners have come up in the present writ petition.
6.
It is not disputed, but it is rather admitted that seniority of the Accounts Clerks is maintained Circle-wise.
This is in fact in accordance with the Punjab Public Works Subordinate Services Buildings & Roads Rules, 1934, as replaced by Punjab Department of Public Works (Building and Roads Branch) Circle Offices (Class III Ministerial) Service Rules, 1988.
The case as put fort by the learned counsel for the petitioners is that once the seniority is Circle-wise then any person who is transferred from one circle to another at his own request, would be placed below the juniormost person who is already working in the same rank in that Circle.
Since, according to the counsel for the petitioners, the transfer of Respondent No. 4 to Sangrur Circle from Bhatinda Circle, was at his own request as is clearly mentioned in the transfer order, dated 28th January, 1980 (Annexure P-3).
Petitioner would not be entitled to count his previous service in the other circle for the purpose of seniority and was to be placed below the juniormost.
Accounts Clerk in the Sangrur Circle.
He further referred to Annexure P-3 to submit that even on T.A./D.A.
was paid to Respondent No. 4 on his transfer to Sangrur Circle as the said transfer was at his own request.
The learned counsel conceded that if the transfer was made by the competent Authority in public interest, then Respondent No. 4 was entitled to count his entire service as Accounts Clerk in the Circle from where he was transferred.
7.
On the other hand, the stand of the respondents, especially of Respondent No. 4, is that his transfer was made in public interest and not at his own volition.
Further, it was submitted that Respondent No. 4 was higher in merit than the petitioners while being promoted/appointed as Accounts Clerk and that merit would determine the seniority.
Therefore, Respondent No. 4 had to be kept above the petitioners in the seniority list.
8.
After hearing the counsel for the parties, I find considerable force in the arguments of the learned counsel for the petitioners.
The original file has been shown to me, wherein Respondent No. 4 had asked for his transfer from Bhatinda Circle to Sangrur Circle.
A photo copy of the letter has been placed on the record.
Since the seniority of the Accounts Clerks is maintained at the Circle level and the next promotion is also confined to the eligible persons from a particular Circle, it follows that if a person is transferred at his own volition to another Circle, he would be placed below to the juniormost in the seniority list of the rank in the Circle.
It would be different if the transfer is made in public interest without the consent or willingness of the person concerned.
It is evident from the letter of transfer, Annexure P-3, as also the letter of the Superintending Engineer, dated 14th March, 1980 (Annexure P-4) that since Respondent No. 4 was not borne on the cadre of Sangrur Circle, he on transfer would be placed as juniormost Accounts Clerk.
This position could not be changed inasmuch as the transfer of Respondent No. 4 was at his own volition.
As far as the argument of the counsel for the respondents that respondent No. 4 was higher in merit when the petitioners were appointed as Accounts Clerks, it may be observed that merit list would lose its significance after the candidates selected are appointed in different Circles.
In different Circles if he date of appointment is the same, then they would retain their inter-se seniority in accordance with the merit determined by the Selection Body.
9.
For the foregoing reasons, these writ petitions are allowed and it is held that the petitioners would rank senior to Respondent No. 4 and for the purpose of only seniority, Respondent No. 4 would be deemed to have started working in Sangrur Circle as Accounts Clerk with effect from 14th March, 1980, when he had joined on his transfer at his own request vide order dated 28th January, 1980.
As a result of the acceptance their writ petitions, the order dated 27th October, 1986 (Annexure P-13), by which respondent No. 4 was made senior, is quashed, so also the order dated 15th December, 1986 (Annexure P-16) rejecting the representation, However, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.