AL Bahri, J - Punjab School Education Board on receipt of information from the Flying Squad has cancelled the examination in the subject of Physic of 10+2 class in the centre at Guru Nanak Government College, Guru Tegh Bahadurgarh (Faridkot).
The examination is to be held again.
This action is challenged by the present petitioners, who are students, and are now supposed to again take the examination.
Shri Gurdial Singh Gill, father of petitioner Nos. 1 and 2, has argued the case.
We are not satisfied with the arguments advanced to interfere in this writ petition.
It was entirely for the Board inquiry being held to cancel the examination.
No discriminatory treatment is being meted out to the present petitioners.
All the students who had taken examination in Physics, are now to reappear.
The contention raised on behalf of the petitioners is that as provided under Regulation 28 of the Board, an inquiry was contemplated before taking the decision for holding re-examination.
In our view, the inquiry contemplated under Regulation 28 is not such inquiry which is conducted in the disciplinary proceedings, i.e., of serving charge-sheet and getting explanation followed by recording evidence.
The inquiry contemplated under Regulation 28 is only with respect to getting prima facie material that in the examination there was use of unfair means.
It is entirely different when individual students were to be proceeded against for using unfair means in answering question papers, and debarring them from re-appearing in examination on proof of the fact for use of unfair means that opportunity of hearing is to be given which is a principle of natural justice and fair play.
Regulation 28 of the Board reads as under :-  "28.
Re-examination/abolition of an examination centre.
It the Board is satisfied after enquiry that the sanctity of an examination has been violated at an examination centre as a consequence of unfair assistance rendered to the candidates, on a mass scale, the Board may order re-examination besides taking any other action under these regulations and may also abolish the examination centre for future or for a specified period."
When it is the case of mass copying and use of unfair means rendered in the case of candidates in general the only inquiry contemplated under Regulation 28 (supra) is to collect some material in that respect.
In the present case such material constitutes report of the Flying Squad of the Board.
No notice of any such inquiry is contemplated to be served upon one or all the students to be affected by ordering re-examination.
Petition dismissed.