Harjit Singh Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner, who was initially working as a Teacher in the Education Department, Punjab, was appointed as a Librarian with the Punjab Advisory Board of Education Library, Chandigarh, on 16th October, 1967 in the grade of Rs. 80-175, vide Annexure P-1.
As per letter dated 7th March, 1968, the pay scales of Librarians were revised and separate grades were provided with respect to those Librarians who had a post graduate degree in the first or second division with a Diploma in Library Science, and those librarians who were only graduates with a Diploma in Library Science with the requisite experience.
The petitioner, who at the relevant time was a graduate, was granted the pay scale of Rs. 220-300 w.e.f.
3rd November, 1967.
The Government of Punjab thereafter issued instructions dated 10th September, 1970 Annexure P-4 whereby all post graduate librarians having the requisite diploma in library science were given the scales of Rs. 300-600 irrespective of the division obtained by them.
The petitioner who got his post graduate degree in the year 1970 was granted the pay scales of Rs. 300-600 from the date of passing of the post graduate examination.
The Central Government thereafter under a Scheme sponsored by the University Grants Commission, recommended that the pay scales of librarians be revised upwards and promised to pay 80 per cent of the total expenditure of the revised scale of the College Librarians, whereas it declined to do so in respect of those librarians who were working in the public libraries.
The case of the petitioner is that he has been given the grade of Rs. 300-600 w.e.f.
30th May, 1970, when he obtained his post graduate qualifications, whereas he ought to have been given the scales from 3rd November, 1967, i.e. when he was appointed as a Librarian.
In support of his claim attention has been drawn to Annexure P-9 dated 3rd March, 1976, whereby a decision had been taken by the Government to pay the higher pay scales to the College and public librarians without insisting on the prescribed academic qualifications w.e.f.
1111966 or from the date of their respective appointments.
It has been argued by the counsel for the respondents that the petitioners was not entitled to the pay scales given to the College and public librarians, in view of the fact that he was holding an ex cadre post and even the grant of pay scales of Rs. 300-600 was given to him as a concession.
2.
After hearing counsel for the parties, I find that this petition deserves to succeed.
It is clear from the documents on record, particularly from Annexure P-9, that the higher pay scales of Rs. 300-600 were to be made applicable to librarians in College and Public Libraries irrespective of their educational qualification w.e.f.
1111966.
Merely because the petitioner happened to posted in the Punjab Advisory Board of Education Library, Chandigarh, would not have the effect of denying him the scale of pay which was available to the other librarians working in the department.
I am further of the view that the nature of duties and the qualification of the librarians working in the Punjab Advisory Board of Education Library, Chandigarh, as also in the regular cadre being identical, no discrimination could be made to the detriment of the petitioner on that score.
3.
In view of what has been held above, the writ petition is allowed and a direction is issued to the respondent to refix the pay of the petitioner and his retiral benefits (as he has since retired) in the terms indicated, within a period of 3 months from this date and to pay him all arrears with interest calculated at the rate of 18 per cent per annum from the date they fell due till the date of payment within three months thereafter.
No costs.
Petition allowed.