SS Sodhi, J - The matter here concerns payment of pension of former employees of the Zila Parishad, who were later absorbed in government service.
2.
On June 6, 1952, the appellant Prithvi Raj Gambir was appointed as Vaid by the Zila Parishad, Gurgaon.
Later, with effect from November 1, 1966, he was absorbed in service by the Haryana Government and he worked as such till his retirement from service on August 12, 1974.
3.
Accordingly to the instructions issued by the State of Haryana on April 30,1981 (Annexure P/1) the appellant was entitled to pension with effect from the date on which he was absorbed in service by the Haryana Government, that is, November 1, 1966.
The claim of the appellant, however, is that in calculating his pension, the service rendered by him with the Zila Parishad should also be taken into account.
The learned Single Judge, on an interpretation of the instructions of April 30, 1981, declined this prayer.
It is against this judgment that the appellant has now come up in appeal.
4.
The relief claimed by the appellant now stands granted by the latest instructions of the Haryana Government of November 22, 1991, which have been issued in supersession of its earlier instructions of April 30, 1981, (Annexure P/1) and in terms thereof, persons like the appellant have also been held entitled to the benefit of their previous service with the Zila Parishad in the matter of computing their pensionary benefits.
5.
It is accordingly held that in calculating the pension payable to the appellant, the entire service of the appellant with effect from the date when he was appointed by the Zila Parishad, that is, June 6, 1952, shall be taken into account.
The judgment of that learned Single Judge is consequently modified accordingly and this appeal is thus hereby accepted.
6.
The respondents are directed to compute the pensionary benefits payable to the appellant in accordance with the 1991 instructions, within six months from today.
7.
In the circumstances, there will be no order as to costs.
Appeal accepted.