Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was appointed as a Research Officer/District Statistical Officer in the Planning Department of Haryana Govt. on September 1, 1970.
He was promoted to the post of Deputy Economic and Statistical Adviser on May 31, 1983.
In December, 1990 he was served with a notice dated December 14, 1990 by which he was given three months' notice under Rule 532A(c) read with rule 3.26(d) of the Punjab Civil Service Rules, Vol.
I, Part I Aggrieved by the order, the petitioner filed a representation to the Govt. which was rejected vide order dated February 28, 1991.
Copy of the notice for retirement dated December 14, 1990 and the order dated 28, 1991 by which the representation was rejected have been produced as Annexures P-20 and P-23.
The petitioner challenges the validity of these two orders through this writ petition.
2.
On behalf of the respondents, the impugned action is sought to be justified on the basis of the petitioner's performance from the year 1984-89 onwards.
A summary of his confidential reports as given in the written statement may be noticed.
It reads thus :-  Sr.No., Year Category Text of adverse remarks in Annual Confidential Report 1.
1984-85 Average He is rather unpredictable.
As long as he handled only routine work he continued to cooperate but when he was asked to write a chapter on decentralised planning for inclusion in the Seventh Plan he virtually revolted.
Finally he produced a note which was not worth the paper it was written on.
He indulges in the undesirable activity of making imaginary complaints against his officers.
He can be considered as an "Average" officer.
2.
1985-86 Below Average He is uncooperative, incompetent and an indisciplined officer.
He files baseless complaints against this officers in order to mislead the higher authorities and to cover up his shortcomings.
3.
1986-87 Below Average He appears to be mentally unstable and is uncooperative.
4.
1987-88 Below Average The Officer is mentally unstable and is totally uncooperative.
Due to his mental instability, he had been even urinating in his cabin.
Besides, he is a liability and should be compulsorily retried.
5.
1988-89 Below Average It is a mental case.
Accordingly his behaviour with colleagues/seniors and working capacity are almost nil.
6.
1989-90 Below Average The officer is totally uncooperative and mentally unstable.
During the year he did nothing.
3.
It has also been averred that the petitioner is an unwilling worker and has been absenting himself from duty without permission.
In spite of being asked to join his duty after producing a fitness certificate the petitioner continued to remain absent since May 6, 1988.
With regard to the petitioner's averment that his representations against the adverse reports were pending the position has been explained in detail in paragraph 10 of the written statement.
It has been pointed out that the petitioner did not make any representation against the adverse reports for the years 1984-85, 1985-86 and 1986-87.
In response to a representation he was asked to supply copies of representation vide letter dated February 21, 1989.
Thereafter, the representation was considered and rejected.
Similarly, the remarks for the year 1988-89 and 1989-90 were also conveyed to the petitioner.
The representation was duly considered and rejected by the competent authority.
4.
I have heard Mr. Gopal Mahajan for the petitioner Mr. Jaswant Singh for the respondents.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has pointed out two infirmities in the impugned order.
Firstly, he contends that the adverse reports against which representations were pending on the date of the passing of the impugned order could not have been taken into consideration, while issuing the letter dated December 14, 1990 (Annexure P-20).
Secondly, it has been contended that on the showing of the respondents themselves the petitioner was absent from May 1988 onwards.
In such a situation, there was no occasion for the respondents to record an adverse report alleging that the petitioner's behaviour with his colleagues/seniors was uncooperative.
The claim has been controverted on behalf of the respondents.
5.
Admittedly, the reports as noticed above, had been duly conveyed to the petitioner.
The petitioner does not appear to have made any concrete representation against this.
By way of illustration it may be noticed that remarks for the year 1984-85 were conveyed to the petitioner vide letter dated March 3, 1987.
A copy of this letter is at Annexure P-4.
Even though, the subject of the representation indicates that it is against the adverse report for the year 1984-85, a perusal of the contents discloses that not a single averment has been made against the remarks recorded.
Similarly, the report for the year 1985-86 was conveyed to the petitioner vide letter dated October 21, 1986.
A copy of the letter is at Annexure P-5.
The representation against these remarks is at annexure P-6.
Except stating that "the defects which you have pointed out in the above letter and intimated to me on 21.10.1986 are not acceptable to me because I do not have these defects in me."
No challenge has in fact been made to the adverse remarks.
Furthermore, the claim of the petitioner that he had in fact represented and that his representations were actually pending prior to the passing of the impugned order, has been seriously disputed on behalf of the respondents.
Keeping in view the totality of circumstances, I do not find that the order passed by the authorities suffers from any error which may need to be rectified by the issue of a writ of certiorari.
The petitioner's record of service for the relevant period amply justifies the impugned action.
He has been assessed as below average continuously for a number of years.
Such persons cannot man responsible positions in Class-I services.
6.
As for the contention that no report could have been recorded for the years 1988-89 and 1989-90.
It deserves notice that the department had given a charge-sheet to the petitioner on February 1, 1990.
It was pointed out in this charge-sheet that "Shri RS Gupta--goes away from the office at his own will without permission of the competent authority."
Details were furnished in this charge-sheet.
The explanation given by the petitioner was considered and vide order dated September 25, 1989, taking a lenient view, the Govt. had censured the petitioner.
A copy of this order has been shown to me by the learned counsel for the respondents from the original file.
Further, even the two reports to which a challenge has been made by the learned counsel for the petitioner show that his working capacity was assessed as almost nil.
In the report for the year 1989-90, it was categorically stated that "during the year he did nothing".
Consequently, the contention raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner is without any merit and is rejected.
7.
Mr. Mahajan has further contended that the claim of the respondents that the petitioner was actually absent from duty is wholly untenable in law.
According to the learned counsel, the petitioner had actually went for duty, and he was not assigned any work.
Furthermore, he points out that the petitioner was illegally called upon to produce a fitness certificate.
According to the learned counsel, the procedure adopted by the authorities was wholly illegal and as such the petitioner is entitled to be treated as on duty and paid the arrears of salary.
The petitioner claims that he was not on medical leave and as such the authorities were not entitled to ask for the production of a medical certificate.
The claim as made out by the petitioner is disputed on behalf of the respondents.
In the exercise of writ jurisdiction I cannot go into these disputed questions of fact.
If the petitioner has any legally tenable claim for the arrears of salary, he may resort to such appropriate remedy as may be available under the law.
Even though no claim for the above has been made in the petition, yet at the hearing Mr. Mahajan has submitted that the petitioner's case for pension and gratuity has not been decided by the department.
Mr. Jaswant Singh points out that the petitioner has not yet submitted any application for the grant of pension and gratuity.
Mr. Mahajan states that the petitioner would do the needful within a month from today.
In case the petitioner submits his papers for the payment of pension and gratuity etc. the department would finalise the case within three months thereafter.
Subject to the above, I find no merit in this petition.
It is dismissed.
In the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.