MR Agnihotri, J - The solitary grievance of the petitioners is against the rejection of their claim for the grant of bonus in pursuance of the State Government's policy instructions dated 30th March, 1990, as the daily wager Mazdoors have been granted the benefit of bonus, whereas the same has been denied to the petitioners.
The relevant extract of the Haryana Government's circular dated 30th March, 1990, regarding grant of ad hoc bonus to the Haryana Government employees for the year 1988-89, is reproduced hereunder :-  "Subject : Grant of ad hoc bonus to the Haryana Government Employees for the year 1988-89.
(iii) The casual labour who have worked for at least 240 days for each year for 3 years or more, will be eligible for this ad hoc payment.
The amount will be paid on a notional monthly wage of Rs. 300/- irrespective of actual monthly wages.
The amount of ad hoc bonus will be Rs. 300x27/31, i.e. 26129 (rounded off to Rs.
261."
In fact, the respondents had already decided to release this benefit to some of the petitioners but later on by reconsidering the matter, it has been withheld.
Admittedly, some of the petitioners have actually worked for at least 240 days in each year for the last three years and, as such, are eligible for payment of ad hoc bonus.
In the written statement, the respondents have pleaded that the Treasury Officer, Haryana Treasury, Chandigarh, has rejected the claim as "bonus is not admissible to daily wages Mazdoors as per Government instructions No. 4/11/89-3FR-II, dated 30th March, 1990."
However, it has been stated in para 3 of the written statement that "the matter is again being taken up with the Treasury Officer keeping in view the Government instructions contained in letter No. 4/11/89-3FR-II, dated 30.3.90."
In view of the averments made in the written statement, this writ petition is disposed of with the direction that the State Government, instead of leaving the matter at the level of the Treasury Officer, shall decide the matter finally by taking a decision at the level of Secretary to Government so that the controversy is settled once for all.
This shall be done within a period of three months.
The petitioner shall also be apprised of the decision arrived at by the State Government expeditiously.
Order accordingly.