NK Sodhi, J - The petitioner is a retired JBT teacher from the Education Department in the State of Haryana having retired from service on December 31, 1979, on attaining the age of 59 years.
He joined this service on July 17, 1954.
Prior to his joining the Education Department, he had joined the Army on August 6, 1941 and was discharged therefrom on February 6, 1953.
The only grievance of the petitioner is that his military service has not been counted towards pension which he is drawing from the State Government.
The stand of the respondents in para 6 of the written statement is as under :-  "According to the petitioner's own averment, the break in the service between Military and Civil Service is more than one year and the petitioner did not approach the Government to condone the same as required under rule 4-6-A(v) of Civil Service Rules Volume II.
Moreover, it is not obligatory for the Government to accede to the request."
The petitioner had been representing to the respondents for not only condoning the break of more than one year between the military service and the civil service but also for counting his military/war service towards pension.
It may be mentioned that as per Government instructions contained in letter No. 3763(5)F/SI-59/9564 dated 23.9.1959 conveyed by the Secretary to Government Punjab, Financial Department, to all the Heads of Departments, the break in military service was to be treated as automatically condoned provided the period of the break did not exceed one year and break exceeding one year but not exceeding three years could also be condoned in exceptional cases under special order of the Government.
When the writ petition was at the motion stage, the counsel representing the respondents sought a number of a adjournments on the ground that the claim of the petitioner was under consideration.
As the matter was not decided within a reasonable time, the writ petition was admitted and the following order was passed by the motion bench on September 8, 1986 :-  "Admitted.
Without expressing our considered opinion on the question raised in this petition, we recommend the Government to reconsider its decision and to refuse the benefit of the Military service to the petitioner only if there are good and cogent reasons for the same."
During the pendency of the writ petition, the Governor of Haryana has by an order dated 19111990 accorded sanction to the condonation of break in service of the petitioner from 7.2.1953 to 17.7.1954 during which he remained out of service for counting towards pension in the civil service as a teacher.
This has been done under rule 46 of the Punjab Civil Service Rules Volume II.
A photocopy of this order certified to be true by the counsel for the petitioner has been placed on the record and marked 'X'.
In view of this order, the break in service having been condoned, the petitioner becomes entitled to the relief claimed in the writ petition.
Accordingly, the writ petition is allowed and the respondents are directed to count the military/war service of the petitioner towards his pension and refix his pension accordingly and also pay him the arrears.
This should be done expeditiously but not later than three months from the date of receipt of this order.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to interest on the arrears found due to him at the rate of 12% pa from the date of retirement till the date of payment.
No costs.
Petition allowed.