Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner herein is working as a Stenographer in the District Rural Development Agency Bhatinda.
He is aggrieved by the decision of this Agency in reducing rate of House Rent Allowance from 25% of the basic pay to the same rate at which it is admissible to the Government employees.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
On September 20, 1976, the Governing Body decided to sanction House Rent Allowance @ 25% of the basic pay to all the Staff of the Agency subject to certain conditions.
This decision was reiterated in the meeting held on June 18, 1980 and was to remain in force" till any decision becomes available from the Government."
A letter was received from the Government in August, 1981.
A copy of this letter is at Annexure P-4.
It was inter alia mentioned that the employees of the Rural Development Agencies are entitled to get the same house rent allowance and other allowances as the State employees.
On this basis, the Chairman of the Agency issued an order directing that the employees of the Rural Development Agency shall get the same House Rent Allowance as is being paid to the employees of the State Government.
As in the order by the Government, a direction for deduction of the excess amount, if any paid, was also issued.
A twofold grievance has been made on behalf of the petitioner.
Firstly, it is claimed that the order is wholly without jurisdiction as the Governing Body alone was competent to take a decision in the matter.
Secondly, it has been contended that before ordering any deduction, the respondents were bound to afford an opportunity to the petitioner.
3.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondent.
It has been inter alia pointed out that the petitioner was paid House Rent Allowance in accordance with the resolution dated September 20, 1976 passed by the Governing Body of the Agency in the old grade of pay.
By the letter dated January 14, 1980 the employees in various departments of the Government were entitled to only a fixed House Rent in view of the new grades of pay.
It is pointed out that the employees of the Agency are governed by the Punjab Government Rules/Regulations in the matter of payment of DA/ADA and similarly, they are also governed by the Government rules in the matter of payment of house rent.
On this premises, the impugned action is sought to be justified.
4.
A perusal of the record of the case shows that the petitioner was entitled to draw House Rent Allowance @25% only till "any decision becomes available from the Government."
The decision of the Government was available to the Agency on August 27, 1981.
Thereafter, the Chairman was entitled to say that the employees shall be entitled to only such House Rent Allowance as was being paid to the employees of the State Government.
The decision in this behalf had already been taken by the Governing Body in its meeting held on June 18,1980.
The Chairman had only implemented this order vide his order dated August 27, 1981, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P-6 with the writ petition.
Since the Chairman has merely implemented the decision of the Governing Body of the Agency.
I find no merit in the contention raised on behalf of the petitioner that it was the decision of the Chairman and not that of the Governing Body.
This contention clearly belied on a combined reading of the documents at Annexures P-3 and P-6.
5.
So far as the question of deduction is concerned the grievance of the petitioner appears to be well founded.
An executive order to the prejudice of an employee can only be prospective in operation.
The decision to reduce the House Rent Allowance had become available to the Agency, on August 27, 1981.
It can only apply prospectively.
It cannot be applied retrospectively.
Accordingly, no recovery can be made from the petitioner in respect of the House Rent Allowance paid to him prior to August 27, 1981.
The order can be operative only with effect from the date of its acceptance by the Agency.
Since the Chairman had accepted the order of August 27, 1981, the petitioner is entitled to the payment of House Rent Allowance at the reduced rate only w.e.f.
that date.
For the period prior thereto, he is not liable to refund any amount which may have been disbursed to him.
In view of this matter, it is not even necessary to decide the question relating to the violation of the principles of natural justice.
6.
Writ petition is allowed to the extent, indicated above, However, it is made clear that the petitioner shall be entitled to the payment of House Rent Allowance as is being paid to the employees of the State Government w.e.f.
August 27, 1981.
The challenge in that behalf is without any merit and is rejected.
The writ petition is accordingly disposed of.
In the circumstances of the case, there will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.