SS Sodhi, J - The matter here concerns payment of pension to former employees of the Zila Parishad who were later absorbed in government service.
2.
On December 12 1947, the appellant Lal Chand was appointed peon in the office of the Zila Parishad, Rohtak and on April 1, 1958, he was confirmed as Dresser.
Later, he was absorbed in Government Service with effect from November 1, 1966 and posted to the Veterinary Hospital at Rohtak, where he worked till his retirement on March 31, 1984.
3.
According to the instructions issued by the State of Haryana on April 30, 1981 (Annexure P/1), the appellant was entitled to pension with effect from the date on which he was absorbed in service by the Haryana Government, that is November 1, 1966.
The claim of the appellant, however, is that in calculating his pension, the service rendered by him with the Zila Parishad should also be taken into account.
The learned Single Judge, on an interpretation of the instructions of April 30, 1981 declined this prayer.
It is against this judgment that the appellant has now come up in appeal.
4.
The relief claimed by the appellant now stands granted by the latest instructions of the Haryana Government of November 22, 1991, which have been issued in supersession of its earlier instructions of April 30,1981 (Annexure P/1) and in terms thereof, persons like the appellant have also been held entitled to the benefit of their previous service with the Zila Parishad, in the matter of computing their pensionary benefits.
5.
It is accordingly held that in calculating the pension payable to the appellant, the entire service of the appellant with effect from the date when he was appointed by the Zila Parishad, that is, December 12, 1947, shall be taken into account.
The judgment of the learned Single Judge is consequently modified accordingly and this appeal is thus hereby accepted.
6.
The respondents are directed to compute the pensionary benefits payable to the appellant in accordance with the 1991 instructions, within six months from today.
7.
In the circumstances, there will be no order as to costs,  Appeal accepted.