Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner, a Clerk, seeks regularisation of his services.
He also claims parity of treatment in the matter of pay.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
On December 5, 1981 the petitioner was appointed as a daily wage Clerk at Rs. 10/- per day.
This appointment was made for the period from December 5, 1981 to December 31, 1981.
It appears that the petitioner was continuing on this post when he submitted an application dated January 27, 1982 to the Head of Department of Radiotherapy at Post Graduate Institute, Chandigarh (hereinafter referred to as the 'Institute') for appointment under the Project Hospital Base, Tumour Registry.
Vide letter dated February 27, 1982 the Principal Investigator made an offer of appointment on behalf of the Director General Indian Council of Medical Research for the post of Record Clerk on ad hoc basis for 2-1/2 months on the pay scale of Rs. 400/- (consolidated) total pay Rs. 400/-.
This appointment was on temporary basis and could be terminated at any time.
The term of appointment was thereafter extended vide letter dated April 16, 1982 for further period of 2-1/2 months i.e. with effect from April 16, 1982 to June 30, 1982.
Periodic extensions have been granted and the petitioner has continued to work on the post.
3.
On this factual premises two-fold claim has been made in this petition.
Firstly, the petitioner claims a writ of mandamus for regularisation of his service.
Secondly, it has been claimed that the action of the respondent in paying him total salary ranging from Rs. 300/- to Rs. 500/- was wholly illegal.
According to the petitioner, the post carried the pay scale of Rs. 260-400/- which was later on revised to Rs. 950-1500/-.
The petitioner claims that he had a right to be granted this scale of pay.
4.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the Institute, it has been averred that the petitioner was an ad hoc employee of the Research Project of the Indian Council of Medical Research (for short 'ICMR') under Dr. BD Gupta, who is designated as the Principal, Investigator by the ICMR The appointment of the petitioner was not made by the Post-Graduate Institute but was made by the Principal Investigator of the Research Project under the scheme of ICMR solely for the Research Project.
He is under the disciplinary control of the Principal Investigator of the Project and not under the Graduate Institute.
It has also been mentioned that the duties performed by the petitioner relate to the collection of data and the work is limited to a period of 3 to 4 hours approximately per day.
5.
In this case, both the parties have filed miscellaneous applications.
Civil Miscellaneous No. 1682 was filed by the petitioner for a direction to the respondent to pay regular pay scale of Rs. 260-400/- from the date of entry into service and the pay scale of Rs. 950-1500/- with effect from 111986.
In reply to this application, Dr. BD Gupta Principal Investigator has filed an affidavit in which it has been mentioned that the working hours of the petitioner were from 9 AM to 3 PM with one hour break.
It has been further explained that his job was merely confined to the collection of files pertaining to cancer patients from the Emergency Department or other areas for use of the Social Workers and Medical Record Officers.
On this premises, it has been claimed that the petitioner was not entitled to the grant of regular scale, of pay.
6.
The petitioner has filed a rejoinder also reiterating the stand taken by him in the writ petition.
7.
I have heard Mr. JC Verma, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. DS Nehra, learned counsel for the respondent.
8.
The first question that arises for consideration is as to whether or not the petitioner is an employee of the Post-Graduate Institute ?
Mr. Verma submits with reference to letter dated December 5, 1981 (Annexure P.1 with the writ petition) that he had been appointed in the Institute.
A perusal of this letter shows that the petitioner had been offered an appointment as daily wage Clerk by Dr. HD Gupta, Assistant Professor and Head Department of Bio-statistics and Central Registration, Post Graduate Institute, Chandigarh.
This appointment, however, was to last till December 31, 1981.
In any case on January 27, 1982 the petitioner himself submitted an application to the Head, Department of Radiotherapy for appointment under Project Hospital based Tumour Registry.
In pursuance to this letter the petitioner was appointed "on behalf of the Director General ICMR ...." as Record Clerk on ad hoc basis.
This appointment letter was issued by the Principal Investigator.
Even the subject related to appointment under auspices of ICMR On an examination of this letter and the subsequent orders of extension, I am of the view that the petitioner was appointed under a Project of the ICMR and not as an employee of the Post Graduate Institute.
On is suing of the letter dated February 27, 1982 which was accepted by the petitioner, the relationship of employer and employee came to exist between the ICMR and the petition.
Even if, it is assumed that there was initially a relationship between the petitioner and the Institute, it had on his joining the post under the Project.
Consequently, the petitioner vanished has no claim which may be tenable against the Institute.
9.
Mr. Verma submits that the petitioner was actually working in the Central Registration Department in the Post-Graduate Institute and, therefore, there was a relationship of employer and employee between the petitioner and the Institute.
It is admitted position that the petitioner has been appointed by the Principal Investigator on behalf of the Director General of the Council.
It does not matter as to where the petitioner was seated in the Post Graduate Institute.
The Project under which the petitioner was appointed had been allocated to the Institute.
The research work had to be done in the Institution.
Room or office in which the petitioner was made to sit will not determine the relationship between him and the employer.
This depends only on the offer of appointment and acceptance thereof.
The offer had been made on behalf of the Director-General of the Council and the petitioner had accepted it.
Consequently, I find no merit in the contentions raised by Mr. Verma.
10.
Can the petitioner be granted any relief with regard to regularisation or 'equal pay for equal work' against the ICMR ?
Admittedly, the Council is not a party in this writ petition.
In the absence of the Council, no order to its prejudice can be passed.
Neither consideration for regularisation of services nor parity of treatment in the matter of pay can be ordered in the absence of the ICMR In view of the above, I find no merit in this petition.
It is dismissed.
In the circumstances of the case, parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.