Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The Viveka Nand Shiksha Samiti, a registered Society, is the petitioner.
It invokes the provisions of the Haryana Private Colleges (Taking over Management) Act, 1978 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Act') and claims that a writ in the nature of Mandumus be issued to the respondents to hand over the Management "to the newly constituted Governing Body of the College."
Reliance for this purpose is placed on the provisions of Section 5 which reads as under :-  "5.
The State Government may, any time before the expiry of the period for which the management of the College is taken over and shall, on the expiry of the period for which the management of college is taken over, hand over the management along with the college property to the duly constituted managing committee of the College."
2.
A perusal of the above provision shows that the State Government is required to hand over the management of the college property to "a duly constituted Managing Committee of the College."
3.
In the written statement, it has been inter alia pointed out that no valid election to the Governing Body of the Society, has yet taken place.
Necessary parties have not been impleaded, mis-statement of facts has been made and that vide order dated September 6, 1991, the Governor had extended the term of the Administrator.
In view of this order, the present Administrator is entitled to continue and unless that order is challenged, the petitioners are not entitled to the relief claimed by them.
4.
Admittedly, the writ petition has been filed by the Society through Mr. Mala Ram, who is stated to be the President of the Governing Body.
Even a copy of the resolution stated to have been passed by the Members of the Governing Body authorising Mr. Mala Ram to file the writ petition has been produced on record.
The fact remains that the Managing Committee of that College has not filed this petition.
Still further the possession has to be handed over "on the expiry of the period for which the Management of a College is taken over."
The term of the Administrator having been extended and that order having not been challenged the Administrator is entitled to continue to manage the affairs of the College.
In spite of the preliminary objection raised in the written statement, the petitioner has taken no steps to impugn this order.
Still further, under the provisions of Section 3(1)(c) of the Act, the Government is competent to "make an order for taking over the management of such college by the Administrator, for a period not exceeding three years...."  Admittedly, the Management was taken over vide order dated July 26, 1990.
Even though the initial period was for one year, yet its extension by the order dated August 30, 1991 does not exceed the time limit prescribed under Section 3(i)(c).
5.
Taking the totality of circumstances into consideration I find no ground to interfere in the present case.
Accordingly, the writ petition is dismissed.
In the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.