RS Mongia, J (Oral) - The petitioner was granted commission in the State Forces of PEPSU as a Second Lieutenant in the year 1930.
The State Forces belonging to the Princely States were merged with the Indian Army when India attained independence, in 1947, it is not disputed that at the time of merger, the officers of the State Forces of the Princely States were absorbed in the Indian Army or the Territorial Army.
However, the incumbents had no choice to be absorbed either in the Indian Army or in the Territorial Army, but they were so absorbed depending upon the orders issued by the appropriate Authorities.
2.
The petitioner was granted commission in the Territorial Army on 24th November, 1949 as a Captain.
His past service in the State Forces of PEPSU was reckoned for determining his seniority.
Accordingly, the petitioner was deemed to have been commissioned as Second Lieutenant on 12th April, 1938 and as a Lieutenant from 12th April, 1991 and further as Captain with effect from 12th April, 1946.
Later on, he was promoted in the Territorial Army as a Major on 12th April, 1953 and then to the rank of Acting Lieutenant Colonel on 21st January, 1958.
He retired from the Territorial Army with effect from 15th May, 1962 in the substantive rank of a Major.
3.
At the time the petitioner retired from the Territorial Army, there was no rule/order/instructions which entitled such a retiree to get pension.
It was for the first time that on 11th June, 1985, Annexure P4 the Government of India, Ministry of Defence, issued an order whereby a retiree from the Territorial Army was made eligible for grant of pension.
A commissioned Officer was to have 20 years as a minimum qualifying aggregate embodied service to be entitled for pension under this order; whereas JCOs and other ranks were eligible for pension after 15 years of service.
Former qualifying regular service in Army, Navy and Air Force in any rank is to be counted for the purpose of reckoning 20 years/15 years of qualifying service as the case may be.
This order has been made applicable to all Territorial personnel who might have retired even prior to the issuance of this order.
4.
The grievance of the petitioner is that whereas the service rendered in the State Forces has been counted for purposes of pension regarding those incumbents who were absorbed in the regular Army and then retired, but the same service has not been reckoned for purposes of pension in the case of those incumbents who happened to be absorbed in the Territorial Army and then had retired from service.
According to the learned counsel for the petitioner, it is a clear case of discrimination, inasmuch as it was by the orders of appropriate Authority that a person could be absorbed either in the Indian Army or in the Territorial Army and an incumbent had no option to be absorbed in one or the other force.
He submitted that once that State Force service is counted for the purposes of pension qua the incumbent who is absorbed in the Indian Army, there is no justification in denying the same benefit to an incumbent who is absorbed in the Territorial Army.
Specific averments to the effect that State Force service has been counted for the purpose of pension in case of those incumbents who were absorbed in the regular Army, have been made in paras 9 and 10 of the writ petition.
There is no specific denial to these pleadings.
Moreover, the petitioner has placed an order on record as Annexure P-11, dated 19th January, 1965, from the Adjutant General's Branch, whereby the service rendered by one Brig.
JS Sandhu in the erstwhile Faridkot State Forces was reckoned for the purpose of pension, Brig.
JS Sandhu had been absorbed in the regular Indian Army.
5.
Mr. GBS Sodhi, learned counsel, appearing on behalf of the respondents, has submitted that the question of discrimination does not arise, inasmuch as there are two separate classes i.e. one is the regular Indian Army and the other is the Territorial Army, which are governed by separate Rules and if for incumbents who are absorbed in the Indian Army, the State Force service is reckoned for the purpose of pension, then it cannot be said that there is any discrimination if the same benefit is not made available to an incumbent who is absorbed in the Territorial Army.
Further, he submitted that there is no Rule/Order/instructions providing that benefit of State Forces service would be given to incumbents who were absorbed in the Territorial Army and had them retired.
6.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that there is considerable force in the argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
If an incumbent had no choice, whether to be absorbed in the Indian Army or the Territorial Army and he had to obey the orders of the appropriate Authority regarding the absorption from the State Force service, then there is no justification not to count the State force service for purposes of pension, especially when such service has been counted for purpose of seniority.
No doubt, Indian Army and Territorial Army are two different Forces, but here the question is of counting a particular service in these two Forces for purposes of pension.
There is no reasonable nexus with any object which is sought to be achieved about this classification that for one Force the State Force service will be counted and not for the other.
Even no basis have been laid to make this distinction and what object is to be is achieved also not forthcoming.
In this view of the matter, I hold that the action of the respondent in not counting the State Force service of the petitioner for purposes of pension, is arbitrary and discriminatory and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
7.
For the foregoing reasons, this writ petition is allowed and the order dated 2nd July, 1991 (Annexure P-10), is hereby quashed, by which the respondents had rejected the claim of the petitioner made in the present writ petition.
The respondents are directed to calculate the pension of the petitioner by reckoning his State Force Service and release the arrears of pension within six months from the receipt of this order.
It is, however, made clear that by virtue of order, Annexure P-4 dated 11th June, 1985, whereby a retiree from the Territorial Army prior to that date was also made eligible for pension, it has been provided that such an incumbent would not be entitled to any arrears prior to the issuance of that letter.
Consequently, the petitioner would be only entitled to the arrears of pension with effect from 11th June, 1985, subject to the adjustment of the pension which he has already received in lieu of State Force Service after 11th June, 1985.
However, I make no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.