Yogeshwar Dayal, CJ.
- In view of the controversy involved in this writ petition, we may reproduce regulation 19(1) and (2) of the Staff Regulations, 1960 of the Life Insurance Corporation of India, which reads thus :  "19(1).
An employee belonging to Class III or Class IV and a transferred employee belonging to Class I or Class II shall retire on completion of age of 60, but the competent authority may, if it is of the opinion that it is in the interest of the Corporation to do so, direct such employee to retire on completion of 55 years of age or at any time thereafter, on giving him three months' notice or salary in lieu thereof.
(2) An employee belonging to Class I or Class II appointed to the service of the Corporation on or after 1st September, 1956, shall retire on completion of 58 years of age, but the competent authority may, if it is of the opinion that it is in the interest of the Corporation to do so, direct such employee to retire on completion of 50 years of age or at any time thereafter on giving him three months' notice or salary in lieu thereof."
2.
It is clear even on a cursory reading of the above regulation that for the employees belonging to Class I or Class II service appointed on or after 1st September, 1956, the retirement age is 58 years.
It is only for Class III and Class IV employees and to transferred employees belonging to Class I or Class II, the retirement age is 60 years and it continues.
The submission of the learned counsel for the appellants is that the appellants were at one time Class III employees and even though they were promoted to Class I service, they continue to have the same age of retirement.
We are not inclined to accept this contention because the language of regulations 19(1) and (2) is very clear that the age of retirement of non-transferred Class I and Class II employees is 58 years irrespective of the fact whether at one, time they were class III employees.
No other question arises.
The writ appeal is accordingly dismissed.
Appeal dismissed.