GC Garg, J - Respondent No. 3-Ishwar Chand was employed as a Salesman in the petitioner-society and was charged for embezzlement of Rs. 6417/- in the sale of fertilizer and consequently served with a charge sheet on May 10, 1981.
The employee having failed to file any reply to the charge sheet, the matter was considered in the meeting of the Managing Committee of the society held on August 26, 1981 and it was resolved to terminate his services.
Annexure P-1 dated August 26,1981 is a copy of the resolution of the committee.
A reading of Annexure P-1 shows that four members of the committee supported the resolution to the effect that respondent dent No. 3 be relieved from his duties but the Inspector, Cooperative Societies, Chhachrauli who was also one of the members of the committee appended a dissenting note on the resolution to the effect.
2.
"I am not in agreement with Agenda No. 3, Resolution No. 4.
The services of Ishwar Chand, Salesman be continued till the decision by the respondent No. 5 of Arbitrator is given.
This way resolution No. 5 of the general body meeting held on 2480 will also be justified."
Respondent No. 3 consequently approached respondent No. 2 Additional Registrar (Credit) exercising the powers of the Registrar, Co-operative Societies, Haryana, for quashing resolution, Annexure P1 in view of the provisions of Section 26(4) of the Punjab Co-operative Societies Act, 1961 (for short called the Act), as there was a difference of opinion between the member of the committee and the resolution could not be given effect to till the matter was referred to the Government for its decision.
The petitioner-society raised a preliminary objection about the maintainability of the petition moved by respondent No. 3 by contending that the provisions of section 26(4) of the Act were attracted in a matter pertaining to election and nomination of the members only and not in regard to a dispute between an employee and the society.
Respondent No. 2 over-ruled the preliminary objection as, in the view of respondent No. 2, operation of section 26(4) of the Act could not be restricted to matters relating to election and nomination of the Managing Committees.
Aggrieved by the said order passed by respondent No. 2 (copy Annexure P-3), the present writ petition has been filed under Article 26 of the Constitution of India by the petitioner-society.
3.
No written statement has been filed to the allegations made in the petition.
Mr. GS Sandhu, Advocate has, however, put in appearance on behalf of respondent No. 3.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner contended that Section 26 of the Act when read as a whole would show that this relates to election and nomination of members of the Committee only and when an official member nominated by the Government records a note of dissent on any matter other than relating to election and nomination, the provisions of Section 26(4) of the Act would not come into operation and the matter is not required to be referred to the Government for its decision.
Learned counsel further contended that in the present case, the dispute did not pertain either to election or nomination of any of the members of the society but it related to employees and thus the matter was not required to be referred to the Government in terms of Section 26(4) of the Act even when the Inspector, Co-operative Societies, a nominee of the State Government had recorded a dissenting note to the resolution.
Learned counsel appearing on behalf of respondent No. 3 controverted the stand of learned counsel for the petitioner.
5.
In order to appreciate the contention of learned counsel for the petitioner, it is necessary to notice the relevant provisions of Section 26 of the Act which read as under :  "Section 26 as in Haryana.
26.
Election and nomination of members of Committee.
(1) The members of the committee of a co-operative society shall be elected in the manner prescribed and no person shall be so elected unless he is a shareholder of the society.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) (a) where the Government has subscribed to the share capital of a co-operative society or has taken liability by way of guarantee for borrowing moneys exceeding fifty per cent of the working capital of the society, the Government or any person authorised by it in this behalf shall have the right to nominate on the committee such number of persons not exceeding three or one-third of the total number of members thereof, whichever is less, as the Government may determine; xxx xxx xxx xxx  xxx xxx xxx xxx  (3) A person nominated under sub-section (2) shall hold office during the pleasure of the Government or the Corporation or other financing institution, as the case may be.
(4) Where in a co-operative society in which shares have been subscribed or liability by way of guarantee for borrowing exceeding fifty per cent of the working capital of the society has been undertaken by the Government, a difference of opinion in respect of any matter arises between the nominated members of the committee and other members thereof, the matter shall be referred by the committee to the Government whose decision thereon shall be final and will operate as if the same were a decision taken by the committee."
6.
It is not disputed that the Inspector Cooperative Societies who recorded a dissenting note on the resolution dated August 26, 1981 was a nominee of the State Government.
Such a person could be nominated on the committee by the State Government only if the State Government had subscribed to the share capital of the Co-operative Society or taken liability by way of a guarantee for borrowing money exceeding 50 per cent of the working capital of the society.
Clauses (b) to (f) of sub-section (2) of Section 26 of the Act provide for other situations when the members may be nominated by the authorities named therein on the Managing Committee of a Co-operative Society.
Sub-section (3) of Section 26 of the Act provides that a person nominated under sub-section (2) shall hold office during the pleasure of the Government or the Corporation or other financing institution, as the case may be.
Thereafter it is sub-section (4) of Section 26 of the Act which provides that in case a difference of opinion in respect of any matter arises between the nominated members of the committee and other members thereof, the matter shall be referred by the committee to the Government whose decision thereon shall be final and will operate as if the same was a decision taken by the committee.
The matters in my view, as contemplated by sub-section (4) of Section 26 of the Act relate to all matters, especially involving finance of the society, which are required to be referred to the State Government for its decision when nominated member records a note of dissent and is not restricted to decision of the Government in relation to a difference of opinion amongst such members relating to election and nomination.
It is clearly provided in sub section (4) of Section 26 of the Act that where they shares have been subscribed or liability by way guarantee for borrowing exceeding 50 per cent of the working capital of the society has been undertaken by the Government, a difference of opinion in respect of any matter between nominated members of the committee and other members shall be referred to the Government for its decision.
It cannot be read in this sub-section that the matters pertaining only to election and nomination nation are covered by the said section.
The matters relating to election and nomination are rather covered by sub-sections (1), (2) and (3) of Section 26 of the Act.
Sub-Section (4) of Section 2 of the Act, in my view, is purely an independent provision and was perhaps brought on the statute book with a view to enable the State Government to watch its interest, it having subscribed to the share capital or taken liability by way of guarantee for borrowing.
Reference to observations made in Mustafabad Cane Growers Co-operative Society Ltd v. Suraj Bhan Tayagi and others, 1971(1) SLR Pb.
& Hr.
742 and Shiv Dutt Sharma v. The State of Punjab and others, 1980(3) S.L.R.
(Pb.
& Hr.)
381 by learned counsel for the petitioner has no application to the facts of the present case.
There can be no manner of doubt that dissenting opinion recorded by the Government nominee will not be binding on the State Government and it is the State Government who has to take an independent decision when the matter is referred to it for its decision and it is open to the Government to agree with the opinion of the Government nominee or not.
Dismissal removal or termination of an employee inevitably involve financial implications and thus, in a situation like the present, when Government nominee had recorded a note of dissent, it was incumbent upon the society to refer the matter to the State Government for its decision.
There is thus, no merit in this petition and the same deserves to be dismissed.
7.
As a result of the aforesaid discussion, the writ petition fails and is consequently dismissed.
No costs.
Petition dismissed.