Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The two petitioners are steno-typists and are posted in Punjab State Planning Board, Chandigarh.
They aggrieved by the action of the respondent-State in not promoting them to the post of Junior Scale Stenographer in spite of the fact that they have appeared in the test held in pursuance to the decision dated May 7/10, 1991.
The petitioners claim that the action of the respondents in not promoting them is absolutely illegal, arbitrary and contrary to the rules and instructions issued by the department.
2.
The respondents have filed the written statement.
It is averred that the petitioners are required to qualify the stenography tests both in Punjabi and English languages before becoming eligible for promotion to the post of Junior Scale Stenographers.
Since the petitioners have not qualified the stenography test in English language they are not eligible to be considered for promotion.
It has been further averred that vide letter dated August 21, 1991, the petitioners were informed that the stenography test in English shall be held on September 30, 1991.
In spite of this notice the petitioners chose, not to appear in the test.
It has been further averred that the instructions dated May 7/10, 1991 providing that the promotee shall have to quality the stenography test in English were issued inadvertently and were later on withdrawn vide letter dated August 21, 1991.
Mr. JS Khehar, learned Additional Advocate General, Punjab for the respondent suggests that the Government had acted in ignorance in the rules and when it realised its mistake, the corrective step was taken.
3.
Appointment to the post of Junior Scale Stenographer is governed by the Rules called, The Punjab State Planning Board (Class-III) Services Rules, 1988 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Rules').
Method of appointment and qualifications etc. is laid down in Rule 8.
In a nutshell, the rule provides that the appointment shall be made in the manner specified in Appendix-B In Appendix-B, the relevant entry reads as under :-  Sr. No./Designation of Post %age for appointment by Qualification and experience for appointment by Promotion Direct Recruitment Promotion Direct recruitment 1-3 xx xx xx xx 4.
Junior Scale Stenographers 60 per cent 40 per cent i) From amongst the Steno-typists who have an experience of working as such for a minimum period of one year; and ii) Should qualify test in Stenography both in Punjabi and English languages tobe conducted by the Head of Department at such speed as may be specified from time to time i) Should be Graduate or 2nd Class Intermediate of a recognised University or 1st Class Matriculate or its equivalent and ii) Should qualify test in Stenography both in Punjabi and English languages to be conducted by the recruiting authority at such speed as may be specified from time to time.
5.
Steno-typist 40 per cent 60 per cent i)From amongst the Clerks/Typists who have an experience of working as such for a minimum period of one year; and ii) Should qualify test in Stenography both in Punjabi and English languages to be conducted by the recruiting authority at such speed as may be specified from time to time.
i) should be Graduate or second Class Intermediate of a recognized University or First Class Matriculate or its equivalent; and ii) Should qualify test in Stenography both in English and Punjabi languages to be conducted by the Head of the Deptt.
at such speed as may be specified from time to time.
6. xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx 4.
Another rule which deserves notice is Rule 1.8 which clothes the Government with the power of relaxation.
It reads as under :-  "18.
Power to relax :- Where the Government is of opinion that it is necessary or expedient so to do, it may be order for reasons to be recorded, in writing, relax any of the provisions of these rules with respect to any class or category of persons :  Provided that the provisions relating to educational qualifications and experience shall not be relaxed."
A perusal of the entries in Appendix-B, as reproduced above, shows that a person can be recruited as a Steno-typist provided he fulfills the educational qualifications enumerated in Column 5 viz., he should be a Graduate or second class Intermediate of a recognised University or first Class Matriculate or its equivalent.
For the post of Junior Scale Stenographer, educational qualifications have been prescribed for direct recruitment.
However, no educational qualifications have been prescribed in the matter of promotion.
A Stenotypist who has an experience of working as such for one year is eligible to be considered for promotion to the post of Junior Scale Stenographer.
Besides this, additional qualification of qualifying the stenography test both in Punjabi and English languages been prescribed.
5.
It appears that the State Government had issued general instructions, a copy of which has been produced as Annexure P.1 on record.
These instructions postulate that a Steno-typist shall have to qualify the stenography test both in Punjabi and English languages.
It has been inter alia provided that "he/she shall have to qualify the test in English at the prescribed speed within a period of one year from the date of his/her promotion and for this purpose three chances with an interval of approximately four months each will be given."
Presumably in pursuance to these instructions, the respondents issued a letter dated May 7/10, 1991 in which it was stated as under :-  1.
2 posts of Junior Scale Stenographers are lying vacant in Punjab State Planning Board.
In order to fill these posts from amongst Steno-typists departmental test will be held 2451991 at 1100 AM  2.
This test will consist of 2 paragraphs.
In these 2 paragraph there will be 500 words and these will be dictated at the speed of 100 WPM.
This material will have to transcribed and typed at the speed of 20 W.P.M.
Those candidates who will have mistakes upto 8% will be deemed to have been successful.
After clearing the Punjabi test the official will be promoted, but they will be required to clear English shorthand test within one year.
English paragraph consisting of 200 words will be dictated at speed of 50 words per minute and the same will have to be transcribed and typed at the speed of 10 words per minute.
Seniority of successful candidates will be determined keeping in view their seniority as Steno-typist.
Those Steno-typists who have one year regular service under Punjab State Planning Board will be eligible to sit in the test.
Instructions about test are attached.
In order to appear in the test applications must reach by 15591 and after that no application will be considered.
Chandigarh.
May 7, 1991.
No. PSPB (4PB)-91/3077.
Sd/-  C.S. Srivastava, Secretary Planning.
Dated 10.5.91."
In pursuance to the above the petitioners appeared in the Stenography test in Punjabi and qualified.
In spite of that they were not prompted and a representation made by them was rejected.
Accordingly, the petitioners claim that they having been allowed to sit in the test cannot be denied promotion to the post of Junior Scale Stenographers only because they have not yet qualified the Stenography test in English.
They contend that the general order contained in Annexure P-1, was supplemented by the departmental order dated May 7/10, 1991 and they had a right to be promoted after qualifying the stenography test in Punjabi.
It is further maintained on their behalf that the instructions, referred to above, are an order of relaxation within Rule 18, as reproduced above.
As against this, Mr. Khehar states on the basis of the averments made in paragraph 6 of the written statement that the instructions at Annexure P-1 are not the general instructions of the Government but are meant only for the staff working in the Secretariat.
He submits that these instructions have no application to the employees of the Planning Board.
He further submits that the letter dated May 7/10, 1991 was wholly illegal and contrary to the statutory rules as the qualification of test in English stenography could not have been relaxed Rule 18.
He further submits that this letter does not embody an order of relaxation.
It was in view of this position, that a clarificatory order was issued by the Government on August 21, 1991.
6.
After consideration of the matter, I find that the stand taken on behalf of the respondents is wholly untenable.
A perusal of the opening paragraph of instructions at Annexure P-1 shows that the Junior Scale Stenographers are "appointed either by direct recruitment through the Subordinate Services Selection Board or by promotion from amongst the qualified Steno-typist of the Punjab State Planning Board who has served as such for a period of atleast one year."
Accordingly it appears that the employees of the Planning Board were certainly in view of the Government while issuing the letter at Annexure P-1.
Even if, it is assumed that it was not so, a specific order was issued by the Secretary to the Government on May 7/10, 1991 to provide that a test for filling up the two posts of Junior Scale Stenographers will be held or May 24, 1991.
In this letter, it was categorically stated that "after clearing the Punjabi test the official be promoted, but they will be required English shorthand test within one year was on the basis of this letter that the petitioners had appeared in the test and qualified.
Can they be denied promotion after they had appeared in the test and qualified ?
Did they have to pass the English stenography test before becoming eligible for promotion of this post ?
Mr. Khehar states that this order was passed by the Secretary in derogation of the rules.
He submits that power under Rule 18 can be invoked to relax the rigour of any of the rules, but the provisions relating to "educational qualifications and experience" cannot be relaxed.
He submits that qualifying the stenography test is an educational qualification.
7.
After perusing the rule and more particularly the relevant entries in Appendix B (supra) I find that the rule embodies three qualifications, which can be categorised as under :-  (i) Educational qualifications.
(ii) Qualification or experience; and (iii) Qualifying the test.
8.
Under Rule 18, the qualifications at (i) and (ii), viz. the educational qualifications and experience cannot be relaxed.
However, the qualification regarding passing of a test can be relaxed.
Accordingly, the letter dated May 7/10 1991 issued by the Secretary was not in violation of the rules.
This order was clearly within the ambit of Rule 18.
Even if no reference was made to Rule 18, the order is referable to that rule.
That being so, this order was within the competence the State Government and was rightly issued.
The petitioners had qualified the test.
They had a right to be promoted to the post of Junior Scale Stenographers.
After promotion they have to qualify the test in English Stenography.
Since they have not been promoted, the action in asking them to appear in the test or the direction issued by the Government vide its letter dated August 21, 1991 was wholly inapplicable to them.
They would be entitled to appear in and shall have to pass the Stenography test in English in accordance with the decision within one year after their promotion.
9.
In view of the above, the writ petition is allowed it is directed that the respondents shall immediately consider the claim of the petitioners for promotion to the post of Junior Scale Stenographers and unless there is anything else against the them (except the passing of the test in English Stenography) the respondents shall promote them to the post of Junior Scale Stenographer.
The needful shall be done within one month from the date of the receipt of a copy of this order.
The petitioners shall also be entitled to their costs which are assessed at Rs. 2,000/.