UL Bhat, Ag.
C.J.
- Appellant is working as a PD teacher in the Government School.
Her date of birth is shown in school records and in service records as 20.3.1937 in which case she completes 55 years of age on 1921992.
According to the appellant her correct date of birth is 25101939 in which case she completes 55 years of age on 24101994.
Going by Rule 60(c) of Part I of the Kerala Service Rules (for short 'the Rules'), in the former case she would continue in service till 3131992 and in the latter case she would be entitled to continue in service till 3131995.
On 21.10.1989 she submitted an application before the first respondent, Commissioner for Government Examination stating forth her stand and seeking correction of the date of birth in the school records.
The first respondent allowed her request under Ext.
P1 order on 29.3.1990.
On 30.3.1990 appellant submitted Ext.
P2 application before the second respondent, Commissioner and Secretary to Government of Kerala, General Education (L) Department praying that consequential correction may be made in the service records.
That request was rejected by the second respondent under Ext.
P3 order dated 24.7.1990 on the ground that her application was not made prior to two years before the date of retirement, namely, 1921992 and, therefore, was belated and there are no exceptional circumstances warranting condonation of delay.
On two occasions she sought review of the order and on both the occasions her request was rejected as seen from Exts.
P7 and P8.
Thereupon she filed OP 2193 of 1991 seeking to quash Exts.
P3, P7 and P8 and seeking a writ of mandamus directing the second respondent to allow Ext.
P2 application and correct her date of birth in the service records.
The learned single Judge who heard the Original Petition took the view that since the appellant would complete 55 years of age on 1921992 she has to retire from service on superannuation on 29.2.1992 and since the application was filed on 30.3.1990 it was well within two years prior to the date of retirement and the view taken by the Government is correct.
Accordingly the writ petition was dismissed.
Hence this appeal.
2.
Appellant is governed by the Kerala Service Rules.
Compulsory retirement is dealt with in Chapter VIII of Part I of the Rules.
Rule 60 lays down the dates on which government employees of various categories are to retire.
Sub-rule (a) is the general provision which states that except as otherwise provided in these rules the date of compulsory retirement of an officer shall take effect from the afternoon of the last day of the month in which he attains the age of 55 years.
Sub-rule (b) deals with officers in the Last Grade Service on 741970.
According to this sub-rule, such officers will retire on the afternoon of the last day of the month in which they attain the age of 60 years provided that this benefit will be available to them only as long as they continue to be in the Last Grade Service as defined in Rule 12.
Sub-rule (c) deals with teaching staff of all educational institutions.
According to this sub-rule the teaching staff of all educational institutions who complete the age of 55 years during the course of an academic year shall continue in service till the last day of the month in which the academic year ends.
They shall be entitled to the benefits of increments and promotion which fall due, before the last day of the month in which they attain the age of 55 years, but they shall not be eligible for increment or promotion during the period of their service beyond such date.'
It is unnecessary to refer to the other details in the sub-rule.
The second paragraph of sub-rule (c) indicates that if the day on which the teaching staff attain the age of 55 years falls within the period of one month beginning with the day of reopening of the institutions they shall ceases to be on duty with effect from the date of such re-opening and they shall be granted additional leave from the date of re-opening to the last day of the month in which they attain the age of 55 years'.
According to the third paragraph of sub-rule (c), if they are eligible to continue in service till the close of the academic year under the 1st paragraph of this sub-rule they shall be granted additional leave from the date of closing for vacation till the last day of the month when the date of closing is earlier than the last day of the month.
3.
There are eleven notes to Rule 60.
Notes and 2 deal with officers of Last Grade Service an teaching staff who complete 55 years of age on 451967 or attain the age of 55 years within period of three months from that date.
Note 7 in dictates that completion of 55 years in service is the afternoon and not in the forenoon and that person whose date of birth is first of July completes his 55th year on 30th June and since the latter date is the last day of the month in which he completes the 55 years on first of July in his 56th year and that day is a non-working day for him, he shall cease to be in service on and from 1st July.
Note 8 states that a teacher whose date of birth is first July and who attains the age of 55 years shall not continue in service till the end of the academic year except in the case specified therein.
Note 10 indicates that last day of the month means the last day of the month in Christian Era.
Note 11 states that in cases where the academic year in respect of the institutions under the Director of Public Instruction is extended beyond the 31st of March in any year, the teaching staff of such institutions who are allowed to continue in service beyond the date of superannuation under sub-rule (c) shall retire on the last day of March itself.
4.
A close study of Rule 60 of the Rules indicates that while sub-rule (a) deals with the generality of the cases, sub-rule (b) deals with officers on Last Grade Service on 741970 and sub-rule (c) deals with teaching staff of all educational institutions.
The general rule, namely the one contained in sub-rule (a) prescribes that the date of retirement shall take effect from the afternoon of the last day of the month in which the officer attains the age of 55 years.
Under sub-rule (b) the officers dealt with thereunder will retire on the afternoon of the last day of the month in which they attain the age of 60 years provided that this benefit will be available to them only as long as they continue to be in the Last Grade Service as defined in Rule 12.
Under sub-rule (c), the officers contemplated therein will continue in service till the last day of the month in which the academic year ends.
Those who do not attract sub-rule (c) or sub-rule (b) will come under sub-rule (c) or sub-rule (b) will come under sub-rule (a) since the latter is the general provision.
The rule thus speaks of three different dates, namely, the date on which an officer completes 55 years, the date of superannuation and the date actual retirement.
Except in rare cases no officer retires on the day in which he completes 55 years.
The date of superannuation and the date of retirement for the purpose of sub-rule (a) is the last day of the month in which an officer attains the age of 55 years.
But for sub-rule (c) teaching staff of educational, institution also would be governed by sub-rule (a), It is only by virtue of sub-rule (c) that an exception is carved out in regard to teaching staff of all educational institutions and they are allowed to continue in service till the last day of the month in which the academic year ends.
The scheme of the Rule and the various notes would indicate that an academic year is ordinarily taken to be the year ending with 31st March.
We say so because Note 11 takes care of an extraordinary contingency where the academic year is extended beyond 31st March.
5.
A teacher in an educational institution governed by the Rules will ordinarily retire only on 31st March of the year in which he completes 55 years, though exceptionally he may retire on the last day of the month in which he competes 55 years.
It is clear that the date on which an officer completes 55 years can never be regarded as the date of superannuation, under any circumstances.
What can be said at best is that the last day of the month in which an officer completes 55 years is the date of superannuation.
But, nevertheless the date of his retirement is the 31st of March of the academic year.
6.
The question of correction of date of birth in school records and service records is dealt with various Government Orders.
They are G.O.
(P) 344/65/PD dated 2731965, G.O.
(MS) 39/72/PD dated 2211972, G.O.
(MS) 123/75/PD dated 15.6.1975 and GO(P) 260/75/PD dated 3111975.
All these Government Orders are referred to in Ext.
P4, government circular dated 3121987.
The circular clarifies some of the doubts which arose on a reading of the Government Orders.
Paragraph 4 of the circular clarifies that requests for correction of date of birth in the Service Register made within two years of the retirement of the government servant warranting condonation of delay should not be entertained even when the correction is requested on the basis of correction made in the SSLC Book/SCC Book.
Requests made by the employees to the government in the concerned Administrative Departments for the correction of date of birth noted in their Service Register before two years of their retirement based on the correction of date of birth passed by the Commissioner for Government Examinations will be considered and decide on merits and existing orders'.
A doubt arose whether by "date of retirement" is meant the date of retirement according to the date of birth in the service records or the corrected date of birth in the school records.
This doubt was set at rest by Ext.
P5 circular dated 24101988 stating that two years restriction could only be with reference to the date of retirement as per the original entries in the service book.
It is, therefore, clear that any application made within two years of the date of retirement as calculated on the basis of the original entry in the service register is liable to be rejected on that ground, except of course, in exceptional cases.
In other words any application made prior to the two years from such date of retirement cannot be rejected on the ground of delay and has to be considered on merit and disposed of according to the guidelines lines.
The various Government Orders speak not of the date on which an officer completes 55 years, not even the date of superannuation, but the 'date of retirement'.
As we have already indicated, so far as teaching staff in an educational institution are concerned they retire, except in the exceptional cases, on the 31st March of the academic year.
When the Government Orders and circulars use the expression 'date of retirement' that expression must carry the same meaning as is given in Rule 60(c).
The expression 'date of retirement' cannot be taken to mean the date on which an officer completes 55 years or even the last day of the month in which the officer completes 55 years.
7.
In the present case the date of birth recorded in the Service Register is 2021937.
The appellant completes 55 years of age on 1921992.
Under sub-rule (c) of Rule 60 she is to continue in service and retire on 3131992.
She submitted Ext.
P2 application on 30.3.1990, that is, one day prior to the period of two years before the date of retirement.
The application satisfied the time limit prescribed by the Government in the various Government Orders and circulars.
Therefore, the orders in Exts.
P3, P7 and P8 inasmuch as they treat Ext.
P2 application as violating the time limit prescribed by the government in the various Government orders is unsustainable.
The learned single Judge was in error in holding that the date of retirement is the last day of the month in which the officer complete 55 years.
That may be so in a case not governed by sub-rule (c) of Rule 60, but governed by sub-rule (a) of Rule 60.
In the result, we set aside the impugned Judgment of the learned single Judge and quash Exts.
P3, P7 and P8 and direct the second respondent to consider Ext.
P2 application afresh after giving an opportunity of hearing to the appellant and dispose of the same on merits as expeditiously as possible and, at any rate, within four months from today.
The appeal is allowed, but without costs.
Appeal allowed