Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The appellant, an Assistant in the Punjab Civil Secretariat, was aggrieved by the order of premature retirement passed on March 10, 1989.
His writ petition having been dismissed, he has filed the present Letters Patent Appeal.
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The appellant joined as a Clerk in the Punjab Civil Secretariat on July 7, 1958.
This appointment was made on an ad hoc basis.
Later, the petitioner competed for regular selection through the Subordinate Services Selection Board and was appointed as a Clerk in the Department of Industrial Training on July 8, 1959.
On November 18, 1964, the appellant was appointed as an Assistant in the Industrial Training Department after he had qualified the Assistant's Grade Examination.
On April 30, 1973, he was appointed as an Assistant in the Punjab Civil Secretariat through direct recruitment.
While working as such the appellant was ordered to be retired on March 10,1989.
By this time, he had not even completed 51 years of age as he was born on September 7, 1938.
Aggrieved by the order, he filed a writ petition viz. C.W.P.
No. 4271 of 1989 which was disposed of by the Motion Bench by its order of March 30, 1989.
The appellant was permitted to withdraw the writ petition to enable him to file a representation.
His representation having failed, he filed C.W.P.
No. 7756 of 1989 out of which the present appeal has arisen.
3.
We have gone through the pleadings of the parties and the appellant's record of service.
When the case was originally heard, we were also shown the official file dealing with the examination of the representation submitted by the petitioner by Mr. OP Goyal, learned Additional Advocate General, who had then appeared for the respondent.
As resume of the annual confidential reports has been given by the appellant as Annexure P.7 with his petition.
It is as under :  "1973-74 Very Good 1974-75 Outstanding Appreciation letter issued.
1975-76 Good 1976-77 Outstanding 1977-78 Outstanding 1978-79 Very Good 1979-80 Good 1980-81 Good 1981-82 Good 1982-83 Very Good 1983-84 Very Good 1984-85 Very Good 1985-86 Adverse  1986-87 Very Good 1987-88 Very Good 4.
On behalf of the respondent, the assessment as given by the appellant has not been disputed.
From a perusal of this record, it appears that only one adverse report had been conveyed to the appellant for the year 1985-86.
This report described the appellant as "a corrupt official."
The report did not relate to the whole year but only to the period from December 23, 1985 to March 31, 1986.
There was no report for the remaining period alleging anything against the appellant.
An effort was made on behalf of the appellant to show that this report was based on a mistake of identity.
It was also suggested that the appellant was not entrusted with the work on account of which this report appears to have been recorded.
A perusal of the official record shows that even a special report was obtained on the appellant's work.
It has been produced as Annexure P-8 with the petition.
It reads as under :-  "SPECIAL REPORT"  Shri Chander Singh Negi, Senior Assistant has been working in the Branch since 26th September, 1986.
During this period his work and conduct has been of outstanding nature and there has been no occasion to doubt his honesty in any manner whatsoever.
He possesses noble character and is an honest official.
I have no complaint against him.
In fact, in the whole of branch he is, able to do any type of work entrusted to him and if he is given any additional work he acquits himself very well.
Sd/-  Kirpal Singh Bala  Superintendent Judicial Branch  21.3.1988  Sd/- RM Bassi  22388  D.S.H.
(B)  A.C.S.
Sd/- R.P.
Ojha"  In spite of this report, the appellant's representation against the adverse remarks as also against the order of premature retirement was rejected.
On perusal of the official file, we find that the Chief Secretary observed as under :-  "I agree with the office examination of the matter.
Since the adverse entry against integrity stands in the service record and there is no discretion available to the appointing authority to ignore, relax or waive the Govt. policy instructions, in such a case, the representation(s) has to be rejected.
I have passed the speaking order, in detail, and it is placed below for further n.a.
and being conveyed to Shri Negi.
Sd/-  R.P.
Ojha 5.6.89"  The instructions referred to in the above order were issued by the Govt. vide their letter of June 22, 1981.
These instructions inter alia provide as under :  "I am directed to invite your attention to Punjab Govt. circular letter No. 6520-2S-II-75-38581 dated the 26th Sept 1975 relating to the weeding out of corrupt, dishonest or inefficient officers/officials from services under the Punjab Civil Services (Premature Retirement) Rules, 1975 and to say that Govt. have reviewed the matter in the light of the revised policy of the Government of India and other administrative requirements.
Government have decided to lay down the following additional guidelines in the matter : xxx xxx xxx  iii) If an adverse entry relating to integrity exists in the confidential reports during the 10 years preceding the review, or if after its recording there has been no change in the class, status or the post of the officer that single entry should be considered sufficient for ordering premature retirement."
It is on the basis of the above instructions that the authorities appear to have, taken the view that the appointing authority has no discretion in the matter.
It is the correctness of this view that is being challenged before us.
Learned counsel for the appellant has vehemently contended that it is for the appropriate authority to form an opinion as to whether or not it is in public interest to retain an employee on the date on which he completes 25 years of qualifying service or attains 50 years of age.
He contends that in this case the appropriate authority has acted mechanically on the basis of the instructions and not exercised the absolute discretion that vested in it.
5.
Inevitably, it is necessary to refer to the provisions of the relevant rules.
These provisions are contained in Rules 2 and 3 which are reproduced as under :-  "2.
In these rules, unless the context otherwise requires, the following expressions have the meanings hereby respectively assigned to them, that is to say -  (1) appropriate authority" means the authority which has the power to make substantive appointments to the post or service from which the Government employee is required or wants to retire or any other authority to which it is subordinate."
"3.
(1) (a) The appropriate authority shall, if it is of the opinion that it is in public interest to do so, have the absolute right, by giving an employee prior notice in writing, to retire that employee on the date on which he completes twenty-five years of qualifying service or attains fifty years of age or any date thereafter to be specified in the notice.
(b) The period of such notice shall not be less than three months :  Provided that where at least three months' notice is not given or notice for a period less than three months is given, the employee shall be entitled to claim a sum equivalent to the amount of his pay and allowances, at the same rates at which he was drawing them immediately before the date of retirement, for a period of three months or, as the case may be; for the period by which such notice falls short of three months.
(2) Any Government employee may, after giving at least three months' previous notice in writing to the appropriate authority retire from service on the date on which he completes twenty-five years of qualifying service or attains fifty years of age or on any date thereafter to be specified in the notice :  Provided that no employee under suspension shall retire from service except with the specific approval of the appropriate authority."
On a perusal of the above rule, we find that the authority competent to make the substantive appointments is the appropriate authority.
Under Rule 3, the appropriate authority has "the absolute right" to form an opinion that "it is in public interest" to retire an employee on the date on which he completes "25 years of qualifying service or attains 50 years of age."
In the present case the appropriate authority has not exercised its own judgment.
It has considered itself as totally bound by the instructions.
It has not come to a conclusion on the examination of record that it is in public interest to retire the appellant.
On the contrary, it has taken the view that the instructions leave "no discretion available to the appropriate authority to ignore, release or waive the Govt. policy instructions ...." In our view, it was necessary for the authority to objectively examine the service record and to come to a finding one way or the other.
It has not done so.
6.
We are also of the view that the instructions issued by the Govt. vide its letter of June 22, 1981, are merely 'guidelines' and do not embody an inflexible rule which may have to be rigidly followed.
The stipulation in the instructions that "single entry should be considered sufficient for ordering premature retirement" cannot be interpreted as a mandatory rule.
In our considered opinion it only means that a single entry can be considered sufficient for ordering premature retirement.
On an overall consideration of the matter we find that appropriate authority should have considered the totality of the record and then formed an opinion as to whether or not it was in public interest to retire the appellant.
This has not been done.
In this situation, we have no alternative but to accept the contention raised on behalf of the respondent.
7.
In this view of the matter, we do not consider it necessary to go into the other contentions raised by the learned counsel for the appellant.
8.
Before parting with the judgment it may be mentioned that the learned Additional Advocate General Punjab, appearing on behalf of the respondent was directed by us to produce the record relating to the case of the appellant.
In particular, the file relating to his annual confidential reports was asked for.
Even though the judgment was originally reserved on October 1, 1991, the file relating to the confidential reports of the appellant was not produced.
On October 11, 1991, Mr. OP Goyal had produced a note from Mr. KL Sharma, Superintendent (Establishment Branch-I), Civil Sectt.
Chandigarh informing us that "the ACR file of Shri Chander Singh Negi is not traceable in spite of our best efforts.
No formation regarding the reporting officer, from the year 1973-74 till 1985-86, is otherwise available in the record.
However, effort is being made to search the file.
Time in this case may kindly be granted till lunch time on 21.10.1991."
Even though considerable time has elapsed since then, the file was not produced.
9.
Accordingly, we accept the appeal, set aside the judgment of the learned Single Judge and allow this petition.
The order dated March 7, 1989 directing the premature retirement of the appellant as also the order dated June 5, 1989 rejecting his representation are set aside.
As a result, the appellant shall be deemed to have continued in service and shall be entitled to all consequential reliefs in the nature of arrears of salary etc.
The needful shall be done within a period of three months from the date of the receipt of a copy of this order.
In the circumstances of the case, we leave the parties to bear their own costs.
Appeal accepted.