Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner was appointed as Assistant Professor, Veterinary Parasitology, College of Veterinary Science, Punjab Agricultural University vide orders dated March 24, 1990.
This appointment was made on ad hoc basis "till the joining back of the regular incumbent of the post.
The petitioner actually joined duties on May 16, 1990.
On July 12, 1990 Dr AK Sangwan, regular incumbent of post of Assistant Professor, appears to have joined and submitted his resignation.
This resignation was accepted on July 4, 1990.
The petitioner continued to hold the post and vide letter dated October 6, 1990, the Head of the Department under whom the petitioner was working recommended that the services of the petitioner be regularised.
It was also observed that "Dr. SS Rath is per forming his duties quite well on the present post."
On January 28, 1991, the Registrar issued an order observing that "in pursuance of decision of Board of Management taken in its 125th meeting held on 151190, the Vice Chancellor hereby regularises the services of Sh. SS Rath, Assistant Professor of Veterinary Parasitology."
It appears that on some objections having been raised by the auditors, the Vice Chancellor passed an order on May 6, 1991 observing that the petitioner should have been relieved on the joining of Dr. AS Sangwan on July 2, 1990.
A copy of this order sent by the Registrar to the Dean of the College has been produced as Annexure P-6 with the replication filed by the petitioner.
In this letter, the date originally typed was 6991.
However, in the replication with which this document has been produced, the date mentioned is 6591.
It appears that this letter from the Registrar was referred back by the office of the College of Veterinary Science to the Vice Chancellor.
A copy of the note, which is stated to be dated May 19, 1991 has been produced as Annexure P-7.
In this note, it has been inter-alia mentioned that "since the joining of Dr. Sangwan was notional, so break in service of Dr. Rath was also notional."
It has been further mentioned that "it is proven fact that orders of regularisation were passed after observing all the formalities for recruitment.
This case was recommended by the competent Selection Committee for orders and appointment was subsequently approved by the Board."
The note further states that "another point to be seen in that he has not been paid his salary with effect from July, 1990 whereas he has actually worked.
The University has no right to deny his wages for this period.
Having once regularised his service it is not judicial to remove him unceremoniously without giving him any opportunity."
The note goes on to state that "if he is removed, the teaching work of the department, will get dislocated.
There are three posts of Assistant Professor out of which only one is filled which is occupied by him.
As on account of peak teaching load of undergraduate studies, there will be no teacher to share this burden.
His relieving shall, thus, not be in the interest of the institution."
On these premises, it was observed that "we may request the Vice Chancellor to reconsider the case."
In spite of this, the Registrar conveyed an order to the Dean, vide a letter dated June 20, 1991.
A copy of this letter has been produced as Annexure P-8 with the replication.
The date typed on this document is June 20, 1990.
However, in the affidavit filed by the petitioner with which this document has been produced, the date has mentioned as June 20, 1991 in paragraph No. 9.
In view of the sequence of events the correct date appears to be June 20, 1991.
By this order, the Registrar conveyed the following orders passed by the Vice Chancellor :  "Reply from the Dean is not correct as stated at portion marked `O'.
For this reasons action be taken according to earlier orders issued on 6591.
Those who had not given correct position from the office of the Dean ......" 2.
When the petition was originally filed by the petitioner on June 20, 1991, it appears that he did not have all the documents.
Accordingly, a number of documents have been produced only with the replication.
In the petition, the action of the respondents in withholding the Wary of the petitioner from November, 1990 as also for ordering to relieve him retrospectively with effect from July 2, 1990 after he had been regularised has been challenged primarily on two grounds.
It has been averred that the service of the petitioner having been regularised, no action could have been taken against him without the grant of an opportunity.
It has been further averred that the action of the respondents in not paying him the salary and in terminating his services retrospectively is wholly illegal.
3.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents by the Registrar of the University.
It has been inter alia stated that on the joining back of the regular incumbent of the post of Assistant Professor (Sh. AK Sangwan) on July 2, 1990, the services of the petitioner stood automatically terminated.
It has been further stated that the service of the petitioner had been regularised by the Vice Chancellor on recommendations from the Head of the Department and the Dean of the College.
Since correct facts had not been disclosed, the regularisation itself was illegal and the mistake could be rectified.
It is averred that the order of regularisation had been withdrawn by the Competent Authority as the petitioner had ceaed to be an employee of the University after July 2, 1990.
It has also been suggested that the Head of the Department was twisting the facts to favour the petitioner and had thus, not relieved him.
It has been further stated that on the joining back of the regular incumbent of the post, the services of the petitioner were liable to be terminated without any notice.
Consequently, he was not entitled to any opportunity to show cause etc. A reply has also been filed to the replication.
Primarily the reply suggests that the Head of the Department and the Dean had not given the facts accordingly.
4.
Mr. Deepak Thapar, Advocate, appearing for the petitioner, has raised a two-fold contention.
He submits that the action of the respondents in terminating the services of the petitioner, after he had been regularised, without the grant of any opportunity whatsoever, is wholly violative of the principles of natural justice.
He further submits that the respondents have no jurisdiction to terminate the services of the petitioner retrospectively and to deny him the salary for the period during which he has actually performed his duties.
5.
Indisputably the services of the petitioner had been regularised vide orders dated January 28, 1991 this order was passed by the Vice Chancellor in pursuance of the decision taken by the Board of Management.
The petitioner was, thus, working on regular basis.
He had acquired a right to continue on the post, which could not be defeated except in accordance with the provisions of the rules.
No rule has been pointed out or even mentioned to justify the action.
Even if it is assumed that there is no Rule, though the position is otherwise, the principles of natural justice are certainly attracted.
It was accordingly incumbent upon the respondents and especially the Vice Chancellor to have given the petitioner a due and reasonable opportunity.
If such an opportunity had been given the petitioner could have shown from the record, as has been prima facie shown now, that infact three posts of Assistant Professors existed and besides the one held by him, the other two posts were lying vacant.
He could have further shown that he had been regularly selected and that in view of the decision of the Board of Management, a copy of which has been produced with the affidavit of the Registrar as Annexure R-4, he had a right to be regularised.
He could have further shown that the respondents have no jurisdiction to terminate his services retrospectively or to deny him the salary for the period he had actually worked.
Failure to grant an opportunity denied the petitioner a valuable right of putting forth his view point.
It resulted in material miscarriage of justice.
It denied the petitioner an opportunity which was due to him in accordance with the principles of natural justice.
On this ground alone, the action of the respondents in terminating the service of the petitioner is vitiated.
Since I am quashing the order on account of violation of the principles of natural justice, it is not necessary for me to go into the question of the validity of retrospective termination of service.
The stand taken on behalf of the respondents that the petitioner's service stood automatically terminated on the joining of Sh. AK Sangwan does not commend itself to me.
The petitioner was working on the post and no order of termination had been conveyed to him.
Unless, an order of termination is actually passed by the Competent Authority and duly conveyed to the person concerned, there cannot be an effective termination of service.
6.
As a result, this writ petition is allowed.
The order of termination of the services of the petitioner is set aside.
It is declared that he will be deemed to have continued as an Assistant Professor in Veterinary Parasitology.
He will also be entitled to all consequential reliefs in the nature of arrears of salary etc.
Since the petitioner was deprived of his pay and allowances in a wholly arbitrary manner, he would be entitled to interest on all the arrears from the date these fell due till the date of actual payment at the rate of 12% per annum.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to his costs, which are assessed at Rs. 2,000/-.
Petition allowed.