HS Bedi, J - The petitioner was appointed as Prosecuting Sub-Inspector by the respondent-State of Punjab on 14th June 1961 and continued to serve the Directorate of Prosecuting and Litigation upto July 1978, when he joined as Executive Officer under the Department of Local Government, Punjab, vide letter of appointment Annexure R-1.
The petitioner was relieved from the Department of Prosecution and Litigation, on 14th August 1978 vide order Annexure P-1 and it was specifically said in the order that the petitioner was being allowed to join his new assignment as foreign service under the Department of Local Government on the specific condition that he would contribute towards the cost of his pension and the cost of his leave salary as required by Rule 10.9 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules Vol. 1, Part-I (hereinafter to be referred as the Rules).
Vide Annexure P-2, the petitioner was given ad hoc promotion as Assistant District Attorney Grade I, though he continued to be on deputation as Executive Officer with the Municipal Committee, Sangrur.
Vide Annexure P-3, the petitioner was conferred the powers of Additional Public Prosecutor under Section 24(3) of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
Still later vide Annexure P-4, the service of the petitioner as Assistant District Attorney Grade-I, was made regular.
It will be seen from the resume of the facts given above that to all intents and purposes, the petitioner continued to be under the effective employment of the State Government and was given the benefits of promotion and regularisation of service in the Directorate of Prosecution and Litigation.
It has been averred by the petitioner that on his retirement from service vice as an Executive Officer on 31st May, 1988, the requisite and full pension has not been paid to him by the Directorate Prosecution and Litigation on the ground that he had not completed 20 years of qualifying service under that department whereas the Department of Local Government is denying its liability to pay its share of the contribution on the ground that the petitioner had not complied with the order Annexure P-1 in that he did not pay his contribution towards pension.
It has also been additionally averred by the petitioner that the Department of Local Government was denying the liability to pay its share towards pension on the ground that the appointment of the petitioner as Executive Officer was in the nature of a fresh appointment and the petitioner did not as such have the requisite qualifying service under that department.
2.
The case of the petitioner is that the service under the State of Punjab, whether under one department or the other, was liable to be taken into account for the purpose of determining the pension and he having been in the service of the State, from June 1961 to 31st May 1988, is entitled to the payment of pension and other retirement benefits.
Reliance for this purpose has been placed by the counsel for the petitioner on Devdutta and others v. State of MP & others, 1991(1) L.L.J.
492 and K Madhavan and another v. Union of India and others, 1987(5) S.D.R.
725.
In Devdutta's case (supra), it has been held as under :-  "It will be against all rules of service jurisprudence, if, when a Govt. servant holding a post is transferred to the same or equivalent post in another Govt. Deptt.
the period of his service in the post before transfer is not taken into consideration in computing his seniority in the post to which he is transferred.
The transfer cannot wipe out his length of service in the post from which he has been transferred."
3.
As already mentioned above, the very letter of appointment of the petitioner as an Executive Officer Annexure P-1 shows that the petitioner was appointed as a State Government employee under the orders of the Secretary to Government, Punjab, Local Government Department and the fact that the petitioner was being put to foreign service on his transfer, is set out in order Annexure P-1 to which reference has already been made.
It is, therefore, apparent to me that the service of the petitioner continued to be under the State Government and as such he was entitled to count his entire period of service from the date of his appointment as Prosecuting Sub-Inspector till his retirement for the purpose of computation of pension.
Mr. Cheema has argued that as per Rule 10.9 the petitioner was required to pay the cost towards pension and this was also reflected in the relieving order Annexure P-1.
Assuming for a moment that the petitioner did not comply with the provision aforesaid."
I am of the view that this would not take away right to the grant of pension at this stage.
Moreover, Section 44 of the Pb.
Municipal Act, 1911, provides that where an employee as been employed partly by the Government and partly by a Committee, the Committee shall make such contributions to his pension and leave allowance as may be required by the conditions of his service under the Government to be paid by him or on his behalf.
In this view of the matter, it is clear that if any amount was, in fact, payable by the petitioner, the liability stood transferred to the Committee as per provision of Section 44.
It is also significant to note that the Legal Remembrancer and Director Prosecution wrote a letter dated 19th January, 1990 to the Department of Local Government that this department was required to contribute towards the pension and leave salary contribution of the petitioner but despite the advice, so tendered, the petitioner was not still granted the requisite relief.
4.
In view of what has been stated above, the present petition is allowed with costs which are assessed at Rs. 2,000/- and a direction is issued to respondent No. 2 to make the necessary payment of arrears of pension, along with interest at the rate of 12 per cent per annum from the date on which it fell due to the date on which it is actually paid within a period of two months from the date of receipt of copy of this order by the said respondent.
A direction is also issued that if any arrears are due to the upward revision of pay scales, the same shall also be released to the petitioner within the aforesaid period alongwith interest at the rate of 12 per cent per annum.
Petition allowed.