B R Arora, J - Both the writ petition and the special appeal raise a common controversy and, therefore, they are being disposed of by this common judgment.
2.
The petitioners are the members of Other Backward Classes (for short, the OBC').
An advertisement dated 211194 was issued by the Rajasthan Public Service Commission, Ajmer inviting applications for Direct Recruitment to Rajasthan State and Subordinate Services by Combined Competitive Examination, 1994.
The petitioners being eligible for these services, also, applied for the same.
The preliminary examination for the State and Subordinate Services were held on 101294 and the result of the Preliminary Examination was declared by the Rajasthan Public Service Commission, Ajmer (for short the Commission') on 10496.
The Commission neither gave the benefit of proviso to Rule 13 of the Rules, 1962 to keep the cut off marks upto 5% less than the general candidates to the OBC nor the result of the Preliminary Examination was declared category-wise.
The petitioners, therefore, challenged the declaration of the result of combined examination by this writ petition and prayed that the respondents may be directed to publish a separate list of the result of OBC candidates fifteen times of the total approximate number of the vacancies advertised by Advertisement Annexure 1.
It has, also been prayed that the respondents may be directed to give benefit of the 5% less cut off marks to the OBC candidates also as has been given to the members of Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes as per the proviso to Rule 13 of the Rajasthan State and Subordinate Services Direct Recruitment by Combined Competitive Examination) Rules, 1962 (for short, the Rules, 1962').
3.
The writ petition filed by the petitioners has been opposed by the State of Rajasthan as well as by the Rajasthan Public Service Commission.
According to the respondents the benefit of 5% less cut off marks as per Rule 13 of the Rules, 1962 is available only to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes candidates and not to the candidates of Other Backward Classes and the Rules nowhere provide for category wise publication of the result.
4.
It is contended by the learned counsel for the petitioners that (i) the benefit of 5% less cut off marks, as provided under proviso to Rule 13 of the Rules, 1962 should be extended to the candidates of Other Backward Classes also, as has been done in the cases of the candidates belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes from the same class; (ii) the result of the preliminary examination should be declared category-wise and should include 15 times of the posts reserved for the Other Backward Classes; and (iii) the reservation policy made applicable to the Other Backward Classes cannot be implemented in its true sense without category wise declaring the result.
5.
Learned counsel for the Commission as well as the learned Additional Advocate General, on the other hand have submitted that the proviso to Rule 13 is applicable only to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes candidates and not to the candidates of Other Backward Classes as they do not constitute the same class; and (ii) the category-wise declaration of the result is not envisaged by the Rules.
6.
I have considered the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties.
7.
The first question which requires consideration is : Whether the benefit of 5% less cut off marks available to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes as per proviso to Rule 13 of the Rules, 1962, is available to the OBC candidates also, or it can be extended to them ?
8.
The examination for Rajasthan State and Subordinate Services is conducted under the Rajasthan State and Subordinate Services (Direct Recruitment by Combined Competitive Examination) Rules, 1962, made by the State Government under Article 309 of the Constitution of India.
These Rules were framed in the year 1962 and at that time there was no reservation in the service for Other Backward Classes.
Rule 3 of the Rules, 1962 deals with the Scheme of the Examination, Personality and Viva Voce Test.
The proviso appended to Rule 13, which is relevant for resolving the present controversy, reads as under :  "Provided further that if adequate number of candidates belonging to the Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes are not available amongst the candidates to be declared qualified for admission to the Main Examination, the Commission may at their discretion, keep the cut off marks upto 5 (five) per cent less than the general candidates."
The proviso appended to Rule 13 gives a discretion to the Commission to keep the cut off marks upto 5% less to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes candidates than the general candidates if the number of the candidates belonging to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes are not available amongst the candidates declared qualified for admission to the main examination.
The reservation in the service to the Other Backward Classes was made in the year 1994.
By making the reservation in favour of Other Backward Classes, the benefit of proviso to Rule 13 available to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes candidates automatically will not be available to the candidates belonging to Other Backward Classes.
The proviso to Rule 13 of the Rules, 1962 has been made applicable by the State only to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes candidates.
For giving benefit of this proviso to the Other Backward Classes, the State Government has to make a provision in the Rules taking into consideration the reality and the circumstances prevailing in the State.
In the absence of any provision providing of 5% less cut off marks to the candidates of Other Backward Classes, the benefit of this proviso cannot be extended to the Other Backward Classes.
9.
Though the expression "Backward Classes of the Citizens" used in Article 16(4) of the Constitution of India, does not make any distinction between Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes and the Other Backward Classes but the use of expression "Other Backward Classes" together with "Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes" in Article 15(4) clearly indicate that the Other Backward Classes" are other than Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and constitutes a distinct class.
Therefore, it cannot be presumed that the proviso will automatically apply to the Other Backward Classes when the reservation has not been made in their favour.
For applicability of the proviso to the Other Backward Classes, an amendment in the Rules, making it applicable to the "Other Backward Classes", has to be made and without relevant amendment in the Rules, the benefit of the proviso to Rule 13 of the Rules, 1962 cannot be extended to the candidates of Other Backward Classes.
In the absence of the provision in the Rules, the benefit of 5% less cut off marks is not available to the OBC candidates.
10.
There is a Constitutional sanction of reservation for advancement of the Backward Classes of the society.
It aims to eradicate our aged-long social injustice through an enlightened constitutional order.
Different constitutional provisions for reservation in favour of the members of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes have been made.
Articles 15(4) and 16(4) of the Constitution of India confer a privileged status on Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
Though different language has been used in Article 15(4) and Article 16(4) but the beneficiaries under both these articles are the same.
Article 15(4) authorises the State Government for making any special provision for the advancement of any socially and educationally Backward Class of citizen or for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
Article 16(4) of the Constitution deals with the reservation in appointments in favour of "Backward Classes in Citizens", which, in the opinion of the State, is not adequately represented in the service under the State.
Though this sub-clause (4) of Article 16 does not separately mention the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes but it includes them in it.
Reservation for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the matters of promotion to any class or classes of the posts in the service under the State in favour of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, has also, been made under Article 16(4) of the Constitution of India.
The reservation in the Parliament and the State Legislature has, also been provided to them under Articles 330 and 332 of the Constitution of India but there is no such reservation provided for Other Backward Classes.
Article 335 of the Constitution of India, also, deals with the claims of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes candidates to the service and posts while no such provision has been made for Other Backward Classes.
Backward Classes other than the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes have been called as "Other Backward Classes" and they cannot be compared with the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.
For giving benefit of reservation etc. as per Article 16(4) of the members of the Other Backward Classes, it has to be seen by the State whether the backward classes have been inadequately represented in the service under the State; while no such requirement is necessary for making reservation in the cases of the members of Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.
The reservation in service for the candidates of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes is directly proportionate to their population while reservation for Other Backward Classes is about 50% of the population percentage.
11.
Article 46 of the Constitution of India which is part of Directive Principles of State Policy, declares the objectives of the State to promote the educational and economic interests of the weaker sections of the people, in particular of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and shall protect them from social injustice and all forms of exploitation.
The expression "weaker section" used in Article 46 is much wider than the "Backward Classes of the Citizens".
Other Backward Classes are only a part of the "weaker section".
12.
The above discussion, therefore, makes it clear that though Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes are privileged classes and Articles 15(4) and 16(4) confer upon them a privileged status but still in the matter of privilege, they are not comparable and are distinct.
In Article 15(4) Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes have been mentioned along with the expression "Backward Classes of the Citizen" which means that the backward class persons are other than Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes are specially prompted classes while Other Backward Classes are not.
There is a constitutional presumption in favour of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes regarding their social, economic and educational backwardness while there is no such presumption in favour of the Other Backward Classes.
These privileges have been given to the members of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes looking to the past social disparities and restricted opportunities.
Despite the Constitutional inducement to awaken these utterly deprived and pathetically neglected social categories, they have a long social distance to travel for becoming a part of the mainstream of the national life.
For the redressal of the past injustice, a national policy has been framed to provide representation to these Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes people in economy, polity and administration commensurating with their ratio in the population.
There is a firm constitutional commitment for the economic betterment of the members of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes who are constitutionally defined and carefully designated.
The Other Backward Classes, on the other hand, have nowhere been defined in the Constitution and are left at the determination of the State Government(s).
The Other Backward Classes are widely perceived to be numerous, populous and indefinitely expandable categories and are not comparable to those of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
Backward Classes other than the Scheduled Castes and there Scheduled Tribes can be called as the "Other Backward Classes" and it is not necessary for a caste to be designated as a Backward Class as it is situated equally to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes categories.
It has been classified as a separate category under the Constitution and as such Other Backward Classes candidates, cannot be equated with the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.
The difference between the "Backward Classes of the Citizens" and the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes has been accepted even by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Indra Sawhney v. Union of India, AIR 1993 SC 447 : 1993(1) SCT 448 in para 92-A of the judgment in the following words :  "There is another way of looking at this issue.
Article 16(4) recognises only one class viz., "Backward Class of Citizens".
It does not speak separately of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, as does Article 15(4).
Even so, it is beyond controversy that Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes are also included in the expression "Backward Class of Citizens" and that separate reservation can be provided in their favour.
It is a well-accepted phenomenon throughout the country.
What is the logic behind it ?
It is that if Scheduled Tribes, Scheduled Castes and Other Backward Classes are lumped together, OBCs will take away all the vacancies leaving Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes high and dry.
The same logic also warrants categorisation as between more backward and backward.
We do not mean to say we may reiterate that this should be done.
We are only saying that if a State chooses to do it, it is not impermissible in law."
Number of seats for Other Backward Classes in different categories of State and Subordinate Services were reserved in the 1994 examination.
The examinations were conducted as per the Rules, 1962.
Since there is no provision in the Rules for giving the benefit relating to 5% less cut off marks to the OBC candidates and it has been limited only to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes candidates, the benefits of the proviso to Rule 13 cannot be extended to the petitioners and the other OBC candidates.
The proviso to Rule 13 does not suffer from the vice of discrimination or arbitrariness.
Looking to the mandate of the Constitution treating Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes as specially protected classes and giving the benefit of 5% less cut off marks to them in passing the Preliminary Examination and not to the Other Backward Classes, cannot be said to be unreasonable.
The policy is intended to give benefit to the historically discriminated and pathetically neglected members of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
Such relaxation in favour of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes candidates is neither unreasonable nor constitutes violation of Article 15(1) or 16 of the Constitution of India.
This relaxation, also, does not offend Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
13.
The next contention raised by the learned counsel for the petitioners is regarding category-wise declaration of the result in the ratio of 15 times of each of the categories.
This controversy stands concluded by the Division Bench judgment of this Court rendered in Mahesh Kumar Khandelwal and 16 others v. State of Rajasthan and others, 1995(2) WLC (Raj.)
223 : 1998(2) R.C.R.
(Criminal) 125.
The controversy before the Division Bench in Mahesh Kumar Khandelwal's case was : Whether category-wise declaration of result and preparation of separate list of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes candidates was necessary for the Commission ?
The Division Bench of this Court in Khandelwal's case, held that "Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes candidates cannot complain that a separate list should have been prepared with regard to these candidates, when the Rules do not mandate it either by express words or by necessary implication."
14.
The contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners is that for future examination the RPSC has made a provision for the category-wise publication of the result and the UPSC, in the present year, has, also, published the result category-wise.
15.
Rule 13 of the Rules, as it stood on the relevant day, does not envisage the category-wise publication of the result.
Rule 13 of the Rules has, now, been amended.
The amended rule makes a provision for category-wise publication of the result but this amended rule is not applicable to the present examination of 1994.
16.
Even otherwise category-wise publication of the result will not make any difference.
Only 352 candidates belonging to Other Backward Classes category have qualified to appear in the main examination.
There is a short-611 of 428 candidates who could not reach upto the cut-off marks.
Even if the category- wise result is declared, the petitioner and the other persons who have failed to reach upto the cut off marks, cannot be benefited.
The list even if separately prepared, will contain only 352 candidates who have qualified the preliminary examination by securing above the cut off marks.
In this view of the matter, there will not be any change in the result even if it is declared category-wise.
Thus, neither any prejudice has been caused to the petitioners in non-category-wise publication of the result nor was it necessary for the RPCS to do so as has been held by the Division Bench of this Court in Mahesh Kumar Khandelwal's case.
17.
The last contention raised by the learned counsel for the petitioners is that the reservation policy cannot be implemented without category-wise declaration of the result of the preliminary examination.
The object of category-wise declaration of the result is that fifteen times of the number of the candidates of each category should be allowed to appear in the main examination.
Fifteen times of the number of the candidates of each category can be included in the list provided such number of candidates have crossed the cut off marks.
If the number of the candidates who have qualified for the main examination by securing the marks above the cut off marks in the category is less than fifteen times then they cannot be included in the list of successful candidates to complete the 15 times of the reserved posts.
In the present case, only 352 candidates belonging to Other Backward Classes obtained more marks than the cut off marks and, therefore, only those candidates can be included in the list and preparation of the separate list will be of no consequence as only 352 candidates of Other Backward Classes can be included in the list even if it is separately prepared.
The reservation policy only requires that fifteen times of the persons of the category reserved for that particular category should be declared successful to compete in the main examination but if the requisite number of the candidates have not obtained the qualifying marks then their names cannot be included in that particular category.
Only successful candidates, who have crossed the cut off marks, are to be included and not the other persons to complete the figure of fifteen times.
The contention raised by the learned counsel for the petitioners is, therefore, bereft of any substance.
18.
In the result, I do not find any merit in the writ petition filed by the petitioners and the same deserves to be dismissed.
Since the writ petition filed by the petitioners itself has been heard and decided on merit, learned counsel for the appellants Rajasthan Public Service Commission and another, therefore, does not press the appeal which has been filed against the Order dated 1.8.96 passed by the learned single Judge on the stay application in SB Civil Writ Petition No. 1579 of 1996 (Vijay Kumar Gehlot and others v. Rajasthan Public Service Commission and others).
19.
In the result, I do not find any merit in this writ petition and the same is hereby dismissed.
The appeal filed by the Rajasthan Public Service Commission and another is, also, dismissed as not pressed.
J C Verma, J - I had privilege and benefit to go through the judgment of brother Judge.
On certain points in the circumstances of the case, with utmost respect to my brother colleague, I have not my own reservation so far it relates to deprives the benefits of one reserved category from the benefits which have been awarded to another reserved category and to my humble opinion, it shall amount to be against the well defined principles of equality before law which principles are very dear to the Courts.
Therefore, I give the separate judgment.
2.
The petitioners, members of other backward classes (for short as "OBC"), a reserved category, brought on the list of reserved category for the purpose of reservation in the services first time in the year 1994, are claiming in the present writ petition, the same benefits which have been awarded to other reserved categories in the Rules vide notification dated 13th September, 1962 published in the Rajasthan Rajpatra, Extraordinary, Part-IV (C), dated 13962, under Article 309 of the Constitution of India, whereby the Rules called as the Rajasthan State and Subordinate Service (Direct Recruitment by Combined Competitive Examination) Rules, 1962 (for short as "Rules of 1962") had come into force for recruitment in the service by way of competitive examination etc. etc. Rule 13 of the Rules of 1962 provides a scheme of examination i.e. this examination is to be conducted by the Commission in two stages i.e. preliminary examination and main examination.
The marks obtained in the preliminary examination by the candidates who are declared qualified for admission to the main examinations, are not to be counted for determining their final order of merit.
The number of candidates to be admitted to the main examination will be 15 times the total approximate number of vacancies to be filled in the year in the various services.
A proviso has been added to the Rule 13 to the fact that if adequate number of candidates belonging to the Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes (for short as SC/ST) are not available amongst the candidates to be declared qualified for admission to the main examination, the Commission may at their discretion keep the cut off marks upto 5 per cent less than the general candidates.
3.
The grievance of the petitioners is, that once the proviso to Rule 13 is adopted and the Commission takes a decision to keep the cut off marks upto 5 per cent (less-sic), for admission to the main examination, in respect to the SC/ST, the "OBC" reserved category which has now been inducted in the year 1994 is to be treated alike and give the same benefit as has been bestowed on the SC/ST candidates.
4.
Admittedly, when these rules along with the proviso were framed in the year 1962, the only reserved class available was SC/ST and, therefore, if there was no "OBC" class available at the relevant time of 1962, there was no question of including the word "OBC" in the proviso itself.
The question to be answered by the Court is as to whether the OBC class, once has been declared as entitled to reservation under various Articles of the Constitution of India and after getting the report of the Commission as appointed under the relevant provisions of the Constitution of India for declaring the reserved class, is also entitled to the similar treatment as being awarded to other reserved category/class.
In the present case, it is not disputed that the candidates belonging to SC/ST have been awarded the benefit of cut off mark is upto 5 per cent less than the General candidates.
But as per the respondents, OBC class has been denied this benefit only because of the reason that in the Rules of 1962, the word "OBC" has not been included and, therefore, until and unless the "OBC" is also mentioned in the rules, no benefit can be derived by the petitioners under the Rules.
There is no doubt that under the Rules of 1962, OBC class could not be mentioned; there was an existence of OBC at that time, and the OBC came into being for the first time, only in the year 1994 for being treated as a reserved category.
The discrimination would arise amongst the equally placed category if they are treated unequals and thus there would be clear infringement of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
The Courts cannot lose sight of the fact that the main purpose of giving such a concession to, the then reserved class, was to uplift them to some level because of their social, economic and education backwardness.
If these very tests are also available to the OBC and the backward classes have been declared as backward class because of their social, economic and educational backwardness status, it shall be legally not permissible to not to include the OBC class for the benefit of proviso to Rule 13 as to bring them parallel to the benefits being given to SC/ST.
Article 14 of the Constitution of India provides equalities before the law or the equal protection of law within the territory of India.
To trace the history of equality before the law, Article 15, sub-section (4) enables the State for making special provisions for the advancement of any socially and educationally backward classes of citizens or for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and various type of reservation made by the State have been held to be legal if the action of State conforms the four corners of Constitution of India.
In regard to equality of opportunity in the matters of public employment.
Article 16 sub-clause (4) further empowers the State Government for making any provisions for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any backward class of citizens which, in the opinion of the State, is not adequately represented in the services under the State.
5.
Article 16, sub-clause (4) clearly talks of the backward classes of citizens who are to be given some protection of reservation, if so considered by the State.
The backward class of citizens is a class in themselves, which have been further defined into the SC/ST or given any other name as per the recommendation of various reports of the Committees and Commissions.
In the Constitution itself, the classes which were already known and defined to be backwards, were included as SC/ST, but certain classes were still to be earmarked by the Commission or the State for the purpose of reservation.
6.
It is not disputed that in the present case, reservations have been made for recruitment in the rules of 1962 to the extent of 16 per cent for SC, 12 per cent for ST and 21 per cent for the OBC.
The OBC class has been defined as backward class after proper investigation and declaration as such.
The State of Rajasthan has reserved 21 per cent for the purpose of recruitment to various classes of employment from amongst the OBCs.
7.
It is necessary to note whether there is any difference between the SC/ST or OBC or the State can by any of its action, act differently while admitting the said class falling under the reserved categories based on the same criteria of social/economic and educational backwardness, but still depriving one or the other reserved category of some concession, while awarding same to other reserved category.
Had there been any overt action or order in writing or some notification whereby the OBC reserved category which had been defined for the first time as a reserved category, the same was liable to be analysed in the judicial review.
But to say that in the Rules of 1962, the OBC reserved category is not mentioned which category has been for the first time brought to life in the year 1994 and, therefore, not entitled to benefits being provided to other reserve categories, is something which is unimaginable.
There is no difference of the reserved categories amongst themselves, once they are included as such for the purpose of reservation for the public employment, may be SC/ST or other OBC reserved category.
Article 15(4) authorises the State to make a special provision for advancement of any socially or educationally backward class of citizens as distinguished from SC and ST. Sub-clauses 24 and 25 of Article 366 defines SC and ST respectively, but there is no clause of defining socially and educationally backward class of citizens, and so in determining the question as to whether a particular provision has been validly made under Clause 15(4) or not, the first question which falls to be determined is whether the State has validly determined which should be included in the backward class.
In the present case, the State has already determined the backward class was per the requirement of Article 15(4).
After such determination, the backward class is deemed to be similar for the purpose of other benefits to that of SC and ST which have been defined and were known to be backward class when the Constitution was made.
It has been held by Hon'ble Supreme Court in M. R. Balaji v. The State of Mysore and others, AIR 1963 SC 649, as follows :  "It seems fairly clear that the backward classes of citizens for whom special provision is authorised to be made are, by Article 15(4) itself, treated as being similar to the Scheduled Castes, and Scheduled Tribes which have been defined were known to be backward and the Constitution makers felt no doubt that special provision had to be made for their advancement.
It was realised that in the Indian Society there were other classes of citizens who were equally, or may be somewhat less backward than the Scheduled Castes and Tribes and it was thought that some special provision ought to be made even for them.
Article 341 provides for the issue of public notification specifying the castes, races or tribes which shall, for the purposes of this Constitution, be deemed to be Scheduled Castes either in the State or the Union Territory as the case may be.
Similarly Article 342 makes a provision for the issue of public notification in respect of Scheduled Tribes.
Under Article 338(3), it is provided that references to the SC and ST shall be construed as including reference to such other backward classes as the President may, on receipt of the report of a Commission appointed under Article 340(1), by order, specify and also to the Anglo Indian Community.
It would, thus, be seen that this provision contemplates that some Backward Classes may by the Presidential Order be included in SC and ST. That helps to bring out the point that the Backward Classes for whose improvement special provision is contemplated by Article 15(4) are in the matter of their backwardness comparable to SC and ST."  8.
Article 15 prohibits the State from discriminating against any citizen on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them.
By Clause (3) of Article 15 the State is, notwithstanding the provision contained in Clause (1), permitted to make special provision for women and children.
By Clause (4) a special provision for the advancement of any socially and educationally Backward Classes of citizens or for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes is outside the purview of Clause (1).
But Clause (4) is an exception to Clause (1).
Being an exception, it cannot be extended so as in effect to destroy the guarantee of Clause (1).
The Parliament has by enacting Clause (4) attempted to balance as against the right of equality of citizens the special necessities of the weaker sections of the people by allowing a provision to be made for their advancement.
In order that effect may be given to Clause (4), it must appear that the beneficiaries of the special provision are classes which are backward socially and educationally and they are other than the SC and ST, and that the provisions made is for their advancement.
Reservation may be adopted to advance the interests of weaker sections of society.
9.
In the present case, once the State had come to this conclusion that backward class is now defined as OBC and brought under the reserved category similar to that of SC and ST, it cannot be denied the other benefit which has been bestowed on other reserved category.
As soon as any reserved category is defined, and reservation clause is adopted for their advancement, all the reserved categories are treated to be equal and alike and that is the spirit of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
Not treating them alike would be violating the fundamental rights of that reserved category and they cannot be made unequals amongst the equals.
10.
It needs no emphasis to say that principal aim of Articles 14 and 16 is equality and equality of opportunity and that Clause (4) of Article 16 is but a means of achieving the very same objective.
Clause (4) is a special provision, though not an exception to Clause (1).
Both the provisions have to be harmonised keeping in mind the fact that both are but the reinstatements of the principle of equality enshrined in Article 14.
To say that after defining as particular clause under the exception clause either Clause (4) of Article 15 or (4) of Article 16, there should be discrimination within such clauses, is nothing but an infringement of Article 14 of the Constitution.
The action of the State in exclusion of persons belonging to socially and educationally backward class on the ground of higher income against the reserved seats in Medical College was set aside by the Kerala High Court in the case reported in 1975 A.I.R.
Page 131 (Kerala) (Kumari T Shameen and others v. Principal Medical College, Trivandrum) holding that this cannot be the factor for determining the social and educational backwardness under Article 15 of Clause 4 and the restriction imposed was declared unconstitutional and invalid.
In AIR 1988 SC 1663, Haryana State Adhyapak Sangh v. State of Haryana, the Apex Court held that emoluments of teachers of aided private schools and teachers of the government schools are to be given parity as per recommendation of the Kothari Commission.
The action of the State Government in revising the pay scales of the teachers in the government school and in not giving the same benefit to the teachers of private aided schools was held to be arbitrary and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution on the ground that the teachers as a class cannot be discriminated.
11.
In the case reported in AIR 1973 Andhra Pradesh, Page 65 (M. Venkatachalam and others v. State of Andhra Pradesh), the rule laying down for giving half fee concession to the economically backward students to the extent of Rs. 3,600/- income of their parents was modified to deprive new class of employee-students.
The employee students in the evening classes were deprived of half fee concession.
It was held that students are class in themselves and there is no nexus of the object that was sought to be achieved by giving concessions to the economically backward students and the government order was set aside being violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
12.
The facts in the present case have already been stated and need not be reproduced.
The petitioners who had appeared in the preliminary examination, result of which was published on 10496.
The advertisement for inviting the applications was made on 21.11.1994.
The examination itself was held on 10121994.
The result of the preliminary examination was not declared category-wise, even though the reservations were provided on regard to Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and OBC The benefit of 5% less cut-off marks, as provided under proviso to Rule 13 of the Rules of 1962 was extended to the candidates belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
The counsel for the petitioner has raised the following three contentions to be determined i.e. (i) providing the benefit of 5% less cut-off marks, (ii) the result of the preliminary examination be declared category-wise and should include 15 times of the post reserved for other backward classes as well, (iii) result be declared category-wise.
13.
The counsel appearing for the respondents has opposed to extend the benefit to the OBC on the ground that benefit of Rule 13 including the proviso is applicable to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes only as these categories are mentioned in the Rules of 1962, where OBC Class has not been included and, further, the OBCs not the same class as that of Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes.
It was also opposed that category-wise declaration of the result is not envisaged by the Rules.
14.
As has been discussed above, that once a discretion by the Commission is exercised to keep the cut-off marks upto 5% less to the reserved categories mentioned in the rules, this benefit is to be made available to all other reserved categories as well i.e. backward class category along with Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribes.
The reservation of OBC in the service was made in the year 1994 and, therefore, there was no occasion whatsoever to include the OBC Class in the Rules of 1962 from the very initial stage.
A clear arbitrariness is writ large when discrimination is made for awarding the benefit of the proviso of Rule 13 amongst reserved class itself.
The aim of including such a benefit in the Rules of 1962 at that time was to provide such benefits to all the reserved classes existing at that time and if and when any reserved class is defined later on, that class cannot be discriminated against.
Once, the OBC has been defined as backward class of the citizens and the State has accepted such status of such classes in the society and has also granted the reservation in the services by issuing appropriate notification, it shall be not proper for the State to deprive such new included class under the reserved category, to be deprived of the benefits being awarded to other reserved categories.
As such, the writ petition is allowed to the extent that OBC Class as well, is entitled to all such benefits as provided under the Rule 13 and proviso of Rule 13 of the Rules of 1962, in similar and alike manner as that of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, if the Commission exercises the discretion to bestow such benefits in favour of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
In the case in hand, the Commission has already exercised such discretion in favour of reserved classes of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes only and has denied such benefits to the OBC Class mainly on the ground that in the year 1962, OBC was not included under the Rules of 1962, which even otherwise could not have been included as OBC for the reason that it as such was defined only in the year 1994 and the State has accepted the reservation provision for the OBC as socially, economically and educationally backward class.
15.
In regard to the contention that Commission was bound to publish a separate list in regard to all the categories i.e. general category and reserved categories, I fully agree with the views of my brother Judge, as the matter stands covered by the Division Bench Judgment of this Court reported in 1995(2) W.L.C.
223,, but as has been pointed out and also admitted by the respondents that presently the Commission has framed rules to publish the category-wise list prospectively and such procedure is also adopted by the Union Public Service Commission, it would be quite appropriate and no harm would be caused that category-wise list be prepared in the present case as well.
Even though, legally, it cannot be forced upon the Commission to prepare category-wise list because of the Division Bench Judgment in Mahesh Kumar's case.
If the Commission has already taken a decision to publish the category-wise result of the preliminary examination, for proper and smooth working of the Commission, and if such procedure has been adopted now, no harm would be caused if category-wise list is also prepared in the present case by showing grace and to remove doubts in the minds of the candidates.
It would have been different matter, if the Commission had not adopted this procedure now prospectively.
In the result, the writ petition is allowed and the Commission is directed to bestow the same benefit as provided under the Rule 13 and its proviso of the Rules of 1962 to the reserved category of OBC as well in the same manner as has been adopted in favour of other reserved categories i.e. SC/ST.
No order as to costs.
ORDER OF REFERENCE (30.8.1996) V S Kokje, J - This reference has come to me under Rule 61-A of the Rules of the High Court of Judicature for Rajasthan, 1952 on difference of opinion between Hon'ble B R Arora, J and Hon'ble J C Verma, J, the learned Judges of the Division Bench which heard the petition on the same being withdrawn from a Single Bench.
2.
The petition came up before the Single Bench according to roster.
On July 4, the learned single Judge issued an ad interim writ directing the respondents to publish the result of the preliminary examination of Rajasthan State and Subordinate Services Combined Competitive Examination, 1994 (hereinafter called `The Examination') category-wise for the Scheduled Caste candidates, the Scheduled Tribes Candidates, the Other Backward Class candidates and the rest of the candidates in general category separately.
It was also directed that the number of candidates permitted to take the main examination should be fifteen times of the vacancies.
It was, further, directed that the main examination be not held on the basis of the results of the preliminary examination already published which were under challenge.
On August 1, 1996, the learned single Judge by a detailed Order dismissed the application under Article 226(3) of the Constitution of India filed by the respondents and confirmed the earlier ad-interim writ issued with a modification that if the Rajasthan Public Service Commission decides to publish the result of preliminary examination category-wise then the main examination may be held but the result of the main examination so held should not be declared till the pendency of the writ petition.
3.
The Rajasthan Public Service Commission (hereinafter referred to as `Commission') filed a DB Civil Special Appeal (Writ) No. 427/96 against the order dated August 1, 1996 before the Division Bench.
On August 9, 1996 the Division Bench hearing the appeal withdrew the petition from the single Bench and transferred the case to a Division Bench observing that there were sufficient questions of law of great importance involved in the matter and, therefore, the matter deserved to be heard and decided by a Division Bench.
This is how the main SB writ petition went before the regular Division Bench and was heard along with DB Civil Special Appeal (Writ) No. 427/96.
4.
The petitioners are candidates for recruitment to Rajasthan State and Subordinate Services Combined Competitive Examination, 1994.
Under the scheme of the examination a preliminary is held and the candidates who successfully clear the preliminary examination only are allowed to take the main examination.
Cut-off marks are applied for the preliminary examination on the basis of which success or failure of the candidates is decided.
These marks are not counted for any other purpose than for qualifying to take the main examination.
Out of the successful candidates in the preliminary examination candidates equivalent to fifteen times the number of posts available are allowed to take the main examination.
It is also provided in the scheme that if there is a shortfall in the number of candidates available for the main examination according to the aforesaid norms in the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (for short `SC' and `ST' hereinafter) categories, the Commission may lower down the cut-off marks by five per cent in case of SCs and STs candidates.
5.
The petitioners belong to Other Backward Class (for short `the OBC' hereinafter) category.
It is common ground that reservations have been provided by a general order in the Government employment to SC, ST and OBC.
Reservation to the SC and ST candidates was available when initially the Rules were framed in the year 1962.
Subsequently, in the year 1994 reservations were also granted to OBCs.
The petitioners contended that the results of the preliminary examination have to be declared separately category-wise for the SC, ST and OBC and the general or unreserved class.
It was also contended that the concession of lowering the cut-off marks by five per cent in case of short-fall of candidates has also to be made available to the candidates belonging to OBCs as it is available to SC and ST candidates.
6.
The learned Judges of the Division Bench unanimously turned down the contention that it was necessary for the Commission to publish the result of the preliminary examination category-wise.
They, however, differed on the point of availability of five per cent concession in the cut-off marks to the OBC candidates on par with SC and ST candidates.
Hon'ble B R Arora, J was of the view that since the Rules did not specially provide for any such concession to be given to the OBC candidates, no such concession could be made available to them.
Hon'ble J C Verma, J however, was of the opinion that the SC, ST and OBC candidates form one class and no distinction could be made in the treatment to be meted out to them.
He was, therefore, of the opinion that the concession of lowering of the cut-off marks by five per cent was available to OBC candidates also as it was available to SC and ST candidates.
Because of this difference of opinion, the learned Judges of the Division Bench directed the matter to be placed before the Hon'ble Chief Justice.
Therefore, Hon'ble the Chief Justice nominated me as a Judge to hear the reference in accordance with Rule 61-A of the Rules of the High Court of Judicature for Rajasthan, 1952 (for short `the Rules' hereinafter).
7.
In view of Rule 61-A of the Rules, the point to be decided by me is the point on which Hon'ble Judges have differed.
Therefore, the scope of the arguments before me is limited to the point of difference viz., "Whether the five per cent concession in cut-off marks which is available to SC/ST candidates is available or can be made available to OBC candidates also."
8.
Shri Govind Mathur, learned counsel for Vijay Kumar and others submitted that the SC/ST candidates and the OBC candidates form but one class of this `Backward Class' and as such the concession given to SC/ST in the proviso to Rule 13 of the concerned Rules would accrue to OBC also.
He submitted that at the time when Rules were framed no reservation was available for OBC and that is the reason why the Rules did not provide specifically for lowering the cut-off marks by five per cent in the case of OBC also.
Pointing out that Article 16(4) of the Constitution does not speak of SC and ST separately but only speaks of `any backward class of citizens' as, contra-distinguished from Article 15(4) of the Constitution which specifically uses the terms SC and ST along with any socially and educationally backward class citizens, the learned counsel contended that so far as Article 16(4) is concerned no distinction could be made amongst the categories falling within the backward class once `backward class' is found to be entitled to reservation by the State.
He also contended that the criteria on the basis of which reservations are to be decided under Article 16(4) of the Constitution could not be different for different categories of backward class and, therefore, on the same considerations on which the concession was granted to SC and ST candidates, the OBC were also entitled to similar treatment as they form a single class for the purposes of Article 16(4) of the Constitution as members of the `backward class of citizens'.
9.
The learned counsel, further, elaborated that the only criterion prescribed under Article 16(4) of the Constitution for deciding to make a provision for reservation in favour of any backward class of citizens is inadequacy of their representation in the services under the State.
According to the learned counsel once it is decided to grant reservation to the OBC along with SC/ST candidates they are on par with them and form but a single backward class which is not adequately represented in the services under the State and they could not be treated differently for any purpose at all.
The learned counsel, therefore, contended that to achieve the constitutional goal of bringing backward classes on par with the advanced classes of society by employing corrective or compensatory discriminations, the OBC should be deemed to be included in SC, ST for the purpose of proviso to Rule 13 of the Rules.
10.
The second limb of argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner is based on doctrine of equality.
According to the learned counsel, SC/ST candidates and the OBC candidates are parts of but one `backward class' and, therefore, depriving the benefits which were available to the SC/ST candidates to the OBC candidates would be discriminatory and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
The learned counsel, further, contended that SC, ST and OBC are similarly situated and are on par with each other in the manner of backwardness and inadequacy of representation in employment under the State.
They cannot, therefore, be treated differently.
11.
In reply Shri J P. Joshi, learned counsel appearing for the Commission submitted that the proviso to Rule 13 of the concerned Rules is clear, unequivocal and unambiguous.
It clearly provides the lowering down of the cut-off marks in the given contingency for the SC/ST candidates only.
According to him when language of the provision is clear, it was not permissible to add something which is not there in it.
The learned counsel submitted that according to the recognised canons of interpretation it was not permissible to add words where the makers of the provision have used clear and unequivocal language.
He submitted that the OBC category could not be included in the beneficiaries of the proviso by a deeming fiction.
The learned counsel also refuted the arguments based on the difference in language of Articles 15(4) and 16(4) of the Constitution of India and pointed out that even that argument should not now be available after the amendment of the Constitution of India in 1995 by which sub-clause 4(A) to Article 16 was introduced in which SC and ST are specifically mentioned.
12.
The learned counsel, further, submitted that all the backward classes cannot be clubbed together into one class so as to make it impossible to treat them separately in proportion to the degree of their backwardness.
The learned counsel also pointed out that the SC/ST and OBC are being differently treated in any respect under various provisions of the Rules like the maximum age limit, the percentage of seats reserved, number of chances available at the examinations etc.
It was also contended that after Indra Sawhney's case there should be no dispute that even amongst the OBC, it was permissible to identify various sections or layers of OBC for the purpose of reservations.
The learned counsel, therefore, submitted that the SC/ST and OBC are two distinct categories of the backward class and, therefore, could be treated differently.
13.
Shri K L Jasmatia, learned Additional Advocate General appearing for the State supported the view taken by Hon'ble B R Arora, J and adopted the arguments advanced by Shri J P. Joshi, the learned counsel for the Commission.
14.
It would be necessary to quote relevant portion of Rule 13, the proviso to which is the basis on which the relief has been sought in the petition.
It reads as under :  13.
Scheme of Examination, personality and Vice-Voce Test.
- Competitive Examination shall be conducted by the Commission in two stages i.e. preliminary examination and main examination as per the scheme specified in Scheduled III.
The marks obtained in the preliminary examination by the candidates, who are declared qualified for admission to the main examination will not be counted for determining their final order of merit.
The number of candidates to be admitted to the main examination will be 15 times the total approximate number of vacancies to be filled in the year in the various services and posts, provided they are otherwise eligible, but in the said range all those candidates, who secure the same percentage of marks as may be fixed by the Commission for any lowest range will be admitted to the main examination.
Provided, further, that if adequate number of candidates belonging to the Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes are not available amongst the candidates to be declared qualified for admission to the main examination, the Commission may at their discretion keep the cut off marks upto 5 (five) per cent less than the General candidates......."  15.
It is contended that the words SC/ST in the proviso shall also include OBC.
It is submitted that in view of the difference in language used in Articles 15(4) and 16(4), SC and ST could be a separate category of backward class for the purpose of Article 15(4) of the Constitution but not for the purpose of Article 16(4) of the Constitution.
As the words SC and ST are not specifically used in Article 16(4) of the Constitution it was contended that there could be only one backward class for the purpose of Article 16(4) and once it was decided to give reservation to any category of candidates under Article 16(4) of the Constitution, it was available to all of them and not to some of them alone.
It was, thus, contended that once the State made reservation in favour of OBC under Article 16(4) of the Constitution of India, they have to be treated on par for all purposes as a single backward class and there could not be sub-classification amongst the backward class.
It was, therefore, contended that the State was not free to grant concession in cut- off marks by five per cent only to the members of the SC and ST and, therefore, the same concession should be deemed to be available to OBC also.
16.
The argument is ex-facie fallacious.
The expression "any backward class of citizens" used in Article 16(4) of the Constitution does not suggest a single class of citizen.
The very use of the word "any" before the words `backward class of citizens' suggests that the framers of the Constitution were alive to the situation that there is no single backward class of the citizen in the country but there were many categories and layers in the backward classes themselves.
If the framers of the Constitution were of the view that the entire backward classes of the society were but one single unit, they would have used the words `the backward class of the citizens'.
Moreover, after the addition of Clause 4(A) to Article 16 of the Constitution in the year 1995, it has become clear that for the purpose of Article 16 also SC and ST are recognised as a distinct and separate entity.
After Indra Sawhney's case, AIR 1993 SC 477, it is clear that there could be sub- classification amongst the backward class and SC and ST are but one category of backward classes constitutionally recognised.
There is, therefore, no force in the contention that the words SC and ST used in the proviso to Rule 13 include OBC also.
17.
There is considerable force in the contention of the respondents that the plain language of the proviso is not capable of any other interpretation and the concession which has been specifically granted to SC and ST could not be extended to OBC by a deeming fiction.
What the petitioners are asking the Court to do is read the word `OBC' which is not there in the proviso.
18.
In Kanailal Sur v. Paramnidi Sadhu Khan, AIR 1957 SC 907, Gajendragadkar, J observed that "if the words used are capable of one construction only then it would not be open to the courts to adopt any other hypothetical construction on the ground that such construction is more consistent with the alleged object and policy of the Act".
The same view was taken in Ranajaya Singh v. Baijnath Singh, AIR 1972 SC 749, Senior Superintendent, RMS Cochin v. K B Gopinath, AIR 1972 SC 1487.
In Pakala Narayanswami v. Emperor, AIR 1939 P.C.
47, Lord Atkin observed that "when the meaning of the words is plain, it is not the duty of courts to busy themselves with supposed intentions".
In Ranajaya Singh's case (supra) which was referred in Dibya Singh Malana v. State of Orissa, AIR 1989 SC 1737 : 1989(1) R.R.R.
506, S R Das has observed that "the spirit of the law may well be an elusive and unsafe guide and the supposed spirit can certainly not be given effect to in opposition to the plain language of the sections of the Act".
19.
Justice G P Singh in his celebrated book "Principles of Statutory Interpretation" (Fifth Edition 1992), has succinctly dealt with the case law on the topic at page 42 onwards.
Several decisions have been quoted by him under the Sub-Head : (Casus omissus).
It would be useful to reproduce some of the excerpts quoted by him.
On page 47, the learned author has dwelled upon the liberal view of Constitution propounded by Lord Denning and it would be appropriate to quote the author himself.
20.
"Before leaving the topic, a reference is necessary to certain observations of Denning, L. J which have been cited with approval by the Supreme Court.
Denning, L. J said : "When a defect appears a Judge cannot simply fold his hands and blame the draftsman.
He must set to work on the constructive task of finding the intention of Parliament and then he must supplement the written words so as to give `force and life' to the intention of the legislature.
A Judge should ask himself the question how, if the makers of the Act had themselves come across this ruck in the texture of it, they would have straightened it out ?
He must then do as they would have done.
A Judge must not alter the material of which the Act is woven, but he can and should iron out the creases.
In a subsequent case he re-stated the same thing in a new form : "We sit here to find out the intention of Parliament and of ministers and carry it out, and we do this better by filling in the gaps and making sense of the enactment than by opening it up to destructive analysis.
But these observation of Denning, L. J came up for severe criticism at the hands of the House of Lords and were plainly disapproved.
"It appears to me", said Lord Simonds "to be a naked usurpation of the legislative function under the thin disguise of interpretation.
Lord Morton (with whom Lord Goddard entirely agreed) observed: "These heroics are out of place" and pointed out Lord Tucker : "Your Lordships would be acting in a legislative rather than a judicial capacity if the view put forward by Denning, L. J were to prevail".
It does not seem, however, reasonable to infer that Lord Denning was intending to lay down a rule permitting usurpation of legislative function by courts and it is more proper to infer that he was emphasising in somewhat unconventional manner that when object or policy of a statute can be ascertained, imprecision in its language should not be readily allowed in the way of adopting a reasonable construction which avoids absurdities and incongruities and carried out the object or policy.
The difference, if at all, is regarding the extent of the limited creative role which the Judges can plan".
21.
To conclude the discussion on the topic, it is necessary to refer to the decisions of the Supreme Court in Petron Engineering Construction Pvt. Ltd. v. Central Board of Direct Taxes, AIR 1989 SC 501, and P K Unni v. Nirmala Industries, AIR 1990 SC 933, wherein it has been observed that if a matter, provision for which may have been desirable, has not been really provided for by the legislature, the omission cannot be called a defect of the nature which can be cured or supplied by recourse to the mode of construction advocated by Lord Denning in the case of Seaford Court Estate Ltd, (1949) 2 All.
ER 155 (CA).
22.
The next question for determination is whether not extending the benefit of lowering of cut-off marks to the OBC would amount to discrimination against them violative of the equality clauses of the Constitution.
To my mind the question really does not arise in the case because what is being asked by the petitioners is the benefit at par with SC and ST and not the striking out of the provision giving concession to the SC and ST.
If the provision is discriminatory, the consequence would be depriving the SC and ST also of the benefit of lowering of the cut-off marks.
It cannot result in automatic grant of the benefit to other categories to whom the benefit has not been extended.
The maximum which could be asked from this Court is a declaration that in this matter the SC, ST and OBC have to be treated similarly and the State could either give the benefit to the SC, ST and the OBC taken as a whole or not at all.
Normally mandamus cannot be issued to further legislate in order to bring the earlier legislation in conformity with the Constitution.
If it is possible, an interpretation which would tend to uphold the provision can be adopted but the State cannot be asked to legislate or to make provision in the Rules one way or the other.
In the peculiar circumstances of this case, the petitioners have prayed for being treated at par with the SCs and STs in the matter of grant of lowering of cut-off marks by extending the benefit of OBC.
24.
Even assuming that it was possible for this Court to grant such a relief, it is difficult to accept the contention of the petitioners that SCs, STs and OBCs are similarly situated and they cannot be classified separately on rational basis.
The provisions of the Constitution recognize the SC and ST each as separate entity.
There is no doubt about it.
Not only that Article 15(4)) and Article 16(4) use the specific words SC and ST but Articles 341 and 342 provide for specifying particular castes, races or tribes as SC and ST.
Article 330 provides for reservation of seats for SC and ST in the House of People and Article 332 provides for reservation of seats for them in the State Legislative Assemblies.
Article 335 of the Constitution specifically provides that claim of the members of the SC and ST shall be taken into consideration consistently with the maintenance of efficiency of administration, in the making of appointments to service and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union or of State.
The fact that no such parallel provisions have been made for the OBC is sufficient to separate it from the SC and ST as a distinct class.
No only this, Article 338 provides for a National Commission for the SC and ST and a separate Article 340 provides for appointment for a Commission to investigate the conditions of backward classes.
A comparison of Articles 338 and 340 of the Constitution shows that whereas it is mandatory to have a National Commission for SC and ST, it is not so in the case of a Commission for Backward Classes.
All these provisions clearly show that the Constitution recognized SC and ST as a distinct class independent and separate from the OBC.
The term `backward class' includes SC and ST but the terms `SC' and `ST' do not include OBC.
The use of expression `Other Backward Class' clearly indicates that they are apart from SC and ST which also are a part of the backward class.
The word `other' signifies other than SC and ST.  25.
The conclusion, therefore, is that SC and ST are distinct and separate from OBC and provision could be made separately for SC/ST without violating the principle of equality.
26.
In fact in many respects of ST and ST have been differently treated from OBCs in the scheme of the recruitment procedure itself.
They differ in percentage of seats reserved, in the eligibility criteria and so there cannot be any objection to their being treated differently in the matter of grant of the concession of cut-off marks.
27.
There are well recognised limitations to the doctrine of `equal protection'.
The principles of equality do not mean that every law must have universal application for all persons who are not by nature, attainment or circumstances in the same position, as the varying needs of different classes of person often require separate treatment.
The principle does not take away from the State of power of classifying persons for legitimate purposes.
It is also true that every classification is in some degree likely to produce some inequality, and mere production of inequality is not enough.
If a law deals equally with members of a well defined class, it is not obnoxious and it is not open to the charge of denial of equal protection on the ground that it has no application to other persons.
Legislation enacted for the achievement of a particular object or purpose need not be all-embracing.
It is for the Legislature to determine what categories it would include within the scope of legislation and merely because certain categories which would stand on the same footing as those which are covered by the legislation are left out it would not render the legislation in any manner discriminatory and violative of Article 14.
28.
It is also to be noted that Article 14 does not prevent the Legislature from introducing a reform gradually, that is to say, at first applying the legislation to some of the institutions or objects having common features or particular areas only, according to the exigencies of the situation.
In Sainik Motors v. State of Rajasthan, AIR 1961 SC 1480, it was observed that where the Constitution itself makes a classification the charge of discrimination cannot be levelled against such separate treatment.
In this case, therefore, when the Constitution itself makes a distinction between the SC and ST on the one hand and OBC on the other hand, it cannot be said that if they are treated separately in the matter of grant of concession in cut-off marks it would amount to impermissible discrimination under the Constitution of India.
29.
In Budhan v. State of Bihar, (1955) 1 SCR 1045 and Hanif v. State of Bihar, AIR 1918 SC 731, Harakchand v. Union of India, (1969) 2 SCC 166 and Pathumma v. State of Kerala, AIR 1978 SC 771, it was held that in other to pass the test of permissible classification two conditions must be fulfilled, namely, (i) that the classification must be founded on an intelligible differential which distinguishes persons or things that are grouped together from others left out of the group and (ii) that, that differential must have a rational relation to the object sought to be achieved by the statute in question.
In Kedar Nath v. State of WB, AIR 1953 SC 401, P B Roy v Union of India, (1972) 2 SCC 432), it was held that Article 14 does not insist that legislative classification should be scientifically perfect or logically complete.
In Re : Special Courts Bill, AIR 1979 SC 478, it was observed that classification would be justified if it is not palpably arbitrary.
In Venkateswara v. State of AP, AIR 1993 SC 1947 and Khandige v AITO, AIR 1963 SC 591, it was observed that if there is equality and uniformity within each group, the law will not be condemned as discriminative, though due to some fortuitous circumstances arising out of a peculiar situation some included in a class get an advantage over others, so long as they are not singled out for special treatment.
30.
Moreover, after the decision of the Supreme Court in Indira Sawhney v. Union of India, AIR 1993 SC 477, there can be little doubt that sub- classification amongst the backward classes on a rational basis is permissible and there can be a reasonable classification amongst backward and more backward.
Hon'ble B R Arora, J has aptly quoted the relevant passage from this decision in his opinion.
31.
There is one more important aspect of the case.
Charge of discrimination is by a group claiming special treatment and not by persons challenging special treatment to be given to a particular class.
It is easier to decide a question between the pro-reservationist and anti-reservationist but the same problem of classification becomes complex when the charge of discrimination is levelled by a group claiming reservation.
It is the basic principle under Article 15(1) or Article 16(1) of the Constitution of India that all are equal before the law and all are entitled to equal protection.
To these basic rules exceptions can be made in favour of backward class if the State is of the opinion that it was so necessary.
The expanse and the extent of such exception is to be determined by the State and not by anyone else.
When the State is of the opinion that exception to the Rule of equality is necessary to a particular extent in favour of a particular backward class, it cannot be said that such reservation or special treatment as an exception to the Rule of equality is not permissible.
However, when the State is of the opinion that though a class or community of the society is in fact backward but it is not of further opinion that an exception deserves to be made in respect of such community, it cannot be said that not forming of an opinion in favour of a class or community amongst the backward classes that it requires special treatment by making an exception to the general rule of equality, it cannot be said that holding of such an opinion by the State amounts to discrimination.
When it is left to the State for what section of backward class of people it shall make reservations by way of exception to the principle of equality a mandamus cannot be issued to ask the State to include a certain backward class in the pale of exception.
Under the scheme of Article 15(4) and Article 16(4) such a direction cannot be issued to the State to create exception in favour of particular community even if such communities are recognised by the State as Backward.
32.
The learned counsel for the petitioners relied on a decision of the Supreme Court in State of Kerala v. Kum.
T P Roshaa, AIR 1979 SC 765 and ITC Ltd v. State of Karnataka, (1985) (Supp.)
SCC 476, in support of the proposition that in a suitable case, the Court can mould the relief to suit the situation and in fact the Court is duly bound to do so in certain case.
In answer to this, the learned counsel for the Commission, cites a Full Bench decision of this Court in Shankar v UOI, 1982 RLR 1, and contends that in case of under inclusion in a reservation category, no challenge can be sustained.
33.
In the facts and circumstances of this case, I find that there is no scope for moulding the relief in favour of the petitioners, as what they are asking for is not within the jurisdiction of this Court to grant.
To mould the relief by increasing seats in College is quite different than asking the State to raise the percentage of reservation or grant reservation or special benefits where the State is not of the opinion that any such reservation or concession deserves to be granted.
The question in the present case is not of moulding relief to do justice all around but is of usurping the jurisdiction and interfering in the field reserved by the Constitution for the Legislature and the Executive.
The decisions, therefore, have no application to the present case.
34.
Before parting with the case I feel compelled to make certain observations which are not strictly necessary for the purpose of the reference of which the scope is limited to the point of difference amongst the learned Judges of the Division Bench.
But I feel so compelled because it was vehemently argued by the learned counsel for the petitioners that this Court should not remain a dumb spectator to the palpable injustice being done to the members of the OBC.
It was contended that the spirit behind providing 21% reservation to the OBC is to see that they really get adequate representation in the service by occupying the posts reserved for them.
By depriving them of an opportunity to appear at the main examination, the very purpose of the reservation was being defeated as per the learned counsel for the petitioners.
The answer to all these pleas is very simple.
If the petitioners wanted to canvass that point, it was open to them to challenge the very basis of providing cut-off marks for the preliminary examination.
A preliminary examination is essentially a screening test for short-listing candidates to a reasonable and practical extent so that in the main examination, the confusion and disorder likely to be created because of large number of candidates is avoided.
In these days of ever increasing unemployment, hundreds of applications are received for one post.
To allow all the candidates holding minimum qualifications for the post to appear at the written test or the interviews is simply not only impracticable but almost an impossible task.
It also involves tremendous wastage of time, money, and energy.
The short- listing procedure has, therefore, gained wide acceptability.
Short-listing can be made in two ways (i) by prescribing the maximum number of candidates in order of merit who could be allowed to take the main examination or (ii) by fixing minimum qualifying marks which may be called cut-off marks for deciding as to who can appear at the main examination.
All this becomes necessary when the number of candidates is large as compared to the seats available.
When the number of qualifying candidates available is less, problem of short- listing should not arise.
In the present case, when the number of candidates available in the categories of SC and ST and OBC are not even fifteen times the number of posts available for them there is indeed no rationale behind prescribing cut off marks at the preliminary examination.
It is true that because of Article 335 of the Constitution of India, the power under Article 16(4) is subject to the rider of maintenance of efficiency in the administration and, therefore, it is necessary for the State to fix certain minimum standards even for the reserved categories.
But this rider cannot apply to preliminary examination and could apply to the main examination because, only because, some one is allowed to compete at the main examination he does not get automatically inducted in the Government service and giving a chance to appear in the main examination does not interfere with or lower down the standards of administrative efficiency.
35.
Actually, the Rules also do not prescribe specifically, cut off marks for the preliminary examination as they prescribe for the main examination.
Rule 13 prescribes that number of candidates to be admitted in the main examination will be fifteen times of approximate number of the vacancies to be filled in the year in the various services and posts provided they are otherwise eligible and all those candidates who secure the same percentage of marks as may be fixed by the Commission, as the lowest range will be admitted to the main examination.
This means the number of candidates will be fifteen times the total number of vacancies subject to the candidates being otherwise eligible and also subject to a condition that all those candidates who have secured equivalent percentage of marks to the candidates who become eligible as the last candidates in the range of candidates fixed on the basis of fifteen times of the total number of vacancies shall be entitled to participate.
The main Rule does not speak of cut-off marks for the preliminary examination at all.
It is only in the proviso that there is a mention of cut-off marks for preliminary examination.
The whole Scheme is, therefore, confused and has created difficulties giving rise to this petition.
However, the petitioners cannot derive any benefit out of the aforesaid situation in this case firstly because they have not chosen to challenge the applicability of cut-off marks in preliminary examination and secondly, because the scope of this reference is very limited and confined to only the point of difference between the learned Judges of the Division Bench.
36.
For the aforesaid reasons, I am of the opinion that the OBC cannot be deemed to be included in the SC and ST for the purpose of lowering down the cut-off marks for the purpose of proviso to Rule 13 of the Rules and that the SC and ST are distinct and separate class as compared to the OBC.
The classification for the purposes of lowering the cut-off marks in favour of the SC and ST candidates only and not extending the benefit to OBC candidates is, therefore, reasonable and is not violative of Articles 14 and 15 or 16 of the Constitution of India.
37.
In the result I agree with the conclusions drawn by Hon'ble B R Arora, J and regret my inability to concur with the opinion of Hon'ble J C Verma, J The opinion of Hon'ble B R Arora, J with which I have agreed shall prevail in view of Rule 61-A of the Rules of the High Court of Judicature for Rajasthan, 1952 and the petition has to be decided accordingly.
38.
Consequently, the petition shall stand dismissed per majority in terms of the opinion rendered by Hon'ble B R Arora, J  Petition dismissed.