GC Garg, J - Petitioner filed the present writ petition for the issuance of a writ, order or direction for quashing letter dated October 19, 1989 by which respondent No. 2 recommended that Death-cum-Retirement gratuity (hereinafter referred to as gratuity) of the petitioner be not yet released.
2.
As per the allegations in the petition, the petitioner was posted as Medical Superintendent, in Guru Gobind Singh Hospital at Fardikot.
He retired from service on April 30, 1989 on attaining the age of superannuation by order Annexure P-1.
Neither any inquiry or other proceedings were pending against him nor he was issued any charge-sheet till the date of his retirement.
No inquiry or disciplinary proceedings had been initiated against him during the tenure of his service.
There was some shortage of medicines in the store of the Hospital and on an inquiry conducted by the Vice Principal, some employees of the Hospital we found responsible, but the petitioner was never associated in the enquiry proceedings.
The pension of the petitioner was released but his gratuity was not paid in spite of a representation dated November 28, 1980, Annexure P-2, made by him in that behalf and it has led to the filing of this writ petition.
3.
In the written statement filed by the respondent the broad stand taken is that some preliminary inquiry was conducted by the Principal on January 10, 1989 in a case of embezzlement of medicines/hospital material, whose overall incharge was the petitioner.
A case of embezzlement was got registered by the Punjab Government with the Vigilance Department on May 29, 1989 and subsequently on November 3, 1989, the Punjab Government considered and ordered to initiate departmental proceedings against the delinquent officers.
It is further stated in the written statement that final report of the departmental inquiry was received on September 7, 1989.
The respondents also stated that gratuity of the petitioner was withheld in view of rule 22 (c) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules Vol. II and that steps were being taken to serve charge sheet on the petitioner, who was also held responsible for the embezzlement.
4.
Learned counsel for the petitioner contended that the petitioner has not been served with any charge-sheet till today and a huge amount of gratuity which became due to him on April 30, 1989 has been withheld and has not so far been paid to the petitioner.
Learned counsel submitted that no inquiry proceedings of any kind were pending against the petitioner nor has he received any notice therefore, though a period of about three years has elapsed when gratuity became due to him.
Learned Assistant Advocate General, Punjab appearing on behalf of the respondents was unable to controvert the submission of the learned counsel.
He was also not able to point out that the charge-sheet which was contemplated to be served on the petitioner as far back as April, 1990, has been served.
As per the respondents, initially a preliminary inquiry was conducted and a case of embezzlement of medicines/hospital material was got registered.
Departmental inquiry was also conducted, but the petitioner was never associated or called in any inquiry proceedings.
The respondents have, even till date, not been able to show by producing any document or otherwise that the petitioner was ever called by any enquiring officer in connection with the alleged shortage or embezzlements of medicines.
A period of about three years has elapsed and by withholding the gratuity for this period, the petitioner has already been deprived of about Rs. 20,000/- by way of interest only.
It could not be pointed out by reference to record that either the inquiry has started and is likely to be finalised shortly.
5.
Having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case and keeping in view that period of about three years has elapsed and no charge-sheet has been served on the petitioner, there seems to be no justification whatsoever for the respondents to withhold the gratuity of the petitioner which became due to him on the date of his retirement itself.
Petitioner is suffering everyday because of the acts of the respondents and they cannot be allowed to withhold the gratuity at their whim by simply alleging that an inquiry was contemplated against the officer, especially when the charge-sheet has not been shown to have been served during a period of about three years, not to talk of completing the inquiry and passing a final order, though in the written statement filed in April, 1990 it was stated that steps were being taken to serve a charge-sheet on the petitioner.
6.
Resultantly, the writ petition succeeds, letter Annexure P-3 recommending withholding of gratuity payable to the petitioner is quashed and the respondents are directed to pay the amount of Death-cum-Retirement gratuity to the petitioner which became due to him on the date of his retirement, within four months, failing which the amount shall be paid with interest at the rate of 12 per cent per annum from the date it became due till the date of payment.
The petitioner shall have his costs which are assessed at Rs. 1000/-.
Petition allowed.