Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner is a widow.
Her husband MS Randhawa was appointed as Assistant Superintendent (Jails) on January 25, 1969.
On November 16, 1976, he was promoted as Deputy Superintendent Grade II.
He died on December 22, 1990.
After the death of Mr. Randhawa, the Government passed two orders dated January 31, 1991 (Annexure P-1) and February 22, 1991 (Annexure P-2) by which the Government imposed the punishment of stoppage of promotion to Deputy Superintendent Grade I from March 11, 1982 to March 10, 1989 and fixed the pay in the grade of Rs. 750-1300 and Rs. 1800-3200/-.
The petitioner claims that as result of these orders her entitlement to pension etc. has been adversely affected.
Consequently this petition has been filed.
A few facts need to be noticed.
2.
During the year 1982, Mr. MS Randhawa was posted as Deputy Superintendent in Borstal Jail, Faridkot.
A prisoner Salwinder Singh escaped from the prison.
Vide letter dated October 19, 1982 a charge-sheet was issued to Mr. Randhawa.
After he had submitted his reply, the Government appointed an Enquiry Officer on June 17, 1983.
After the conclusion of the enquiry a show cause notice dated February 13, 1986 was issued to the delinquent officer.
He submitted his detailed reply vide letter dated March 17, 1986, a copy of which has been produced on record as (Annexure P-10).
The matter was kept pending for a long time and it was only after the death of Mr. Randhawa that the impugned orders dated January 31, 1991 and February 22, 1991 were passed.
These orders have been challenged on various grounds through this writ petition.
3.
A written statement has been filed in which the claim made by the petitioner has been controverted.
4.
I have heard Mr. RS Bains, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. SS Dhaliwal, Deputy Advocate General, Punjab for the respondents.
5.
Mr. Bains has challenged the order imposing the punishment of stoppage of promotion for seven years on the ground that the order does not disclose the process of reasoning.
It does not mention the grounds on which the reply submitted by Mr. Randhawa to the show cause notice was not found satisfactory.
He contends that it is not a speaking order.
It has been further submitted that the charge related to an event which had occurred in March 1982 and the enquiry proceedings had been concluded in the year 1986.
Though Mr. Randhawa has submitted his reply to the show cause notice during the year 1986 itself, yet the Government took more than four years in deciding the matter.
The final decision was taken only after the death of Mr. Randhawa.
According to the learned counsel, the delay in decision should vitiate the entire proceedings.
He has further submitted that the order regarding fixation of pay has been passed only as a consequence of the order dt. January 31, 1991 (Annexure P-1).
It is only on account of imposition of punishment that Mr. Randhawa was not allowed to cross the efficiency bar as a result of which monetary loss has been caused to his wife and other members of his family.
On the other hand, Mr. SS Dhaliwal, Deputy Advocate General has controverted the claim as made by the petitioner.
6.
Indisputably, the petitioner's husband had filed a detailed reply in response to the show cause notice.
He had inter-alia contended that he was not at all responsible for either the escape of the prisoner or any other lapse.
He had further pointed out that on account of his distinguished service career, he had been sent on deputation at Delhi Administration to work in Tihar Jail.
He had specifically pointed out the name of prominent dignatory like Chowdhary Charan Singh, former Prime Minister, to testify his capability, uprightness and integrity.
He had also tried to invite the attention of the Government to a number of cases where to action had been taken against the jail officers concerned.
None of these matters appear to have been even noticed by the punishing authority while passing the impugned order of January 31.
It does not disclose the process of reasoning.
It does not show any application of mind.
On this short ground alone, the order deserves to be set aside.
7.
Even otherwise the enquiry proceedings appear to have been finalised before February 13, 1986 when a show cause notice had been issued to the husband of the petitioner.
He had submitted his reply on March 17, 1986.
The impugned order was passed after a long lapse of time.
No explanation for his inordinate long delay has been given.
8.
Taking the totality of the circumstances into consideration, I am unable to sustain the order by which the punishment of stoppage of promotion for seven years had been inflicted on MS Randhawa.
9.
The claim made by Mr. Bains that the order dated February 22, 1991 is a consequence of the order dated January 31, 1991 has not been seriously disputed on behalf of the respondents.
In any event, it appears that it was only on account of the pendency of the enquiry that the case of MS Randhawa regarding crossing of efficiency bar and release of annual increments had not been decided.
That being so, in view of the fact that I have found the order of January 31, 1991 to be unsustainable, the Government will have to review the case of MS Randhawa regarding the fixation of his pay.
10.
As a result the impugned orders Annexure P-1 and Annexures P-2 are quashed.
Consequently, the respondents are directed to consider the claim of MS Randhawa for promotion with effect from March 11, 1982 on every occasion when a person junior to him was promoted.
In the event of his promotion with effect from a particular date, all consequential reliefs in the nature of arrears of salary etc. shall follow.
Even if MS Randhawa is found unsuitable for promotion, the Government shall refix his pay on the hypothesis that the order dated January 31, 1990 has been quashed.
All consequential relief like arrears of salary, fixation of pension/family pension to which the petitioner may be entitled shall be finalised within three months from the date of receipt of copy of this order by the Government.
In case the government fails to do the needful within the said period of three months, the petitioner shall be entitled to the payment of interest @ 15 percent on all the arrears from the date the amount fell due till the date of its actual payment.
The petitioner will also be entitled to her costs which are assessed at Rs. 200/-.
Petition allowed.