Srivastava, J - The petitioner No. 1 is a trade union of worker employees of M/s. Sibson Structural, Bamunimaidan, the respondent No. 1 in this petition.
The petitioner No. 2 is the Assistant General Secretary of said trade union.
The petitioners assail the award dated 17.5.86 passed by the Industrial Tribunal, Assam, Guwahati.
2.
Briefly, the facts giving rise to this petition are that by an agreement between the Union and the Management of the respondent No. 1, the workers were entitled to `Bihu' advance.
In the year, 1984, the management did not give the said advances on the ground that there were financial difficulties.
Following some dispute, it appears an FIR was lodged by the management, and some workers were arrested on 2484.
By order dated 5.4.84, the management declared lockout with effect from 6484.
The Assistant Labour Commissioner, Assam made effort for reconciliation but did not succeed.
The management was required by communication dated 9584 to lift the lockout.
The management did not comply.
The Government directed the management to lift the lockout and the lockout was lifted.
Industrial dispute was raised.
The Government by Notification No. CIB 326/84/12 dated 18th July, 1984 referred following two questions to the Industrial Tribunal :  1.
Whether the management of M/s. Sibson Structural, Bamunimaidan, Gauhati-21 are justified in declaring lockout in their factory with effect from 6484 ?
2.
If not, whether the workmen are entitled to full wages for the period of lockout with compensation for delayed payment or any other relief in lieu thereof ?
3.
The Tribunal required the management and the Union to file their written statements.
The witnesses were examined.
Two witnesses for the Union were examined on 3386.
The Union prayed for adjournment to produce the ASTC witness in support of their contention that the lockout was unjustified.
The prayer was, however, not accepted.
The Tribunal by the impugned award held that the lockout was justified.
However, the Tribunal allowed the workers twenty days' wages for the period of lockout of about three months.
4.
Aggrieved, the petitioners have come under Article 226 of the Constitution of India and Sri SN Sarma, learned counsel appearing on their behalf has submitted that the Tribunal committed grave procedural error in not allowing the petitioner-Union to adduce full evidence in support of its contention, which had resulted in grave miscarriage of justice.
5.
We have also heard Sri DC Chakraborty, learned Government Advocate for the respondent State of Assam.
The respondent No. 1 has not put in appearance.
6.
The petitioners' contention was that the lockout was unjustified and the workers were entitled to wages for the period of lockout.
The petitioners, therefore, had the right to adduce all the evidence which they could in support of their contention and also to refute the submission on behalf of the management in justification of the lockout.
The order sheet of the Tribunal dated 3386 shows that on that day one witness for the Union was partly cross-examined and was discharged.
Another witness was also examined and discharged.
Thereafter, the Union prayed for summoning other witnesses from the Assam State Transport Corporation.
The witnesses were officials.
The Tribunal, however, rejected the prayer on the ground that the witnesses could have been summoned earlier.
In view of the contentions of the petitioner-Union, we are inclined to think that the Tribunal should have allowed opportunity to the Union to produce the witnesses who were after all officials of the ASTC and could not have been produced without summons.
It may be noted that the prayer was not rejected on the ground that the evidence of the witnesses was not necessary, but on the ground that they could have been summoned earlier.
We find from the order sheet that repeated adjournments had been granted to the Management as well as to the Union for evidence and as such we see no justification for not having allowed opportunity to the Union to produce all its witnesses.
We, therefore, think that the Tribunal was in error in not allowing the Union to adduce evidence, as was prayed by the Union, and consequently the impugned award should be set aside.
7.
The matter has to be remitted to the Tribunal for giving the petitioner-Union opportunity to adduce evidence in support of their contention and for fresh decision thereafter in accordance with law.
We order accordingly.
Petition allowed.