Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner, Public Analyst in the Food Laboratory, Chandigarh is aggrieved by the order dated January 29, 1991 by which punishment of stoppage of two grade increments with cumulative effect, which had been reduced to simple warning by the Minister, has been restored.
A few facts may be noticed :  2.
The petitioner was given a charge-sheet on March 7, 1986 under Rule 8 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1952.
It was alleged that the petitioner was guilty of certain lapses.
He submitted his reply on April 21, 1986, which was subsequently supplemented by another reply dated May 21, 1986.
On consideration of the reply and after hearing the petitioner in person, punishment of stoppage of two grade increments with cumulative effect was imposed on the petitioner.
The petitioner represented against this order.
Vide order dated January 19, 1988, the same officer (Mr. TD Jogpal), Commissioner & Secretary to Government, Haryana, conveyed an order that "It has been decided to reduce the punishment awarded for stoppage of two grade increments to Sh. SK Anand to simple warning to be careful in future."
Subsequently, vide order dated January 29, 1991, it was observed that" the appointing/disciplinary authority of Shri SK Anand, Public Analyst, is the State Government and punishment of stoppage of two increments could only be reviewed by the Governor of Haryana through a memorial.
In view of this, the orders passed by the then Health Minister to reduce the punishment of stoppage of two grade increments to a simple warning was not in accordance with the provisions of rules and were not legally correct.
The HPSC has also objected to the issuance of the said order.
In view of the above, the erroneous order endorsed vide No. 12/45/83-2 HB-II, dated 4288 is hereby withdrawn".
As a result, the punishment of stoppage of two grade increments with cumulative effect stood restored.
Aggrieved by this order, the petitioner has filed the present petition.
The impugned order has been challenged inter alia on the ground that the stoppage of two increments with cumulative effect amounts to imposition of a major penalty.
It is averred that such an action could not have been taken except after holding a regular inquiry under the rules.
It has been further averred that the impugned order has been passed without giving any opportunity whatsoever to the petitioner.
3.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents, in which it has been inter alia stated that the reply submitted by the petitioner to the charge-sheet was duly considered and he was also heard personally on August 18, 1986 by the Punishing Authority.
It has been further averred that the petitioner represented against the order dated August 24, 1987 to the then Health Minister, who was not competent to take any action on the representation.
According to the respondents, the petitioner could have only submitted a Memorial to the Governor of Haryana.
Accordingly, it is averred that the order passed in the representation by the Minister is not sustainable.
It has been further averred that there is no provision under rule 8 of the Rules making it incumbent upon the Authority to hold regular enquiry before passing an order of punishment.
In reply to the petitioner's assertion that he has not been given reasonable opportunity of making representation against the penalty imposed upon him by review of the order, it has been inter alia averred that the punishment order has been passed after following proper procedure prescribed under rule 8 of the Rules.
4.
The learned counsel for the petitioner contends that no opportunity was given to the petitioner before the review of the order dated January 19, 1988.
The reply filed on behalf of the respondents does not show that any opportunity had been given.
The averment that proper procedure has been followed before passing the impugned order, only appears to suggest that opportunity had been given before passing of the order dated August 24, 1987.
The fact remains that the order dated January 19, 1988 had been passed by which the punishment had been reduced to a simple warning.
If the Government wanted to review that order, it was bound to give the petitioner a due and reasonable opportunity.
He could have shown that the Minister was competent to pass order under the Rules.
He would have further shown that under the Rules, the Punishing Authority had the power to review the order.
Failure to grant an opportunity deprived the petitioner of the chance of putting forth his view point.
As a result, his interest was prejudiced and the impugned order is vitiated on this ground alone.
5.
It is also now settled that stoppage of increment with cumulative effect amounts to imposition of a major penalty.
A detailed enquiry has to be held before a major penalty can be imposed.
This was admittedly not done.
Even on this account, the impugned order is liable to be set aside.
6.
This writ petition is accordingly allowed.
The order dated January 29, 1991 (Annexure P-5) is set aside.
Since no one has appeared on behalf of the respondents to contest this petition, I make no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.