AL Bahri, J (Oral) - Petitioner Harjinder Singh has filed this writ petition under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution for a direction to the respondent-Punjab School Education Board to declare the result of the petitioner in 10 + 1 and 10 + 2 examination, which were withheld.
2.
In September, 1989, the petitioner appeared in 10 + 1 examination and was placed in compartment in subject of Chemistry.
In March, 1990, he appeared in the examination to clear the compartment.
However, he failed.
In September, 1990, he again appeared in examination to clear the compartment and failed.
In March, 1991, he again attempted to clear the compartment.
Simultaneously, he appeared in 10+2 examinations.
The respondent-Board withheld the result of these examination.
The stand of the petitioner is that when he was issued Roll Number for the compartment examination in 10 + 1 as well as for the 10 + 2 examination and he had appeared in the examination, his result ought to have been declared.
The stand of the Board in the written statement is that under the regulations of the Board, the petitioner could clear the compartment in two consecutive attempts and he having failed to do so, was required to clear the entire examination and he could not now appear in compartment only.
3.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, we are of the opinion that in the peculiar facts of the present case, the petitioner was misled by the Board that he could appear for clearing compartment in March, 1991 examination and Roll Number was also issued to him.
The original forms submitted by the petitioner have been produced in order to show that when his admission form was submitted, the petitioner had given the full particulars of the previous examinations taken by him, i.e. of September, 1989, and March, 1990.
When subsequently, he appeared in the compartment examination, he did not mention the examination taken in 1989.
The stand of the Board is that Roll Number was issued to him thinking that it was his second attempt in March, 1991, and the petitioner, thus, concealed the factum that he was appearing in the third attempt.
Under these circumstances, Roll Number was issued to the petitioner, but he was otherwise ineligible under Regulation 16(d), which reads as under :-  "16(D).
Eligibility for Compartment : A candidate failing in any one compulsory subject (all groups or any one elective subject (all groups) will be eligible for compartment/reappear examination.
He/she will be declared to have passed the compartment/Reappear examination on clearing the subject.
Candidates will be allowed two consecutive chances to pass the compartment/reappear examination.
A candidate who does not appear at one or both the chances of compartment or having appeared does not pass in the subject of compartment/reappear shall be considered to have failed in the examination and shall be required to reappear in the examination in all the subjects at any subsequent annual examination of the Board as per Syllabuses and Courses laid down for the examination concerned in order to pass the examination".
4.
The stand of the Board would have been accepted if the result of the petitioner of examination conducted in November, 1990, vide Annexure P-1, had been properly declared.
Annexure P1, which is an extract from the Board gazette, shows that the petitioner was placed in compartment of the subject of Chemistry and that he could clear it upto March, 1991.
In this respect a specific allegation was made in para 3 of the writ petition that by this result the petitioner was given a third chance to appear in the compartment examination upto March, 1991.
In para 3 of the reply filed by the Board, this stand has been admitted.
However, it is further added that the petitioner was required to appear in all the subjects in March, 1991, or any subsequent examination.
This stand now taken is not in accordance with the result declared vide Annexure P-1.
Maybe as per regulations of the Board the petitioner was ineligible to appear in the compartment examination held in March, 1991, but he was not only misled as about, but he was also issued Roll Number and allowed to take the examination.
Now the Board cannot withhold his result.
5.
For the reasons recorded above, this writ petition is allowed with the direction to the Board to first declare the result of 10 + 1 examination (Compartment) held in March, 1991, and thereafter the result of 10+2 examination.
Let it be done within a period of fifteen days.
With the direction aforesaid, this writ petition is disposed of.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.