Sardar Ali Khan, J - The Gantur District Cooperative Central Bank Employees' Association is the petitioner in this matter.
The writ has been filed for the issuance of a writ of mandamus to declare the proceedings Rc.
No. 141791/79/C1 dated 811980 of the Registrar of Co-operative Societies as illegal and inoperative inasmuch as they are not in conformity with the GO Ms No. 469 dated 18.6.1977 and GO Ms No. 943 dated 2791976; (ii) compelling the respondents to treat the family planning incentive increments to be included in the basic pay; (iii) to grant consequential benefits of difference in pay and allowances and other fringe benefits; and (iv) to grant such other relief.
2.
Sri Jogaiah Sarma, the learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that the Government of Andhra Pradesh issued GO Ms No. 943, M&H Department dated 2791976 giving directions for incentives to be given for persons who adopt the family planning programmes.
The employees having two or less children will be entitled to the incentives if either of the spouses undergoes a sterilisation operation, the advance increments are to be given from the date of sterilisation.
The Registrar of Co-operative Societies issued Memo No. 402/D-2/78 M&H, dated 551978 circulating the text of GO Ms No. 401 Family Planning (Fin.
Wing FRI) Department dated 17111977 stating that the State Government has given directions that the additional pay will count as pay for purposes of ad hoc dearness allowance, city compensatory allowance, leave salary etc. A clarification was issued by Memo No. 402/D-2/78 M&H dated 5578 that the incentive increments are to be treated as personal pay to be reckoned as basic pay for the purpose of pension etc.
Moreover, the Registrar of Co-operative Societies respondent No. 2 herein directed by his proceedings Rc No. 158240/76/C1(b) dated 11101977 that the family planning incentive scheme to the employees working under the Co-operative institutions should be implemented.
In proceedings dated 2241978 the extension of the incentives was granted in favour of the employees of the Co-operative Central Bank.
It is significant to note that the Guntur District Co-operative Central Bank Limited, Tenali-respondent No. 1 herein incorporated the scheme of the family planning incentives by amending the subsidiary regulations and inserting Regulation 72(b) adopting the scheme as mentioned in GO Ms No. 469 (F&A) Co-operatives II, dated 18.6.1977 with effect from 171978.
3.
However, the second respondent-the Commissioner for Co-operation and Registrar of Cooperative Societies vide orders in Rc.
No. 141791/79/C1 dated 811980 have informed the Bank that the incentive increments given under family planning programme should not be added to basic pay but should be treated as personal pay of the employees.
Against the said order issued by the second respondent, the petitioner filed the present writ petition challenging the same as being illegal and inoperative as it is in conflict with GO Ms No. 469 dated 18.6.1977 and GOMs.
No. 943 dated 27976.
4.
Subsidiary Regulation 72(b) was incorporated by the Bank in the existing subsidiary regulations in pursuance of the GO Ms No. 469 dated 18.6.1977.
According to this subsidiary regulation employees having two or less living children and who have undergone vasectomy sterilisation operation under the family planning programme shall be eligible for two advance increments from the date of sterilisation.
Furthermore, it is stated in GOMs.
No. 469 that the incentives shall be extended to the Government employees mentioned in GO Ms No. 943 dated 2791976 and to the employees of Co-operative institutions also with immediate effect.
And a reading of GO Ms No. 943 dated 2791976 makes it clear that increments as envisaged under the incentive scheme shall be granted on production of a certificate from a Medical Officer not below the rank of Civil Assistant Surgeon.
Under paragraph 5(1) of the said GO, it is clarified that the increments will not have any effect on one's normal increment as they are a sort of an incentive.
Under paragraph 9(1)(ii) it is stated that in case where the employee has reached the maximum of the scale he/she will be given the increment or increments over and above the maximum and it will be treated as personal pay to be reckoned as basic pay for purposes of pension etc.
Under sub-para (iii) of para 5 the advance increment or increments will be allowed from the date of sterilisation only.
But, it would not affect the date of normal increment.
It is necessary to read the provisions of GO Ms No. 943 collectively to arrive at a just and fair conclusion in this matter.
A reading of the above clearly reveals the fact that the increments are treated as quite distinct and separate from the normal increments that may be earned by any employee.
Apart from the above, it is clarified that where the employee has reached the maximum scale he will be given the increments over and above the maximum which shall be treated as personal pay to be reckoned as basic pay for purposes of pension etc.
This clearly shows that the intention is to treat this increment as a part of the basic pay apart from the normal increment which may be given to an employee.
It would be therefore futile to suggest that these increments are not be included in the basic pay.
It is clearly stated in GO Ms No. 943 that the advance increments are to be given from the date of sterilisation only and it could not affect the date of normal increments.
A reading of GO Ms No. 469 dated 18.6.77 and GO Ms No. 943 dated 27976 go to show that the clear intention of the authorities is to treat the incentives given in lieu of undergoing family planning operations as a part of the basic pay drawn by the employee.
It is a well known fact that family planning has been given top priority by the Governments of Centre and State.
It has often been stressed that it is the need of hour that in view of the rising population in India more and more people should adopt family planning methods.
It is for the benefit of this laudable object that the family planning scheme has been formulated providing for payment of incentives to such employees who undergo family planning operations when they have two or less living children.
It cannot be said that such an incentive should be added to the basic pay and shall remain merely as an increment accruing to the employee without any consequential benefits that flow from it.
It may be mentioned that in WP No. 2667/80 dated 3171986 a similar view was taken by learned Single Judge giving direction that the increments should be added to the basic pay of the employees who are entitled to it.
In the above said case, the respondent-bank also figures as respondent No. 3.
Sri Jogaiah Sharma the learned counsel has further submitted that no appeal has been filed against the said judgment in WP No. 2667/80 which has become final.
Any discrimination now in not granting the same relief to other employees will result in infringement of Article 14 of Constitution of India which guarantees the equality before law for all its citizens.
The Writ Petition is therefore allowed and the proceedings dated 811980 issued by the Registrar of Co-operative Societies-respondent No. 2 herein are set aside with a direction that the increments granted to the employees of the petitioner-Association in lieu of their undergoing family planning operations shall be treated as the part of the basic pay in accordance with law.
No cost.
Petition allowed.