Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner is the grand-son of Sh. Jaswant Singh, a freedom fighter.
He is aggrieved by the action of the respondents in not considering him for appointment against one of the two posts of Veterinary Officers, which have been reserved for "children/grand- children of freedom fighters of Punjab".
A few facts may be noticed.
2.
The petitioner is a graduate in Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry.
He was appointed as Veterinary Officer vide orders dated February 1, 1990 on purely temporary and ad hoc basis.
On January 6, 1990, the Punjab Public Service Commission had advertised 134 posts of Veterinary Officers.
Out of these posts, two had been reserved for children and grand-children of freedom fighters of Punjab.
The petitioner applied for one of these posts.
He produced a certificate, which had been obtained by his uncle in the year 1985, in support of the fact that his grand-father Mr. Jaswant Singh Danewalia had "suffered imprisonment for the period from 19.8.1922 (??)
to 191923 in Ferozepur and Mianwali (Pakistan) Jails during Freedom Struggle."
On this basis the Deputy Secretary to Government Punjab had vide letter dated January 9, 1985 certified the factual position.
As a result the District Magistrate, Ferozepur had observed that Mr. Jaswant Singh "was thus a freedom fighter."
Besides this, the petitioner also claims to have produced a certificate from the Superintendent Central Jail, Ferozepur supporting the factual position.
It also appears that besides the above cited imprisonment, Mr Jaswant Singh had been sentenced to two years rigorous imprisonment and a fine of Rs. 200/- on August 23, 1930 under Sections 147/341 of the Indian Penal Code by Magistrate First Class, Ferozepur and had been transferred to Attock Jail on September 26, 1930.
In spite of these facts, the respondents have not considered the petitioner's claim against one of the two posts reserved for the children/ grand-children of freedom fighters.
3.
The petitioner further avers that vide letter dated April 4, 1985, the State of Punjab had issued instructions observing inter alia that "for the entitlement to above cited concessions, in future only those freedom fighters and their wards will be eligible who have either been granted a freedom fighter's pension from the Punjab Government or have been awarded Tamra Patras for their political sufferings during pre-Independence freedom movements.
The Deputy Commissioner of District to which a freedom fighter belongs will be the only competent authority to provide an eligibility certificate to this effect i.e. for the grant of all types of those concessions to a freedom fighter, or his wards."
It is stated that the petitioner's grand-father was well to do and had never sought to avail of the scheme for grant of pension to the freedom fighters.
It has been further stated that Mr. Jaswant Singh had died in the year 1962 while the scheme for the award of Tamra Patras had been introduced in the year 1972.
On this premises it is claimed that the action of the respondents in not considering the petitioner against one of the reserved posts only on the ground that neither the freedom fighters' pension had been granted nor a Tamra Patra had been issued is wholly arbitrary and unfair.
4.
A written statement has been filed only on behalf of the Public Service Commission.
Besides the preliminary objection that the Animal Husbandry Department is a necessary party it has been inter alia averred that the "petitioner is not eligible for this benefit as the grand-father of the petitioner was neither in receipt of State Government pension nor was awarded 'Tamra Patra'.
According to instructions of Punjab Government dated 4.4.85, only those freedom fighters are eligible for benefit who have either been granted a freedom fighter's pension from the Punjab Government or have been awarded 'Tamra Patra' for their political sufferings during pre-Independence Freedom Movements."
It has been further stated that the Punjab Government had started its pension scheme in the year 1952 and the scheme for the award of Tamra Patras was started in the year 1972 by the Government of India.
On this premises, the claim of the petitioner for consideration against one of the reserved posts has been contested.
5.
I have heard Mr. DV Sharma, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. SS, Dhaliwal, for the respondents.
6.
It is not disputed that Mr. Jaswant Singh was a freedom fighter.
The fact was verified by the Government and a certificate was accordingly issued by the District Magistrate, Ferozepur.
Even the Superintendent, Central Jail, Ferozepur had issued a certificate showing that Mr. Jaswant Singh had been convicted and was one of the prisoners there.
It has also not been disputed that the petitioner is the grand-son of Mr. Jaswant Singh.
The claim of the petitioner is being contested only on the ground that neither pension, nor Tamra Patra had been granted to Mr. Jaswant Singh.
Is this valid ?
7.
The purpose of the instructions issued by the Government vide its letter dated April 4, 1985 is only to ensure that the benefit is conferred on such persons, as are actually freedom fighters.
If the grant of freedom fighters pension or the award of a Tamra Patra appears to have been made a condition precedent only with the object of eliminating chances of the benefit being availed of by undeserving persons.
However, in a case where even in spite of the issue of instructions, the District Magistrate, Ferozepur had forwarded the said freedom fighters certificate vide his letter dated June 24, 1985 (Annexure P.3) and the factual position had been verified by the Government itself, it does not appear to be just and fair to deny the benefit to the petitioner.
His grand-father Mr. Jaswant Singh has been found to be a freedom fighter.
Factual position has been verified by the Government itself.
A formal certificate has been issued even by the Deputy Commissioner.
Tamra Patra is only meant to certify that the person is a freedom fighter and nothing more.
Once the factual position has been found correct and duly certified, even if a certificate has not been issued in the form of Tamra Patra, the petitioner was fully eligible and entitled to be considered against one of the posts reserved for children/grand-children of freedom fighters.
Even before me it has not been disputed that Mr. Jaswant Singh was a freedom fighter.
That being so, I am not satisfied that the petitioner was ineligible to be considered for one of the posts only on the ground that a formal Tamra Patra had not been issued.
This is all the more so as the scheme for the issue of a Tamra Patra was introduced in the year 1972 while Mr. Jaswant Singh had actually passed away in the year 1962.
As for pension, it was not obligatory on a freedom fighter to claim pension.
All patriots may not like to encash their patriotism, Mr. Jaswant Singh could have been one of them.
That, however, did not disentitle his grand-children from claiming the benefits available to their class.
8.
If the Government instructions are interpreted to mean, as has been contended for by Mr. Dhaliwal, that unless a freedom fighter has actually drawn pension or been issued a Tamra Patra, the benefit of reservation shall not be available to his children or grand-children.
One would be driven to conclude that the action suffers from the vice of arbitrariness and even attracts the vice of discrimination prohibited by Article 14 of the Constitution.
All freedom fighters, without anything more, constitute one class.
It has not been shown that Tamra Patra or pension had to be granted only to a particular class out of the category of freedom fighters.
Vide order dated December 2, 1991, learned counsel for the respondents had been directed to produce instructions relating to the award of Tamra Patra and the grant of freedom fighters pension.
Purpose was to see if the Tamra Patra or pension had to be granted only to a particular category of freedom fighters.
Instructions have not been produced.
It has not been shown that the eligibility for the issue of a Tamra Patra or grant of pension was dependent upon certified facts which Mr. Jaswant Singh did hot fulfil.
In this situation, the mere fact that a formal Tamra Patra had not been issued to Mr. Jaswant Singh or that he had not availed of the scheme of freedom fighters pension cannot exclude him from the category of freedom fighters.
In this situation, the action of the respondents was wholly arbitrary and discriminatory.
9.
Accordingly, the writ petition is allowed.
The respondents are directed to consider the claim of the petitioner against one of the two posts reserved for the children/grand-children of freedom fighters.
The needful shall be done within two months from the date of the receipt of a copy of this judgment.
In the circumstances of the case, I make no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.