SC Jain, J. - Mr. IP Mahendru, hereinafter referred to as the petitioner, has been working as Assistant General Manager with New Bank of India, respondent No. 1.
On 7890, several union leaders forcibly entered the petitioner's chamber and hurled filthy abuses and unparliamentary language.
The petitioner lodged a written complaint to the General Manager (Personnel) and sought action to be taken against the erring-employees so that disciplinary action should be taken against them, but respondents 2 and 3 persuaded the petitioner to initiate the action against the erring employees himself.
On showing his inability to do so on the ground that he being the complainant cannot be a judge in his own cause, the petitioner was threatened and humiliated by respondent No. 2 and rather he was served with a show cause notice dated 20890 which was followed by a charge-sheet and was suspended w.e.f.
1st October, 1990 for not initiating action against the erring employees.
The enquiry did not make any progress and he preferred an appeal under the rules to the Board of Directors of the respondent bank.
The said appeal was decided vide order dated 19791 and the petitioner was informed that the suspension corder of the petitioner is revoked by the Board of Directors.
The Managing Committee's resolution dated 1871991 reads as under :  "Considered (Shri J Sethi, Executive Director, not participating) Personnel Department note dated 1171991 relating to appeal dated 5111990 of General Manager (P) Disciplinary Authority, placing Shri IP Mahendru, under suspension, in contemplation of disciplinary proceedings against him and also on going through the memo dated 1161991, of the Central Vigilance Commission and Bank's reply dated 2861991 thereto and resolve that suspension of Shri IP Mahendru, Assistant General Manager, be and is hereby revoked pending departmental enquiry against him.
Further resolved that enquiry against Shri IP Mahendru, be continued and Central Vigilance Commission be requested to nominate Commissioner of Departmental Inquiries as Enquiry Authority and that enquiry be completed expeditiously."
2.
That the said resolution passed by the Board of Directors was, however, communicated to the petitioner vide memo dated 19791, which was not prepared in accordance with the resolution of the Board of Directors.
In this memo communicated to the petitioner, it has been mentioned that the Managing Committee of the Board had decided to revoke suspension of the petitioner but directed that the petitioner shall not be entitled to any other benefits other than the subsistence allowance paid/payable to him for the period of suspension and that enquiry against him shall continue and that on revocation of the suspesion the disciplinary authority may pass necessary orders about the posting of Shri Mahendru.
His order of posting was made as Assistant General Manager, Regional Office, Lucknow and that the order of revocation was made conditional to the effect that it will take effect from the day when he takes charge in Lukhnow.
3.
The petitioner has challenged this memo allegedly signed by the disciplinary authority on various grounds by filing this writ petition and he made allegations of mala fides against respondent No. 2 Mr. J Sethi, Executive Director and Mr. AR Sethi General Manager (Personnel) who had issued this memo in contravention of the resolution passed by the Managing Committee of the Board.
4.
Rule has been issued in this case by the D.B.
on 7.8.91 and the writ petition is pending disposal.
Now the petitioner has filed this application under Section 151 CPC for grant of stay of order dated 19791 whereby he has been transferred to Lucknow Regional Office and also to stay the enquiry proceedings initiated by the respondents vide charge-sheet dated 1.10.1990 on the plea that both these orders are against the resolution passed by the Managing Committee of the Board of Directors.
5.
I have heard the counsel for the parties and gone through the record.
Counsel for respondents argued that every officer of the bank is liable to be transferred to any place in India.
The petitioner is working as Assistant General Manager and his posting as Assistant General Manager at Lucknow is not against the rules and regulations of the bank.
On revocation of suspension order, the petitioner was to be posted at some place and accordingly he was posted at Lucknow regional office vide order dated 1971991.
There is nothing wrong in the posting.
When the petitioner was suspended he was working as regional Head of Delhi Region.
The said region is now headed by Mr. KK Modi, Dy.
General Manager.
Therefore, keeping in view the administrative exigency it was desirable to post the petitioner as Regional Head of Lucknow Region.
The petitioner cannot challenge his posting to Lucknow on revocation of his suspension.
6.
On the other hand, the counsel for the petitioner submitted that the transfer of the petitioner is absolutely illegal and it is mala fide and it amounts to reduction in rank.
Admittedly the petitioner is an employee in the scale V but the post to which he has been transferred to Lucknow is in the scale IV.
The bank has violated its own hierarchy contained in letter dated 17101986.
He also pointed out that this transfer of the petitioner to Lucknow is opposed to the Govt. of India instructions contained in letter dated 521991.
A perusal of the letter clearly shows that the Govt. of India has taken note of the fact that the banks have been posting officers irregularly.
Govt. of India has directed the posting of officers of a particular grade to a posting in different grade only by a duly constituted DPC which has to record adequate justification for the same.
According to the learned counsel in the present case no DPC has been held before posting the petitioner to grade IV post.
7.
Regarding the stay of enquiry proceedings, learned counsel for the petitioner argued that in view of the resolution of the Board of Directors, enquiry sought to be proceeded with cannot be conducted by Chief Vigilance Officer of the bank.
Same can be done by the Commissioner of Departmental Enquiries in the Central Vigilance Commission.
According to him the stand taken by the respondent is misleading.
Continuing with the enquiry by the Chief Vigilance Officer of the bank is in direct contravention of the resolution of the Managing Committee of the Board of Directors dated 1871991 which decided that the enquiry should be referred to the Central Vigilance Commission which could be requested to nominate a Commissioner of departmental enquiries as Enquiry Authority.
8.
According to the learned counsel for the respondents, the Central Vigilance Commission was requested to appoint an enquiry officer, but the Central Vigilance Commission informed the Executive Director of the bank vide letter dated 18791 that the Commissioner's concurrence is not necessary for the bank's proposed appointment of an enquiry authority in a particular case, and as such the bank may take administrative view in the matter.
According to the learned counsel continuance of the enquiry by the Chief Vigilance Officer of the Bank is not in contravention of the resolution dated 18791 and this enquiry is not liable to be stayed.
9.
I have given my considered thought to the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties and gone through the record.
Regarding the transfer of the petitioner to Lucknow as Assistant General Manager, on prima facie grounds, I find that this order smacks of vindictiveness on the part of the respondents 2 and 3.
Admittedly, the post of Assistant General Manager at Lucknow is in grade IV, whereas the post of the petitioner is in grade V. His transfer to Lucknow is not by the order of DPC.
The letter of the Govt. of India dated 521991, which is Annexure A indicates that the posting of an officer in a particular grade to a different grade can be undertaken by a duly constituted DPC who has to record adequate justification for the same.
It is not the case of the respondent bank that the order of transfer of the petitioner to Lucknow is on account of decision taken by the DPC.
Moreover, the petitioner has made serious allegations of mala fide against respondents 2 and 3 Mr. J Sethi and Mr AR Sethi who are said to be instrumental in the inpugned transfer of the petitioner to Lucknow region.
No substitute has been posted on regular basis in place of the petitioner, who was under suspension and only a Dy.
General Manager was made to look after that work besides his own duties.
In view of the allegations which have come on record and the mala fides attributed against respondents 2 and 3, on prima facie ground, I feel that the petitioner is entitled to an interim relief of stay of his transfer form New Delhi to Lucknow regional office.
I, therefore, stay the impugned transfer order dated 1971991.
10.
Regarding continuance of the enquiry by the Chief Vigilance Officer of the Bank, I find that it is against the resolution passed by the Managing Committee of the Board of Directors dated 18791.
The stand taken by the respondent in this regard is totally misleading.
Record shows that in the correspondence, which the officer of the respondent bank exchanged with the Central Vigilance Commission the stand taken by the respondent bank was that the case involves no vigilance angle and as such an enquiry by an outside agency is not warranted.
The letter from the Central Vigilance Commission dated 18791 relates to letter dated 23391 addressed by the bank.
The letter dated 18791 has been written only on the basis of communication addressed by the bank on 23391.
This letter dated 18791 of the Central Vigilance Commission was received by the bank on 29791 after the resolution dated 18791 of the Managing Committee of the Board of Directors.
After the resolution dated 18791, the bank has not informed the Central Vigilance Commission to appoint a Commissioner of Departmental Enquiry till date.
The stand taken by the respondents that apart from the resolution of the Managing Committee of the Board of Directors there were informal directions given by the Managing Committee on 18791 is against the record.
There can be no such informal directions against the resolution passed by the Board of Directors.
Even otherwise, this fact has been brought to the notice of the Managing Committee that the Central Vigilance Commissioner is not ready and willing to nominate a Commissioner of enquiry in this case.
It means that the Managing Committee has been kept in dark that the resolution passed by it has not been implemented in its letter and spirit.
11.
On prima facie grounds, it is apparent that respondents 2 and 3 with some ulterior motive intentionally have not chosen to refer the matter to Central Vigilance Commission after the resolution dated 18791 for appointing a Commissioner of enquiry to hold an enquiry against the petitioner about the charges against him.
Rather they thought it better that enquiry be conducted by the Chief Vigilance Officer of the bank.
On the basis of this prima facie evidence on record, I am also of the view that the petitioner has made out a prima facie case for the grant of stay of the enquiry by the Chief Vigilance Officer of the respondent bank.
Enquiry against the petitioner is, therefore, stayed till such time the bank in compliance with the resolution of the Managing Committee of the Board of Directors dated 18791 requests the Central Vigilance Commission for appointment/nomination of Commissioner of departmental enquiry as enquiry authority.
Ordered accordingly