RS Mongia, J (oral) - This writ petition has been filed by the unfortunate widow, whose husband died while in Government service.
Her claim for grant of family pension has been declined by the respondents, which has led her to file the present writ petition.
2.
Briefly, the facts of the case, as averred in the writ petition, are that the petitioner's husband joined the Haryana Government service as Irrigation Booking Clerk in the office of the Executive Engineer, Betterment levy Division, Rohtak on 2211974.
Subsequently his services were transferred in the same capacity to Minor Irrigation and Tubewell Corporation w.e.f.
16111976 and he was posted in Lining Division, Sirsa.
According to the petitioner when the Lining work had almost come to an end, the services of her husband were transferred to the Revenue Department and the Director Land Records, Haryana ordered that twenty person relieved from Minor Irrigation and Tubewell Corporation be appointed as Patwaris.
The husband of the petitioner being one of those persons who had been relieved was appointed as Patwari on 231 1990.
Unfortunately, the petitioner's husband while working as such died on 671990.
The petitioner claims that she was entitled to family pension under the Family Pension Scheme, 1964.
This claim was denied by respondents on the ground that her case did not fall under the provisions of the Family Pension Scheme.
Relevant extract of the Family Pension Scheme on which respondents rely is as under :  "The family pension is admissible in case of death, while in service or after retirement on or after the 1st July, 1964 if at the time of death, the retired officer was in receipt of a compensation, in valid retirement or superannuation pension.
In case of death while in service, the Govt. Servant should have completed a minimum period of one-year continuous service without break."
3.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that it is wrong on the part of the respondents to consider that the initial recruitment of the petitioner's husband as Irrigation Booking Clerk in the office of Executive Engineer, Betterment Levy Division, Rohtak was in a semi-government department.
In fact according to the learned counsel for the petitioner it was a Government department and from there his services were transferred to the minor Irrigation and Tubewell Corporation.
No option was asked at the time when services of the petitioner's husband were transferred to the Corporation and the transfer was not on the volition of the husband of the petitioner.
He further submitted that infact the petitioner's husband was not appointed patwari as afresh appointee but since the work of Canal Lining had almost come to an end, the surplus staff was absorbed in Revenue Department as Patwaris.
According to the learned counsel for the petitioner, the entire service should be counted as Government service.
4.
On the other hand, the learned counsel for the respondents submitted that the appointment as patwari was a fresh appointment and since the services rendered in the Government department prior to the death of the husband of the petitioner, was less than one year, the petitioner was not on entitled to family pension in accordance with the Family Pension Scheme.
5.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that there is force in the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
The initial recruitment cannot be said to be in a Semi Government Department.
Once a person is appointed in a Government department and is sent later on to a Corporation which is also owned by Government and the transfer is not on the volition of the employee, then for the purpose of the scheme, the entire service should be considered as Government service.
When the petitioner's husband became surplus in the Corporation, he was absorbed in the Revenue Department.
In this view of the matter the Government service rendered by the petitioner's husband prior to his death was more than one year and consequently would be covered under the pension Scheme.
6.
For the foregoing reasons, this writ petition is allowed and the petitioner is held entitled to the family pension under the Family Pension Scheme, 1964.
Let the case of the petitioner be finalized regarding the grant of the family pension within three months of the receipt of this order and the arrears be paid immediately thereafter.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.