Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioners, who are working as Chief Draftsmen and Circle Head Draftsmen in the Haryana State Electricity Board, impugn the provisions of Rules notified by the Board under Section 79(c) of the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948, vide notification dated February 19, 1988.
Their grievance in a nutshell is that according to the Rules, which were in force at the time of the formation of the Haryana State Electricity Board on May 2, 1967, the Drawing Establishment had a quota to the extent of 4% for promotion to the post of Assistant Engineer.
According to the petitioners, this constituted a condition of service, which was duly protected by the Board vide its order Nos. 18 and 19 dated May 10, 1967.
The petitioners aver that by the impugned notification, the members of the Drawing Establishment, like the petitioners, have been totally excluded from the category of Engineering subordinates and as a result they have been rendered ineligible for the post of Assistant Engineer.
The notification is challenged primarily on the ground that it is violative of the orders dated May 10, 1967, issued by Board.
2.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been inter alia averred that in pursuance to the representations received from various officials of the Board, the matter was referred to a committee.
On the recommendation of the committee, the officials belonging to the Drawing Establishment have been provided a separate channel of promotion to the post of Assistant Engineer (Civil).
Accordingly, it is maintained that the Board had not acted in violation of the orders dated May 10, 1967.
It has also been pointed out that the promotion policy had been originally framed more than two decades back when technically qualified persons were not available.
With the advancement in technology and availability of qualified personnel, the Board had considered it expedient that the post of Assistant Engineer in the Civil and Mechanical cadres be filled up by promotion from amongst the technically qualified persons.
It is on this premises that the impugned amendment has been justified.
3.
I have heard Mr. KK Jagia, learned counsel for the petitioners, and Mr. MS Jain, learned counsel for the respondents.
4.
The only contention raised on behalf of the petitioners is that by the orders dated May 10, 1967, the Board had unequivocally provided that "officers/staff of the composite Punjab State Electricity Board who have been allocated to the Haryana State Electricity Board shall continue to be governed by the same terms and conditions of service as were applicable to them in the defunct Punjab State Electricity Board."
(emphasis supplied).
According to the learned counsel this was a guarantee given to the petitioners when they were allocated to the Haryana State Electricity Board.
It could not be violated so long as the persons, who were originally working in the Punjab State Electricity Board, remain in the service of the Haryana State Electricity Board.
According to the learned counsel, the Board was estopped from amending the Rules in the manner that the conditions of service governing the petitioners were adversely affected.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondents has pointed out that the terms and conditions of the service governing the petitioners have not been altered to their disadvantage.
According to the learned counsel, new avenues for promotion have been provided to the members of the Drawing Establishment.
The counsel maintains that the amendment was introduced with a view to promote efficiency in the service of the Board.
5.
Undisputably, chances of promotion do not constitute condition of service.
It is also settled on the record of this case that the right of the members of the Drawing Establishment to be considered for promotion to the post of Assistant Engineer Civil) has been ensured by the Board.
Mr. Jagia, however, submits that the petitioners were originally eligible for promotion to the post of Assistant Engineer irrespective of the fact whether such post belonged to the electrical, mechanical or the civil cadre.
He submits that by the impugned action the petitioners have been rendered totally ineligible for promotion to the post of Assistant Engineer in mechanical and electrical cadres.
This according to the learned counsel amounted to change in condition of service.
6.
Possibly, the chances of promotion have been affected.
However, I am not inclined to hold that the petitioners have been rendered totally ineligible for promotion to the post of Assistant Engineer.
If the Board has reorganised its cadre and made provision for promotion to different cadres on the basis of educational qualifications, which are not wholly unrelated to the requirement of the job, its action cannot be said either to be arbitrary or illegal Under section 79(c) of the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948, the Board has as power to frame statutory regulations.
It is in the exercise of the statutory power that the Board has passed the impugned order.
Exercise of legislative function cannot basically be curtailed by an executive order.
In any case, I am of the view that even the executive order has not been violated inasmuch as some avenue of promotion has been provided to the drawing Establishment.
I am also of the view that the letter dated May 10, 1967, does not estop the Board from exercising its legislative functions.
7.
Accordingly, I find no merit in this petition.
It is dismissed.
In the circumstances of the case, I leave the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.