NK Sodhi, J - The petitioner who is a Scheduled Caste was promoted as Superintending Engineer and joined as such on September 18, 1986 as per office order dated 511989 issued by the Punjab State Electricity Board (hereinafter called the Board).
The next higher post to which promotion can be made is that of Chief Engineer.
It is the admitted case of the parties that the policy of reservation in regard to promotion was introduced w.e.f.
March 6, 1974.
No Scheduled Caste Officer from amongst the Superintending Engineers was, however, promoted as Chief Engineer till 681982 as according to the Board no eligible scheduled caste officer was available for promotion.
It may be mentioned that the minimum necessary qualification for promotion as Chief Engineer is the possession of a degree of Bachelor of Engineering with five years experience as a Superintending Engineer.
One Shri MS Sandhu who is a scheduled caste was promoted by the Board as Chief Engineer on 681982 and thereafter, many more promotions were made from the general category.
Again, one Sh. PR Bhatti who is a scheduled caste was promoted to the post of a Chief Engineer on 161987 and at present these are the only two scheduled caste officers who are working as Chief Engineers.
There are 18 cadre posts of Chief Engineers with the Board and according to it, two posts of Chief Engineers who are sent on deputation with the Bhakra Beas Management Board are not included in the cadre strength of the Board.
The service to which the petitioner belongs is governed by the Punjab State Electricity Board Service of Engineers (Electrical) Regulations, 1965 (for short, the Regulations).
According to Regulation 12-A 16 per cent of the posts to be filled up by promotion to or within Class I and II service in the Board shall be reserved for members of the scheduled castes and backward classes (14 per cent for members of scheduled caste and 2 per cent for members of backward classes) subject to the following conditions :  a) The persons to be considered must possess minimum necessary qualifications, and b) They should have a satisfactory record of service.
This Regulation further prescribes the roster according to which in a lot of 100 vacancies occurring from time to time, those falling at serial numbers mentioned below shall be treated as reserved for the members of the scheduled castes :  1, 7, 15, 22, 30, 37, 44, 51, 58, 65, 72, 80, 87, 94 and so on.
2.
The grievance of the writ petitioner is that right from the day when the policy of reservation for promotion was introduced in March, 1974 not a single post was filled up from amongst the scheduled caste candidates and the first appointment in this regard was of Mr. MS Sandhu who was promoted on 681982.
The contention is that the posts falling to the share of the scheduled castes right from 1973 onwards should be calculated by the Board according to the roster prescribed by Regulation 12-A of the Regulations and the same be filled up by scheduled caste candidates, if available.
3.
The stand of the writ petitioner has been controverted by the Board and it is submitted on its behalf that no eligible scheduled caste candidate was available till August 6, 1989 and that at present out of the eighteen cadre posts only two posts fail to the share of the scheduled casts candidates which stand filled up by Shri MS Sandhu and Shri PR Bhatti who are both senior to the petitioner and for this reason, the latter has no cause for grievance and that the writ petition is misconceived.
4.
Counsel for the petitioner urged that in view of the government instructions which have been adopted by the Board, the unfilled posts at different roster points reserved for scheduled castes ought to have been carried forward from 1973 on wards and in this way, a large number of posts for scheduled castes would fall vacant and the Board be directed to fill up those posts if such candidates are available.
The Statutory Regulations are silent in regard to carrying forward of posts and no such government instructions have been placed on the record of this case nor has any averment been made to this effect in the writ petition.
Counsel for the petitioner made a mention of them at the time of arguments but that too without producing the same.
The reservation prescribed is to be given effect to in accordance with the roster to be maintained and which is to be implemented in the form of a running account from year to year.
There is nothing on the record of this case to show as to how many posts of Chief Engineers were filled from 1973 upto 1982 and even thereafter nor has any reference been made in the pleadings of the parties to any roster or if it was ever prepared and maintained by the Board.
There is, indeed, no data before me on which I could decide the issue raised by the petitioner.
In such a situation, the only course which would be reasonable in the circumstances of the present case is that the petitioner should first make a demand on the Board by way of a detailed representation in regard to the various roster points which according to him would fall vacant and against which Scheduled Caste officers need to be appointed in terms of roster, if any prepared, by the Board under Regulation 12-A If any such representation is filed, the Board shall dispose of the same in the light of the Regulations, particularly Regulation 12-A within six months thereafter.
With these observations, the writ petition is disposed of with no order as to costs.
Petition disposed of.