Ashok Bhan, J - Petitioners were appointed as Head Clerks an different dates from 17121962 to 221965 in different Panchayat Samitis in the State of Haryana.
2.
Respondent Nos. 3 to 40 were appointed as Head Clerks in different Panchayat Samitis after October, 1963.
The petitioners and the private respondents were governed by the Punjab Panchayat Samitis and Zia Parishads Services Rules, 1965 (hereinafter referred to as the Rules).
According to these rules, the seniority in the services was to be determined according to the length of service.
On 11111975, seniority list (Annexure P/2) was issued on the basis of 1965 Rules and the petitioners were shown senior to respondent Nos. 3 to 40.
Similarly, another seniority list was issued in the year 1986 (Annexure P/3) and there also the petitioners were shown senior to respondent Nos. 3 to 40.
3.
On 121977, services of all the employees working in Panchayat Samitis were provincialised.
Petitioners as well as respondent Nos. 3 to 40 were taken in Government service after 121977.
Inter se seniority of the petitioners and respondent Nos. 3 to 40 continued to be governed under the 1965 Rules.
In the year 1987, respondent No. 2 issued a tentative seniority list Annexure P-4 in which some of the respondents were shown senior to the petitioners.
Respondent No. 2 adopted a novel criteria of determining the seniority, i.e. date of birth instead of length of service.
Objections were invited and the petitioners filed their objections.
Before deciding the objections they were called for personal hearing vide Annexure P/5 annexed with the writ petition.
In due course, objections filed by the petitioners were rejected.
On rejection of their objections, petitioners have filed the present writ petition on the ground that change of criteria of determining the seniority from length of service to date of birth is unjust and arbitrary.
It was further urged that in the case of Gram Sachiv and Junior Engineers who were employees of the Panchayat Samtis and whose services were also provincialised along with the petitioners, the criteria for determining the seniority by length of service has been maintained whereas in the case of Head Clerks, the criteria has been changed to that of date of birth which amounts to discrimination in the eyes of law.
4.
I find force in the submission of the learned counsel for the petitioners.
Petitioners were governed by 1965 rules where the criteria for determining the seniority was length of service.
Petitioners continued to be senior to respondent Nos. 3 to 40 till their services were provincialised and their seniority was sought to be changed after a lapse of 21 years of their joining the service by adopting a totally new criteria based on age which in my view is different from that made applicable at the time of absorbing them in Government Service unjust and arbitrary.
On the provincialisation of the services of the Head Clerks in the Panchayat Samitis, the inter se seniority could not be changed by adopting a new basis i.e. the date of birth instead of length of service.
For example a person may join a particular service at the age of 21 and a person who is senior to him in age may join the same service after a lapse of four or five years; then according to the criteria fixed by the respondent Nos. 1 and 2, the person who joined the service later would become senior to the person who joined the service earlier on the ground that he is senior in age to the person who had joined the service earlier.
For instance, petitioner No. 2 Karam Singh was appointed as Head Clerk on 1391963 whereas respondent No. 15 Shri Om Parkash was appointed as Head Clerk on 6121971 almost after eight years after the appointment of petitioner No. 2 and had always been shown as junior to petitioner No. 2 but now by virtue of change in criteria he has been shown senior to petitioner No. 2.
Similarly Hanuman Singh respondent No. 13 was appointed as Head Clerk on 2351966 i.e. almost after three years of the appointment of petitioner No. 2 as Head Clerk, has now been shown senior to petitioner No. 2 because the seniority has now been determined on the basis of dates of birth.
By adoption of this method some Head Clerks who joined the service much later have been made senior to those who had joined the service earlier which has resulted into unjust and arbitrary results and the same deserves to be quashed.
5.
I find force in the second submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner as well.
In the case of Gram Sachiv and Junior Engineers whose services had also been provincialised along with the petitioners, the criteria for determining the inter se seniority by length of service has been maintained whereas in the case of Head Clerks, the method has been changed to date of birth.
No explanation has been given by the State in adopting the two different criterion for determining the seniority of two different sets of employees whose services have been provincialised on the same day.
It is a clear case of discrimination because in the case of some employees of the Panchayat Samitis, inter se seniority has been determined on the basis of length of service which is a reasonable criteria whereas in the case of petitioners, inter se seniority is being determined by adopting the date of birth as to be the criteria for determining the seniority.
The criteria that a person senior in the age shall rank senior to a person who had joined the service much earlier in point of time is arbitrary and unreasonable.
6.
Moreover, a new method could not be introduced for determining the seniority of class of persons inter se only because their services had provincialised.
Inter se seniority of the petitioners vis-a-vis respondent Nos. 3 to 40 continued to be governed as per 1965 rules which was based on a reasonable criteria of length of service.
7.
In conclusion, it is held that the criteria based on date of birth, adopted by the respondents for determining the seniority of the Head Clerks inter se is discriminatory, arbitrary and wholly unjustified in law.
For the reasons given above, the seniority list finalised by respondent No. 2 in which respondent Nos. 3 to 40 have been shown senior to the petitioners determining the seniority on the basis of date of birth is quashed.
Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 are directed to re-determine the seniority taking the criteria of length of service to be valid criteria within a period of four months.
Petitioners shall also be entitled to all the consequential benefits which would have accrued to them but for the order which stands quashed.
The writ petition is allowed with costs.
Costs are assessed at Rs. 1000/-.
Petition allowed.