RS Mongia, J (Oral) - It is not necessary to advert to any detailed facts because of the subsequent developments that have taken place since the filing of the writ petition.
2.
The petitioner who is an ex-serviceman filed the present writ petition with two main prayers : (1) for quashing the selection/appointment to the post of ASIs.
in Haryana Police which was made vide order dated 641990 (Annexure 3) to the extent that it violated the reservation policy framed by appoint the Government of Haryana; (2) for directing the respondents to consider and the petitioner as ASI in Haryana Police on the basis of his merit obtained by him in the interview held in August, 1989, in pursuance of advertisement No. 1/88, Category No. II.
3.
The police department had initially made requisition for 40 posts of ASIs., with the Service Selection Board, Haryana but the said demand was revised from time to time and total posts for which requisition was made, was raised to 98.
This fact has been admitted in the written statement filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1 and 2 i.e. State of Haryana and Director General of Police, Haryana.
Out of the initial 40 posts that were requisitioned seven posts were reserved for the exservicemen category.
According to the petitioner, out of 98 posts 22 posts came to the share of exservicemen.
Only seven appointments were made from this category.
In C.M.
No. 3522-A of 1991, the petitioner has averred as under :-  "That admittedly respondents have taken 59 persons and the demand has been raised to 98.
Out of 59, the respondents have taken only 7 from Ex-Servicemen category which quota was initially meant out of 40.
Further, respondent No. 2. while raising the demand has reserved 22 posts for Ex-Servicemen and whereas only 7 Ex-Servicemen have been appointed."
No reply has been filed to this application.
The petitioner has placed a photocopy of letter dated 17691 from the Secretary, Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana to the Director General of Police, Haryana, Chandigarh vide which the petitioner's name has also been recommended for appointment as ASI in the Ex-servicemen category.
In that letter it has been requested that the petitioner be given appointment in the shortest possible time.
4.
The learned counsel for the petitioner states at the bar that till date the petitioner has not been given the appointment.
If 59 appointinents have been made as per averment of the petitioner, even then about ten posts will come to the category of the Ex-servicemen.
In view of the fact that total of 59 appointments have been made as per averments of the writ petitioner and further the Subordinate Services Selection Board, Haryana having recommended the name of the petitioner for appointment, I find no justification with respondent Nos. 1 and 2 to deny appointment to the petitioner as he falls within his quota of the posts meant for Ex-Servicemen.
5.
For the foregoing reasons, this writ petition is allowed and the respondents are directed to give appointment to the petitioner to the post of ASI forthwith.
It may be clarified that if any person who was lower in merit in the category of the Ex-servicemen and has been given appointment, the petitioner would be given appointment from that date when any person lower in merit than the petitioner was appointed as ASI from the Ex-servicemen category.
I leave the parties to bear their own costs.