GR Majithia, J - The petitioner has sought a mandate to the respondent to grant him pensionary benefits in terms of the decision rendered in Kesar Chand v. State of Punjab and others, A.I.R. 1988 Punjab and Haryana 265 in this writ petition under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
2.
The respondents in the written statement have taken similar objections which were repelled by the Full Bench in Kesar Chand's case (supra).
In that case it was held thus :-  "Once the services of a work-charged employee have been regularised, there is no logic to deprive him of the pensionary benefits as are available to other public servants under rule 317 of the Rules.
Equal protection of laws must mean the protection of equal laws for all persons similarly situated.
Article 14 strikes at arbitrariness because a provision which is arbitrary involves the negation of equality.
Even the temporary or officiating service under the State Government has to be reckoned for determining the qualifying service.
It looks to be illogical that the period of service spent by an employee in a work-charged establishment before his regularisation has not been taken into consideration for determining his qualifying service.
The classification which is sought to be made among Government servants who are eligible for pension and those who started as work-charged employees and their services regularised subsequently, and the others is not based on any intelligible criteria and, therefore, is not sustainable at law.
After the services of a workcharged employee have been regularised, he is a public servant like any other servant.
To deprive him of the pension is not only unjust and inequitable but is hit by the vice of arbitrariness, and for these reasons the provisions of sub-rule (ii) of rule 317 of the Rules would be liable to be struck down being violative Article 14 of the Constitution.
The fact that the authorities had granted exemption from rules in certain cases would not be justifiable reason for excluding others from the grant of pension and gratuity benefits.
For this reason, too, rule 317(ii) is bad at law, as it enables the Government to discriminate between employees similarly situated."
3.
In the light of this judgment, the petitioner is entitled to pensionary benefits.
The respondents are directed to sanction the pensionary benefits to the petitioner in the light of the judgment rendered in Kesar Chand's case (supra) one month from the date of receipt of copy of this judgment.
Respondent No. 5 will release payment within one month of the determination made by respondent Nos. 1 to 4.
If respondent Nos. 1 to 4 fail to sanction the pensionary benefits within one month, the petitioner will be entitled to receive the arrears of pension with interest at the rate 12% per annum from the date the right accrued.
The writ petition stands disposed of.
No order as to costs.
Order accordingly.