RS Mongia, J - This appeal by the State of Punjab has been filed against the judgment of the learned Single Judge, dated 5th October, 1983, in which certain directions were given, to which reference would be made hereinafter.
2.
The writ petitioner was appointed as a Junior School Teacher Cadre Mistress in the grade of Rs. 125-300 on purely temporary basis with effect from 2nd September, 1968, and worked from the said date with certain national breaks.
She had served for less than one year in that grade and thereafter she was made to serve in the higher grade of Rs. 225-500.
She claimed regularisation on the basis of Government instructions, which laid down that the services of those ad hocemployees who had completed one year service on 1st January, 1973 and satisfied some other conditions should be regularised.
However, vide order dated 9th May, 1977 (Annexure P-3) the prayer of the writ petitioner was declined on the ground that the writ petitioner had rendered some service in the grade of Rs. 125-300 and some service in the grade of Rs. 225-500 and her services did not fall within one cadre.
It was this order which was impugned before the learned Single Judge.
The learned Single Judge allowed the writ petition and gave the following directions :-  "In the result the writ petition is allowed, the decision contained in letter dated May 9, 1977 (P.3) declining to consider the case of the petitioner for regularisation of her service in terms of the letter of the Government dated January 29, 1973 (P2) is quashed.
The case of the petitioner be considered for regularisation of her service in the light of the observations made above in case her services have not been regularised already in pursuance of any subsequent policy decision of the Government.
If the services of the petitioner are regularised her claim for higher grade of Rs. 200-500 shall be considered according to law.
No order as to costs."
3.
Mr. HS Riar, learned Additional Advocate General, Punjab, has submitted that the first part of the directions was dependent on the non- happening of the second part of the directions.
In other words, if the writ petitioner had already been regularised in pursuance of some subsequent instructions, then her case need not be considered for regularisation in accordance with instructions dated 29th January, 1973 (Anenxure P2).
He has brought to our notice an order dated 15th May, 1981, showing that the petitioner stood regularised in pursuance of later instructions of the Government dated 3rd May, 1977.
He submitted that this order should have been brought to the notice of the learned Single Judge, but for some reason or the other the same had not been produced before the learned Single Judge.
He submitted that in view of order dated 15th May, 1981, the writ petition should be dismissed as infructuous.
4.
There is no doubt that the directions of the learned Single Judge do convey the meaning as has been put forth by the learned counsel.
However, we find that in view of quashing of order, Annexure P-3, the writ petitioner had a right to be considered for regularisation in view of the earlier instructions dated 29173 (Anenxure P2).
Simply because she has been regularised by virtue of later instructions that would not take away her right to be considered for regularisation in accordance with the earlier instructions on the point, as this would affect her seniority.
5.
Consequently, we clarify the directions of the learned Single Judge that the writ petitioner would be considered for regularisation of her services in pursuance of the Government instructions dated 29th January, 1973 and in case she is found fit for regularisation, all consequential benefits flowing therefrom shall accrue to the petitioner.
With this modification in the judgment of the learned Single Judge, the Letters Patent Appeal is dismissed.
There will be no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.