JL Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioner is aggrieved by order dated December 18, 1985 which he was ordered to be compulsorily retired from service and the order dated July 17, 1985 by which his appeal against the order of compulsory retirement was rejected.
2.
The departmental proceedings were initiated against the petitioner in the year 1982 and they culminated in the passing of these two orders.
The grievance made in this petition was two fold.
Firstly, it is contended that after the finding of the enquiry officer against the petitioner, no show cause notice as required under Regulation 9(4) of the Punjab State Electricity Board Employees (Punishment and Appeal) Regulations, 1971 (hereinafter referred to as Regulations) was given to the petitioner.
Secondly, the petitioner claims that his appeal in which he had raised a number of points has been rejected by a wholly cryptic order without assigning any reason.
3.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents it has been inter alia pointed out that Clause (4) of Regulation 9 has been amended on August 27, 1985.
In the amended clause it was specifically provided that it shall not be necessary to give the employee any opportunity of making representation on the penalty proposed to be imposed.
It was further averred that the appeal submitted by the petitioner was duly considered by the whole time members of the Board.
Consequently, it has been prayed that the writ petition which is lacking in merit may be dismissed.
4.
Admittedly, the proceedings had been initiated against the petitioner in the year 1982.
At that time Regulation 9(4) provided for the issue of a 'show cause notice before any penalty could be imposed.
Admittedly no such notice was given to the petitioner.
In my view the amended regulation was only prospective and could apply to the proceeding which had been initiated after the amendment.
The amendment in August, 1985 could not retrospectively take away the right which vested in the petitioner regarding the issue of a show cause notice.
The action of the Board in applying the amended regulation was wholly illegal.
The show cause notice which deserved to be given, having not been given, the order of punishment Annexure P/10 cannot be sustained.
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioner also submits that the order of appellate authority is also wholly cryptic and assigns no reason.
A perusal of the order shows that the petitioner's appeal is stated to have been considered by the whole time members and rejected.
The order does not show the process of reasoning.
It does not disclose as to how and why the points raised by the petitioner were lacking in merit and have been rejected.
6.
Accordingly, the writ petition is allowed.
The orders at Annexures P/10 and P/12 are quashed.
Consequential reliefs in the nature of arrears of salary etc. shall follow.
However, this order shall not debar the respondents from proceeding against the petitioner in accordance with law.
Petition allowed.