Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The petitioner who was enrolled in the Indian Army in February, 1972 was discharged from service on March 1, 1987.
In the writ petition, it has been averred that in the year 1975, the petitioner alongwith 17 other Jawans was undergoing military training when a grenade fell on his left hand and exploded.
Due to the explosion, the petitioner's vision in the left eye was affected.
As a result, he remained in Military Hospital, Ramgarh from where he was transferred to Military Hospital at Meerut.
In the process, he suffered disability which was assessed at 40%.
The petitioner claims that this disability is still continuing and after his discharge from the Army, he was entitled to the grant of disability pension besides the other pension sanctioned by the respondents.
2.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been inter alia averred that there is no record that the petitioner was injured by any grenade.
It is pointed out that no injury report was even prepared by the Unit.
The factum of his admission in the Military Hospital on July 20, 1976 and discharge from there on July 31, 1976 with diagnosis Cataract (Left) eye, has been admitted.
Furthermore, the factum of the petitioner's having disability which was assessed at 40% has not been disputed.
It has, however, been averred that the claim of the petitioner for the grant of disability pension was rejected on the disability was not attributable to Army service.
It has been further pointed out that there is no direct or circumstantial evidence in favour of the petitioner.
3.
Regulation 173 of the Pension Regulations, 1961 provides as under :-  "Unless otherwise specifically provided, a disability pension may be granted to an individual who is invalided from service on account of a disability which is attributable to or aggravated by military service and is assessed at 20 per cent or over.
The question whether a disability is attributable to or aggravated by military service shall be determined under the rules in Appendix II."
The relevant entry in Appendix II which has been referred to in regulation 173 reads as under :-  7(b) "A disease which has led to an individual's discharge or death will ordinarily be deemed to have arisen in service if no note of it was made at the time of the individual's acceptance for military service.
However, if medical opinion holds, for reasons to be stated, that the disease could not have been detected on medical examination prior to acceptance for service the disease will be deemed to have arisen during service."
4.
A perusal of the above clause 7(b) shows that if no note of any disability has been made at the time of a person's entry into service, it is presumed to be attributable to the army service.
Admittedly the petitioner's vision at the time of his enrolment in February 1972 was 6/6.
In 1976 his disability was assessed at 40%.
It has not been shown that the disability has since disappeared.
Since the disability continues to be over 40%, the petitioner was entitled to the grant of disability pension.
The action of the respondents in declining his claim was, in my view, contrary to the provisions of regulation 173 and para 7(b) as noted above.
5.
The writ petition is accordingly allowed.
The respondents are directed to grant the disability pension to the petitioner.
In the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.