Jawahar Lal Gupta, J. (Oral) - The petitioners, who were appointed on work charge basis, had been served with notices of termination in the year 1988.
Copies of these notices have been appended as Annexures P-2/1 to P-2/5 with the writ petition.
The petitioners claim that having worked almost for four years before the impugned notices were served on them, they have a right to be regularised on the respective posts held by them.
2.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it has been averred that members of the work-charge establishment are liable to be discharged at any time on ten days' notice.
It has been further pointed out that the services of the workcharge employees have been dispensed with on account of the completion of work, for which they had been engaged.
In paragraph 6 complete details of the job on which the petitioners were engaged have been given.
It has also been mentioned that the entire work pertaining to the trade of the petitioners has since been completed.
It has also been averred that the petitioners were the junior-most amongst the workcharge employees, whose services were being terminated.
3.
The work in the SYL Project is primarily of a temporary nature.
According to the written statement, the petitioners had been appointed for carrying out a specific job, which has since been completed.
Their appointment in the very nature of things was for a temporary duration.
In such a situation, the question of regularisation does not arise.
In my view, the question of regularisation can only arise when a regular post is available.
It is not so in the present case.
The specific averments made in the written statement to the effect that the work has been completed and that the petitioners are the junior-most in the cadre have not been rebutted.
No replication has been filed to controvert this position.
In such a situation, I find no fault with the order of termination.
4.
Consequently this writ petition is dismissed.
In the circumstances of the case, parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.