AL Bahri, J - Grave injustice appears to have been done in this case when the Punjab School Education Board respondent No. 1 declined the result of the petitioner who had appeared to 10 + 1 examination.
2.
Petitioner Rimmi Sehgal did Matric from Himachal Pradesh.
On the transfer of her father to Ludhiana, she joined New Senior Secondary School Civil Lines, Ludhiana.
At that time she was in compartment.
After joining the school, she appeared in the compartment of Matric examination of Himachal Pradesh and cleared it in November 1990 i.e. supplementary examination.
She submitted her admission form for 10 + I examination to her school which was duly forwarded by the Principal of the school respondent No. 2 to the Board.
The Board issued roll No. 834433 and the petitioner took the examination.
Subsequently when the result of the examination was declared, the -petitioner's result was withheld.
Several reminders were issued to the Board.
However, ultimately the stand taken by the Board is that the petitioner initially was not eligible to take admission in the school and that is why the result was withheld.
3.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, we are of the view that at the final stage of declaration of result, the Board was not justified in withholding the result of the petitioner who had put in one year of educational career and had appeared in examination.
At no stage, the petitioner concealed the facts of her educational career as briefly reproduced above.
It was the duty of the Board to issue necessary Rules and Regulations to the school concerned.
As per affidavit filed by the Principal of the school respondent No. 2, no such Rules or Regulations were submitted so that it could be checked when the petitioner was admitted in the school, as to whether she was eligible or not.
Moreover when the admission form was submitted to the Board, it was the duty of the Board to promptly check it before issuing the roll number.
After roll number had been issued and the petitioner was allowed to take the examination, it is too late for the Board to withhold the result, on that ground.
4.
It has been contended on behalf of the counsel for the Board that in the admission form some alterations appear to have been made that the word compartment was shown.
Since the admission form in original is coming from the Board, it is for the Board to show as to how this word compartment" was added therein.
Otherwise, it is to be taken that the petitioner did not conceal the factum of compartment when admission form was submitted.
Moreover the petitioner had cleared the Matric examination, before she took 10 + 1 examination in dispute.
5.
For the reasons recorded above, this Writ Petition is allowed.
A direction is given to the respondent-Board to declare the result of the petitioner of 10 + 1 examination.
Let it be done within a period of 15 days.
The petitioner will get costs which are quantified at Rs. 500/-.
Petition allowed.