Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - In this petition filed under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the petitioner is seeking direction to the respondent to admit him as a Ward of Ex-serviceman for the BE Course which commenced from August, 1991.
2.
The case of the petitioner is that he had applied for admission for the seats reserved for the Wards of Defence Personnel in Government Engineering College, Bhatinda.
The application form was submitted on 1071991 along with a certificate to show that his father Lt. Col. SS Sodhi shall be retiring from the Army Service on 3171991.
3.
In the Prospectus, the Schedule for interview for different categories was laid down.
The petitioner appeared for interview on 581991 and was placed at serial No. 18 for admission to the Government Engineering College, Bhatinda.
After the interview, the Selection/Interviewing Committee having considered all the aspects of eligibility of the petitioner gave him chit bearing serial 18 and merit No. 2132 and asked him to get the fee card prepared at the next counter.
But to petitioner's great dismay when he approached at the counter where fee card was to be prepared he was told that his position has been changed from serial No. 18 to 61.
No reason, whatsoever, was assigned for changing the merit position,  4.
Counsel for the petitioner has contended that once the petitioner's candidature was considered for the seat reserved for the Wards of Ex- servicemen by the Selection Committee, which had considered all the aspects of eligibility at the time of interview, no subsequent change at a later stage could be made.
Counsel also contended that though the petitioner was a candidate for the seat meant for the Wards of Ex-servicemen, but later on he appeared in the interview on 3181991 before the Selection Committee for all the vacant seats of different categories.
His candidature was not considered for the general category on the ground that he had applied only for the quota/seats reserved for the Wards of Ex-servicemen.
It was also contended that the candidates lower in merit have been granted admission in general category, whereas petitioner who was higher in merit has not been considered at all.
The act of the respondent according to the petitioner is discriminatory and against the principles of justice.
5.
In the written statement filed by the respondents, it has been stated that the petitioner's name was placed at Serial No. 18 but at the time of scrutiny it was found that the petitioner's candidature falls under sub- clause VI-Wards of Serving Defence Personnel as his father was in service on the last date for submission of application and his candidature was considered for the wards of serving defence personnel in which category he was placed at serial No. 61 in the merit.
It has been stated that the chit issued by the representative of the Chairman Joint Admission Committee was no guarantee for admission.
It was only after verifying the eligibility and original certificates that the candidate is given admission card.
It has been admitted in the written statement that the petitioner had appeared in the interview before the Selection Committee on 3181991 for the vacant seats of all the categories.
Petitioner has been rightly refused admission for the general category for which he was not a candidate.
6.
The Assistant Advocate General, Punjab, had issued with vehemence that the Punjab Government had issued corrigendum which appeared in The Tribune dated 1271991 and Punjabi Tribune dated 1171991 to the effect that all the candidates seeking admission in more than one category were required to submit separate applications for each category.
The petitioner did not apply for general/open category.
So his name could not be considered in open/general category and the petitioner has not been discriminated in any manner.
7.
I have considered the submissions made at the Bar and perused the documents.
8.
The important aspect of the matter is that though the petitioner applied for the seats reserved for the Wards of Ex-servicemen, but when it came to the notice of the respondents that petitioner's claim for admission for the said category cannot be considered, the respondents suo motu changed his category and his candidature was considered for the category of wards of serving defence personnel but he could not get admission in the said category being lower in merit.
Petitioner's case for admission for general category was not considered, as according to the corrigendum issued, a candidate seeking admission in more than one category was required to submit separate application for each category, and the petitioner had applied for admission only in one category.
Petitioner's candidature was considered for the category for which he never applied.
If the respondents could do so why could not the petitioner be considered for the general category which was more advantageous to him.
The candidates, who were lower than the petitioner in merit, have been admitted in general category.
As such taking into consideration this aspect of the matter, petitioner's candidature for general category should have been considered.
9.
In view of the foregoing discussion, it is directed that petitioner's case for admission to BE be considered for general category.
If no seat is lying vacant, one seat is to be created.
The writ petition is disposed of as indicated above.
There will, however, be no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.