RS Mongia, J - The petitioners were working as Junior Engineers and Sub Divisional Engineers with the Haryana State Industrial Development Corporation Ltd (hereinafter called the Corporation), which is a Haryana Government undertaking.
While they were working as such, the Corporation redesignated the post of Junior Engineer as Assistant Manager (Industrial Area) and that of Sub Divisional Engineer as Manager (Industrial Area), vide order dated 16th June, 1980 (Annexure P.1).
It has been averred in the writ petition, which is not denied, that the petitioners who were working as Sub Divisional Engineers and Junior Engineers, were given the pay-scales of Rs, 400-1100 and Rs. 200-450 respectively, which were the pay scales of Sub Divisional Engineers and Junior Engineers working in the departments of the State of Haryana.
The further pleadings in the petition are that the petitioners after their redesignation as Managers and Assistant Managers (Industrial Area) kept on performing the same duties as they were performing prior to their redesignation.
The petitioner possessed the same academic qualification or equivalent thereto as the employees working as Sub Divisional Engineers and Junior Engineers in the State of Haryana.
2.
The State of Haryana, with effect from 1st April, 1979 revised the pay scales of all categories of employees working in different departments of Haryana, including Sub-Divisional Engineers and Junior Engineers.
The Corporation also revised the pay scales of Assistant Managers (Industrial Area) at par with the Junior Engineers of State of Haryana from Rs. 200-450 to Rs. 525-1050.
However, the pay-scales of Managers (Industrial Area) were not revised and made equal and brought at par with the Sub Divisional Engineers of the Haryana Government.
The Managers had been making representations to the Corporation that their pay-scales should also be revised and be brought at par with the Sub Divisional Engineers of the Haryana Government.
3.
The State of Haryana further revised the pay scales of all categories of its employees, including Sub-Divisional Engineers and Junior Engineers, with effect from 1st February, 1981 and raised the pay-scale from Rs. 900-1700 to Rs. 940-2000 and from Rs. 525-1050 to Rs. 600-1100 respectively.
These pay-scales were further revised by the State Government with effect from 1st July, 1985.
However, the Corporation did not revise the pay-scales of its Assistant Managers and Managers with effect from 1st February, 1981 and 1st July, 1985 when the pay-scales of Junior Engineers and Sub Divisional Engineers were revised by the State, of Haryana.
The petitioners naturally felt aggrieved and made representations to the Corporation that they were treated initially at par with the Junior Engineers and Sub Divisional Engineers of the State of Haryana and in fact prior to 16th June, 1980 they were even working as Sub Divisional Engineers/Junior Engineers on which date only their designations were changed but they kept on performing the same duties and functions.
The Corporation found force in the representation of the petitioners and the Board of the Corporation vide its decision dated 4th October, 1983 (Copy Annexure P.3) agreed that the pay scales of Managers and Assistant Managers be revised to Rs. 900-1700 and Rs. 600-1100 respectively, which was equal to the pay scales of Sub Divisional Engineers and Junior Engineers in the State of Haryana.
This decision was, however, not implemented as the Corporation thought of referring the matter to the State Government for its approval.
I am told by the learned counsel for the petitioners that till date no decision has been given by the State Government one way or the other.
4.
Article 95 of the Articles of Association of the Corporation reads as under :-  "95.
The Chairman shall reserve for the decision of the Government any proposals or decisions of the Board of Directors or any matter brought before the Board which raises in the opinion of the Chairman, an important issue and which is on that account fit to be reserved for the decision of the Government and no decision on such an important issue shall be taken in the absence of the Chairman appointed by the Government.
In respect of matters reserved by the Chairman for decision of the Government, if the Government's views are not received within a period of two months, the Board of Directors shall be entitled to act in accordance with the proposal or decision without further reference to the Government."
In view of this article, an Agenda was issued for 140th meeting of Board of Directors of the Corporation to the effect that on 4th October, 1983, the Board had passed a resolution to revise all pay-scales of Managers and Assistant Managers to bring at par with the pay scales of Sub Divisional Engineers/Junior Engineers in the State of Haryana and further it had been decided that subject to the clearance from the State Finance Department the revision of pay scales be given immediate effect.
It was mentioned in this Agenda that in view of Article 95 of the Articles of Association of the Corporation, the Board should approve to implement the decision earlier taken on 4th October, 1983, as no decision had been received one way or the other from the State Government within two months as envisaged by Article 95 quoted above.
5.
It has been submitted by the learned counsel for the petitioners that there is no denying the fact that the petitioners were earlier working as Sub Divisional Engineers/Junior Engineers in the Corporation which posts were redesignated in the year 1980 as Managers/Assistant Managers (Industrial Area) and, therefore, there was no reasonable or justifiable basis or grounds to deprive the petitioners of the revision of pay scales, benefit of which was given to Sub Divisional Engineers and Junior Engineers in the State of Haryana.
Apart from that, the petitioners' counsel submitted that in fact the Corporation vide resolution dated 4th October, 1983 (Annexure P.3) had already decided to give pay scales to the petitioners equivalent to that of Sub Divisional Engineers/Junior Engineers in the State of Haryana and since no decision had been conveyed by the Government within two months of the sending of the resolution to the State Government, on 11th October, 1983, the Board of the Corporation itself was competent to grant the revised pay scales view of Article 95 of the Articles of Association.
The stand taken by the respondents is that the matter is still under consideration and this was the stand at the time of the motion hearing.
6.
There is force in the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners.
Once it is admitted that the petitioners were working as Sub Divisional Engineers and Junior Engineers in the Corporation, they were entitled to the revision of pay scales and mere change of designation would not deprive them of the revision of the pay scales.
In fact, as is evident from the facts mentioned above, the Corporation itself had decided on 4th October, 1983 to grant the petitioners the revised pay scales, as was given to the Sub Divisional Engineers/Junior Engineers of the State of Haryana.
There is no impediment for the Corporation in implementing this decision in view of Article 95, as the Corporation itself decided that it is not necessary to await the decision of the State Government.
7.
For the foregoing reasons, the writ petition is allowed and the respondent-Corporation is directed to decide finally the matter regarding the implementation of its resolution dated 4th October, 1983 regarding the grant of revision of pay scales to the Managers/Assistant Managers without waiting for the decision of the State Government, as the same is not required in view of Article 95 of the Articles of Association.
This may be done within two months from the receipt of this order and if the decision is taken in favour of the petitioners and similarly situated persons, the arrears of the revised pay scales be released within two months thereafter.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.