NK Sodhi, J - This judgment will dispose of two writ petition Nos. 9234 and 9228 of 1987 as the relief claimed by the petitioners in both of them is the same.
2.
The petitioners who are trained Daies had been employed by the Indian Red Cross Society, Jalandhar, District branch, Jalandhar (for short 'the Society') in the Red Cross Dai Centres run by it in the District of Jalandhar.
It is the admitted case of the parties that the Deputy Commissioner, Jalandhar, who is ex-officio President of the Branch ordered the closure of all the Red Cross Dai Centres in the District due to paucity of funds and financial stringencies as a result whereof the services of all the petitioners were terminated w.e.f.
30111987.
Even otherwise, these Dai Centres started by respondent No. 2 could not continue to function since the State Government through its Health Department had opened Health Centres/Sub Centres and Dispensaries throughout the State of Punjab including the District of Jalandhar and the activities carried on by the Dai Cantres became redundant.
On the closure of the Centres, the Society recommended to the Civil Surgeon Jalandhar that the claim of the petitioners for alternative employment in the Health Centres/Dispensaries started by the State Government be considered sympathetically and if possible they be absorbed in these Centres.
As a result of this recommendation, some of the petitioners were offered temporary employment for 89 days in the Health Centres on the terms and conditions mentioned in the letter of appointment, a copy whereof has been attached with the writ petition as Annexure P-2.
it appears that the petitioners were not willing to accept this alternative employment and did not join.
They instead filed the present writ petitions for a writ of mandamus to be issued to the respondents for regularising their services claiming that they had been in service of the Society for different periods ranging from 5 to 20 years.
3.
The Dai Centres run by the Society have since been closed, no relief can, thus, be given to the petitioners and the question of regularising their services with the Society does not arise.
However, if the petitioners approach the concerned authorities of the State Government for employment in the Health Centres and Dispensaries in the District, I am sure that their claim would be considered sympathetically and in case there is scope for their absorption, the authorities would accommodate them.
With these observations, the writ petition stands dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.