VK Jhanji, J - The petitioners are employees of Haryana State Electricity Board.
Initially, the petitioners were appointed as Clerks in the service of Punjab Public Works Department (Electricity Branch) and their service conditions were governed by the Punjab Public Works Department (Electricity Branch) State Service Class-III (Subordinate Posts) Rules, 1952 (hereinafter referred to as the 1952 Rules), framed under Article 309 of the Constitution of India.
Punjab State Electricity Board was constituted under Section 3 of the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948 (hereinafter referred to as the Act).
2.
Though under Section 79 of the Act, the Board was competent to make regulations with regard to the conditions of service of the employees, yet no regulations were framed for the category of the petitioners and the existing Rules remained applicable to the Service including that of the petitioners.
3.
The State Government vide letter dated 13th of December, 1972, requested the Haryana State Electricity Board (hereinafter Board for short), a statutory Corporation, to provide for reservation of 22 per cent of vacancies in the initial recruitment and promotional posts for being filled up for the members of Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe as well as by members of Backward Classes.
The Board adopted circular letter dated 2741972 providing for reservation of posts both for initial recruitment and promotion.
The reservation policy in respect of Scheduled Caste and Backward classes was adopted by the Board, w.e.f.
1871973.
The 1952 Rules do not include the cadre of Deputy Superintendent as this cadre was not in existence in the office of the Chief Engineer erstwhile Punjab P.W.D.
Electricity Branch being Class 'B' office at the time of framing the 1952 Rules.
The office of the Chief Engineer erstwhile Punjab P.W.D.
Electricity Branch was upgraded from Class 'B' to 'A' vide Punjab Govt. letter No. 9637-FR-55/3681, dated 30-4-1956.
On the upgradation of the office, the cadre of Head Assistant was converted into the cadre of Deputy Superintendent.
Sub-rule 2 of the Rule 3-A(1) of the 1952 Rules deals with the conditions governing promotions in the respective cadre or from one to the other cadre.
Clause (e) of Sub-rule 2 of Rule 3-A(1) of the 1952 Rules provided that Circle/Officer Superintendent and the Head Office Head Assistant, will both be eligible for promotion to the post of Superintendent in the Head Office on the basis of their seniority, merit and confidential record.
As stated above, at the time when the 1952 Rules were framed, the category of Deputy Superintendent was not in existence and for the first time, it came into existence only in the year 1956 when on the up- gradation of the office, the cadre of Head Assistant was converted to Deputy Superintendent.
The Board continued to follow the 1952 Rules for the purpose of promotion to the post of Deputy Superintendent.
According to Sub-rule 2 of Rule 3-A(1) on the option of reservation policy by the Board, the benefit of reservation was given to the members of Scheduled Caste/Tribes and Backward classes on the basis of seniority-cum-merit because the 1952 Rules provided that the posts to be filled by way of promotion are to be on seniority-cum- merit basis.
The Board vide its order dated 7th of October, 1978, revised the recruitment and promotion policy which provided that the posts of Deputy Superintendents may be filled up by promotion from amongst the Assistants in order of seniority, and the posts of Superintendents may be filled up by promotion from amongst the Deputy Superintendents in order of seniority.
This office order superseded all previous instructions, Rules/Regulations issued by the Board relating to recruitment and promotion policy in respect of categories mentioned in the said order.
4.
The Government of Haryana vide circular letter dated 9th of February, 1979, reviewed the existing policy of reservation of posts for Scheduled Caste, Backward classes and Ex-servicemen in the Service of Haryana.
Para-6 of the said circular letter provided that "In case posts to be filled up by way of promotion, the benefit of reservation should be given where the basis of promotion is seniority-cum-merit and the benefit of reservation should not be made available where promotion is to be given on the basis of seniority-cum-fitness."
In view of the aforesaid Circular letter which was adopted, and approved by the Board in its meeting held on 2071989, the benefit of reservation cannot be given where the promotion is on the basis of seniority-cum-fitness.
5.
The contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners is that as per office order dated 7th of October, 1978, issued by the Board relating to recruitment and promotion policy, promotions to the posts of Deputy Superintendent and Superintendent had to be made only in order of seniority.
In view of letter dated 6.8.1979 (Annexure P-6) whereby the Board adopted circular letter dated 921979 (Annexure P.5).
After consideration of the matter in the meeting held on 2071989, the benefit of reservation cannot be given as the promotion is to be made only on the basis of seniority-cum- fitness.
On the other hand, the learned counsel for the respondent-Board as well as private respondents denied that an appointment to the post of Deputy Superintendent had to be made on the basis of seniority-cum-fitness.
The stand taken in the written statement filed by the Board as well as private respondents is that the recruitment and promotion policy issued vide office order dated 7101978 (Annexure P.4) does not in any way come into conflict or take away the right of Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribes in the matter of giving reservation to them under the instructions of the State Government and duly adopted by the Board from time to time.
6.
If the contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners is accepted, then in view of office order dated 7101978 (Annexure P.4) benefit of reservation policy cannot be given to the members of the Scheduled Caste and Backward classes because the office order dated 7101978 nowhere provided that the posts of Deputy Superintendent and Superintendent have to be filled up on the basis of seniority-cum-merit, rather it provides that posts have to be filled up only in order of seniority.
7.
Admittedly, the Board adopted reservation policy in respect of Scheduled Castes and Backward classes, w.e.f.
1871973.
By order dated 7101978, the Board revised the recruitment policy providing promotion to the posts of Superintendents/Deputy Superintendents in order of seniority.
No doubt, the Government of Haryana vide circular letter dated 9th of February, 1979, directed that the benefit of reservation should be given only on the basis of seniority-cum-merit and the benefit of reservation cannot be made available where promotion is to be given on the basis of seniority-cum- fitness.
In its meeting held on 20.7.1979, the Board approved this circular, approval of which was conveyed vide order dated 6.8.1979.
8.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, the contention of learned counsel for the petitioners cannot be accepted because I am of the view that office order dated 7101978 providing for filling up the posts in order of seniority, cannot be given precedence over the 1952 Rules framed under Article 309 of the Constitution of India.
Admittedly, 1952 Rules remained applicable to the service, including that of the petitioners, when on reorganisation of the State the Board came into existence.
The Office of the Chief Engineer erstwhile Punjab P.W.D.
Electricity Branch was upgraded from Cadre 'B' to 'A' and on the upgradation of the office, the cadre of Head Assistant was to be reckoned as the cadre of Deputy Superintendents and the Board had been following the 1952 Rules for promotion to the posts of Deputy Superintendent.
A query was made by the Chief Secretary to Government of Haryana, vide letter dated, 1411976 addressed to the Secretary, Haryana State Electricity Board, Chandigarh, whereby the Board was asked to make its position clear as to whether the promotion to the posts of Deputy Superintendent is made on the basis of seniority-cum-merit or seniority-cum- fitness.
The Board was also asked to clarify as to whether any amendment had been made separately for this purpose or whether the 1952 Rules are applicable to the posts of Deputy Superintendent.
In response thereto, the Board clarified its position in letter dated 621976 by stating that 1952 Rules are applicable to the post of Deputy Superintendent.
This position was maintained by the Board in Notification No. 82/Reg-29/L-I; dated 19.10.90 which was issued by the Board in exercise of its powers conferred under Clause (c) of Section 79 of the Act, vide which, the Board revised the recruitment and promotion policy in respect of ministerial service.
This notification was in partial modification of office order dated 7101978 and superseded all previous rules/regulations, orders and instructions issued by the Board from time to time relating to recruitment and promotion policy in respect of categories detailed in the said notification.
The notification provided that the promotion to the posts of Deputy Superintendent from amongst the Assistants shall be filled up on senioritycum-merit basis, and to the posts of Superintendent from amongst the Deputy Superintendents on seniority-cum-merit basis.
As discussed above, the Board at no stage had made promotion to the posts of Deputy Superintendent or Superintendent on the basis of seniority-cum-fitness as urged by the learned counsel for the petitioners, but the promotion was made only on the basis of seniority-cum-merit.
This was for the reason because 1952 Rules do not include the cadre of Deputy Superintendent as this cadre came into existence only when the office of Chief Engineer erstwhile P.W.D.
Electricity Branch was upgraded from Class 'B' to "A', and on the upgradation of the posts, the cadre of Head Assistant was converted into the cadre of Deputy Superintendent.
Sub-rule 2 of Rule 3-A(1) provides that promotion to the posts of Head Assistant shall be on the basis of seniority and confidential record meaning thereby that the promotion was only to be made on the basis of seniority-cum-merit.
The office order dated 7101978 is of no help to the petitioners because rules framed under Article 309 of the Constitution of India cannot be amended or superseded by administrative instructions nor it can be super-imposed by anything inconsistent to the rules.
9.
Admittedly, respondent Nos. 2 and 3 belong to the category of Backward class, whereas respondent Nos. 4 to 6 category of Scheduled Caste.
Though the respondents were promoted as Assistants after the petitioners and now have been promoted as Deputy Superintendents, yet their promotion to the posts of Deputy Superintendent was made on the basis of reservation policy which was adopted by the Board, w.e.f.
1871973.
No challenge in the present writ petition has been made to the reservation policy adopted by the Board, w.e.f.
1871973 and thus, the petitioners are not entitled to challenge the action of the Board in promoting respondent Nos. 2 to 6 to the posts of Deputy Superintendent.
Their promotion to the posts of Deputy Superintendent was made on the basis of reservation policy adopted by the Board.
Consequently, I find no merit in this writ petition and the same is hereby dismissed.
However, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.