Amarjeet Chaudhary, J (Oral) - The facts of the case are that respondent No. 3 was appointed as Manager, Mini Bank, on probation for a period of two years on 1491976.
On 2871979, the Managing Committee also known as Board of Directors, terminated the services of respondent No. 3 under Rule 5(v) of the Haryana State Central Co-operative Bank's Staff Service (Common Cadre) Rules, 1975, vide order, copy Annexure P-4, Respondent No. 3 preferred an appeal which was accepted by respondent No. 2 and he was reinstated in service.
Feeling aggrieved, the petitioner-Bank has filed this writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India for quashing order dated 30.11.1979 passed by respondent No. 2 reinstating respondent No. 3.
2.
Mr. BS Khoji, learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that services of respondent No. 3 were terminated after holding thorough inquiry.
According to him, respondent No. 2 erred in accepting the appeal of respondent No. 3, whose services were rightly terminated after following the procedure required under the rules and law.
3.
On bestowing my consideration to the matter, I am of the view that it is not in dispute that respondent No. 3 was appointed as Manager, Mini Bank on probation for a period of two years on 1491976 and the appointment letter contained a clause that the probation period can be extended and during the probation period if his work is found unsatisfactory or makes poor progress, the services of the petitioner can be terminated without giving any notice and assigning any reason.
The position remains that respondent No. 3 was placed under suspension, enquiry was made and suspension allowance was paid for the month of August, 1979, whereas his services were terminated on 2871979.
It is revealed from the paper-book that when the process of punishing the petitioner was in progress, the Bank, to the contrary, chose to terminate, respondent No. 3's services under the probation clause of Common Cadre Rules i.e. Rule 5(v).
Under rule 27 of the Rules, suspension has been regarded as punishment and Rule 28 envisages that no penalty shall be imposed on any employee unless proposed charges are communicated and delinquent official has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken against him.
In the instant case, it is apparent from the record that no show cause notice for taking the proposed action was given to respondent No. 3.
It is well settled principle of law that if the termination of services of a probationer is by way of punishment, he has to be given an opportunity to defend himself.
In the case in hand, admittedly the procedure as required under the law was not followed and the services of respondent No. 3 were terminated under the veil of probation clause, which recourse as adopted by the Bank was illegal and against the principles of natural justice.
Therefore, I find no infirmity in the impugned order dated 30.11.1979 passed by respondent No. 2 accepting the appeal of respondent No. 3 and consequently reinstating him.
4.
For the reasons, recorded above, the writ is dismissed being devoid of merit.
The parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition dismissed.