VK Bali, J - The petitioner seeks a writ of certiorari so as to quash th examination system of Intermediate School Course and further for issuance of writ of mandamus directing the respondent Nos. 3 and 4 to allow the petitioner to appear in those papers only in which he was declared unsuccessful.
The brief facts be enumerated first :  2.
The petitioner was enrolled in Haryana Police on 671970 and he was enlisted for list 'C' in the year 1979.
He was promoted as Head Constable on 24121979, on which post he was confirmed on 3181980.
He was recommended to be deputed for Intermediate School Course for 29th Batch.
He attended the said Course from 1.4.1990 to 19.12.1990.
The petitioner after completion of the Course, was subjected to the tests of various subjects which have been detailed in paragraph 3 of the petition.
Along with the petitioner other Head Constables were also deputed for the Course of Intermediate School forming 29th batch but 15 persons whose names have been detailed in paragraph 4 did not pass.
It is the case of the petitioner that Principal of the Police Training School is exercising all the powers for conducting the said examinations but he is using them in arbitrary manner.
Further, that the results of the said examination are not prepared in accordance with the merits of candidates but the performance of the incumbent is being judged on account of extraneous considerations and that the final list of successful candidates is prepared on the basis of favouritism.
Some examples of Head Constables having been declared failed and later passed by the Principal are given in the petition to highlight the contention of the petitioner with regard to favouritism indulged in by the Principal.
Further the case of the petitioner is that in any case, he could not be directed to clear all the papers once again and inasmuch as some other candidates were asked to clear only those papers in which they failed, there was no reason for the authorities to direct the petitioner to clear all the papers once again.
It is on the aforesaid facts that the petitioner seeks writ or direction in the manner given in the earlier part of the judgement.
3.
This petition has been strongly opposed.
The allegations of mala fide and favouritism have been stoutly denied.
The positive case as pleaded in the written statement and sought to be canvassed at the time of arguments by the State is that the Board found only two trainees who had not come up to the requisite standard and ordered that the said candidates shall reappear in the subjects in which they had failed.
Out of all those who appeared, six Head Constables were such who had failed in a large number of subjects and as such were relegated to the next batch to repeat the entire training again.
It is made out that even though the Board had power to fail a candidate but by considering that this would ruin the career prospects of the Head Constables, the Board had relegated those Head Constables to repeat their training in the next batch by way of concession.
It is pertinent to mention here that the petitioner had failed in three papers.
It would be, thus, made out from the tenor of the written statement that the trainees who had failed by only a few marks, were awarded grace marks by the Board and they were asked to reappear in the subjects in which they failed but, those who had failed with larger margin or in the larger papers, were relegated to the next batch.
4.
Mr. SK Lamba for the petitioner, mainly contends that there are no rules/instructions or regulations providing particular standard of passing the training course and subjects and that alone would leave the authorities with a choice to make any standard at a given time on its wish and whim and pass or fail a particular candidate.
Non-providing of the standard had resulted in arbitrariness, contends the counsel.
5.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and going through the record, I do not find any force in the contentions raised by Mr. SK Lamba, learned counsel for the petitioner.
It is settled proposition of law that wherever rules are silent, the Government would have every power to regulate such things which are not provided in the rules by instruction or general politicies.
The consistent case of the respondents is that only those Head Constables who had marginally failed were given grace marks and only those who failed in one or two papers were asked to reappear in all the papers.
List of such Head Constables has been given in the written statement and it is clearly made out that the petitioner failed in three subjects/papers.
No case of discrimination is also, thus, made out from the facts of the present case.
Faced with this situation, Mr. Lamba then contended that in one of the papers, the petitioner is stated to have failed is a revolver/sten-gun firing which is not a subject provided under instructions dealing with the promotion course of Assistant Sub Inspectors.
The contention of Mr. Lamba is factually incorrect.
Under the hearing "Promotion Course for Assistant Sub Inspectors" for which course admittedly the petitioner was an examinee, "revolver firing " has been mentioned as 'Principal's Test".
6.
No other point has been raised in this case.
Finding no substance in the petition, I dismiss the same.
There shall, however, be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.