Ashok Bhan, J - Petitioner, after doing his MBBS from Government Medical College, Amritsar, in the year 1984, joined the service of State of Punjab as PCMS-II on 27th March, 1987.
Petitioner was posted at a rural dispensary in School Health Clinic, Kala Bala, District Gurdaspur, and remained posted there for a period of more than three years.
While working in Kala Bala, District Gurdaspur, the petitioner was selected for the post of Registrar and was posted as such in Guru Gobind Singh Medical College, Faridkot, in the Department of Surgery.
Petitioner joined as Registrar in the Guru Gobind Singh College, Faridkot on 6th September, 1990.
2.
There are three Government Medical Colleges in Punjab State, i.e. at Amritsar, Patiala and Faridkot.
Principal of Medical College, Amritsar invited applications from Medical Graduates for admission to two years post-graduate medical degree/one year post-graduate Medical Diploma courses in two of the three State Medical Colleges, i.e. at Amritsar and Patiala.
The applications were to reach the Medical College, Amritsar, on or before 4th March, 1990 by 500 PM Petitioner applied for the post-graduate degree course in MS (General Surgery).
The duration of the post-graduate degree course is two years.
It is mentioned in the advertisement, Annexure P-2, that 25% of the total seats speciality-wise were to be filled on all-India basis through a competitive entrance examination to be conducted by the All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi.
Remaining seats, as per decision of the Government, were to be filled up as under :-  1) 60% seats shall be first filled up from amongst Registrars/Demonstrators and remaining seats will be offered to PCMS-II Officers with a minimum of 3 years Rural Service and ad hoc Service continuous with regular service will be counted.
The Registrar/Demonstrators will be considered only in the subject where they are posted : 2) 40% seats shall be filled strictly on merit from fresh graduates, PCMS-II officers and Registrars/Demonstrators.
3.
It is further mentioned that 20% seats are reserved for the candidates belonging to Scheduled Castes, 5% seats for Backward Classes, 2% for November 1984 riots affected persons/terrorist affected persons, 2% for sportsmen and 1% for handicapped candidates.
Petitioner is Ramdasia Sikh, a Scheduled Caste and has put in a claim to be selected against the seats reserved for Scheduled Castes.
Petitioner appeared for the interview, but was not selected for the course.
Aggrieved against the said action of the respondents, the petitioner has filed the present petition.
4.
It has been contended by the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner that the respondents have arbitrarily denied that seat to the Petitioner when he was fully eligible for a seat against 60% quota for the Registrars/Demonstrators in the speciality in which he was working; that the petitioner was entitled to be selected against a seat reserved for Scheduled Caste candidates under the category of 60% seats reserved for Registrars/Demonstrators and was entitled to the first seat in the MS (General Surgery) as the seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes would be 1, 5, 9 and so on according to roster point.
5.
In the written statement filed, the stand taken is that admission to the post-graduate course was for Medical Colleges, Patiala and Amritsar only.
The Registrar/Demonstrators posted in these two Colleges, would only be eligible and that Registrars - posted at Medical College, Faridkot - cannot be considered for admission along with Registrars posted at Medical Colleges, Patiala and Amritsar.
6.
I have heard the learned counsel for parties at length and find force in the submissions made by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
It is nowhere mentioned in the admission notice, Annexure P-2, that admission to the Post-Graduate course against the 60% seats reserved for Registrars/Demonstrators is open to only those who were working as Registrars/Demonstrators at two Medical Colleges i.e. at Patiala and Amritsar only.
As stated in the foregoing paragraph, there are three State-run Medical Colleges in Punjab.
25% of the total seats speciality-wise were to be filled up on all-India basis through a competitive entrance examination conducted by all India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi.
Out of the remaining seats, 60% seats were to be filled up from amongst the Registrars/Demonstrators.
It is not specified in the admission notice that only the Registrars/Demonstrators working at Medical College, Amritsar and Patiala would be eligible for admission to the post-graduate course in Medical Degree.
The remaining seats were to be offered to PCMS Officers with minimum three years of rural service as well.
The stand taken by the respondents is that the Petitioner would be considered against the seats meant for PCMS-II Scheduled Caste doctors at his merit subject to his reversion to PCMS-II from Registrarship.
In my view, the petitioner was fully eligible so far as the academic qualifications were concerned.
He belonged to Scheduled Caste.
Petitioner was working as a Registrar in Guru Gobind Singh Medical College, Faridkot and was entitled to be selected against the 60% posts reserved for Registrars/Demonstrators against a reserved vacancy meant for Scheduled Caste.
Petitioner was also entitled to be selected against the seats meant for PCMS-II Scheduled Caste although he was working as a Registrar in the College.
He had already put in 3 years Rural Service as PCMS-II and he had also completed three years rural service.
The stand taken by the respondents that he could be considered against the seat meant for PCMS-II Scheduled Caste doctors only after his reversion from Registrar to PCMS-II cannot be sustained because such is not the condition as per the admission notice, Annexure-P2.
Thus petitioner was entitled to be selected against the seats meant for PCMS-II against a reserved vacancy, he being a Scheduled Caste.
Respondents have tried to read much more than what has been prescribed and stated by them in the admission notice, Annexure P-2.
Respondents have acted in an arbitrary manner in denying to the petitioner what was due to him otherwise on merit.
The action being arbitrary, is violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India Respondents are directed to admit the petitioner to two years' post-graduate Medical Course in General Surgery in the Current Session.
If all the seats have been filled up then a special seat be created for the petitioner.
Writ petition stands allowed.
No costs.
Petition allowed.