NK Sodhi, J - Petitioners who are working as Upper Division Clerks, Cash Audit Clerks and Typewriter Mechanics with the Haryana State Electricity Board (for short, 'the Board') are presently drawing pay in the scale of Rs. 1350-2200/- and their grievance in the present writ petition is that they should be given the scale of Rs. 1400-2600/- whcih was given to other categories of employees who were drawing pay in the scale of Rs. 525-900 like the petitioners before the revision of grades w.e.f.
111986.
2.
The Board as per its office order No. 384 dated 1981987 decided to revise the pay scales of various categories of the employees (regular, ad hoc and work-charged employees) w.e.f.
111986 as indicated in the Annexure appended to that order.
The posts of the Upper Division Clerks, Cash Audit Clerks and Typewriter Mechanics were also included in this Annexure and their pay scale had also been revised from Rs. 525-900/- to Rs. 1200-2040/- w.e.f.
111986.
The petitioners represented to the Board and claimed that their pay scale should have been revised to Rs. 1400-2600/- which was the grade given to all other categories of employees who were drawing pay in the scale of Rs. 525-900/- prior to the date of revision.
In other words, the claim of the petitioners ws that prior to the date of revision, they were drawing pay in the scale of Rs. 525-900/- along with various other categories of employees like Analysts, Senior Fireman, B.Ed.
teachers, Dispensers, Asstt.
Fire Operators Grade-II etc. and after revision w.e.f.
111986, they were discriminated against inasmuch as they were given the revised scale of Rs. 1200-2040/- whereas other employees who were drawing pay in the same scale of pay as theirs prior to the date of revision were given the high er scale, w.e.f.
111986.
Various other categories of employees had also represented to the Board in regard to the revision of their pay scales and a number of anomalies came to notice during the implementation of the revised pay scales as effected from 111986.
As a result of all this, the Board as per its office order No. 437 F dated 19.1.1989 constituted a Pay Anomaly Committee to examine the anomalies in respect of pay scales revised w.e.f.
111986 and this committee in its meeting held on 621991 considered the anomalies and on the pattern adopted by the Haryana Government, recommended to the Board the re-revision of different pay scales w.e.f.
May 1, 1990 including the pay scales of the petitioners.
In the case of the petitioners, it was recommended that their pay scale be re-revised to Rs. 1350-2200/-.
The Board accepted the recommendation of the Anomalies Committee and granted this scale to the petitioners w.e.f.
May 1, 1990.
3.
The first contention advanced on behalf of the writ petitioners is that they are entitled to the higher grade of Rs. 1400-2600/- since this higher grade has been given to the B.Ed.
teachers who were also drawing pay in the scale of Rs. 525-1050 with a start of Rs. 585/- prior to the date of revision.
I find no merit in this contention.
The teachers were drawing pay in the higher scale even prior to the date of revision of grades by the Board and the Board in its wisdom decided to grant them the scale of Rs. 1400-2600/- w.e.f.
111986.
Moreover, the petitioners who are working as Upper Division Clerks and Typewriter Mechanics cannot claim parity in the matter of pay scale with the teachers whose nature of duties are altogether different from those performed by the petitioners.
Even their qualifications differ and there is no similarity between the jobs performed by the petitioners and the teachers.
4.
The petitioners then claimed parity with the Upper Division Clerks working in the Haryana Civil Secretariat who draw pay in the scale of Rs. 1400-2600/-.
This submission of the petitioners is equally devoid of merit.
As per the affidavit filed on behalf of the respondents, there is only one solitary post of an Upper Division Clerk in the Haryana Civil Secretariat in the Panchayat Department, which too is an ex-cadre post and there being no promotional avenues for the incumbent to this post, the State Government has given to him the higher grade of an Assistant in the scale of Rs. 1400-2600/-.
In view of these peculiar circumstances prevailing in the Panchayat Department, and there being no regular posts of Upper Division Clerks in the Haryana Civil Secretariat, the petitioners, in my opinion, cannot claim parity with the sole incumbent occupying the post of Upper Division Clerk in the Panchayat Department and their claim for equal pay cannot be accepted.
The petitioners have failed to place any material on the record showing that duties and functions performed by them are the same which the Upper Division Clerk performs in the Panchayat Department occupying the ex-cadre post.
There may be difference in their qualifications, quality and volume of work required to be performed and in the absence of any such material, it is not possible to hold that petitioners have been denied equality before the law.
Moreover, the employer of the petitioners and that of the Upper Division Clerk in the Haryana Civil Secretariat is not the same and, therefore, the principle of 'equal pay for equal work' would not be applicable.
5.
The learned counsel for the petitioners then submitted that both the Board as well as the State of Haryana fall within the meaning of 'State' as defined in Articles 12 and 36 of the Constitution of India and therefore, whatever grades the State of Haryana gives to its employees must ipso facto be given by the Board to its employees as well.
The contention is that both the employers being 'State' for the purposes of part III and IV of the Constitution cannot be allowed to give different grades to their respective employees.
I regret my inability to accept this contention as well.
The Board, no doubt, its 'State' within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution and therefore, as an employer it cannot be allowed to discriminate amongst its own employees because all its actions have to be judged in the light of fundamental rights guaranteed by Part III of the Constitution.
Nevertheless, the Board as an employer is different from the State Government and its employees cannot be said to be State Govt. employees and for this reason, the Board as an autonomous statutory body can always have and fix pay scales for its employees which may be different from the pay scales fixed by the State Government for its own employees.
If the contention of the learned counsel for petitioners were to be accepted then all different autonomous bodies not only within the State but throughout the country which would fall within the ambit of Article 12, cannot have different pay scales for their respective employees.
I am of the view that such bodies can have their own pay scales and the mere fact that those scales are different under one authority or the other would not violate the equality clause guaranteed by Article 14 of the Constitution  6.
Lastly, it was urged that the Pay Anomalies Committee constituted by the Board recommended the scale of 1350-2200 w.e.f.
May 1, 1990 for the upper Division Clerk and Typewriter Mechanics and the Board while accepting the recommendation started giving those grades to them only w.e.f.
the date recommended by the Committee and not from the date when the Board decided to revise the grades of its employees.
We find force in this contention.
It is not in dispute that the Board decided to revise the grades of different categories of its employees w.e.f.
111986 including the grades of the petitioners.
It was only when some Anomalies came to notice in the implementation of those revised grades that (sic) Anomalies Committee was constituted with a view to remove those anomalies.
This committee after examining the various anomalies and obviously with a view to remove them recommended to the Board the higher pay scale of Rs. 1350-2200/- for the class of employees like the petitioners.
If anomalies existed in the implementation of revised grades and the same had to be removed they must necessarily be removed from the date when the grades were revised and there would be no meaning in removing an anomaly from a date subsequent to the date when the grades were revised.
in other words, if new grades had to be given by way of removing an anomaly, such grades should take effect from the date when the grades were originally revised.
In this view of the matter, the petitioners are justified in claiming the higher grade of Rs. 1350-2200/- w.e.f.
111986.
7.
No other point was raised.
8.
In the result, the writ petition is partly allowed and the Board is directed to give to the petitioners and other employees of their class the higher grade of Rs. 1350-2200/- w.e.f.
January 1, 1986.
9.
In the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition partly allowed.