Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The three petitioners, who are working as Superintendents in the Directorate of Health Services, Punjab, were granted a premature increment w.e.f.
February 8, 1978 for not participating in the strike of the employees.
Vide order dated November 12, 1982, the Government of Punjab in the Department of Personnel and Administrative Reforms decided that the Superintendents of 'B' Class offices, which had been upgraded to 'A' class offices vide orders dated February 23, 1977, but on whom gazetted status was to be conferred after making necessary amendment in the relevant service rules were not entitled to the grant of a premature increment for not participating in the strike of February 8, 1978.
In pursuance to this order, the Director Health Service issued an order dated December 28, 1982 ordering the withdrawal of the increment w.e.f.
February 8, 1978.
Copies of these orders have been placed on record as Annexures P7 and P.5 respectively.
Aggrieved by these orders, the petitioners have filed the present writ petition.
2.
The Motion Bench vide its order of July 21, 1983 had stayed the recovery during the pendency of the petition.
3.
A written statement has been filed on behalf of the respondents by Sh. Prithpal Singh, Deputy Director.
It has been inter alia averred that "the post of Superintendent Grade-I of this Directorate, which was upgraded from 'B' class to 'A' class vide Govt. letter No. 10649-2FR-76, dated February 23, 1977, are although non-gazetted but have been brought at par with the Superintendents of 'A' class offices for all intents and purposes except that they remained to be notified as Gazetted which is in the process of being done as the rules are being amended."
It has been further averred that the premature increment was released to them, but it was withdrawn by the impugned order on account of the clarification given by the Chief Secretary to Government, Punjab.
4.
I have heard Mr. KS Gill, learned counsel for the petitioners and Mr. TS Dhindsa on behalf of the respondents.
5.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I find that the post of Superintendent was a non-gazetted post of February 8, 1978.
The petitioners were consequently non-gazetted employees.
They were, thus, entitled to the grant of a premature increment and the action of the respondents in releasing the increment in the year 1982 w.e.f.
February 8, 1978, though belated, was absolutely legal and proper.
Its withdrawal was contrary to the original order by whcih all non-gazetted employees, who had not participated in the strike were held entitled to the grant of the increment.
The action was arbitrary.
I am further of the opinion that the benefit once granted could not have been even withdrawn without the grant of an opportunity to the petitioners.
If an opportunity had been given to the petitioners, they could have proved that in fact they were entitled to the increment and it could not as such be withdrawn.
The Director Health Services acted in violation of the principles of natural justice in withdrawing the increment retrospectively by an order at Annexure P5.
6.
The writ petition is accordingly allowed.
The impugned orders are quashed.
the petitioners shall also be entitled to their costs, which are assessed at Rs. 3,000/-.
Petition allowed.