GR Majithia, J - The petitioner has impugned the instructions issued by respondent No. 2 for fixation of seniority of Firemen of District Level on transfer, in this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
The facts :-  2.
The petitioner on his appointment as Fireman on August 24, 1978 was posted at Fire Station, Rohtak.
The next promotion from the post of Firemen is that of Leading Firemen.
The service conditions for Firemen and Leading Firemen are regulated by the Haryana Municipal Services (Integration, Recruitment and Conditions of Service) Rules, 1982 (for short, the Rules).
The inter se seniority of the members of the Service has to be regulated under Rule 14 of the Rules.
In Apri,l 1985, respondent No. 1 decided to open a new Fire Brigade Station at Pehowa.
The petitioner was transferred and posted at the Fire Brigade Station at Pehowa, in public interest.
After his transfer from Rohtak to Pehowa, his lien was terminated by the Administrator, Municipal Committee, Rohtak on July 17, 1978.
Thereafter, Deputy Commissioner Kurukshetra (Respondent No. 4) circulated a seniority list of Firemen of Kurukshetra District on December 10, 1987 and the petitioner's name in the seniority list was shown at serial No. 16.
The name of respondent No. 5 was shown at serial No. 17 in the seniority list.
He filed a representation for deletion of petitioner's name from the seniority list of Firemen of District Kurukshetra as he had been transferred from Rohtak.
After the name of the petitioner was deleted from the seniority list of Firemen of District Kurukshetra, respondent No. 5 was promoted as Leading Fireman vide order dated May 27, 1988.
The petitioner's grouse that the seniority list of Firemen of District Kurukshetra was framed in accordance with the instructions issued by respondent No. 2 vide Memo No. 1622-DLB/FA/87/50323-34, dated December 29, 1987 which action is illegal being contrary to Rule 14 of the Rules.
3.
It is unfortunate that the respondents have not chosen to file a counter to the petition.
4.
Respondent No. 1, in exercise of the power conferred by Sections 38, 39, 41 and clause (m) of sub-section (1) of Section 257 of the Haryana Municipal Act, 1973, framed rules called the Haryana Municipal Services (Integration, Recruitment and Conditions of Service) Rules, 1982.
Clause (i) of sub-rule (1) of Rule 2 defines 'member', which means a member of the State Level or District Level Service detailed in Appendix A Clause (b) of sub-rule (1) of Rule 2 says that 'Appendix' means an Appendix to the Rules.
Rule 3 says that a service shall comprise of posts shown in Appendix A to the Rules.
Proviso to rule 3 provides that the Government can make addition to, or reduction in, the number of such posts or to create new posts with different designations and scales of pay, either permanently or temporarily.
The post of Fireman is mentioned at Serial No. 56 in the Appendix.
Rule 10 lays down the method for filling in the vacancies in the State Level Services and the District level Services.
Posts of Firemen and Leading Firemen fall in District Level Services.
The inter se seniority of the members of the service has to be fixed under rule 14 of the Rules which says that the inter se seniority of the members of the service shall be determined separately for every category by the length of their continuous Service on a post in the said category.
Proviso to this Rule says that in case of members appointed by direct recruitment, their inter se seniority shall be in the order of merit determined by the Commission, Board or any other authority as the case may be and that in the case of two or more members appointed on the same date, a member appointed by direct recruitment shall be senior to a member appointed otherwise.
Rule 14 is silent as to how the seniority is to be fixed when the Services of a member of the District Level Service are transferred to another district.
To fill the gap in the statutory rules, respondent No. 2, vide Memo No. 1622-DLB/FA/87/50323-34, directions :-  "(a).
The employees who will be transferred on their own request will be losing their seniority of their parent Districts and their seniority will be counted in the District where they have been transferred from the date of their joining there.
(b) Those employees of the District Level Service who have been transferred/will be transferred to other District on account of administrative reasons/public interest, their seniority will be kept in their parent District and they will be considered at the time of promotion in the parent district."
In the case of an employee who has been transferred to other district on account of administrative reasons, his seniority will be kept in his parent District and he will be considered at the time of promotion in the parent district.
5.
In this instant case, the petitioner was transferred from Rohtak to Pehowa in Kurushetra District as Fireman on the opening of a new Fire Brigade Station there.
His name was borne on the seniority list of Firemen of Kurukshetra District, but on a representation made by respondent No. 5, his name was deleted from the seniority list of Kurukshetra District.
On fixation of his seniority as Fireman in Kurukshetra District, his lien on the post in Rohtak District was terminated as is evident from letter No. 1077/LF, dated May 17, 1988 from the Deputy Commissioner, Rohtak to respondent No. 2.
The lien of the petitioner could only be terminated on his absorption against another permanent post.
In terms of the directions contained in Memo No. 1622-DIB/FA/87/50323-34, dated December 29, 1987, issued by respondent No. 2, the petitioner who, on his initial appointment as Fireman, was posted at Fire Brigade Station, Rohtak, his seniority has to be borne in the seniority list of Firemen of Rohtak District.
He has to be considered for promotion in District Rohtak, the District of his original posting.
The petitioner will be eligible for consideration for promotion to the post of Leading Fireman as and when the vacancy arises in District Rohtak.
6.
The petitioner's grouse that the instructions contained in letter dated December 29, 1987, issued by respondent No. 2 are contrary to the statutory rules is unfounded.
These instructions do not supplant the Rules but supplement the same.
The instructions are only clarificatory and fill in the gap in the statutory rules by providing that if an employee of the District Level Service has been transferred in public interest, his seniority will be kept in parent district and he will be considered for next higher promotion in his parent district.
The petitioner had no right for consideration for the next higher post District Kurukshetra.
He was transferred in public interest.
He will be considered for next higher promotion as and when the vacancy arises.
The order of the Deputy Commissioner, Rohtak terminating his lien against the post of Fireman in District Rohtak cannot be sustained.
7.
For the reasons recorded above, the writ petition partly succeeds and the order of the Deputy Commissioner, Rohtak dated May 17, 1988 terminating the lien of the petitioner in District Rohtak is quashed.
The petitioner will be entitled to next higher promotion to the post of Leading Fireman as and when a vacancy arises in his parent district i.e. Rohtak.
The order of respondent No. 2 dated December 29, 1987 laying down the criterion for fixation of the seniority inter se of the members of the District Level Service is maintained.
In the circumstances of the case, the parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition partly allowed.