NK Sodhi, J - Petitioners who are Junior Engineers (Civil) of the Haryana Public Works Department (Buildings & Roads) Branch and possess AMIE/degree qualification were ordered to be promoted to the higher posts of Sub Divisional Engineers on ad hoc basis for a period of six months in public interest w.e.f.
the date of their taking over the charge as such.
The higher posts of Sub Divisional Engineers belong to the Haryana Service of Engineers Class-II P.W.D.
(Buildings & Roads) Branch and are governed by the Punjab Service of Engineers Class II P.W.D.
(Buildings & Roads) Branch Rules, 1965 (hereinafter called 'the Rules').
Recruitment to the Service for cadre and ex-cadre posts is made under Rule 6(1) from four different sources mentioned therein and according to the proportion and allocation made in regard to each source in a lot of 40 vacancies.
These sources are (1) direct anointment (2) promotion from the members of the Haryana PWD (B&R) Sectional Officer (Engineering) Service (3) promotion from draftsman members of the Draftsmen and Tracers Service and (4) promotion from members of the Haryana PWD (B&R) Sectional Officer (Engineering) Service and Draftsmen & Tracers Service, possessing qualifications prescribed in Appendix B Sixty-five per cent of the posts in the Service are reserved for persons belonging to source No. (1) whereas 20%, 5% and 10% posts are reserved for source Nos. (2), (3) and (4) respectively.
According to the rotational system provided in this Rule, the 16th, 24th, 32nd and 40th posts in a lot of every 40 vacancies are meant for persons to be promoted to the service from source No. (4).
In case suitable candidates are not available from source No. (4), vacancies shall be filled by direct recruitment but if candidates are not available from source No. (1) and (3) and a person has to be appointed in public interest as stop-gap arrangement from other than the allotted sources, then such a person is liable to be reverted to his original cadre when a candidate from the allotted source becomes available and the period of service rendered by such a person will not be reckoned for the purpose of seniority.
The Government also has a right to fill up a short term vacancy in the exigencies of public service after recording specific reasons for a period not exceeding six months in each case by a local arrangement from amongst members of the Haryana PWD (B&R) Sectional Officers (Engineering) Service without resorting to the select list prepared under Rule 9.
Rule 9 deals with the appointment by promotion and requires the Selection Committee as referred to therein to prepare a select list of officials suitable for promotion to the Service and inclusion in such list is barred on merit and suitability in all respects with due regard to the seniority.
The names of the officers included in this list are arranged in order of seniority in Haryana P.W.D.
(B&R) Sectional Officer (Engineering) Service and members of Draftsmen and Tracers Service.
The list so prepared is required to be revised every year.
A reading of these Rules makes it clear that a person to be promoted to Class II Service from source No. (4) belongs to sources No. (2) or (3) and becomes eligible only when he acquires/possesses qualifications prescribed in Appendix B and has put in five years service in case he possesses AMIE qualification and two years service in case he is a degree holder.
It can so happen that a person who is junior in the Haryana PWD (B&R) Sectional Officer (Engineering) Service may acquire the AMIE/Degree qualification earlier to a person who may be otherwise senior to him and may, therefore, become eligible for being promoted to Class II Service earlier to the senior man.
On being promoted he would thus rank senior in Class II Service to the person who may otherwise be senior to him but has acquired the AMIE/Degree qualification subsequently and gets promoted thereafter.
2.
The petitioners were promoted on ad hoc basis on 28121981 for a period of six months only to fill short term vacancies under Rule 6(4) and it is not their case that they were promoted against their quota from source (4).
What they contend is that after they had been promoted outside their quota some posts falling to their quota fell vacant and they should be deemed to have been promoted against those posts subsequently and the only prayer now made is that the respondents be directed to treat them as having been regularly appointed as Sub Divisional Engineers in their own quota and that they are not liable to be reverted as Junior Engineers.
Apprehending their reversion, they filed the present writ petition.
To support this contention, it is alleged that there were a total of 295 sanctioned posts, both cadre and ex-cadre posts, upto 31121982 and the roster for the appointment starting from 1111966 (when the State of Haryana came into existence) stretched upto point 383 and the 10% share of source No. (4) works out at 38.
Reference is then made to the seniority list of AMIE/Degree Holder promotees starting from 1111966 upto 31121982 wherein the petitioners figure at serial Nos. 31 to 33.
According to the petitioners, there was still a shortfall of 5 posts belonging to source No. (4) and therefore, it could not be said that the petitioners were not working against the posts falling to their quota.
If this position is factually correct, the petitioner are right.
In the replies filed on behalf of the respondents, the claim of the petitioners has been resisted and it is stated that the petitioners had been promoted on ad hoc basis for a period of six months but somehow they have continued working against the posts meant for the direct recruits and their continuance on ad hoc basis did not give them any right under the Rules to be treated as regularly promoted Sub Divisional Engineers.
It is further stated that 13 posts meant for source No. (4) under rule (1) had been filled up by candidates from source No. (1) and therefore, these posts automatically stood diverted to the share/quota of direct recruits.
Since the learned counsel for the petitioners stoutly denied the stand of the respondents, I sent for the original record to verify as to whether 13 posts meant for source No. (4) had actually been diverted by being occupied by direct recruits.
The original record has been shown and I am satisfied that in fact 9 posts were filled up by direct recruits due to non-availability of AMIE/Degree Holders who belonged to source No. (4).
A certified copy of the roster has been placed on record.
Post at roster point No. 81 in Class II Service was filled up by one Shri Arjan Singh Parmar on 2021970 who was a direct recruit due to non-availability of a candidate from source No. (4).
Similarly posts at roster point Nos. 114, 122, 138, 146, 154, 162, 178, and 186 were filled up by direct recruits as AMIE/Degree Holders from source No. (4) were again not available.
Last of these appointments was made in the year 1971.
In these circumstances when 9 posts meant for source No. (4) were filled up by direct recruits and that when AMIE/Degree Holders from source No. (4) were not available, the posts were, therefore, beyond doubt occupied by the direct recruits substantively in their own right as contemplated by Rule 6(2) of the Rules and these posts, thus, automatically got diverted to the share/quota of the direct recruits.
In other words, the quota of promotees from source No. (4) got accordingly reduced.
When such is the factual situation as the record shows, the learned counsel for the petitioners had to concede that his clients could not be said to be occupying the posts in Class II Service against their own quota.
It must be said that the learned counsel challenged the authenticity of the original record though I do not find any reason to have any doubts in this regard In view of my finding that 9 posts were occupied by direct recruits w.e.f.
2021970 till the year 1972 due to the non-availability of AMIE/Degree Holders from source No. (4) and these posts having been diverted to their share thereby reducing the quota of AMIE/Degree Holders, there is no merit in the writ petition and the same is dismissed with no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.