Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - The petitioner had joined in MR College, Fazika as Lecturer on 26.11.1956.
He was confirmed on completion of one year's service on 20111957.
At the time of joining, the College was being run by the Local Managing Committee.
Under the Punjab affiliated Colleges (Security of Service of Employees) Act, 1974, as amended upto date and under the Panjab University Calendar, Volume-I, 1976 Edition.
In Chapter VIII(E), the condition of service and conduct of teachers in the non-Govt.
Affiliated Colleges, the age of retirement of a teacher is 60 years and can further be extended by the Governing Body upto 65 years depending upon the mental and physical fitness of a teacher.
In view of the above service rules, the petitioner was to retire on 31101991, his date of birth being 29101931.
On attaining the age of superannuation, the petitioner was to get provident fund.
However, no teacher was to be allowed gratuity unless he had completed 15 years continuous service in the Institution.
2.
MR College, Fazika, was taken over by the Government after obtaining approval of the Governor of Punjab on 13.9.1982.
At the time of taking over of the College the petitioner had rendered 26 years service.
In the month of September, 1989, the petitioner was informed by respondent No. 3 that he shall be retiring on 31101989 as the age of superannuation in Government Colleges is 58 years and that the petitioner shall be paid gratuity after calculating the length of service rendered by him after taking over of the college and the service rendered by the petitioner in MR College before its taking over was not to be considered.
The petitioner was informed by respondent No. 3 vide letter dated 31101989 that he stands retired w.e.f.
31101989, having attained the age of 58 years.
The petitioner was handed over another letter indicating that he was only to get gratuity which was to be calculated from the date of taking over of the college.
The petitioner was not allowed any pension.
3.
The petitioner through this writ petition seeks direction to the respondents to pay him pension/gratuity and all pensionary benefits after taking into consideration the total length of service from the date of his joining.
Rules 7 and 14 of the Panjab University Calendar as contained in Volume-I is that age of retirement of Lecturers in privately managed colleges is 60 years and such Lecturers will be entitled to all the pensionary benefits of service after taking into account the full length of service.
Had the respondent not taken over the management of the college he would have continued to serve MR College upto 60 years and the petitioner would have earned provident fund as well as gratuity on completion of 15 years service.
The service rules cannot be altered so as to put the petitioner in disadvantageous position.
4.
Counsel for the petitioner has laid stress that in private colleges, the age of retirement is 60 years.
Even in the case of University teachers the age of retirement is 60 years and the petitioner has been made to retire on his attaining the age of 58 years.
The next contention is that once right has accrued to the petitioner by serving the Institution, the same could not be taken back.
5.
The stand of the respondents is that the petitioner being Punjab Government employee was to retire at the age of 58 years and his service was governed under the Punjab Educational Services (College Cadre) (Class-II) Rules, 1976.
The provisions as contained in para 14 Rule 14 of Chapter VIII(E) of Panjab University Calendar, Volume-I, are meant for the lecturers working in privately managed colleges.
The petitioner cannot derive any benefit.
The petitioner had not rendered requisite service which could make him eligible for grant of pension.
6.
I have considered the submissions made at Bar and have also perused the paper book.
7.
At the time of taking over of MR College, at Gift Deed was made between the State of Haryana on the one part and the Trust of the College on the other part.
In the Gift Deed, there was a specific condition that Government shall not accept any liability or responsibility for the period prior to the taking over of the College by the Government prior to 3061983.
All such liabilities shall be cleared by the Managing Committee of the College.
It was further stipulated in the said Deed that for other administrative and financial matters not specifically mentioned in the Deed, the College is to be governed by such rules, regulations/instructions and order as are issued by the Government from time to time as applicable to other Government Colleges in the State.
8.
The most important condition of terms and conditions of taking over of the College is that members of the staff were to be treated as fresh entrants and were to be placed at the bottom of the old Govt. employees in their respective categories.
In view of the aforesaid condition of taking over of the college, the petitioner was to be treated as a new entrant in the Government service.
After taking over of the College, the petitioner had rendered only five years service with the Government.
The service earlier rendered by him with the erstwhile Management of the College was not taken into account as the petitioner was treated as new entrant.
Under rule 326 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Vol.
I, Part I, a Government employees is to retire on attaining superannuation at the age of 58 years.
As such, the petitioner had retired on attaining the age of superannuation.
Since the petitioner was a Punjab Government employee, his service conditions were governed under the Punjab Educational Services (College Cadre) (Class-II) Rules, 1976.
The provisions of Panjab University Calendar Vol.
I, cannot be made applicable in the petitioner's case as they apply to the Lecturers working in the private colleges.
As per Government instructions, a Govt. employees can seek the pensionary benefits only if he had rendered 10 years service under the Government which admittedly the petitioner had not rendered.
In the light of the foregoing discussion, I am of the view that the petitioner is not eligible for the grant of pension since he had not rendered requisite length of service with the Government.
The petitioner is entitled to the benefit of Gratuity and Leave Encashment on his retirement at the age of 58 years as are admissible to other Government employees.
However, he is entitled to only such benefits from his earlier employer i.e. Respondent No. 3 which were admissible to him under the rules prevalent in his parent College/Management.
9.
Consequently, I find no merit in the writ petition and the same is dismissed with no order as to costs qua respondent Nos. 1 and 2.
However, respondent No3 will grant the benefit if admissible for the period the petitioner served under them before taking over of the College by the Government.
Petition dismissed.