GR Majithia, J - The petitioner has challenged the decision of the Unfair Means Committee disqualifying him from passing in B.Sc.
Part III examination and from appearing in this examination before March/April,1990 in this petition under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India.
2.
The facts :  The petitioner has a brilliant academic record that he passed Middle Standard Examination, Matriculation Examination, Pre-University Examination, B.Sc.
Part I Examination, B.Sc.
Part II Examination in first division but Pre-Engineering Examination in second division; that he was a student of BSc Part III of Daya Nand College, Hissar in the Session 1987-88 and appeared in the examination in April 1988; that on April 16, 1988 he was taking his examination in Electronics; that during the course of examination members of the Flying Squad noticed a half-written diagram on the palm of his left hand and registered a case of unfair means against him; that he be asked to appear before the Unfair Means Committee where he was asked the following three questions, viz, i) Have you copied ?
ii) Have you anything to say ?
iii) Do you have any enmity with anyone ?
; that he replied in the negative; that the explanation of the petitioner was sought regarding the diagram and he answered thus :  "Respectfully submitted that on 16.4.1988 when I was going to the examination centre, one boy asked me on the way to explain him the diagram of Micro-computer.
I explained him the diagram by drawing the same on my hand.
The diagram was incomplete because some part of it was explained to him verbally.
After that, I cleared my hand but even then some impression of the diagram was left on my hand.
When there were five minutes left for the completion of the paper, the Flying Squad appeared in the Examination Hall and noticed the diagram on my hand.
Members of the Flying Squad registered an unfair means case.
I requested them with folded hands not to register a case, otherwise my life would be spoiled.
I had a every brilliant academic career as I secured 70 per cent marks in B.Sc.
Part I and II Examinations.
They did not pay heed to my request and also registered a case under Misconduct whereas, I simply made the request for not spoiling my career."
The petitioner was disqualified as stated above.
3.
Written statement was filed on behalf of the Registrar.
The factual averment in the petition that the petitioner had a brilliant academic record was not denied.
It was, however, stated that the petitioner was taking examination in the subject of Electronics of B.Sc.
Part-III under Roll No. 56278 on April 16, 1988 and he was found copying from the palm of his left hand on which a diagram relating to the said examination was sketched; that he tried to manhandle and scuffle with the members of Flying Squad; that the Unfair Means Committee imposed punishment according to rules.
4.
The respondent, to say the least, has acted in a highhanded manner.
It is expected to act fairly.
The petitioner is his statement before the Unfair Means Committee stated that the Flying Squad observed a faded diagram on the left palm of his hand and asked him to sketch that diagram on a plain paper and he did so but he refused to sign the paper on which the diagram was drawn.
The order under challenge does no indicate under which particular regulation of Kurukshetra University Calender Volume III the order was passed by the respondent.
Assuming that a faded diagram existed on the left hand palm of the petitioner but it is not indicator to the conclusion that he had used the same in answering any of the questions of the question paper.
The fact that the petitioner drew the sketch of the diagram on a plain paper when asked by the Flying Squad is conclusive proof of the fact that the candidate knew the answer very well.
The faded diagram on the left hand of the petitioner may have been drawn by him in the examination hall to satisfy himself that he can correctly draw the sketch.
In the absence of any other evidence, it was not possible for the university authorities to come to the conclusion that the sketch on the left palm of the petitioner was drawn by him before entering the examination hall and that the same was drawn for the purpose of using it in the examination hall for answering the question paper.
The petitioner has been made to suffer as a result of the unjust and arbitrary action of the respondent.
5.
For reasons aforesaid, the writ petition succeeds; the Order dated August 10, 1988 (Ex. P2) disqualifying the petitioner from passing in BSc III examination and from appearing in this examination before March/April, 1990 is quashed with costs assessed at Rs. 5000/- which will be paid to the petitioner by way of compensation.
Order accordingly.