Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - The Punjab Public Service Commission (hereinafter referred to as 'the Commission') invited applications for recruitment to the 23 posts of Deputy Superintendent of Police and 8 posts of Deputy Superintendent Jail Grade-II/District Probation Officers.
Out of 23 posts of Deputy Superintendent of Police, 12 were to be filled up from amongst the members of the general category and 11 were reserved for candidates belonging to the categories of Scheduled Castes, Backward Classes and Ex-servicemen etc.
The petitioners competed for these posts and were placed at Sr. No. 13 and 14 in the combined merit list of general category candidates.
However since the Commission had recommended only 12 candidates for appointment to the posts of Deputy Superintendent of Police, the names of the petitioners were recommended at Sr. Nos. 1 and 2 for appointment to the posts of Deputy Superintendent Jail Grade-II/District Probation Officers.
Accordingly letters for appointment to the posts of Deputy Superintendents of Police were issued in April, 1990.
Persons, like the petitioners whose names were recommended for appointment to the posts of Deputy Superintendents-Jails, were given letters of appointment in August, 1990.
Two candidates out of 12 recommended for appointment to the posts of Deputy Superintendent of Police, namely, M/s Ravi Kumar and Baljinder Kumar Uppal did not join their respective posts in the cadre of Deputy Superintendent of Police.
The petitioners relying on the instructions issued by the Government vide their letter dated March 22, 1957, claim that they have a right to be appointed to the posts of Deputy Superintendent Jail.
They claim that while reallocation has been made in the case of a candidate viz, Shri Ranbir Singh Khatra belonging to the category of ex-servicemen, the petitioners have been arbitrarily denied the opportunity for appointment to the posts of Deputy Superintendents of Police in spite of the fact that they had made representations vide Annexures P.4 and P.5 in that behalf.
This action of the respondents in not deallocating and appointing the petitioners to the posts of Deputy Superintendents of Police has been challenged as being arbitrary and violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
2.
The Motion Bench while admitting the writ petition had directed that "any appointment to be made by the respondents against the two posts in pursuance of fresh advertisement shall be subject to the final decision of the writ petition."
3.
No written statement has been filed on behalf of the State of Punjab, which has been impleaded as respondent No. 1.
However, a written statement has been filed on behalf of the Commission, respondent No. 2.
It has been inter alia averred that the petitioners had appeared in the competitive examination of 1989 and their names were recommended in accordance with the position in the merit list.
It has been further mentioned that the examination in the year 1990 had already been held and the result announced on November 21, 1990.
With regard to the action of the Commission in recommending the case of Sh. Khatra for the post of Deputy Superintendent of Police, it has been averred that the applications for the examination held in the year 1990 were called in March 1990 and the name of Sh. Khatra had been recommended prior to the calling of applications.
(In the petition the name has been given as Ranbir Singh Khatra while in the written statement it has been mentioned as Gurbir Singh Khatra).
It has been further averred that the instructions issued vide letter of March 22, 1957 have no application to the facts of the present case.
4.
I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record of the case.
The averment in the petition that the letters of appointment had been issued to the 12 candidates in April, 1990 and that the two candidates viz, M/s. Ravi Kumar and Baljidner Kumar Uppal had not joined the said posts, has not denied.
It is also the admitted position that the advertisement for the examination to be held in the year 1990 had been issued in March, 1990.
Consequently, the two vacancies against which M/s Ravi Kumar and Baljinder Kumar Uppal had been given the offer of appointment in April, 1990 could not have formed a part of the advertisement issued in March, 1990.
It is thus reasonable to infer that no selection could have been made against these two posts.
I am accordingly of the view that the selection made in the year 1990 has no relevance to the controversy in the present case.
5.
Admittedly, 12 posts in the rank of Deputy Superintendent of Police had been advertised.
It is also undisputable that the petitioners were at Sr. No. 13 and 14 in the combined merit list of candidates belonging to general category.
Since the two persons higher in order of merit than the petitioner had not joined, the claims of the petitioners deserved to be considered.
No written statement has been filed on behalf in respondent No. 1 to state as to why the claims of the petitioners were not considered.
Unless the petitioners were found to be unsuitable for appointment as Deputy Superintendents of Police, the State could not refuse to appoint them.
Nothing has been brought to my notice even at the time of arguments which may show as to why their claim was not considered.
While it is no doubt true that a selected candidate has no indefeasible right for appointment, the State cannot arbitrarily refuse appointment to a candidate who has been duly selected.
As a normal rule, the offer of appointment is made in order of merit.
However, when a candidate higher in order of merit does not join, the vacancy should be offered to the candidate next in order of merit.
It is only when the State prescribes a minimum standard and the candidate fails to come up to that standard the action of the authority in not offering the post to the next candidate can be held to be legally valid.
In the present case, it has not been shown that the State had prescribed a standard, which the two petitioners have failed to attain.
In such a situation, the action of the respondents in not making the offer of appointment to the posts of Deputy Superintendents of Police to the petitioners appears to be arbitrary and unfair.
6.
I, accordingly allow this writ petition and direct the respondents to consider the claim of the petitioners for appointment to the posts of Deputy Superintendent of Police.
Needful shall be done within a period of two months from the date of the receipt of the copy of this judgment.
The petitioners are also held entitled to their costs which are assessed at Rs. 2000/-.
Petition allowed.