VK Bali, J - In this petition order Annexure P-IX passed by respondent No. 3 has been challenged.
2.
Three respondents Sarvshri Janak Raj Goyal, Tarsem Chand and Hem Raj Bansal, who were clerks, were discharged from service of the Municipal Committee Lehragaga under Section 45(1) of the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911.
The order of discharge was set aside vide Annexure P-IX.
The learned counsel for the parties have brought to my notice that during the pendency of the writ petition resolution No. 237 dated October 10, 1985 was passed in the special proceedings of the Municipal Committee and it was unanimously resolved that Tarsem Chand should be reinstated.
Similar resolution was passed in case of Janak Raj Goyal.
It is an admitted position that both these respondents are ever since working.
In so far as Hem Raj Bansal-respondent is concerned, he has admittedly died during the pendency of the Writ Petition.
It has been rightly suggested by the learned counsel appearing for the parties that inasmuch as the question of termination of services of the respondent has paled into insignificance, the matter does not require to be gone into on merits.
However, the question of arrears of pay is still not dependent and it has been rightly stated by the learned counsel for the parties that the same should be left to be decided afresh by the Municipal Committee.
Counsel appearing for Hem Raj Bansal contends that his legal heirs would also be entitled to a job on compassionate grounds.
I am of the view that even this matter has to be left to be decided by the Municipal Committee.
3.
In view of the facts referred to above, this petition needs no order on merits and is disposed of with an observation that the Municipal Committee would consider the case of Tarsem Chand and Janak Raj Goyal with regard to arrears to pay.
There is no denial of the fact that had Hem Raj Bansal not died, a resolution as passed in the case of other two would also have been passed in his favour and he too would have taken back in the service.
It shall, thus, be open to the legal representatives of Hem Raj Bansal to ask for arrears of pay that might have been due to Hem Raj Bansal had he not died.
It shall also be open to them to make out a case for job to either of them on compassionate grounds and in case such a prayer is made, the Municipal Committee shall decide the same in accordance with law.
This petition is thus disposed of in the manner indicated above.
Order accordingly.