Ashok Bhan, J - Petitioner passed his diploma in Indian Medicine and Surgery from Board of Ayurvedic and Unani System of Medicine, Delhi and thereafter passed 1-1/2 years condensed course.
After passing the aforementioned two courses, petitioner was awarded the degree of Bachelor of Indian Medicine and Surgery (for short BIMS).
Petitioner was appointed as Vaidya by the respondents which post was later on designated as Ayurvedic Medical Officer (for short referred to A.M.O.).
Service of Vaidya/AMO is governed by statutory rules called The Punjab Ayurvedic Department (Class-III-Technical) Service Rules, 1963 (hereinafter referred to as the Rules).
Rule 6 of the abovesaid rules is reproduced below :-  "6.
No person shall be recruited to the service by direct appointment, unless he possesses such qualifications; as are shown in column 4 of Appendix 'A'  Note 1 :- Other things being equal, preference will be given to direct recruits who have worked for the cause of National Independence or have rendered some outstanding social or public service.
Note 2 :- Notwithstanding anything contained in the table of qualifications given in Appendix 'A' diplomas or degree of recognised Institutions only will be accepted."
The Appendix 'A' of the abovesaid Rules in which qualification for Vaidya is given is reproduced below :-  "Designation of post Qualifications for recruitment Vaidya A diploma or degree in Ayurveda of any recognised university or Board of Indian System of Medicine established by law in India or any teaching institution recognised by Govt." It is further necessary to mention here that Appendix 'A' was further amended by the notification dated 12121975 and qualifications for Vaidya were prescribed as follows :-  "Vaidya, A diploma or degree in Ayurveda of any of the institutions mentioned in Annexure I to these rules."
Annexure I to this effect is reproduced below :-  Sr. No. Name of the Institution/University.
Name of degree 1.
Faculty of Ayurvedic and Unani System of Medicine, Haryana.
GAMS 2.
Faculty of Ayurvedic and Unani System of Medicine, Punjab.
GAMS 3.
Banaras Hindu University, Banaras.
B.A.M.S.
4.
Banaras Hindu University, Banaras A.M.B.S.
5.
Board of Indian Medicine, U.P.
A.M.B.S.
6.
Board of Indian Medicine, U.P.
BIMS 7.
Board of Ayurvedic/Unani System of Medicines, Delhi.
BIMS 8.
XXX XXX XXX 2.
The qualification possessed by the petitioner finds mention at item No. 7 of Annexure I appended to the rules, referred to in the earlier portion of this judgment.
With effect from 121981, the pay scales of Vaidya/AMO were revised from Rs. 380-600 to Rs. 700-1400 and it was also decided that benefit of two advance increments shall be granted for B.A.M.S./GAMS degree holders.
In Annexure I to the Rules, degree of GAMS finds mention which was later on re-designated as BAMS Petitioner who had passed his BIMS from Examining Body, Ayurvedic and Unani System of Medicine and which was equivalent to B.A.M.S./GAMS and, therefore, Chief Medical Officer granted the benefit of two advance increments to the petitioner although the qualification BIMS was not mentioned in the letter vide which benefit of two advance increments had been granted to B.A.M.S./GAMS degree holders.
The benefit of two advance increments continued to be extended to the petition upto 2821984.
Vide Annexure P/5 dated 15.12.1986, State of Haryana, issued a show cause notice stating therein that the benefit of two advance increments was admissible only to those Ayurvedic Medicine Officers possessing the qualification of B.A.M.S./GAMS but Chief Medical Officer, Bhiwani, had granted the petitioner the benefit of two advance increments with effect from 141981 to 2821984 which was contrary to the instructions because the petitioner did not possess the requisite qualifications of B.A.M.S./GAMS therefore, recovery of Rs. 995180 which was received by the petitioner in excess was sought to be effected.
Petitioner filed his reply wherein he stated that he was qualified graduate Doctor and passed his BIMS from Examining Body, Ayurvedic and Unani System of Medicine, Delhi and the said qualification was equivalent to B.A.M.S./GAMS and is treated as such for entering into service and, therefore, petitioner could not be discriminated against only because the expression to his qualification was given as BIMS and not B.A.M.S./GAMS although essentially both these qualifications were equivalent to each other in all respects and were being treated as such by the respondents.
Petitioner's case was rejected by the respondents vide order dated 1351987 (Annexure P/7) without even adverting to the contentions raised in the petition.
Petitioner has filed the present writ petition claiming three reliefs i.e. (i) quashing of the order dated 1351987 Annexure P/7, (ii) petitioner had been wrongly denied the benefit of crossing of efficiency bar which relief has now been granted to the petitioner and is no longer under challenge in this writ petition, and (iii) that persons junior to the petitioner have been promoted as District Ayurvedic Officers whereas the petitioner had been denied promotion to the post of District Ayurvedic Officer.
3.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length and find force in the submission of learned counsel for the petitioner.
4.
Bachelor in Indian Medicine and Surgery from Examining Body, Ayurvedic and Unani System of Medicine, Delhi, is a recognised degree which is equivalent and is treated equivalent to B.A.M.S./GAMS for appointment to the post of Vaidya/AMO Otherwise also, the qualification BIMS possessed by the petitioner and B.A.M.S./GAMS qualification are equivalent and the petitioner performs the same and similar duties and responsibilities as compared to the Vaidya/AMO possessing B.A.M.S./GAMSdegrees.
Under the circumstances the respondents are not justified in discriminating between the persons possessing the degree of BIMS and B.A.M.S./GAMS in granting advance increments and pay scales between persons of the same cadre.
A qualification, which is considered by the respondents equivalent for the purpose of initial appointment cannot be treated differently while granting advance increments or while making promotions in future.
Granting of two advance increments to B.A.M.S./GAMS and depriving the other persons who possess equivalent qualification of BIMS is arbitrary and thus violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
While passing the order Annexure P/7, respondents did not deal with the points raised by the petitioner in his reply Annexure P/6 to the show-cause notice issued to him.
It was incumbent upon the respondents to deal with the contentions raised by the petitioner in his reply to the show-cause notice to make the order Annexure P/7 passed by it to be a truly speaking order.
Respondents have failed to do so.
In all such matters where show cause notice is given and a reply thereto has been received then while accepting/rejecting the representation filed the quasi-judicial authorities should deal with all the points raised by the aggrieved person and only then it would be deemed to be a speaking and just order.
In this case, the authorities that be, did not deal with all the points raised by the petitioner in his representation against the show cause notice and the order is liable to be set aside on that account as well.
5.
Coming to the last point that persons junior to the petitioner have been given promotion to the post of District Ayurvedic Officer while ignoring the petitioner, it has been stated in paragraph 13 of the written statement that the matter is being examined and is under consideration.
It is stated by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the petitioner is going to retire next year and direction be issued to the respondents to decide the case of the petitioner at an early date and if the authorities find that the petitioner has a deserving case then they should be directed to give the petitioner promotion from the date his juniors were promoted.
I am inclined to accept the request of learned counsel for the petitioner.
Respondents are directed to process the case of the petitioner for promotion to the post of District Ayurvedic Officer within one month from the receipt of this order and if found due, petitioner should be promoted from the date his juniors were promoted with all consequential benefits.
6.
For the foregoing reasons, this writ petition is allowed with costs, order Annexure P/7 is quashed and respondents are directed to treat the qualification of the petitioner BIMS equivalent to B.A.M.S./GAMS for the purpose of grant of two advance increments.
Costs are quantified at Rs. 500/-  Petition allowed.