RS Mongia, J - It is not necessary to advert to the facts of the case in detail as the only prayer made by the petitioner is that respondent No. 3 i.e. the Haryana State Federation of Consumers Co-operative Wholesale Stores Ltd, through its Managing Director should be directed to comply with the provisions of the Haryana State Federation of Consumers' Co-operative Wholesale Store Ltd Staff Service Rules, 1975 (hereinafter called the rules) inasmuch as the said respondent was violating Rule 94 of the Rules by not adhering to the quota provided for the promotional posts of the ranks of General Manager/Assistant Managers.
Rule 94 of the Rules provides that 66-2/3% posts of General Managers/Assistant Managers/Accounts Officer/Establishment Officer shall be filled by way of promotion and 33-1/3% by way of direct recruitment.
Rule 94, with which we are concerned is reproduced below :-  "94(a) Appointments to the various posts under different categories as indicated under rule 9(3) shall be in the ratio as given below :-  S. No. Name of posts.
Percentage of promotion.
Direct recruitment.
1.
XXX XXX XXX XXX XXX 2.
XXX XXX XXX XXX 3.
General Managers/ Assistant Managers/ Accounts Officer/Establishment Officer.
66-2/3% 33-1/3% 4.
Accountants/Assistants Store-keeper, Salesmen 50% 50% 5.
6.
XXX XXX XXX XXX 2.
The grievance of the petitioner is that on 31st December, 1987, the sanctioned strength of General Managers and Assistant Managers was 15 and 41 respectively; whereas actual incumbents who were holding these posts were 42 and 67 respectively.
In other words, there were temporary posts over and above the sanctioned strength in these ranks.
It has further been averred in the writ petition that as far as the General Managers were concerned there were 38 incumbents who were holding posts as direct recruits, while 4 were the promotees.
So far as the Assistant Managers are concerned, 61 were the direct recruits and 6 were the promotees.
These averments have not been denied by respondent No. 3.
According to the learned counsel for the petitioner, from the abovesaid quoted figures, it would be evident that amongst the General Managers and Assistant Managers direct recruits were far in excess than the prescribed quota under Rule 94 ibid.
The learned counsel further drew my attention to the averments made in para 9 of the petition, wherein it is averred as under :  "That whereas 61 posts out of 67 posts of Assistant Managers had been filled out of the direct appointment as against 6 posts as that stood on 31121967, at present out of 100 posts of Assistant Managers only seven had been appointed by way of promotion and 93 have been filed by way of direct appointment.
This is in complete violation of Statutory Service Rule 94 ibid for which Respondent No. 3 deserves to be ordained to complete to the quota of promotees."
The learned counsel stressed that in spite of the clear cut-mandate of Rule 94 of the Rules, reproduced above, the respondents are making appointments to the posts of General Managers and Assistant Managers by way of direct recruitment and not considering the case of the petitioner and other eligible persons for promotion to the said ranks in accordance with the quota fixed under Rule 94 of the Rules.
3.
I find force in the submissions of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
Respondent No. 3 cannot violate the quota fixed under Rule 94.
Even if the temporary posts are to be filled, the same are to be filled in accordance with the quota prescribed under Rule 94.
It may not be appropriate at this stage to disturb the persons, who might have been appointed by way of direct recruitment, though in excess of their quota.
However, respondent No. 3 is required to follow Rule 94 for the future appointments to the above ranks and adhere to the quota of the promotees and the direct recruits.
It may be clarified that whether the posts are to be filled on permanent basis or temporary basis, quota has to be adhered to.
Since as averred by the petitioner (and there is no denial) that direct recruits are already in excess of their quota, all future vacancies of General Managers/Assistant Managers be filled by way of promotion, so that the quota of promotees and direct recruits is maintained as provided in Rule 94 of the Rules.
4.
For the foregoing reasons, I allow this petition and direct respondent No. 3 that permanent/temporary posts of General Managers and Assistant Managers, which may fall vacant or may be created, shall be filled in accordance with the quota prescribed under Rule 94 of the Rules only by way of promotion so that the quota of promotion and direct recruits is maintained as provided in Rule 94.
The petitioner as well as all other eligible persons shall be considered for promotion to these posts in accordance with their seniority and other qualifications which may have been prescribed for considering them for promotion to the said ranks.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.