RS Mongia, J (Oral) - On 20th of June 1989, Divisional Office of the Life Insurance Corporation of India (hereinafter called Corporation) at Karnal issued an advertisement inviting applications for the posts of Clerical Assistants, Typists (Bi-lingual), Stenographers etc. Three posts of Clerical Assistants were reserved for candidates belonging to scheduled tribes.
Only three candidates including the petitioner belonging to the category of the scheduled tribes applied for the post of clerical Assistants.
The petitioner sat in the written test and qualified the same by getting 26-1/2 marks out of 50.
However, no mark was given to her in the interview as according to the respondent she was found unsuitable for appointment.
2.
In fact no candidate from the scheduled tribes was given appointment.
The petitioner has challenged her non-selection for the post of Clerical Assistant by way of the present writ petition,  3.
The learned counsel for the petitioner submits that in the advertisement, though there was mentioned regarding written test, yet there was no mention for holding an interview for being appointed to the post of clerical Assistant.
Consequently, according to the learned counsel, no interview could be held to see the suitability of a candidate.
4.
The learned counsel appearing for the Corporation has submitted that the method of recruitment to the post of Clerical Assistants and other posts is prescribed in Regulations of the Corporation known as Life Insurance Corporation of India (Staff) Regulations 1960 and LIC Recruitment (of Class III and Class IV Staff) Instructions 1979.
According to the learned counsel, the 1979 Instructions envisage an interview and he has brought to my notice Para 13 of the Instructions of 1979 which reads as under :  "Marks for interview :  13.
The Selection Committee shall allot marks for interview on the basis of merit and suitability as adjudged on the basis of the performance of the candidate at the interview.
The marks to be allotted shall be as shown below :  (i) Where pre-recruitment test is prescribed for selection to a post :  Pre-recruitment test : 50 marks maximum Interview : 50 marks maximum Total : 100 marks maximum (ii) Where no pre-recruitment test is prescribed for selection to a post, the maximum marks for interview shall be 100.
The Selection Committee shall also test the knowledge of the candidate in the Regional language of the Division.
No marks for interview shall be allotted to those candidates who do not possess adequate knowledge of the regional language and also to those candidates found unsuitable for appointment.
The ranking list shall be on the basis of marks gained for test and interviews.
Provided, however, the ranking of the candidates shall be subject to the separate instructions issued in the matter of reservation of post of Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes and other candidates."
5.
Mr. Laler, learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that even under para 13 of the Instructions, there was no requirement of minimum marks being obtained in the interview.
Therefore, according to him the merit list should have been prepared in accordance with the marks obtained in the written test as well as in the interview and even if a candidate was to get zero mark in the interview that should not have made any difference in compiling the merit list.
In other words a person who gets 49 marks out of 50 marks in the written test and zero mark in the interview should be preferred to a person who gets 36 marks in the written test and 12 marks in the interview.
6.
The learned counsel for the respondents, however, submitted that it was inherent in para 13 of the Instructions that to obtain some marks in interview a candidate has to be found suitable for appointment before he could be considered for placing in the merit list on the basis of marks obtained in written test and interview.
In other words, there was intrinsic condition of getting qualifying marks in the interview and the line separating the qualified and unqualified in the interview was the suitability and non- suitability.
The intention of the Instructions seems to be that if a person is unsuitable, why any marks be given to the candidate for the interview inasmuch as irrespective of the merit, he would not be appointed.
The candidate will be deemed to have not obtained the qualifying marks in the interview if he is otherwise found unsuitable for appointment.
In the present case, it has been stated that the petitioner was not given any mark in the interview as she was unsuitable, I find no infirmity in not selecting her as it is the interview committee which is the best judge to see the suitability of a candidate.
For the foregoing reasons, I find no merit in this petition and the same is dismissed.
However, there will be no order as to costs.