VK Bali, J - The Petitioner seeks an appropriate writ so as to quash the order of respondent No. 2 dated November 27, 1990 (Annexure P4) whereby her name has been ordered to be struck off from the Military Nursing Service strength.
Admittedly she was holding the post of Lieutenant.
The brief facts that have given rise to the present petition be narrated first.
2.
The petitioner was granted commission in the Army as Local Military Nursing Service with effect from May 29, 1981.
The petitioner held the rank of Lieutenant and was posted at Military Hospital, Ambala Cant.
The petitioner is admittedly governed by the Army Act, 1950 and the rules framed thereunder.
It could not be disputed that every person subject to the Army Act holds office during the pleasure of the President and that his/her services can be terminated by the Central Government subject to the provisions of the Act and rules and regulations framed thereunder.
Section 20 of the Army Act deals with dismissal, removal and reduction in rank whereas Section 22 deals with retirement, release or discharge from service.
3.
Inasmuch as petitioner was facing some difficulties in her family affairs, she made an application on April 20, 1990 for being released from military service and her application was forwarded by the Commandant of the Hospital respondent No. 3 with his recommendations.
The aforesaid application of the petitioner for release/retirement from the army was still pending when on account of change in circumstances in the family affairs of petitioner, she made, yet another application on September 11, 1990 praying that her earlier application dated April 20 1990 may be considered as having been withdrawn and she may not be released from the army service.
Admittedly when she filed subsequent application, she was still in service and her earlier application had not come up for consideration and disposal till then.
This application was admittedly forwarded by the Commandant of the hospital i.e. respondent No. 3 to whom even the earlier application was also addressed.
The respondent forwarded.
The subsequent application of petitioner containing prayer for withdrawal of the earlier request of petitioner for release from the army.
The forwarding letter dated September 22, 1990 has been annexed with the petition as Annexure P-3.
The petitioner repeated her request by yet another application dated November 26, 1990 which, too, was forwarded by the officiating commandant to the headquarters at Simla.
4.
The grouse of petitioner is that even though by the time her application for withdrawal was forwarded to the Headquarters, the first prayers of the petitioner had not been considered and disposed of yet the authorities while completely ignoring her request for withdrawal of her earlier application considered her first application and allowed the same.
The learned counsel for the petitioner contends that the order dated November 27, 1990 approving the relinquishment of Commission of the petitioner in spite of the fact that the petitioner had withdrawn her request for her release from the Army far prior in time, is wholly illegal and cannot sustain.
5.
The petition has been resisted through written statement filed by respondents No. 1 to 3 and it is mainly contended that the applicant had applied for release from service on April 20, 1990 on the ground of family problems and also for the reasons that the petitioner was unable to concentrate while on duty.
It is mentioned in the written statement that the Government after due consideration of the case approved relinquishment of commission of petitioner at her own request on compassionate grounds and in view of the fact that the reasons for cancelling the commission as made out by the petitioner herself were incapability and lack of concentration in the performance of her duties.
The request earlier made had to be allowed even though the same was sought to be withdrawn prior to passing of the impugned order.
6.
After hearing the learned counsel for the petitioner and going through the written statement, I am of the considered view that this petition deserves to succeed.
The positive case of petitioner was that the family problems which were troubling her resulting in lack of concentration in her work were no more in existence on account of change in circumstances.
She had admittedly withdrawn her earlier request of release from military service prior to the passing of the impugned order.
There was, thus, no choice with the respondents but to accept her request of withdrawal contained in her subsequent application and it is only if the petitioner was found lacking in performance of duties that action as contemplated under the Army Act could be taken against her.
The respondent could not presume that the continuation of the petitioner in service any more would result in lack of concentration of the petitioner in the service.
The stand of the respondents is presumptuous and is based upon conjectures and surmises and is, therefore, totally devoid of merit and has to be rejected.
7.
The petition, thus, succeeds.
The impugned order Annexure P4 dated November 27, 1990 is set aside.
The petitioner is held to be in continuous service and be paid all her emoluments that she deserved if she was to continue in her service.
The petitioner would also be entitled to all consequential benefits that might accrue to her on account of her continuous service by completely ignoring the impugned order Annexure P4.
This Writ Petition is allowed with costs.
Writ petition allowed.