Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - Can the seniority fixed by the Board be upset by the Government without hearing the petitioner who was likely to be adversely affected and did the Government at all have the jurisdiction to upset the decision of the Board are the two basic issues that arise in this case.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as Assistant Draftsman (Civil) on 4121972.
He actually joined on 15121972.
He claims to have been confirmed as Assistant Draftsman with effect from 15121973.
The petitioner further claims that the post of Head Draftsman (Civil) was advertised in the Hindustan Times of 1361974.
He claims that he was duly selected.
The petitioner claims that he was appointed as Head Draftsman vide letter dated 2281974 and he joined as such on 291974.
3.
It is further averred in the petition that respondent No. 5 possessed the qualification of certificate in the mechanical trade.
He was initially appointed as Head Draftsman (Civil) in the Haryana Housing Board (for short 'the Board').
However, his work and conduct having been found to be wholly unsatisfactory, his services were terminated with effect from 24101973.
He was again appointed on ad hoc basis as Assistant Draftsman on 26101973 on which post he joined on 30.10.1973.
4.
On the basis of the factual position as mentioned above the petitioner claims to be senior to respondent No. 5.
He further submits that respondent No. 5 managed to get himself appointed as Head Draftsman with effect from 3071974 i.e. with effect from a date earlier than one on which petitioner was appointed.
Since this appointment was wholly illegal, he was ordered to be reverted vide orders dated 23975 (Annexure P-3).
The petitioner claims that respondent No. 5 again brought extraneous pressure to bear upon the authorities and managed to get himself appointed as Head Draftsman and then promoted to the post of Circle Head Draftsman.
5.
The petitioner further alleges that in the year 1979, a seniority list of the employees of the Board was published.
In this seniority list (Copy at Annexure P-4) the petitioner was shown at serial No. 1 in the cadre of Assistant Draftsman while respondent No. 5 was shown in the cadre of Head Draftsman.
This was done on the hypothesis that he had joined as such with effect from 921973.
The petitioner claims to have represented against this to the Chairman which representation is alleged to have been accepted by the competent authority, viz the Chairman vide orders dated 2621980 (Copy at Annexure P-5).
This order is stated to have been passed after the issue of a show cause notice to respondent No. 5.
As a consequence of the order at Annexure P-5 it is alleged that respondent No. 5 was reverted to the post of Head Draftsman and shown junior to the petitioner vide order passed on 2821980 (Copy at Annexure P-6).
The petitioner further claims that he was promoted as Circle Head Draftsman vide orders dated 2621980 (Annexure P-6).
It is alleged that respondent No. 5 again represented on 391980 against his reversion from the post of Circle Head Draftsman.
The matter was considered by the Board of Directors and vide its orders dated 1081981, the representation was rejected.
A copy of this order has been produced as Annexure P-7.
In this meeting, it is averred, that out of 8 members 7 were in favour of the petitioner and one against him.
It is averred that he continued his efforts secretly and finally he managed to get an order passed in his favour by the State Govt. A copy of this order has been attached as Annexure P-8/A In pursuance to this, he was again declared senior by the Chief Administrator vide Annexure P-8/A As a result, respondent No. 5 was posted as Circle Head Draftsman while the petitioner was reverted as Head Draftsman.
The orders at Annexure P-8 and P-8/A have been challenged.
Challenge has also been made to the jurisdiction of the Government and also to the vires of the regulations framed by the Government.
6.
Separate written statements have been filed in the case.
One written statement has been filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 1, 2 and 3.
Separate written statement has been filed on behalf of respondent No. 4.
Respondent No. 5 has also filed a written statement.
It has been broadly averred that respondent No. 5 was initially appointed as Head Draftsman in the year 1973 whereafter he was accommodated on the post of Assistant Draftsman on the abolition of the post of Head Draftsman.
It has been stated that respondent No. 5 was again appointed as Head Draftsman on 3071974.
It is claimed that "the petitioner should have filed the writ petition either in the year 1973 or in the year 1974 challenging the basic qualifications of respondent No. 5 because the petitioner was directly serving under respondent No. 5 at that time and was very much in the service of the answering-respondent."
It is averred that respondent No. 5 was appointed as Head Draftsman (Civil) in the Board by transfer from Rural Housing Wing, Punjab Engineering College where he was working as Head Draftsman.
It was on account of decrease in the work load in Faridabad Division, that the post of Head Draftsman was abolished.
The services of respondent No. 5 were terminated as he was the junior-most Head Draftsman working on probation.
Various other averments made in the writ petition have also been controverted in the written statements filed on behalf of the respondents.
7.
Mr. Gopi Chand Bhalla has addressed the arguments on behalf of the petitioner.
He has referred to the sequence of events and contended that the whole action is illegal and arbitrary.
He pointed out that the seniority of the petitioner had been fixed by the Board after hearing both sides vide orders dated 2621980 (Annexure P-5).
In this order, it had been specifically found that the petitioner had joined as Assistant Draftsman on 15121972 while respondent No. 5 had joined as such on 30.10.1973.
It was consequently held that the petitioner was senior to respondent No. 5.
It had been further found that respondent No. 5 did not possess the requisite qualifications of diploma in Civil Draftsman.
So his appointment as Assistant Draftsman/Head Draftsman was irregular.
The Chairman further found that respondent No. 5 had not applied for the post of Head Draftsman in response to the advertisement dated 1361974, and he was never selected by the Selection Committee.
On the basis of his being junior to the petitioner respondent No. 5 was reverted as Assistant Draftsman on 23.9.1975.
As such, he could not have been promoted to the post of Circle Head Draftsman and Head Draftsman before the petitioner.
It is also observed that he was not even qualified for appointment as Assistant Draftsman or Head Draftsman but taking a lenient view he was being retained in service as Head Draftsman on compassionate grounds after relaxing the qualifications.
In view of this, the petitioner was found to be senior to respondent No. 5.
The petitioner was consequently promoted as Circle Head Draftsman vide orders dated 2621980.
Thereafter, the representation of respondent No. 5 was considered by a committee appointed by the Board.
The Committee vide its recommendation dated 2211981 (Annexure P7/A) had found no merit in the representation and recommended that the representation be rejected and the orders of the Chairman passed on 2621980 promoting the petitioner as Circle Head Draftsman be confirmed/approved.
This recommendation of the Committee was accepted by the Board vide its proceedings of 1081981 (Annexure P-7).
Out of eight persons seven had supported the decision while the Chief Administrator had recorded a note of dissent.
This decision of the Board, the counsel submits, had been upset by the State Govt. vide orders dated 3051983 (Annexure P-8/A) without affording the petitioner any opportunity whatsoever.
The counsel submits that the action of the State Govt. was wholly illegal inasmuch as it violated the principles of natural justice and had been passed without affording any opportunity whatsoever to the petitioner.
He also contends that the Govt. had no jurisdiction to upset the orders passed by the Board under any rule or law.
On the other hand, Mr. Harbhagwan Singh addressed arguments on behalf of the Board and Mr. VK Vashisht appeared for respondent No. 5.
The basic contention was that respondent No. 5 had been appointed as a Head Draftsman in the year 1973.
The petitioner could have challenged the appointment at that time and not now through the present writ petition.
He also argued that the action of the Govt. was in strict conformity with the rules.
My attention was drawn to the provisions of regulation 172 of the Housing Board Haryana (Conduct of Meetings) Regulations, 1980 in this behalf.
8.
I have considered the respective contentions.
The sequence of events as given above shows that a seniority list was issued by the Board for the first time in the year 1979.
In this list, the name of the petitioner was shown in the category of Assistant Draftsman while that of respondent No. 5 was shown in the category of Head Draftsman.
Petitioner had represented against it.
Respondent No. 5 was given a show cause notice.
He had submitted his reply.
This reply was considered and vide order at Annexure P-5, the Chairman had found the petitioner to be senior.
He had also found respondent No. 5 to be totally ineligible for the post of even Assistant Draftsman.
It was further observed that respondent No. 5 was being allowed to continue in service as Head Draftsman on compassionate grounds.
The Chairman had also ordered the promotion of the petitioner to the post of Circle Head Draftsman.
This decision of the Chairman was duly approved by the Board on 1081981.
Thereafter, the Govt. accepted the representation of respondent No. 5.
It is alleged that the petitioner was given no notice of this representation.
The petitioner has averred in grounds contained in para 21(c) that his seniority has been disturbed without the petitioner having been given any opportunity of being heard.
He has alleged the violation of principles of natural justice.
In the reply filed on behalf of respondent No. 4, it has been averred that ground (c) of para 21 of the writ petition is wrong and hence denied and that the Orders of the Govt. at Annexure P-8/A are legal and valid in view of the position explained in preceding paragraphs.
There is no specific averment to the effect that any notice was given to the petitioner.
In the reply filed on behalf of the Board it has been stated that since respondent No. 5 was appointed earlier as Head Draftsman so he was bound to be considered as senior.
It has been further averred that "the petitioner have got no right of being heard under the law because he was very well aware regarding the seniority of respondent No. 5".
Even respondent No. 5 in his written statement has not alleged that any opportunity was to the petitioner.
In view of this factual position I am of the firm view that the orders passed by the Govt. at Annexure P-8/A and by the Chief Administrator vide Annexure P-8 are wholly illegal and vitiated.
It is well settled that seniority cannot be disturbed without hearing the persons who are likely to be adversely affected.
When the original seniority fixed vide Annexure P-4 was challenged by the petitioner through a representation to the Chairman of the Board, a show cause notice was given to respondent No. 5.
Thereafter, the seniority was fixed.
This decision of the Chairman was duly approved by the Board.
If this decision was sought to be reviewed by any authority, it was incumbent upon it to give the petitioner a due and reasonable opportunity.
If an opportunity had been granted it would have been possible for the petitioner to put forth his view point.
The petitioner was wrongly denied this opportunity.
The action is consequently vitiated.
The orders at Annexure P8 are therefore liable to be quashed.
Since the orders at Annexure P-8 were passed merely as a consequence of orders of the Govt. at Annexure P-8/A, even this order is liable to be set aside.
9.
Even otherwise, from a perusal of the facts and the findings recorded by the Board, I am satisfied that the petitioner is senior to Respondent No. 5.
The sequence of events shows that the petitioner had been recruited as Assistant Draftsman in the year 1972 while respondent No. 5 was appointed as Assistant Draftsman on 30.10.1973.
He had no doubt been initially appointed as Head Draftsman but his services were terminated in the year 1973 itself on account of the abolition of the post as suggested by the respondents.
He was, thereafter, appointed only in the rank of Assistant Draftsman.
It has also been found by the Board that he did not fulfil the qualifications and had been accommodated on compassionate grounds.
The order at Annexure P8/A passed by the Government gives no reason for taking a different view.
Even during the course of hearing, no reasons were at all pointed out which could persuade me to take a contrary view.
In this situation, when respondent No. 5 had entered service as an Assistant Draftsman long after the petitioner, he cannot by any process of law or logic be treated as senior to the petitioner.
It has been further stated before me that during the pendency of the writ petition, respondent No. 5 was further promoted to the post of Assistant Engineer.
The petitioner had amended his petition to even challenge this appointment.
It has been specifically averred that respondent No. 5 was not eligible for this post and the action was discriminatory and violative of the rules.
The averment of the petitioner in sub-para (h) of para 21 to the effect that respondent No. 5 did not possess the qualification for appointment to the post of Assistant Engineer has been specifically denied.
Furthermore, the averments in para (i) of para 21 that the action is discriminatory has not at all been answered in the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents.
Since the petitioner has been declared senior to Respondent No. 5, it would be incumbent upon the respondents to reconsider the claim of the petitioner for appointment to the post of Assistant Engineer.
The appointment of respondent No. 5 to the post of Assistant Engineer is vitiated and is consequently set aside.
10.
In this view of the matter, I do not think it is necessary for me to go into the ancillary question of the competence of the Government or the vires of the Regulations.
I, therefore, quash the orders at Annexure P-8 and P-8/A as also the appointment of respondent No. 5 to the post of Assistant Engineer.
As a result, the orders at Annexure P6 and P-7 are restored.
It is further directed that the claim of the petitioner for appointment to the post of Assistant Engineer shall be considered with effect from the date respondent No. 5 has been promoted.
The petitioner will be entitled to all the consequential reliefs.
11.
The writ petition is accordingly allowed.
The petitioner shall be entitled to his cost which are assessed at Rs. 2000/-.