GR Majithia, J - The petitioners have sought a mandate to the respondents to grant them the pay scale as admissible to them, in this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
2.
The facts found established from the record, briefly, are :-  The petitioners after their selection as Dairy Extension Assistants Grade II were appointed as such by respondent No. 2.
Respondent No. 2 communicated to the Subordinate Services Selection Board/Departmental Selection Committee the following qualifications for recruitment to the posts of Dairy Extension Assistant :-  "i) B.Sc.
Dairying, or ii) B.V.Sc., or iii) B.Sc.
Agriculture, or iv) I.D.D., or v) B.Sc.
Animal Science.
vi) Animal Husbandry Assistant Course from a recognised Institution.
Note : The candidates possessing the qualifications as B.Sc.
Dairying and B.V.Sc.
will be appointed in the scale of Rs. 200-500 (Revised Scale Rs. 700-1200) and the others in the scale of Rs. 160-400 (Revised Scale Rs.
570-1080)."
The petitioners had been appointed as per the said qualifications/scales meant as such and they accepted the appointments accordingly.
Petitioners No. 1 to 3 and 5 are B.Sc.
(Agriculture) and petitioner No. 4 is MSc.
(Agri).
3.
The candidates who possess the Degree of B.Sc.
(Dairying) and B.V.Sc.
are appointed as Dairy Extension Assistants Grade I, while other graduates are appointed as Dairy Extension Assistants Grade II.
The petitioners were appointed as Dairy Extension Assistants Grade II since they did not possess the qualification of B.Sc.
(Dairying) and BV Sc.
Respondents No. 1 issued directions as contained in Memo.
No. 2408-AH-Il72/623, dated January 6, 1973 to respondent No. 2 intimating that the Governor of Punjab was pleased to accord sanction that the Degree-holders may be given Grade I in the scale of pay of Rs. 200-15-380/20-500 on their first appointment in Dairy Development Department, Punjab and the remaining posts of Grade I may be given to the Diploma-holders appointed in Grade II on the basis of their seniority-cum-merit from the date of actual appointment to Grade I, subject to the condition that in future the posts created in this cadre should also be divided in Grade I and Grade II in the ratio of 1/3rd and 2/3rd respectively.
Petitioners claim for fixation in the higher grade is solely based upon this letter.
4.
Respondent No. 1 framed the Rules called the Punjab Dairy Development, Non-Ministerial (State Service Class III) Rules, 1981 (for short, 1981 Rules).
Under these Rules, candidates possessing qualification of B.Sc.
(Agriculture) are ineligible for appointment as Dairy Extension Assistants Grade I in the pay scale of Rs. 200-500 (Revised pay scale of Rs. 700-1200) on direct recruitment.
However, a provision is made under 1991 Rules that the Dairy Extension Assistants Grade II are eligible for promotion as Dairy Extension Assistants Grade I For initial appointment as Dairy Extension Assistant Grade I, the incumbent must possess the qualification of B.Sc.
(Dairy).
Respondent No. 2 in his affidavit has sought to explain the Government letter dated January 6, 1973 that the word "degree-holder" refers to Degree-holder in B.Sc.
(Dairy).
5.
Learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that in the light of the Government letter dated January 6, 1973, to distinction can be drawn between the Degree-holder in B.Sc.
(Dairy) or B.Sc.
(Agri.)
and there was no justification for respondent No. 2 to fix the petitioners in a lower pay scale of Rs. 160-400 (Revised pay scale Rs. 570-1080).
Degree-holders in B.Sc.
(Dairy) or B.Sc.
(Agriculture) have to be granted pay scale of Rs. 200-500 (Revised to Rs. 700-1200).
6.
The submission is devoid of any merit.
The petitioners were selected and appointed as Dairy Extension Assistants Grade II pursuant to the advertisement in which it was specifically mentioned that the post of Dairy Extension Assistant Grade II is in the grade of Rs. 160-400 (now revised to Rs. 570-1080).
The petitioners accepted the appointment on the terms and conditions mentioned in the advertisement.
They cannot turn down and say that they ought to have been fixed in higher grade.
The advertisement is in the nature of an offer to the eligible candidates to apply for the post mentioned therein.
On selection, the appointee cannot be allowed to urge that he/she ought to have been fixed in a different grade than the one advertised.
Apart from this, under 1981 Rules, distinction is made between Dairy Extension Assistant Grade I and Diary Extension Assistant Grade II.
The qualifications prescribed for these two posts are different.
Minimum qualification for appointment to the post of Dairy Extension Assistant Grade I is B.Sc.
(Dairy), while a candidate possessing degree in B.Sc.
(Agriculture) is eligible for initial appointment as Dairy Extension Assistant Grade II.
A person appointed as Dairy Extension Assistant Grade II is eligible for consideration for promotion as Dairy Extension Assistant Grade I, but a degree holder in B.Sc.
(Agriculture) is ineligible for direct appointment as Dairy Extension Assistant Grade I Respondent No. 2 is justified in saying that the word "degree-holder" mentioned in Government letter dated January 6, 1973 refers to the degree holder in B.Sc.
(Dairy).
The petitioners have not established any legal right.
It is elementary that no one can ask for a mandamus without a legal right.
There must be a judicially enforceable right as well as a legally protected right before one suffering a legal grievance can ask for a mandamus.
A person can be said to be aggrieved only when a person is denied a legal right by someone who has a legal duty to do something or to abstain from doing something.
7.
For the reasons stated above, the writ petition is devoid of any merit and the same is dismissed but with no order as to costs.