GR Majithia, J - The petitioner has impugned the order of his termination from service dated August 7, 1981, in this petition under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India.
The facts :-  2.
The petitioner was selected as Manager of the Harkalyan Binders and Printers, Panchkula in the year 1976 by the Departmental Selection Committee constituted by respondent No. 2, namely, the Haryana Harijan Kalyan Nigam Ltd, Chandigarh, which is a Government Company; that respondent No. 2, framed Bye-Laws called the Haryana Harijan Kalyan Nigam Employees Service Bye-Laws (hereinafter referred to as the Bye-Laws); that these Bye-Laws do not contain the provisions regarding the procedure to be followed for imposition of penalty, etc.; that respondent No. 2 by a resolution adopted the Punjab Civil Service (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1952 (for short, the Rules); that in November 1980, the Board of Ayurvedic and Unani System of Medicines, Haryana placed an order for publication/preparation of certain registers with the Press belonging to respondent No. 2; that according to the original letter, the Registrar had requested the petitioner to complete the job within two months and this period was later on enhanced to three months; that a complaint was received by respondent No. 2 that the job was not completed within the prescribed period because of lapse on the part of the petitioner; that respondent No. 3 vide his letter dated May 8, 1981, served a charge-sheet on the petitioner under bye-laws 61 and 62 of the Bye-laws read with rule 7 of the Rules; that the petitioner filed reply to the charge-sheet against the accusation made; that respondent No. 3 appointed the Executive Officer to Act as the Enquiry Officer; that the Enquiry Officer after recording the statement of the petitioner submitted his report and held that the charges stood proved against him; respondent No. 2 after receipt of the enquiry report served a show-cause notice on the petitioner to show-cause why penalty of dismissal from service be not imposed on him; that the petitioner filed a detailed reply to the show-cause notice and after considering the same, the impugned order terminating the petitioner's services was passed by respondent No. 2.
The petitioner unsuccessfully challenged the said order before the Appellate Authority under the Bye-Laws.
3.
The undisputed facts which stand established from the pleadings and the documents placed on record, briefly, are :-  a) The following statement of charges was served upon the petitioner :- i) He has been negligent in the discharge of the duties.
ii) He has been inefficient in the performance of his duties.
iii) He has disobeyed the orders of the Head Office.
b) Reply was submitted to those charges by the petitioner.
No evidence was led by respondent No. 2 to substantive the charges.
The Enquiry Officer after recording the statement of the petitioner submitted his report that the charges stood proved.
On the basis of the enquiry report, the show-cause notice was issued why penalty of dismissal from service be not imposed upon him.
The petitioner filed reply to the show cause notice and after consideration of the same, the order of termination from service was passed by respondent No. 2.
4.
Respondent No. 2 did not produce any evidence to substantiate the charges levelled against the petitioner.
The charged officer has only to refute the evidence against him.
His statement cannot be recorded for establishing the charges against him.
Rule 7 of the Rules reads as under :-  "7.
Inquiry before imposition of certain penalties :  (1) Without prejudice to the provisions of the Public Servants (Inquiries) Act, 1850, no order of dismissal, removal or reduction, shall be passed against a person to whom these rules are applicable, unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken in regard to him.
(2) The grounds on which it is proposed to take such action, shall be reduced to the form of a definite charge or charges which shall be communicated in writing to the persons charged, and he shall be required within a reasonable time to state in writing whether he admits the truth of all, or any of the charges, what explanatory or defence, if any, he has to offer and whether he desires to be heard in person.
If he so desires, or if the authority empowered to dismiss, remove or reduce him so directs, an oral enquiry shall be held at which all evidence shall be heard as to such of the charges as are not admitted.
The person charged shall, subject to the conditions described in sub-rule (3), be entitled to cross-examine the witnesses, to give evidence in person and to have such witnesses called, as he may wish, provided that the officer conducting the enquiry may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, refuse to call any witness.
The proceedings shall contain a sufficient record of the evidence and a statement of findings and the grounds thereof :  Provided that -  (a) It shall not be necessary to frame any additional charge when it is proposed to take action in respect of any statement or allegation made by the person charged, in the course of his defence; (b) the provisions of the foregoing sub-rule shall not apply where a person is dismissed, or removed or reduced on the ground of conduct which has led to his conviction on a criminal charge; or where any authority empowered to dismiss or remove him, or reduce him in rank is satisfied that, for some reason to be recorded by him writing, it is not reasonably practicable to give him an opportunity of showing cause against the action propose to be taken against him or where in the interest of the security of the State, it is considered not expedient to give to that person such an opportunity; (3) If any question arises where it is reasonably practicable to give any person an opportunity to defend himself under sub-rule (2), the decision thereon of the punishing authority shall be final.
(4) xxx xxx xxx xxx (5) xxx xxx xxx xxx (6) After the enquiry against the Government servant has been completed, and after the punishing authority has arrived at a provisional conclusion in regard to the penalty to be imposed, the accused officer shall, if the penalty proposed is dismissal removal or reduction in rank be supplied with a copy of the report of the enquiring authority and be called upon to show cause within reasonable time, not ordinarily exceeding one month, against the particular penalty proposed to be inflicted upon him.
Any representation submitted by the accused in this behalf shall be taken into consideration before final orders are passed."
Sub-rule (2) of Rule 7 says that the Founds on which it is proposed to take action against a delinquent officer/official shall be reduced in the form of a definite charge or charges and these will be communicated in writing to the person charged and the charged person shall be required to state in writing whether he admits the truth of all or any of the charges and what explanation or defence, if any, he intends to offer.
The disciplinary authority could order inquiry and the charged officer has a right to cross- examine the witness produced at the inquiry by the prosecution.
The rule enjoins upon the disciplinary authority to produce such evidence in support of the charge as it thinks fit before the Enquiry Officer and the charged officer/official has a right to cross-examine the witness and produce evidence in defence not only to refute the charge against him but to substantiate his own defence.
In the instant case, the Enquiry Officer adopted a course contrary to the provision of rule 7 of the Rules.
The Disciplinary Authority did not examine any evidence in support of the charges, but the Enquiry Officer on his own recorded the statement of the charged officer and proceeded to hold that the charges stood proved against him.
The inquiry is vitiated for the reason that it was conducted in violation of the mandatory provisions of rule 7 of the Rules and being violative of the principles of natural justice, the charged officer/official cannot be examined to prove statement of charges against him.
Consequently, the impugned order of termination based upon the enquiry report is rendered void and the subsequent order of the Appellate Authority is also rendered illegal.
5.
For the reasons stated above, the writ petition succeeds, and the impugned orders dated August 7, 1981 and the appellate order are quashed but with no order as to costs.
The petitioner will be taken back in service within two weeks from the date of receipt of copy of this judgment but without any back wages.