RS Mongia, J (Oral) - The petitioner was appointed as Assistant Superintendent, Jail in the Jails Department of the Haryana Government on 14th January, 1972, and later on she was directly appointed as Deputy Superintendent, Jail through Haryana Public Service Commission and joined as such on 15th November, 1975.
2.
The petitioner was conveyed adverse remarks vide communication dated 14th January, 1988 (Annexure P.11) for the year 1986-87 (covering the period 5.8.1986 to 3131987).
During this period, she was posted as Deputy Superintendent, Jail, Ambala.
She was also conveyed adverse remarks vide communication dated 9th August, 1988 (Annexure P. 17) for the year 1987-88 (for the period from 141987 to 1081987).
She made a representation against the adverse remarks, but vide communication dated 12th February, 1990 (Annexure P. 20) she was informed that her representation against the expunction of adverse remarks had been considered and rejected.
The petitioner had challenged the rejection of her representation for expunction of the adverse remarks by way of the present writ petition.
3.
The petitioner had arrayed Shri Sada Nand Trikha, Superintendent District Jail, Sirsa, who was at the relevant time, working as Superintendent, Jail, Ambala, as well as the Chief Minister of Haryana State (Shri Om Parkash Chautala) as respondents.
The petitioner has levelled allegations of mala fides against these respondents, which have been denied  4.
The submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that against the adverse remarks, the representation lay to the Administrative Secretary, who, in the present case was the Commissioner, Home Department and he had given the petitioner a personal hearing after she had filed the representation and finding substance in the same, he had ordered the expunction of adverse remarks.
When the file was sent to the Minister concerned, he had also agreed with the Commissioner, Home, that the remarks should be expunged.
However, when the file was sent to the Chief Minister, he disagreed with the Commissioner, Home and ordered that the remarks may not be expunged.
The submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that under the Rules of Business, when a representation of Class II Officer is dealt with by the competent authority, the file does not have to go to the Minister or the Chief Minister.
He has brought to my notice the Rules of Business, wherein it is provided that only the files regarding expunction of remarks of Class I Officers have to be put up to the Chief Minister.
5.
The learned Advocate General, Haryana, appearing for the State of Haryana and the Chief Minister did not dispute this factum that the file of the petitioner, according to the Rules of Business, need not have gone to the Chief Minister.
He further maintained that the sending of the files regarding the expunction of adverse remarks, of Class I or Class II Officers to the Chief Minister, was in routine and that is how the file had gone to the Chief Minister.
There is no denying the fact that Rules of Business have got the force of law.
If the Rules of Business do not provide that the files have to go to the Chief Minister, as in the present case, then the order of the Commissioner, Home, expunging the adverse remarks had become final and the Chief Minister under the Rules of Business could not have gone into the matter.
Apart from that, I have seen the original file and find that detailed reasons have been recorded by the Commissioner, Home, for expunging the remarks, and he had also afforded a personal hearing to the petitioner.
I am told that even the Minister had given personal hearing to the petitioner before approving the decision of the Commissioner, Home.
6.
For the reasons recorded above, I allow this writ petition and quash the order dated 12th February, 1990 (Annexure P. 20), rejecting the representation of the petitioner regarding the expunction of adverse remarks.
In view of the order of the Commissioner, Home, (who was the competent authority in the case of the petitioner), the adverse remarks dated 14th January, 1988 (Annexure P.11) and also adverse remarks dated 9th August, 1988 (Annexure P. 17) would stand expunged, Fortirori the petitioner would be entitled for consideration of promotion to the post with retrospective effect without taking into consideration the adverse remarks referred to above.
The consideration for promotion will be from the date when she was not found fit for promotion on the basis of the adverse remarks referred to above.
If without taking into consideration the adverse remarks referred to above, the petitioner is found fit and suitable for promotion to the higher rank, she will be entitled to all consequential benefits flowing therefrom.
I pass no order as to costs.