RS Mongia, J :- Father of the Petitioner late Shri Nand Kishore Yadav, was working as Inspector in the Haryana Police and he was posted in State Vigilance Bureau, Gurgaon Range, Gurgaon.
While serving as such, he unfortunately died on 27th July, 1988.
2.
The Haryana Government issued executive instructions on 22nd December, 1970 for ex gratia grants and other facilities for families of Government employees who died while in service.
These instructions provide that one or more members of the family of the deceased-employee would be considered for absorption in Government service, the relevant rules being relaxed if necessary and feasible.
These instructions were clarified by the Government on 13th July, 1970.
It was made clear that it was not the intention to provide employment to the dependents of deceased Government employees as a matter of course.
Instead each individual case should be examined carefully and employment, which should be confined to Class III and Class IV posts, should be provided only if it is justified in order to avoid exceptional hardship and not otherwise.
3.
The petitioner, who is a Law-Graduate and considered himself to be eligible and fit for appointment as Inspector of Polices, applied for appointment in place of his deceased father on compassionate grounds as per the policy of Haryana Government referred to above.
According to the petitioner, he had given all the requisite information in his application.
The Director General of Police, respondent No. 7, vide his letter dated 6th December, 1988 asked the Director General, State Vigilance Bureau to furnish the physical measurements of the petitioner, so that the proposal could be seat to the Government for appointment of the petitioner under ex gratia grants scheme.
Vide wireless message dated 9th December, 1988, the petitioner was further directed to appear before the Director General of Police, Haryana, Madhuban for giving one star physical efficiency test.
According to the petitioner after fulfilling all the formalities, his application was sent by the Director General of Police, Haryana to the State Government on 29th March.
1989, for appointment as Inspector of Police.
However, the said application was rejected on 21st April, 1989 (Annexure P.5), on the ground that the married son of the deceased could not be treated as dependent.
On this, the petitioner made a representation on 22nd May, 1989, mentioning that the instructions regarding ex gratia grant and other facilities do not debar the appointment of a married person in case his father dies during the course of his employment.
The petitioner to his representation gave six instances of married sons of some other deceased employees who had been given jobs on compassionate grounds under the instructions referred to above.
The Superintendent of Police, State Vigilance Bureau, Gurgaun, recommended the case of the petitioner and observed "There appears to be some weight in the contention of the applicant particularly to view of the precedents of providing jobs by the Government to married sons of the deceased in the past."
In spite of this recommendation, Director-General, State Vigilance Bureau, Haryana, respondent No. 3, turned down the request of the petitioner.
This led to the filing of the present Pohhon with a prayer that the state should be to appoint the petitioner as an Inspector of Police under the relevant instructions.
4.
Mr. VK Bali, learned Senior Advocate, appearing for the petitioner, submitted that the petitioner had a right to be considered for appointment under the instructions and simply because he was married is no ground not to consider him for appointment as Inspector on compassionate grounds.
A married son can still be dependent on his father.
The counsel further submitted that there have been instances where the State Government could not discriminate the case of the petitioner and the action of the respondents is violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
The learned counsel for the petitioner relied on Ratni Dev v. The Secretary, Haryana State Electricity Board, Chandigarh, 1987(2) P.L.R.
374 and Daya Krishan Bhardwaj v. The Commissioner and Secretary to Government, Haryana and others, 1989(2) S.L.R.
153, in support of his contention.
5.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondents, it was conceded that the proposal for giving appointment to the dependent of Shri Nand Kishore Yadav (father of the petitioner) was still under consideration and no final decision had been taken so far.
During the pendency of the writ petition, an order dated 24th May, 1990 was passed, in which it was stated that the petitioner could not be taken into employment under the ex gratia scheme and the youngest son of the deceased who is studying in HAU Hissar can be taken into service as per his qualification.
This order was attached with the replication as Annexure P-9, to the writ petition.
In the written statement it was further mentioned that according to the certificate issued by the Shri Mange Lal Advocate, Rewari, the petitioner was working with him as his Assistant from April, 1986 to July, 1988, and the deceased had left behind four sons and one daughter, Shri Suresh Kumar, younger brother of the petitioner is married and is employed as a Pharmacist; the other younger brother of the petitioner is also married and is running a cold drink shop at Rewari, and the sister is also married.
The certificate of Mr. Rastogi was produced by the petitioner as Annexure P-10, to which it was mentioned that the petitioner was not paid anything by Mr. Rastogi.
6.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the opinion that on the basis of the above-mentioned two authorities, relied upon by the counsel for the petitioner, there is no bar to a married son being given an appointment under the ex gratia scheme, especially when the respondents had earlier given such appointments to married sons of the deceased employees, Certainly, it cannot be said that a married son cannot be dependent on the father.
There was no material with the respondents to say that the petitioner was not dependent on his father.
7.
For the reasons recorded above, the writ petition is allowed and the orders, Annexure P-5 dated 21st April, 1989, and Annexure P-9 dated 24th May, 1990, are hereby quashed and the respondents are directed to give appointment to the petitioner as Inspector of Police, inasmuch as he has been found fit for the post and it is no ground to deny him the appointment simply because he was a married son of the deceased.
No costs.
Appeal allowed.