MR Agnihotri, J - In this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution, the petitioners, who are Development Officers in the Haryana Khadi and Village Industries Board, in the trades of Leather, Carpentry and Blacksmith, and Pottery, have prayed for the issuance of a direction to the State Government and the Haryana Khadi and Village Industries Board, to release to the petitioners the pay scale of Rs. 800-1600 with effect from 1st April, 1979, and the pay scale of Rs. 900-1700 with effect from 1st April, 1985, and for the quashing of the order dated 26th April, 1985 (Annexure P14), by which the pay scale of Rs. 900-1700 which had already been allowed to the petitioners with effect from 1st April, 1985, has been withdrawn.
2.
Briefly stated, the petitioners are employees of the Haryana Khadi and Village Industries Board (hereinafter referred to as 'the Board'), which is constituted under the Punjab Khadi and Village Industries Act, 1955, as applicable to the State of Haryana.
The Board having been incorporated under the Act of the State Legislature, has also been given the powers of framing Regulations regarding remuneration, allowances and other conditions of service of its employees.
Regulation 11 of the Haryana Khadi and Village Industries Board (Service) Regulations, 1976, which deals with determination of pay of members of the service, reads as under :-  "11.
Pay of Members of Service : Members of the service shall be entitled to such scales of pay including special pay, if any, as may be authorised by Board from time to time.
The scales of pay at present in force in respect of specified posts are given in Appendix 'A' to these Regulations."
Petitioner No. 1 (JL Jaggi) was promoted to the post of Development Officer (Leather) vide order dated 30th April, 1980, whereas petitioner No. 2 (LC Chauhan) was selected for the post of Development Officer, Carpentry and Blacksmithy) on 25th May, 1979, and petitioner No. 3 (Satya Vir Singh) was selected for the post of Development Officer (Pottery) on 18th April, 1980.
There is another post of Gur Development Officer against which one JB Singh was appointed.
All the petitioners were appointed in the pay scale of Rs. 350-800, whereas Gur Development Officer (JB Singh) was placed in the scale of 350-900.
These pay scales were later on revised by the Board and as a result of that Gur Development Officer was placed from the pay scale of Rs. 350-900 to that of Rs. 800-1600, whereas the pay scale of the petitioners was revised from 350-800 to that of Rs. 750-1450.
Feeling aggrieved, the petitioners represented against the same and the matter was considered by the Board in its meeting held on 14th March, 1985, in which the following decision was taken by the Board : "(ENGLISH TRANSLATION OF THE RELEVANT EXTRACT OF THE DECISION) : There are various technical posts in the Board carrying different pay scales.
In some cases, even though the nature of duties of various posts is identical, yet their pay scales are different; for instance, Gur Development Officer vis-a-vis Development Officers and Village Industries Organisers etc.
Hence, the Board decides that in order to remove disparity in the pay scales of these, posts and realising that anomalies do exist, the pay scale of Rs. 900-1700 is hereby allowed to all the Development Officers and Village Industries Organisers.
It was finally decided that as there were considerable anomalies in the pay scales of technical staff, the same may be removed and new pay scale be released with effect from 1st April, 1985."
However, instead of implementing this decision by releasing the revised pay scale to the petitioners, the same was cancelled by office order dated 26th April, 1985 (Annexure P14), without disclosing any reason.
This decision has been challenged by the petitioners broadly on the ground that when the nature of duties and responsibilities of all the posts of Development Officers, including Gur Development Officer, are identical, the refusal of the respondents to revise the pay scale of the petitioners' posts in order to equate the same with the pay scale of Gur Development Officer was arbitrary and discriminatory being violative of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution.
3.
In the written statement, it has been pleaded that the Board was bound by the directions issued by the State Government in financial matters, according to the provisions of Section 31(1) of the Punjab Khadi and Village Industries Act.
All pay scales of the posts of the Board have got to be approved from the Finance Department of the State Government as cent per cent expenditure of the Board was borne by the State Government itself Therefore, since the state Government had not approved the proposal of the Board, the petitioners had no right in law to claim the revision of their pay scales and their equation with that of Gur Development Officer.
On merits it has been pleaded that "the post of Development Officer (Gur) was in existence since 1969 and was sufficientlly in advance stage, while the posts of Development Officers in Leather, Carpentry and Blacksmithy and Pottery, were created later on and were still in the initial stages".
Therefore, different pay scales were provided for different posts.
4.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties and having examined the record, I am of the considered view that the plea taken by the respondents is wholly untenable.
The petitioners have been successful in bringing on record sufficient documentary evidence in support of their claim that duties and responsibilities of Gur Development Officer as well as of Development Officers in Leather, Carpentry and Balcksmithy, and Pottery, were identical, same and equivalent in all respects.
For instance, on 11th August, 1989, the Director of Industries, Haryana, itself pleaded in writing with the State Government for the removal of anomalies in the pay scales of Development Officer of the Board by categorically stating that with the grant of new pay scale of Rs. 2000-3200 to the Gur Development Officer and the new pay scale of other Development Officers being Rs. 1640-2900, the position has become quite anomalous as "their duties and responsibilities, status and position are equivalent."
This was in conformation of recommendations made by the Chief Executive Officer of the Board to the Director of Industries, Haryana, as far back as 17th December, 1984, wherein a request had been made for securing the approval of the State Government for granting to the petitioners the pay scale of Rs. 800-1600 because the nature of duties of these officers was identical to that of Gur Development Officers.
Since there is no qualitative difference in the nature of duties and responsibilities attached to the said posts, and there is complete functional equivalence in both the cases, disparity in their pay scales cannot be countenanced without violating the constitutional guarantee of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution, which ensures equality of opportunity in matters of employment as well as equal protection of law.
5.
Consequently, I allow this writ petition and by issuing a writ of certiorari quash the impugned order dated 26th April, 1985 Annexure P14) and by issuing a writ of mandamus direct the respondents to equate the pay scale of the posts of Development Officers in trades of Leather, Carpentry and Balcksmithy, and Pottery, with the pay scale of post of Gur Development Officer with effect from 1st April, 1979, and by revising the pay scales of these posts accordingly, as and when they were so revised from time to time.
The pay of the petitioners in the revised pay scale shall be fixed and the arrears of salary and allowances to which they are found entitled as a result thereof, shall be released to them within a period of three months.
However, there shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.