RS Mongia, J - This judgment will dispose of Letters Patent Appeal Nos. 1064 and 1065 of 1983, as well as RSA.
No. 3026 of 1985 (which was ordered to be heard with L.P.A. No 1064 of 1983) as common questions of law and fact are involved in these cases.
2.
The facts shorn of details are that all the appellants had served in the Indian Army and after being released from the Armed Forces, had joined service in different departments in the Union Territory, Chandigarh much after 1st November, 1966.
When the appellants were so appointed, Rules known as the Conditions of Service of Union Territory of Chandigarh Employees Rules, 1966, were admitted in force and conditions of service of the appellants were governed by these Rules.
The appellants claimed benefit of Military service towards their seniority under the Rules known as Punjab Government National Emergency (Concession) Rules, 1965 (In short Punjab Rules).
The case put forth by the appellants before the Courts below was that the Punjab Rules continued to be in force in the Union Territory of Chandigarh by virute of the provisions of Section 88 read with Section 2(m) of the Punjab Reorganisation Act, 1966 (hereinafter referred to as the Act).
According to the learned counsel for the respondents, the benefit of Punjab Rules could be given only to those employees who held posts in connection with the affairs of the State of Punjab except Medical and Health Services.
Since at no stage the appellants had been employed in the service or were holding posts in connection with the affairs of the State of Punjab, they were not entitled to any benefit conferred by the Punjab Rules.
In other words, the submission was that only those Punjab Government employees who prior to the reorganisation of the State of Punjab by virtue of the Act, had come to join the service or held post in connection with the affairs of the State of Punjab and were later allocated or transferred to Union Territory or to the State of Haryana, were entitled to the benefit of the Punjab Rules under Section 82(6) of the Act.
3.
The above-mentioned contentions of the respondents were upheld by the learned Single Judge.
The appellants' counsel, however, submitted that the Punjab Rules Ipso facto after reorganisation on 1st November, 1966, applied to the territories which formed part of erstwhile State of Punjab prior to 1st November, 1966.
A reference was made to Section 88 of the Act which is as under :  "Territorial extent of laws :- The provisions of Part II shall be deemed to have effected no change in the territories to which any law in force immediately before the appointed day extends or applies, and territorial references in any such law to the State of Punjab shall, until otherwise provided by a competent Legislature or other competent authority, be construed as meaning the territories within that state immediately before the appointed day."
4.
A reading of Section 88 shows that the laws which were applicable in the erstwhile State of Punjab will keep on applying to the territories which formed Union Territory, Haryana or Himachal Pradesh after 1st November 1966, but this section further says that such law will be applicable until otherwise provided by a competent legislature.
Even if the Punjab Rules were continued to be applied in the Union Territory of Chandigarh, but these would apply only to those employees who were working in connection with the afairs of the State of Punjab, as it is provided in the Punjab Rules that 'they shall apply to all classes of services and posts in connection with the affairs of the State of Punjab except Medical and Health Services'.
So, the Punjab Rules could not be applied to the appellants as they were not working in connection with the affairs of the State of Punjab.
5.
Apart from that, for the employees of the Union Territory, Chandigarh, it was specifically provided by a notification issued on 1st November, 1966 by the President of India in exercise of the powers conferred by Article 309 of the Constitution of India that the conditions of service of persons appointed to the Central Civil Services or posts Class I, Class II, Class III and Class IV under the administrative control of the Union Territory of Chandigarh, shall subject to any other provisions made by the President be the same as the conditions of service of persons appointed to all other corresponding Civil and Central Services or posts.
There were certain other notifications covering the grant of Military benefit issued by the Central Government which were applicable to the Central Government employees.
In view of the provisions of Section 88 of the Act, the conditions of service of Union Territory employees were to be governed by the notification issued on 19 November, 1966.
Admittedly, the appellants had been granted the benefit of Military service under the notifications issued by the Central Government as were given to other Central Government employees.
6.
The learned counsel for the appellants further submitted that the benefit of Military service had been given to certain other Union Territory employees under the Punjab Rules, but the same had been denied to the appellants.
The learned counsel for the Union Territory submitted that it was a fact that certain employees had been given the benefit of Military service under the Punjab Rules, but on re-examination it had been found that the same was erroneous and show cause notices had been issued to those employees as to why the benefit of Military service be not withdrawn.
He also produced some of the show cause notices.
In view of this, it cannot be said that the appellants are being discriminated as the Administration itself has found that a wrong benefit had been given to some of its employees.
7.
For the reasons recorded above, we find no merit in these appeals, which are hereby dismissed.
However, there will be no order as to costs.
Appeal dismissed.