GR Majithia, J - The petitioner has impugned the undated order passed by respondent No. 2 removing him from service in this petition under Article 227 of the Constitution  2.
Facts first :  The petitioner joined service as J.B.T.
Teacher on 2351952; he was confirmed as such on 181953. and was granted selection grade on 1.4.1979; he quarrelled with distant collaterals and this led to the registration of first information report under Section 452/325/148/149 of the Indian Penal Code; he was ultimately convicted and sentenced to undergo one year imprisonment by Judicial Magistrate, Hansi by his order dated 4 61984; he preferred an appeal against the order of the Judicial Magistrate before the Sessions Judge.
The same was admitted to hearing and the execution of sentence was suspended on his furnishing bail in the sum of Rs. 3000/- with one surety in this like amount to the satisfaction of the Illaqa Magistrate/Deputy Magistrate.
During the pendency of appeal, respondent No. 2 issued the impugned order removing the petitioner from service.
3.
Respondent No. 2 has controverted the factual averments made in the petition.
The only defence taken in the written statement is that the impugned order was passed after taking into consideration the order of the Judicial Magistrate dated 461984 and of the Additional Sessions Judge dated 1261984.
4.
The counsel for the petitioner urges that before issuing the order of dismissal from service, respondent No. 2 ought to have afforded an opportunity of hearing to the petitioner.
He further submits that respondent No. 1 took a policy decision to the effect that the ex-convicts convicted of offences involving moral turpitude should neither be taken nor retained in Government services.
The offences which involves moral turpitude were also stated in the policy decision.
5.
There appears to be substance in the submission made.
Respondent No. 1 circulated letter No. 149-5 GS-75/6324 dated 2631975 to all the Heads of Department.
The relevant portion of this letter reads thus :  (iii) Ex-convicts convicted for offences involving moral turpitude should neither be taken nor retained in Government Service.
The following tests should ordinarily be applied in judging whether a certain offence involves moral turpitude or not :- (1) Whether the act leading to a conviction was such as could shock the moral conscience of society in general.
(2) Whether the motive which led to the act was a base one.
(3) Whether on account of the act having been committed the perpetrator could be considered to be of depraved character or a person who was to be locked down upon by the society.
Decision in each case will, however, depend upon the circumstances of the case and the competent authority has to exercise its discretion while taking a decision in accordance with the above mentioned principle.
A list of offences which involve moral turpitude is enclosed for your information and guidance.
This list, however, cannot be said to be exhaustive and there might be offences which are not included in it but which in certain situations and circumstances may involve moral turpitude."
A list of offences which involve moral turpitude was enclosed with the aforesaid letter.
The Sections of the Indian Penal Code concerning serious offences involving moral turpitude have been stated in the appendix to the letter.
The offences under Sections 457/325/148/149 of the Indian Penal Code do not find mention in the said appendix.
Thus, they do not involve moral turpitude.
Consequently, the services of ex-convicts convicted under these offences could not be terminated.
The petitioner was convicted under Sections 452/325/148/149 of the Indian Penal Code.
The substantive offences for which the conviction was recorded were under Sections 452 and 325 of the Indian Penal Code which are not the offences involving moral turpitude.
Consequently, there was no bar for retaining the petitioner into service.
The decision taken by the State Government cannot be flouted by the officers of the State.
The decision taken by respondent No. 2 that retention of the petitioner in Government service is not desirable, cannot be sustained.
It runs counter to the policy decision of the State contained in letter No. 149-5 GSI-75/6324 dated 17/26375.
Moreover before a competent authority comes to a conclusion that the employee is not fit to be retained in service, he or she ought to have been given an opportunity of hearing.
The order entails penal consequences.
It is an elementary rule of law that no order prejudicial to the interest of a citizen should be passed without affording him an opportunity of hearing.
Looking from any angle, the order cannot be sustained.
6.
For the reasons aforesaid, the writ petition succeeds.
The order of respondents No. 2 removing the petitioner from service is set aside.
The petitioners will be taken back in service with all consequential benefits.
No costs.
Petition allowed.