Gokal Chand Mittal, J - The petitioner was entitled to leave while working with the Haryana State Minor Irrigation (Tubewells) Corporation Ltd., Chandigarh and has earned 280 days leave to his credit.
At the time of retirement an incumbent is entitled to leave encashment benefit upto a maximum of 240 days unutilized leave.
2.
The above benefit is granted to the employees who do not take leave in spite of being due to them so that they may work for the Government or corporation and in turn get the benefit by way of leave encashment at the time of their retirement.
3.
It has not been disputed by the Corporation that the petitioner was entitled to unutilized leave enactment upto 240 days leave as 240 days leave was due to him at the time of his retirement but since in his earlier service with the State Government he had enjoyed the benefit of 180 days leave enashment he was given 60 days leave encashment in the new service.
4.
In reply the learned counsel for the petitioner states that the two services are different and in both the services he was entitled to leave encashment.
If he had taken leave of 240 days the Corporation would have paid for that period and since he did not take leave and worked for that period he was clearly entitled to leave encashment and the leave encashment of earlier service does not stand in his way for getting another leave encashment when he was working with the Corporation.
5.
By way of illustration he has pointed out that under the State Government rules maximum gratuity for a period of 16-1/2 months is granted and for the service rendered by the petitioner with the State Government he was granted gratuity for about 15 months and the Corporation has now granted him gratuity of about five months the total whereof exceeds 16-1/2 months which is the limit fixed by the State Government.
On this very parity of reasoning he claims that leave encashment for the entire period for which he was entitled to should be granted.
6.
On the facts of the case, we are of the view that the petitioner is entitled to leave encashment of 240 days.
He has been given the benefit of 60 days leave.
He should now be given the benefit of leave encashment of the remaining 180 days unutilized leave.
The same be paid to the petitioner within two months of the receipt of this order.
With this order and directions the writ petition stands disposed of.
Petition disposed of.