MN Rao, J - The petitioner is the AP Scheduled Castes Welfare Association represented by its president.
This writ petition was filed challenging the legality of GOMs.
No. 296, Revenue (Endowment.III) Department dated 19488, by which the State Government, as a special case directed that :  "The services of the persons appointed on NMR basis/casual labour basis/on consolidated pay basis etc., in TTD during the period from 1179 to 31384, be regularised with immediate effect, without insisting that their appointments should be through the medium of Employment Exchange, and in relaxation of Rule of Reservation, as required under the rules of the Government in force."
2.
Shri Subba Rao, learned counsel for the petitioner contends that in respect of the posts covered by the GO the rule of reservation was in force but the first respondent, Tirumala Tirupathi Devasthanams (for short TTD) in breach of that mandatory requirement appointed certain persons and, therefore, those persons who were so appointed illegally are not entitled to be regularised in the posts.
3.
The learned Government Pleader maintains that as a temporary measure the present GO was issued and he assures that henceforth no breach in the matter of application of rule of reservation will be tolerated.
4.
The learned counsel appearing for the TTD says that because of exigencies several persons have been recruited and as all of them worked for a considerable period from 1979 to 1984 their services cannot be terminated on the ground of non-compliance with the rule of reservation.
5.
Shri Suryanarayana, learned counsel for the third respondent - TTD Canteen Workers Union - contends that the benefit of rule of reservation originally extended in respect of appointments in TTD by an executive order could be validly withdrawn by another executive order and such an action cannot be successfully challenged.
The petitioner has no right to insist upon the requirement of compliance with the rule of reservation.
6.
Section 8 of the AP Charitable and Hindu Religious Institutions and Endowments Act (Act XVII of 1976) empowers the Commissioner of Endowments to have general superintendence and control over all Hindu religious institutions and Endowments and this power includes the power to pass any order :  "Which may be deemed necessary to ensure that such institutions and endownments are properly administered."
Chapter XIV of the 1976 Act contains special provisions relating to TTD.
This chapter consists of Sections 85 P 91.
Sub-section (1) of Sec. 85 says that the provisions of chapter XIV shall apply only to TTD sub-sec. (2) lays down that the other provisions of the Act shall subject to the provisions of chapter XIV apply to TTD also.
7.
In exercise of the statutory power under section 8, the Commissioner of Endownments issued circular No. 13/76/F6 (20242/76), dated 14476 directing all the executive authorities of the religious and charitable institutions to observe the rule of reservation as laid down under rule 22 of the State and Subordinate Services Rules strictly while making recruitment for filling up the vacancies of secular posts in the institutions.
The percentage of posts reserved under Rule 22 in favour of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Backward Classes is 14, 4 and 25 respectively.
In the past between 1975 and 78 several persons were recruited by the TTD without the media of employment exchange and in breach of rule of reservation.
Those appointments were regularised in the year 1981 by the State Government in GOMs.
No. 1458, Revenue (Ends.III) Department dated 19981.
In respect of appointments made between 1179 and 31384, the service Organisations of the TTD represented that the appointments should be regularised.
The Government, therefore, issued the impugned GO directing regularisation of the services.
Although the Government have agreed with the regularisation of persons appointed on N.M.R.
basis/Casual labour basis/on Consolidated pay basis, it had found fault with the TTD in making appointment in breach of the mandatory requirements relating to notifying the vacancies to employment exchanges and non-compliance with the rule of reservation.
Paragraph 5 of the GO which reflects the policy of the State Government and its unhappiness at the breach of the mandatory requirements by the TTD reads :  "Government further observe, that the procedure adopted by the TTD in making temporary appointments initially as NMRs and seeking regularisation later is highly irregular and objectionable inasmuch as appointments have been made, defying the ban orders, without notifying vacancies to employment exchange and by not observing rule of reservation.
What is more reprehensible is that some of the persons appointed are reported to be unqualified for the posts."
The impugned GO does not state the source of power.
The Circular dated 14476 issued by the Commissioner of Endowments has statutory flavour; the power is traceable to section 8 and it is also mentioned in paragraph 3 of the Circular.
The circular by which rule of reservation is extended covers all secular posts in religious and charitable institutions.
N.M.R.
posts, casual labour posts and posts in respect of which consolidated pay was paid, all answer the description of secular posts.
It appears, the State Government, before issuing the impugned GO, had extended the rule of reservation, as a matter of policy, to posts in religious and endowments institutions.
By an executive order of the State can make provisions under Art. 16(4) for the reservation of appointments of posts in favour of any backward class of citizens which in the opinion of the State, is not adequately represented in the services under the State.
It would, therefore, appear that compliance with the rule of reservation for the period between 1179 and 31384 in respect of the posts covered by the impugned GO was waived by the State Government.
Although the impugned order does not clearly mention that the Circular dated 14476 issued by the Commissioner of Endowments was superseded, in effect it had done so.
Nonetheless as the Government in paragraph 5 of the impugned GO has stated that in future there shall not be any breach in respect of the rule of reservation and notifying the vacancies to employment exchange, I am of the view that in order to prevent further breach of compliance with the rule of reservation, necessary direction should be issued, especially having regard to the fact that the circular issued by the Commissioner dated 14476 still continues to be in force.
8.
The first respondent shall not regularly fill up any vacancies henceforth on N.M.R.
basis/Casual Labour basis/on Consolidated pay basis without complying with the requirement of notifying the vacancies to the Employment Exchange and observing the rule of reservation 14%, 4% and 25% in favour of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Backward Classes respectively.
The posts which are now in excess by reasons of non-compliance with the rule of reservation shall be adjusted against future regular recruitment without disturbing the regularisation directed to be effected by virtue of the impugned GO dated 19488, and the services of the persons covered by the impugned GO may be regularised.
The WP is accordingly disposed of.
No costs.
The stay granted earlier is vacated.
Advocate's fee Rs. 350/-  Orders accordingly.