RS Mongia, J (Oral) - The petitioner was appointed as a Steno-typist on ad hoc basis on 2nd March, 1976, in the Punjab State Agricultural Marketing Board (hereinafter referred to as a 'Board').
He was regularised as such on 22nd March, 1977, and was further promoted as a Senior Scale Stenographer with effect from 2nd March, 1978.
At the relevant time with which we are concerned, a Senior Scale Stenographer had two avenues of promotion.
He could be considered for promotion as Personal Assistant or he could opt to be brought in the list of Assistants and considered for promotion to the rank of Superintendent or Secretary of a Market Committee.
On February, 19, 1985, the petitioner represented that he opted for his name to be placed in the cadre of Assistants.
Vide order dated 8th July, 1987 (Annexure P.3) the petitioner was allotted serial No. 41 in the list of Assistants.
Before this order was issued, one Bhupinder Singh, who was placed at serial No. 42 in the list of Assistants prepared on 8th July, 1987, had already been promoted as a Secretary, Market Committee, on 24th March, 1986.
The petitioner represented that since he was senior in the list of Assistants to the said Bhupinder Singh he should also be promoted as Secretary, Market Committee, prior to Bhupinder Singh.
Since his request was not being acceded to, he filed revision petition to the Government under section 42 of the Punjab Agricultural Produce Markets Act, 1961.
2.
The Deputy Secretary to Government, Punjab, exercising the power of the State Government vide his order dated 30th May, 1988 (Annexure P.7) to the writ petition) allowed the revision and held that the date on which the petitioner gave in writing to the Board for fixing his seniority in the Assistants cadre be treated as the cut off date.
In the concluding para of the order, it was observed as under :-  "On the basis of the arguments advanced by the parties and perusal of the record placed before me, I am of the considered opinion that the petitioner has a definite case.
He is definitely entitled to promotion from the date of his eligibility subsequent to the expression of his choice regarding line of promotion in any of the two lines of promotion available to him, on which the Board was yet to decide, of course, from the date of regular vacancy falling vacant, but in any case, not later than the date on which his juniors on either side of line of promotion got the benefit of promotion.
The petition is, therefore, accepted and the relief to the extent mentioned above is also granted."
In view of the abovesaid order, the petitioner made a representation that he should be promoted with effect from 24th March, 1986.
However, the Board rejected his representation vide order dated 17th January, 1989, by saying that "after considering the decision dated 30th May, 1988, given by the Deputy Secretary, Agriculture and Forests Department, Punjab, your representation is rejected."
3.
The grievance of the petitioner is that in spite of the clear-cut order of the Government, dated 30th May, 1988, he has not been considered for promotion as Secretary, Market, Committee, with effect from 24th March, 1986, i.e., the date on which his junior Shri Bhupinder Singh was promoted as such.
4.
The stand of the respondent-Board in its written statement is that since the petitioner does not have the requisite qualifications as prescribed under the statutory rules known as the Punjab State Agricultural Marketing (Class II) Service Rules, 1988, the petitioner cannot be promoted as Secretary, Market Committee.
According to these rules, the qualification for the post is graduate whereas the petitioner is only a matriculate.
5.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that the qualifications which have been prescribed under the above-quoted rules cannot be made applicable to the case of the writ petitioner inasmuch as these rules came into force with effect from 2nd May, 1988, and his case has to be considered with effect from 24th March, 1986, when a matriculate Assistant or Senior Scale Stenographer could be considered for promotion to the rank of Secretary, Market Committee.
I find force in the arguments of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
The qualifications have to be seen on the date the promotion is to be made.
Admittedly, on 24th March, 1986, the incumbent to be considered for promotion to the rank of Secretary, Market Committee, need not have been a graduate.
The petitioner's case cannot be rejected for promotion to the rank of Secretary, Market Committee, on 24th March, 1986, on that ground.
6.
Consequently, the writ petition is allowed.
The order Annexure P10, dated 17th January, 1989, is quashed and the respondent-Board is directed to consider the petitioner's case for promotion to the rank of Secretary, Market Committee, with effect from 24th March, 1986, and if he is found suitable for promotion with effect from that date, all consequential benefits flowing therefrom would accrue to the petitioner.
However, I leave the parties to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.