MR Agnihotri, J - The short point involved in this writ petition is, whether the order of removal from service of the petitioner from the post of Principal, Markanda National College, Shahabad, District Kurukshetra in the State of Haryana, is liable to be set aside on the ground that reasonable opportunity of defending was not afforded to the petitioner, during the course of inquiry by the Inquiry Officer and before passing the impugned order, by the Managing Committee of the College.
2.
Briefly stated, SK Budhiraja petitioner was appointed as Principal of the Markanda National College, Shahabad (hereinafter referred to as 'the College') on 1st October, 1982.
He was served with a charge-sheet on 31st May, 1985, to which he submitted his reply.
Thereafter, another charge-sheet was served upon him on 5th October, 1985, on the basis where of the Managing Committee of the College decided to hold a disciplinary inquiry against the petitioner.
During the course of inquiry, some of the members of the Managing Committee appeared as prosecution witnesses against the petitioner and the same witnesses were members of the Managing Committee which held the petitioner guilty of the charges and proposed the punishment of removal from service.
Further, after the entire evidence before the Inquiry Officer was completed by the parties, the Managing Committee led additional evidence by examining certain witnesses.
The petitioner was, however, not allowed to cross-examine these witnesses by the learned Inquiry Officer, nor was the petitioner permitted to lead evidence in rebuttal of the additional evidence.
Specific averments to this effect have been made in paras 13 to 17 of the writ petition.
Thereafter, on receipt of the report of the Inquiry Officer, the Managing Committee of the College, vide its communication dated 4th October, 1986 (Annexure P4), proposed to impose the punishment of removal from service on the petitioner.
On receipt of the said notice, the petitioner submitted his representation against the proposed punishment to the Director, Higher Education, Haryana, who confirmed the order of removal from service passed by the Managing Committee on 10th February, 1988 (Annexure P. 6).
Thereafter, the Managing Committee of the College vide its communication dated 16th April, 1988 (Annexure P.9), removed the petitioner from service.
The revision filed by the petitioner against the same was also dismissed by the Commissioner and Secretary to Government Haryana, Education Department, on 14th July, 1988 (Annexure P.7).
3.
Notices were issued to the respondents after admission of the writ petition but neither any written statement has been filed nor have the respondents or their counsel put in appearance.
For the second time also, when the writ petition was ordered to be listed for actual date of hearing, registered notices were issued to the respondents, but there is neither any reply filed by the respondents, nor is there any representation on their behalf.
4.
In this situation, after hearing Mr. Satya Pal Jain, learned counsel for the petitioner, I find that the petitioner has been prejudiced in his defence of the case and the inquiry held against him was neither fair nor proper, especially for the reason that the prosecution witnesses were allowed to be cross-examined by the petitioner and the members of the Managing Committee, who found the petitioner guilty, had actually appeared before the Inquiry Officer to depose against the petitioner.
5.
It is beyond comprehension that even though the aforesaid pleas were taken by the petitioner before the Director, Higher Education, Haryana, in his written representation/appeal against the proposed punishment, as well as in his revision before the Commissioner and Secretary to Government, Haryana, Education Department, yet the same did not find favour with the authorities.
It is a clear case of violation of the principles of natural justice as well as of Rule 4(14) of the Haryana Affiliated Colleges (Security of Service) Rules, 1980, framed under Section 16 of the Haryana Affiliated Colleges (Security of Service) Act, 1979, which regulates the procedure for imposing major penalties of dismissal/removal from service on the employees.
Rule 4(14) reads as under :-  "4(14) The inquiring authority may, in its discretion, if it appears necessary before the close of the case on behalf of the Managing Committee, allow the presenting officer to produce evidence not included in the list given to the employee or may itself call for new evidence or recall and reexamine any witness and in such case the employee shall be entitled to have, if the demands it, a copy of the list of further evidence proposed to be produced and an adjournment of the inquiry for three clear days before the production of such new evidence, exclusive of the date of adjournment and the day to which the inquiry is adjourned.
The inquiring authority shall give the employee an opportunity of inspecting such documents before they are taken on the record.
The inquiring authority may also allow the employee to produce new evidence if it is of the opinion that the production of such evidence is necessary in the interest of justice.
Note :- New evidence shall not be produced or called for or any witness shall not be recalled to fill up any gap in the evidence.
Such evidence may be called for only when there is an inherent lacuna or defect in the evidence which has been produced originally."
6.
Consequently, I allow this petition, quash the impugned orders dated 4th October, 1986 (Annexure P4) passed by the Managing Committee of Markanda National College, Shahabad, proposing the punishment of removal of the petitioner from service, dated 10th February, 1988 (Annexure P.6), passed by the Director, Higher Education, Haryana, whereby approval to the proposed punishment was accorded, dated 16th April, 1988 (Annexure P.9) whereby the petitioner has been removed from service and dated 14th July, 1988 (Annexure P.7), passed by the Commissioner and Secretary to Government, Haryana, Education Department, dismissing the revision of the petitioner.
Resultantly, the petitioner shall be deemed to have been reinstated to the post of Principal of the College and shall be deemed to have continued as such from the date of his removal therefrom.
He shall also be entitled to all the arrears of salary and allowances, etc. to which he would have been entitled under the rules, had he not been removed from service.
However, in the circumstances of the case, there shall be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.