RS Mongia, J - This is a Letter Patent Appeal against the judgment of the learned Single Judge, who had allowed the writ petition of Shri Madan Lal Dutta, now respondent in the present appeal.
2.
Brief facts of the case are that Madan Lal Dutta (writ petitioner), was appointed on 15th February, 1973, as Mechanic Transport, in the scale of Rs. 140-225.
According to the writ petitioner, he was promoted as Mechanic Transport in the pay scale of Rs. 200-400, on 5th of November, 1973.
It is further alleged that on 31st December, 1973, the petitioner put in his resignation but on 3rd of January, 1974, he gave an application for withdrawing his resignation.
The Manager of the Haryana Dairy Development Corporation Limited, passed an order on 5th of January, 1974, copy whereof has been attached as Annexure P-4 to the writ petition, the said order reads as under :-  "As desired by Managing Director, Shri Madan Lal Mechanic who was since resigned has been allowed to join his duties for the month on trial basis from 5.1.1974.
During this period, he will be given independent job to repair the vehicles and his performance will be watched by the undersigned the Dairy Technologist.
Today, he was asked to repair the gear box.
In my view, it should not take more than four hours to repair the same and till evening, the gear box should be ready.
Dairy Technologist is requested to watch his performance and see that the gear box is completed or not.
If he is unable to repair the same, some other mechanic will be deputed to repair the gear box."
However, on 21st of January, 1974, an order was passed that the writ petitioner would not be allowed to continue in service beyond 4th of February, 1974.
It was this order that was impugned before the learned Single Judge.
The learned Single Judge quashed this order dated 2111974.
Aggrieved by the said order, the Managing Director-cum-Milk Commissioner, Haryana Dairy Development Corporation, has come up in appeal.
When the appeal was admitted on 13th May, 1983, the operation of the judgment of the learned Single Judge was stayed by the motion Bench.
3.
Learned counsel for the appellant has submitted that, in fact, the resignation of the writ petitioner stood accepted and vide order Annexure P-4, which has already been quoted above, it was a fresh appointment which had been given to the writ petitioner and he was to be tired for one month and if he could show his worth, he would have continued.
Since, according to the learned counsel, the work of the writ petitioner had not been found upto the mark, he was not allowed to continue after 421974.
He drew our attention to communication dated 1211974, addressed to the writ petitioner by the Manager of the Milk Plant that he had not attended to the repair of a Matador, which required urgent repairs and the petitioner was duly informed about it.
It was mentioned in the communication that no improvement in the work was being shown by the writ petitioner.
The counsel for the appellant highlighted one more fact that the writ petitioner had issued a demand notice after his services has been terminated and the matter was taken up by the Labour and Conciliation Officer, under the Industrial Disputes Act.
The Labour and Conciliation Officer observed as under :-  ".........He was reappointed as fresh candidate on 5th January 1974.
It was made clear to him that if his work is not satisfactory within the month, he would be turned out from the service.
He was allotted independent work during the trial period.
During the trial period, his work was not satisfactory.
Applicant was turned out from the service on 481974.
As such, there is no merit in his Demand notice, written statement of the Management is attached as Annexure (A) with the report."
4.
According to the learned counsel, it was a case of fresh appointment and, in any case, the petitioner's services had been terminated during the period of one year probation.
5.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondent (writ petitioner) submitted that the resignation of the writ petitioner had never been accepted and, in fact, he was coerced to submit his resignation.
Since, according to the learned counsel, the resignation had not been accepted, the question of any fresh appointment did not arise.
6.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, we are of the view that the learned Single Judge was not correct in holding that the resignation had not been accepted.
It is clear from the order Annexure P-4, which has already been reproduced above, that the writ petitioner accepted the new terms of appointment in which it is mentioned that the writ petitioner had since resigned.
This was, in fact, a fresh appointment and the writ petitioner was given a chance to show his worth but since he could not come upto the mark, his services could be terminated under the terms of appointment.
Moreover, the services had been terminated within one year, which was the probationary period.
The question of acceptance of resignation, in these circumstances, becomes wholly insignificant.
Even if it is assumed that the resignation had not been accepted on 5th of January, 1974, it can be taken that a term was added to the appointment that if the writ petitioner does not come upto the mark within one month, his services were liable to be terminated.
7.
For the reasons recorded above, this appeal is allowed and the judgment of the learned Single Judge is set aside.
Consequently, writ petition stands dismissed.
However, we leave the parties to bear their own costs.
Appeal allowed.