RS Mongia, J - This is a Letters Patent Appeal by the unsuccessful writ petitioner whose writ petition was dismissed by the learned Single Judge.
Briefly, the facts of the case are as under :-  2.
The appellant Hukam Chand Jindal, was appointed as a Development Officer in the Life Insurance Corporation of India (hereinafter referred to as the LIC), on 17th March, 1962.
While working as such at Mandi (Himachal Pradesh), he applied for six days' casual leave from 19th May, 1976 to 24th May, 1976, on the ground of his wife's illness.
This leave was sanctioned to him.
However, he did not report for duty on 27th May, 1976.
A telegram from the appellant from Malerkotla was received saying "sick, extend leave upto third."
The Branch Manager, LIC Mandi, advised the appellant, by telegram as well as by a letter, to send medical certificate, to substantiate his illness.
Again, on 3rd June, 1976, a telegram was sent to the petitioner by the Mandi Manager of LIC, which reads as under :-  "Medical Certificate from Civil Surgeon not received (.)
Absence unauthorised."
A letter to the same effect followed the above telegram.
For want of receipt of reply or the Medical Certificate, the petitioner was treated on extraordinary leave without pay from 25th May, 1976, a copy of which was sent to the appellant under registered cover.
He was also told that disciplinary action would be taken against him.
Thereafter, the appellant sent a telegram dated 31st July, 1976, to his office in which it was mentioned - "daughter ill, extend leave upto 15th July Jindal."
3.
In view of the facts and conduct of the appellant, the LIC authorities were of the opinion that there was no sense in entertaining the telegram and recommended disciplinary action under the Staff Regulations of the LIC The Chandigarh Authorities of the LIC directed the Mandi authorities to consider the absence of the appellant as unauthorised from 25th May, 1976 to 19th August, 1976, and accordingly to inform the appellant and Single Judge in dismissing the writ petition of the appellant.
4.
It may also be noticed that the learned counsel for the appellant sought to challenge the vires of Regulations 39(4)(iii) before us.
No such argument was raised before the learned Single Judge.
We cannot allow such a point now to be raised in the present appeal especially for the view we are taking in the matter.
Order accordingly.