Amarjeet Chaudhary, J (Oral) - The petitioners who are working as Head Constables/Constables at Police Training College, Madhuban, have sought mandamus directing respondents 1 to 4 to detail them for intermediate course to be commenced from 15111990.
2.
The case of the petitioners, as put forward by their counsel, is that official respondents had deputed private respondents 5 and 6 namely Raj Kumar and Ram Chander, Constables for Lower School Course whereas the claim of the petitioners who are senior to them was ignored.
In order to fortify the contention, the learned Counsel had referred to comparative service data of the petitioners as well as the private respondents.
According to the Counsel, the criterion for deputing a candidate to the Lower School Course, as enumerated by the official respondents, is that a candidate should have put in five years in the Department as on 3091987 and should have served the Police Training College for two years as on 3091987.
Further the candidate should not have been awarded any punishment except Censure during the last five years.
In case a candidate fulfill the requisite qualifications, he is to be sent to the Lower School Course.
3.
The star argument of Mr. IS Balhara, Advocate, learned Counsel for the petitioners is that the petitioners are eligible to be sent to Lower School Course on the basis of qualifications as laid down in Annexure P-1.
4.
On the other hand, the learned counsel for the State was not able to rebut the stand of the petitioner's Counsel, who, however, stated that a candidate should have served in Police Training College for two years as on 3091987.
Since the petitioners have not served the PTC for the requisite period two years, they could not be sent on training.
5.
On the consideration of the entire matter, it cannot be disputed in any manner that the petitioners are senior to private respondents and they have put in more than five years service in the Department as on 3091987 and have served PTC for two years.
The Director General Police, Haryana, vide his communication dated 1991987 (Annexure P-1) keeping in view the administrative requirements, had allotted one more seat to Distt.
Hissar making a total of 8 for the current Session.
Two seats were allotted to PTC making a total 4 for the current session.
The selection of PTC boys for doing LSC against above allotment of four seats was on the following conditions :-  "(1) He should have put in a minimum of 5 years service in the Deptt.
as on 3091987 out of which he should have served in PTC at least for two years as on 3091987.
(2) He should not have been awarded any punishment except Censure during the last 5 years.
(3) Subject to the condition as above selection should be on the basis of seniority in service record from the date of joining the Deptt."
I am of the firm view that the condition of two years' service in PTC was relevant only in the year 1987 for specific batch of the Police Constables to be deputed for training as the guidelines contained in Annexure P-1 were issued in special circumstances on creation of additional seats.
Thus in the year 1990 the State cannot be allowed to take a stand that a candidate who has put in two years service in PTC after putting in five years service in Police Deptt.
as on 3091987 can only be deputed for training.
In my opinion what is the requirement of the rule is that a candidate who has put in minimum five years service in the Police Force out of which he should have served in PTC for two years before the commencement of the Course, is eligible for training.
The petitioners 1 to 3 joined the Police Department in the year 1978/1979 and their date of joining the PTC is 381988, 481988 and 1791988 respectively.
The petitioners having completed five years service in Police Department and having put in two years' service in PTC were eligible for being sent for training.
Since the petitioners were senior to private respondents No. 5 and 6, therefore, their claim for being sent on training was on a better footing than the respondents.
Hence, I find no justification on the part of the official respondents to ignore the petitioners' claim.
More so, there is nothing on the record to show that the petitioners were awarded any punishment at the time.
6.
In view of the foregoing reasons, the writ petition is allowed with a direction to respondents 1 o 4 to depute the petitioners to undergo training to Lower School Course in Police Training College, Madhuban, henceforth.
The parties are left to bear their own costs.
Petition allowed.