Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - The petitioner while posted as Lecturer in Sanskrit in Government College, Narwana, Distt.
Jind, was served with a Three Months' Notice-cum-Retirement Order under the provisions of Rule 5.32-A(C) of the Public Civil Services Rules, Volume-II read with Rule 3.36(d) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Vol, I, Part I (hereinafter referred to as the 'Rules') as applicable to the State of Haryana.
The impugned order was passed in public interest on 13289, copy of which is Annexure P-1 to the writ petition.
2.
Brifely, the case of the petitioner is that he joined the respondent department as a Lecturer in the year 1971.
He attained the age of 50 years on 8121987 and as such he had completed about 16 years of service.
The petitioner during the tenure of his service from 1978-79 to 1988-89 earned 10 Good Reports and one average report pertaining to the year 1983-84 was conveyed to him, which according to the petitioner being average in nature, cannot be treated as adverse in any manner.
On the basis of this single adverse report, the Haryana Government has taken a decision to retire him pre-maturely in public interest though there is no justification for the same.
It was urged by the learned Counsel for the petitioner that the so-called adverse report for the year 1983-84 in which his integrity was graded as 'below average' was recorded at the behest of some senior officers who became annoyed with the petitioner due to some personal reasons and not on account of petitioner's efficiency.
Though the petitioner had submitted a representation dated 9.3.1989 against the impugned order of retirement, but no decision in the matter has been taken.
It was further argued by the learned counsel for the petitioner, Mr. HS Hooda, Senior Advocate, that in the Confidential Report for the year 1983-84 the integrity of the petitioner was graded as 'below average'.
As per plea raised by the learened counsel, there can be no grading about integrity like 'below average' as recorded in the ACR.
One can either be honest or dishonest.
It was vehemently argued that as per instructions of Government contained in letter No. 32/198/83-G.S.I.
dated 1681983, the cases of Class I or II officers, who are going to attain the age of 50 years are to be examined and only such officers whose 50% service records is found to be good or better category, are to be allowed to continue in service beyond 50 years whereas the case of the petitioner was considered on attaining the age of 52 years.
Even thereafter the petitioner was allowed to cross the efficiency bar.
Had there been any doubt about his integrity, the respondent-department would not have allowed the petitioner to cross the efficiency bar.
3.
On the contrary, the stand of the respondent-department is that according to the instructions contained in letter No. 4884-4-G.S.I.-74/22627 dated 2491974, copy of which is Annexure R-1, that where the integrity of the employee concerned is involved, the entire service record is required to be considered for the purpose and the employee concerned cannot be retained in service after the age of 50 years against whom a doubt regarding integrity has been expressed at any stage during the whole period of service.
In the light of the said instructions, the case of the petitioner was examined and it was observed that ACR for the year 1983-84 contains adverse remarks about his integrity.
Accordingly, the case was put up before the officers' Committee and after examining the whole matter the Officers Committee decided that the petitioner should be retired from service.
Thus he was served with the impugned notice of retirement under Rule 5-32-A(C) read with Rule 3.36(D) of the Rules vide order dated 16.2.1989, Annexure P-1 and as such there is no illegality in the same.
4.
I have perused the paper-book and considered the submissions made by the learned Counsel for the parties.
5.
Earlier, the Government Instructions, contained in letter No. 32/198/83-G.S.I.
dated 1681983 which envisage that the cases of Class I or II Officers who are going to attain the age of 50 years are to be examined and only such officers, whose 50% service record is found to be good or better category are to be retained in service beyond 50 years, came up for consideration in KK Vaid v. State of Haryana, 1990(1) SLR 1, wherein these very instructions were quashed and the service career of an employee, who has not earned 70% 'good' or 'average' reports during the preceding 10 years cannot be marred by retiring him pre-matruely at the age of 55 years.
It was also held therein that adverse entry prior to crossing of efficiency bar cannot be taken into consideration for judging the suitability for retaining in service beyond the age of 55 years.
6.
In the present case, the petitioner, in the preceding 10 years' service, earned 10 'good' reports and one 'average' report pertaining to the year 1983-84 in which his integrity was graded as 'below average'.
In my opinion, this report does not clearly reflect on the integrity of the petitioner.
There is no yardstick to measure the honesty of a person and neither it can be measured in degrees.
The Recording Officer should have shown the petitioner to be honest or dishonest in the requisite column.
In case there are doubts about the integrity of employee, thorough investigation is required to be conducted in the matter, which, admittedly, was never done in the case of the petitioner at any stage during his service.
If the petitioner's integrity was really under doubt, he should have been shown to be a person of doubtful integrity.
More so the petitioner was even allowed to cross the efficiency bar after recording of the so-called adverse report.
Had there been any doubt about his honesty, he would not have been allowed to cross the efficiency.
More so, the cases of doubtful integrity are serious and before grading a Govt. Servant to be dishonest, specific instances must be quoted, brought to his notice and he must be afforded an opportunity of being heard before declaring him to be so.
7.
In Dr. Om Parkash Gupta v. The State of Haryana and another, 1988(6) S.L.R.
370, compulsory retirement on the basis of a single adverse entry prior to the date of promotion crossing of efficiency bar was held to be illegal.
While quashing the impugned order of compulsory retirement therein, it was observed as under :-  ".............
In a case of an employee who has successfully completed probationary periods; allowed unusual increments and allowed to cross Efficiency bars at various stages and even given promotion, a single or isolated old adverse entry recorded at the threshold of his career should not be given undue weight.
What will be justified is that adverse entry prior to promotion, crossing of efficiency bar etc. should not be taken into consideration while forming opinion to retire an employee prematurely because of the reason the adverse entries lose their significance after promotion of an employee for this purpose.
There is always scope for improvement.
The consideration is to be the record of last five years.
8.
In view of the foregoing discussion, the writ petition is allowed and the impugned Notice-cum-Retirement-Order dated 1321989, Annexure P-1, is quashed.
The petitioner shall be entitled to all the consequential benefits.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.