Amarjeet Chaudhary, J (Oral) - The petitioner through this writ petition, filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, has sought for quashing of order dated 28th May, 1990, Annexure P-9, whereby the petitioner was retired from service prematurely.
Besides this, he has also sought for quashing of order dated 2641990, Annexure P-7, appointing Deputy Director of Horticulture as Inquiry Officer to conduct regular departmental enquiry against him and order dated 1751990, Annexure P-8 vide which his representation dated 24.8.1988 made against adverse remarks recorded in the ACR for the year 1987-88, was rejected.
2.
Briefly, the case of the petitioner is that he was appointed as Clerk in the Directorate of Agriculture in the erstwhile State of Pepsu on December 10, 1952.
He was promoted from rank to rank and finally to the post of Superintendent Grade-I vide order dated 1271989, a copy of which is annexed as Annexure P-5/A to the writ petition.
The service record of the petitioner has been outstanding and only one adverse entry recorded in his Annual Confidential Report for the year 1987-88 was conveyed to him vide letter dated 2751988, a copy of which is Annexure P-2.
Against the said adverse report, he made a representation on 24.8.1988, which was rejected by the Director of Horticulture, Punjab, respondent No. 2, vide his order dated 1751990.
A departmental inquiry was initiated against him and the petitioner remained under suspension during the pendency of the same.
Meanwhile the petitioner was exonerated of the charges levelled against him and he was reinstated in service.
In the year 1989, respondent No. 2 after his retirement, made a complaint against the petitioner, whereupon de novo enquiry was ordered against him on the plea that the inquiry conducted by the Inquiry Officer, in which the petitioner was exonerated, was not proper as no evidence or statement of any of the witnesses were recorded by him.
Later on, the petitioner was retired prematurely from service vide order dated 2851990 Annexure P-9.
Feeling aggrieved against the action of the respondent, the petitioner filed the present writ petition.
3.
Mr. JS Khehar, Advocate, the learned counsel for the petitioner contended tht the petitioner was retired prematurely on the basis of only one adverse entry recorded in his ACR for the year 1987-88.
There was no material, whatsoever, for recording the same.
Further the stand of the petitioner's Counsel is that on the basis of the adverse remarks, a regular departmental enquiry was conducted against the petitioner and the Inquiry Officer has exonerated the petitioner of the charges levelled against him after recording the evidence of certain witnesses.
In view of this, the action of respondents for holding of de novo enquiry is absolutely wrong and arbitrary.
4.
On the other hand, the stand of the respondents is that the Inquiry Officer had exonerated the petitioner in the departmental enquiry without recording the evidence and the Government is contemplating to initiate de novo proceedings against him.
5.
In order to satisfy myself, I directed the State Counsel to produce the Enquiry Report.
Mr. Rajiv Atma Ram, Deputy Advocate General, Punjab, appearing on behalf of the State has proceed the file containing the enquiry report and I have perused the same.
A bare glance on the enquiry report indicates that the Inquiry Officer had examined certain witnesses and on appreciation of their evidence the petitioner was exonerated of the charges levelled against him.
Thus, I find no substance in the stand taken by the respondents that while exonerating the petitioner from the alleged charges, no evidence was recorded by the Inquiry Officer.
A thorough perusal of the paper book also shows that this alleged adverse entry pertaining to the year 1987-88 was the subject matter of the departmental enquiry, which led to the premature retirement of the petitioner.
In view of the fact that the petitioner was exonerated of the charges levelled against him after recording of statements of some witnesses of the charges levelled against him.
Thus, so called adverse report cannot be given undue weightage for retiring the petitioner prematurely.
Even otherwise, there is absolutely no material, whatsoever, to justify the impugned order of premature retirement.
6.
In view of the foregoing discussion, the writ petition is allowed and the impugned order dated 2851990, Annexure P-9 is quashed.
The petitioner shall be entitled to all consequential benefits.
7.
Under the facts and circumstances there will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.