MR Agnihotri, J - In this petition filed under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India, petitioner Daksh Kumar, Accounts Officer, has prayed for quashing of the order dated 3rd February, 1988 (Annexure P16), by which he has been dismissed from service by the Managing Director of the Haryana Agro-Industries Corporation Limited (hereinafter referred to as 'the Corporation'), mainly on the ground that the Managing Director of the Corporation was not competent to pass the impugned order of dismissal from service, as the competent authority was the Board of Directors of the Corporation which had appointed the petitioner to the service of the Corporation.
2.
On 18th June, 1969, the petitioner was appointed as Assistant Accountant-cum-Cashier in the Corporation.
After completing ten years' service, the petitioner was appointed as Accounts Officer in the pay scale of Rs. 500-1000 in pursuance of the decision of the Board of Directors taken in their 57th meeting held on 26th March, 1979, with effect from 23rd June, 1979.
A copy of this order was forwarde by the Managing Director to the Chairman of the Corporation for his information.
Thereafter, on 22nd February, 1980, this order was modified and in partial modification of the order, the petitioner was "appointed as Accounts Officer in the pay scale of Rs. 500-30-800/40-100, in pursuance of the decision of the Board of Directors taken in their 63rd meeting held on 5th February, 1980, with effect from 26th March, 1979".
While the petitioner was working as Accounts Officer, on the basis of F.I.R. No. 155, dated 12th April, 1983, under Section 409, Indian Penal Code, registered at Police Station South, Union Territory, Chandigarh, the petitioner was placed under suspension in 1983, alleging embezzlement of Rs. 10,28960.
When the report of investigation by the local police was brought to the notice of the Corporation, the Board of Directors in their meeting dated 20th March, 1984, decided that legal advice in the matter be obtained from the Legal Advisor of the Corporation and the matter be pursued in accordance with the advice.
Accordingly, the matter was referred to the Legal Advisor and on 20th March, 1984, the Legal Advisor opined that no case was made out against the petitioner and he made his recommendation to the authorities for cancellation of the case.
He further opined that the petitioner should have been reinstated and necessary action be initiated against the other officials involved in the case.
Consequently, on 12th April, 1984, the Corporation, in pursuance of the decision of the Board of Directors taking in their meeting held on 20th March, 1984, reinstated the petitioner without prejudice to the departmental inquiry to be initiated or pending against the petitioner.
Thereafter, on 7th January, 1986, the petitioner was again place under suspension and a regular inquiry was ordered to be held against him on 20th January, 1986.
However, the Inquiry Officer exonerated the petitioner in June, 1986.
But on 25th June, 1986, itself another charge-sheet was served on the petitioner on the same allegation of embezzlement of Rs. 10,28960 relating to the year 1978.
The Inquiry Officer submitted his report on 10th January, 1987, on the basis where of the Managing Director of the Corporation served a show-cause notice on the petitioner proposing the punishment of dismissal from service.
The petitioner submitted his reply to the show-cause notice on 4th June, 1987, which remained under consideration of the Managing Director, respondent No. 3, for about eight months and on 3rd February, 1988, the petitioner has been served with the impugned order passed by the Managing Director of the Corporation dismissing the petitioner from service of the Corporation.
Apart from challenging the order of dismissal from service on merits, that is, on the basis of non-compliance with the provisions of the principles of natural justice, denial of reasonable opportunity of being heard and procedural infirmities committed by the Inquiry Officer during the course of recording of evidence, etc., the principal ground of attack against the order of dismissal of the petitioner from service is that the Managing Director of the Corporation, respondent No. 3, being not the appointing authority of the petitioner, could not impose the punishment of dismissal from service of the corporation.
3.
In the written statement, the respondent have sought to justify the impugned order by pleading that the order of appointment of the petitioner petitioner having been issued by the Managing Director of the Corporation, the appointing authority of the petitioner was the Managing Directors and not the Board of Directors, of the Corporation.
To appreciate the plea, the relevant extract of para 6 of the written statement is reproduced below :-  "The petitioner was promoted by the then Managing Director after the restructural set up was approved by the Board of Directors, after duly evaluating his personal record.
The petitioner was promoted with effect from June 23, 1979.
The order appointing the petitioner as Accounts Officer was issued by the then Managing Director.
It is vehemently denied that the petitioner was promoted by the Board of Directors.
The remaining contentions of the petitioner have, of course, been denied in the written statement.
4.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, and having gone through the record of the case, I am of the considered view that the order dated 3rd February, 1988, Annexure P16, dismissing the petitioner from service of the Corporation is without jurisdiction and has been passed by the Managing Director who was not the competent authority to impose the punishment of dismissal from service on the petitioner.
On this short ground alone, the impugned order is liable to be quashed.
5.
The Haryana Agro-Industries Corporation Limited is a Haryana State Government undertaking, governed by the Board of Directors nominated by the State Government of Haryana.
The Corporation is financed by the State of Haryana which retains an effective and pervasive control over the affairs of the Corporation.
According to clause 3 of the Regulation of Delegation of Powers of the Corporation, which came into force on 27th April, 1973, the Managing Director was made the appointing authority of only those employees whose pay scale did not exceed Rs. 250-750.
In the case of employees carrying higher pay scale, that is, more than Rs. 250-750, the appointing authority was the Board of Directors.
Since the petitioner was appointed as Accounts Officer in the pay scale of Rs. 500-1000, obviously, the Board of Directors of the Corporation was the appointing authority and not the Managing Director.
Specific assertion was made to this effect in the very first ground of attack in para 33 of the writ petition, which has not been replied specifically in the otherwise detailed written statement.
Though refuted by the respondents as noted earlier, the reply does not disclose any material facts as would be evident from the language used in ground (a) of para 33 of the written statement, which is reproduced below :-  "That contents of sub-para (a) of para 33 of the writ petition are wrong and denied.
The order of dismissal has been passed by the competent authority.
The appointing authority of the petitioner is the Managing Director who has issued the appointment order.
In fact, as stated earlier, the Managing Director is the authority to appoint all the officers in the Corporation.
The petitioner was not appointed by the Board of Directors of the Corporation.
It has already been explained hereinabove that the reference to the decision of the Board dated March 26, 1979, mentioned in the appointment order (Annexure P-2) was only relating to the restructing of the staffing pattern."
Moreover, the Articles of Association of the Corporation provide in clauses 119 and 120 that "the business of the company shall be managed by the Directors" and the Directors shall have the power "to appoint and at their discretion remove or suspend such Secretaries, Officers, Clerks, Agents and servants as they may, from time to time, think fit."
In the face of these specific provisions, it was incumbent on the respondent Corporation to discharge the burden by placing on record specific order either passed by the Board of Directors dismissing the petitioner from service of the Corporation or some order empowering the Managing Director to exercise the power of dismissal in the case of officers carrying the status and pay scale enjoyed by the petitioner.
In the absence of that, the only irresistible conclusion is that the Board of Directors of the Corporation, in pursuance of whose decision the petitioner was appointed as Accounts Officer of the Corporation, alone were competent to initiate the proceedings for taking disciplinary action against the petitioner and impose the major punishment of dismissal from service on him.
Resultantly, the Managing Directors of the Corporation, respondent No. 3, was not competent to serve the charge-sheet or show-cause notice on the petitioner and to pass the final impugned order.
This conclusion is consistent with the conduct of the Corporation right since 1979 when the petitioner was appointed as Accounts Officer as all orders of his appointment, promotion and reinstatement into service, after revoking the order of suspension, were passed by the Board of Director of the Corporation in their regular meetings and never by the Managing Director himself.
6.
Consequently, I allow this writ petition, and quash the impugned orders-the show-cause notice dated 18th May, 1987 (Annexure P13), proposing the imposition of penalty of dismissal from service on the petitioner, and the order dated 3rd February, 1988 (Annexure P16), by which the petitioner was dismissed from service.
As a result of the quashing of the aforesaid orders, the petitioner shall be deemed to have continued in service right from the date of his dismissal, in pursuance of the impugned orders and he shall be entitled to all the arrears of salary, allowances, etc. along with other service benefits to which he would have been entitled, has he not been dismissal from service.
The petitioner shall also be entitled to the costs of this petition which are quantified at Rs. 1,000/-.
Sd/-  MR Agnihotri,  Judge.
Petition allowed.