RS Mongia, J (Oral) - While admitting this case, Motion Bench had ordered it to be heard with C.W.P.
No. 5389 of 1987.
However, I find that there is nothing common between the two writ petitions and, therefore, this writ petition is being disposed of independently of C.W.P.
No. 5389 of 1987.
2.
One of the grievances made by the petitioners in this case is that their representation dated 3rd March, 1988 (Annexure P-2) has not been decided and in fact without taking any decision on the said representation and communicating the same to the petitioners, respondent No. 2 Shri HR Badru was promoted as Labour-cum-Conciliation Officer, on 19th July, 1988.
This led to the petitioner filing the present writ petition.
3.
Without going into the merits of the case at this stage, I consider it appropriate to direct the State of Punjab, through the Secretary to Government, Punjab, Department of Labour and Employment to dispose of the representation of the petitioners (Annexure P-2) by passing a speaking order.
Since according to the petitioners after filing representation (Annexure P-2), some subsequent events have taken place, the petitioners would be at liberty to supplement the representation (Annexure P-2) and raise all the points which they have raised in the writ petition.
They may do so within a fortnight from today.
Respondent No. 1 shall dispose of the representation (Annexure P-2) as also supplementary representation, if any, by passing a speaking order within three months from the receipt of this order.
The petitioners as well as respondent No. 2 would be given an opportunity of being heard by respondent No. 1.
Needless to mention that if the representation of the petitioners is accepted, they will be considered for promotion from the date their promotion fell due to them and if they are so promoted, all consequential benefits shall flow.
4.
With these observations, this writ petition is disposed of with no order as to costs.
The officer is directed that while communicating this order to respondent No. 1, copy of Annexure P-2 also be sent to him.
Ordered accordingly.