Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - The petitioner who was working as Assistant Grade I with the Food Corporation of India, Punjab Region, Chandigarh has been dismissed from the service and through the present writ petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, he has prayed for the issuance of a writ of certiorari mandamus for quashing the impugned orders (Annexure P/3, P/6 and P/8).
Annexure P/3 is the order of punishment, Annexure P/6 is the order passed by the appellate authority, whereby the appeal filed by the petitioner against the order of punishment (Annexure P/3) was rejected and Annexure P/8 is the order passed by the Reviewing Authority whereby the review petition filed against the order (Annexure P/6) was rejected.
2.
Shorn of the superfluous details the main controversy urged by the learned counsel for the petitioner is that the order dated 3091980 (Annexure P/6) of the appellant authority vide which the appeal preferred by the petitioner was rejected and the order dated 1561981 (Annexure P/8) which was passed by the reviewing authority are non-speaking orders as neither original nor the appellant nor the reviewing order is in essence a speaking order.
3.
In this case notice of motion was issued.
The then learned counsel for the respondents, at the time of motion hearing of the case, had taken a stand that Annexure P/6 was in essence a mere intimation of the orders passed by the Zonal Manager and a detailed speaking order has been passed by the competent authority.
The learned counsel for the respondents had also sought time on 12th October, 1981 to place the aforesaid detailed speaking order on the record but a perusal of the paper book indicates that the same has not been filed.
4.
On the careful consideration of the submissions made at the bar and after screening of the entire paper book I am of the considered view that neither the original nor the appellate or the reviewing order is in essence a speaking order.
The orders has been passed in a mechanical manner.
As such there was total lack of application of mind by the authorities concerned while passing the impugned orders.
5.
A perusal of the articles of charge and the charge sheet indicates that the petitioner in connivance with the Watchman on duty/Depot Labour attempted to defraud the Corporation and misappropriated 115 bags of wheat from stack Nos. G.7 and G.20 stored in the open on 2461975.
He also misappropriated 5 bags of wheat from stack No. A2 with mala fide intention.
Therefore, the petitioner alongwith other watchmen was charge-sheeted.
6.
It is the admitted case of the respondents that all the persons who were on duty were chargesheeted to enable each one of them to make clear their position in the departmental inquiry instituted as per Regulation 58 of the Food Corporation of India (Staff) Regulations, 1971.
One Shri Vinod Kumar, workman of Amritsar Depot was also charge-sheeted alongwith the petitioner and the Senior Regional Manager of the Amritsar Depot had imposed a penalty of withholding of four increments with cumulative effect which was to take effect from 1.1.1981 alongwith recovery of Rs. 500/- to be recovered in 10 equal instalments.
7.
As already stated above the petitioner alongwith 14 watchmen was charge-sheeted.
The other watchmen have been awarded only minor penalties whereas the petitioner has been dismissed from the service.
8.
A perusal of the charge-sheet served on 14 W/men reveals that the allegations levelled against the petitioner and in 14 W/men were self contradictory which indicates that the Department itself was not clear about the actual allegations.
Even the modus operandi of these allegations has not been determined during the course of enquiry.
All these facts have not been taken into consideration by the appellate and the reviewing authority, while passing the orders Annexure P/6 and P/8.
Had the appellate and the reviewing authority passed a speaking order after due application of mind the above said facts would not have escaped their notice which to my mind have not been dealt with by these authorities.
As a matter of fact, it was incumbent upon these authorities to have dealt with the issues raised by the petitioner before them.
9.
In view of the foregoing reasons, the impugned order dated 1941980 (Annexure P.3) whereby the petitioner was dismissed from service and the consequent orders Annexure P/6 and P/8 passed by the appellate as well as the reviewing authority are quashed.
However, it is made clear that it will be open to the Corporation to pass a fresh order in the facts and circumstances of the case in accordance with law and after affording proper opportunity to the petitioner.
The writ petition is allowed in the terms indicated above.
Petition allowed.