GR Majithia, J - This Judgement will dispose of C.W.P.
No. 14085 of 1989 and C.W.P.
No. 590 of 1990 as common question of law arises for determination in both the cases.
2.
The petitioners have impugned the order of the Standing Committee holding them guilty under Ordinance 10(j) read with Ordinances 11 and 13 of the Ordinances contained in Guru Nanak Dev University Calender Volume II 1986 (for brevity to be referred to as Ordinances) and disqualifying them from appearing in any examination of the University for a period of one year under each count.
3.
The petitioners received communication from the controller of examinations informing them that while appearing at DAN College of Education Nawanshahr in the subject of teaching of English paper of B.Ed.
examinations held on April 22, 1989, they had openly used unfair means in the examination.
They were called upon to show cause why action should not be taken against them under Ordinance 10(h)(j) read with Ordinance 11 and under Ordinance 13 of the Ordinances ad directed to appear before the Standing Committee.
The petitioner appeared before it.
On the basis of the report of the subject expert and after perusing the answer-sheets, the Standing Committee opined that answers to certain questions of the paper tallied with the answers of other examinees and accordingly found them guilty.
4.
The counsel for the petitioners submits that there is absolutely no material before the unfair means committee for holding the petitioners guilty for using unfair means in the examination under Ordinances 10(j) and 13 of the Ordinances.
It will be useful to reproduce Ordinances 10(j) and 13 of the Ordinances :-  "10(j) receiving help or attempting to receive help for answering the question paper from any source in any manner, inside or outside the examination hall.
13.
If the answer book of a candidate shows or it is otherwise established, that he had received or attempted to receive help from any source and in any manner, or has given help or attempted to give help or attempted to give help to another candidate in any manner, he shall be disqualified from appearing in any examination for a period of not less than two years."
Ordinance 10(j) of the Ordinances will be attracted only if the examinee receives help or attempts to receive help for answering the question paper from any source.
There is no allegation much less proof that the petitioners had received help from some other source while answering the question paper.
Ordinance 13 will be attracted if it is established that the examinee has received help from any source and in any manner while answering the question paper.
There is no material on record suggesting that the petitioners had received help from any source.
Merely because the answers to the questions are tallying with the answer books of other examinees without any corroborative evidence, it cannot be inferred that the petitioners had copied from the answer books of others.
The order of the standing committee cannot be sustained.
5.
For the reasons stated above, the writ petition succeeds and the order of the Standing Committee is quashed.
No order as to costs.
CM No. 8180 of 1990 and CM No. 9115 of 1990 are dismissed as having become infructuous.
Petition allowed.