KP Bhandari, J - Prem Mohini Sadana, petitioner who was formerly Lecturer, Government Girls Higher Secondary School, Sector 18, Chandigarh, has filed the present writ petition for the issuance of writ of mandamus for the grant of benefit of leave due under the rules and payment of leave salary together with interest at the rate of 18 per cent per annum from 1101984.
The admitted facts of the case are as follows :  2.
The petitioner has rendered 30 years' service in Education Department as a Teacher, she was the winner of the best teacher merit certificate.
She sought voluntary retirement under the Punjab Civil Services (Premature Retirement) Rules, 1975, with effect from 3091984 after serving 3 months' notice as laid down in the rules.
She sought retirement on domestic grounds.
3.
The petitioner placed reliance on the provisions of Rule 8116 (Note 4) read with Rule 8.122 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume I, Part I, for laying claim that if a government employee seeks voluntary retirement, he shall be entitled to leave salary, reduced by the amount of pension in lieu of leave due and admissible.
The petitioner submitted her application dated 181984 (Annexure P-1) well within the period of notice for the voluntary retirement, she requested in the application for the leave salary under the aforesaid Rules.
The said application was recommended by the Head of Office, i.e.
Principal, Government Girls Higher Secondary School, where she was working at the time of seeking voluntary retirement.
The application was forwarded to the Government through the Director of Public Instruction (Schools), Union Territory Administration, Chandigarh.
It is claimed that according to the entries in the service book, half-pay leaves to the extent of 420 days was due to the petitioner on the date of application.
The Government declined the request of the petitioner by a single line order : "Government have considered your request and rejected.
", vide Annexure P-5 dated 2721989.
The State Government has filed written statement through Mrs. Jesmer Kaur Kang, Deputy Director (School Administration).
In the written statement the State has defended this action.
The material provisions of the rules bearing on the question are as under :  "Rule 8116 : Note 4 - In case where a Government employee who is required to retire; or who himself chooses to be retired; before the age of superannuation, may be allowed the leave due and admissible to him as indicated below, provided it does not extend beyond the date on which he attains the age of superannuation : (i) Either leave preparatory to retirement upto 180 days on full pay, if it is due; or (ii) Earned leave upto 120 days with permission to combine it with any other kind of leave, if due."
"Rule 8122(5)(a) - A Government employee who is granted leave beyond the date of compulsory retirement or quitting of service, as the case be, shall be entitled during such leave to leave salary as admissible under this rule, reduced by the amount of pension and pension equivalent of other retirement benefits."
4.
A plain reading of the Rules clearly shows that a Government employee who seeks voluntary retirement is entitled to claim leave salary.
It is surprising that the Government in order (Annexure P-5) dated 2721989 has given no reason to decline the request of the petitioner.
When a Government servant for basing his or her claim depends upon Rules, it is obligatory on the authority to consider the provisions of the Rules and to decide the case in the light of the statutory rules.
In such a situation, it is obligatory on the authority concerned to give a personal hearing to the official concerned and also pass a speaking order.
The impugned order (Annexure P-5) is clearly in violation of the principle of natural justice inasmuch as the petitioner was neither given any hearing nor any speaking order was passed.
This order cannot be allowed to sustain and is liable to be quashed.
I order accordingly.
As the claim of the petitioner flows from the provisions of the statutory rules, I do not consider it necessary to remit the case back to the Government for fresh disposal.
The petitioner is entitled to leave salary under the Rules.
When she has sought voluntary retirement, there is no valid reason to refuse this claim to the petitioner.
The aforesaid, rules cast a statutory obligation on the respondent grant leave salary.
The leave salary which was due the petitioner has been illegally withheld for a considerably long time without any reason.
In this view of the matter this petition is allowed with costs and I hereby issue writ of certiorari and quash the order Annexure P-5 and direct the respondents to allow the benefit of leave and leave salary to the petitioner in accordance with the rules considering the leave due to the petitioner according to her service book.
The petitioner will be entitled to 12 per cent per annum interest on the whatever amount becomes due to the petitioner.
The respondents are directed to comply with this order within one month.
Counsel's fee Rs. 500/-.
Petition allowed.