Amarjeet Chaudhary, J (Oral) - This order will dispose of C.W.Ps.
No. 7008 of 1990 - Mohinder Singh and others v. State of Haryana and others, 1991(1) S.C.T.
621 and 8026 of 1990 - Vijay Kumar v. State of Haryana and others, involving identical questions of law and facts.
For the purposes of order facts have been picked up from C.W.P.
No. 7008 of 1990.
2.
The undisputed facts of the case are that the petitioners were recruited as Constables on 6/7.3.1990 in the 5th Battalion of Haryana Armed Police Force, Madhuban.
The persons serving in the Haryana Armed Police are transferable in the Police Department either at the Headquarter or anywhere in the field in the State.
All the petitioners were recruited as they fulfilled the requisite qualifications regarding physical fitness and educational qualifications etc.
But to the petitioners' great dismay, respondent No. 2 passed an order on 1941990 terminating the services of the petitioners.
The petitioners are aggrieved against the said order.
3.
The stand of the petitioners is that since they were recruited by a competent authority, there was no material whatsoever on the basis of which their services could be terminated.
On the other hand, the stand of the respondents is that 15 Head Constables were transferred to various districts by the Deputy Inspector General, Haryana Armed Police vide order dated 3121989.
This was done in response to the Director General of Police, Haryana's order dated 29121989.
However, these police officers were not absorbed in the Districts due to lack of vacancies.
Meanwhile, 49 constables including the petitioners were recruited as Constables and the repatriated officials were ordered to be adjusted in the manner incorporated in Deputy Inspector General, Haryana, Armed Police's letter dated 1441990.
The case of the respondents is that the petitioners were terminated on administrative reasons due to lack of vacancies.
4.
I have considered the submissions of the learned counsel for the parties.
I am of the considered view that vacancies are always filled in anticipation of future vacancies.
For the purpose provision in budget is to be made.
Vacancies are noticed and then filled.
The respondents before recruiting the petitioners must have observed all these procedural formalities.
As such, it does not lie in their mouth to say that the petitioners were discharged for want of vacancies.
5.
In view of the foregoing reasons, a direction is issued to the respondents that on the first available vacancies, all the petitioners are to be considered for absorption in the Police Force.
This petition stands disposed of in the manner indicated above.
No costs.
Petition allowed.