Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - This is a petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India for issuance of mandamus to the respondent to appoint the petitioner as Class-I Medical Officer from the date the person junior to him in merit was appointed.
2.
The petitioner was appointed as HCMS Class-II Medical Officer on ad hoc basis in March, 1982 vide order Annexure P-1.
He was appointed on the said post on the regular basis by the respondent on the recommendation of the Public Service Commission, vide letter of appointment dated 11101984, Annexure P-2.
The Haryana Public Service Commission advertised HCMS Class-I post for which the petitioner submitted his application through his department.
He was duly selected for the said post and was informed by the Secretary, Haryana Public Service Commission that his name stood at Sr. No. 8 in the merit list.
3.
The case of the petitioner is that as many as 17 persons were recommended/selected by the Commission and his name appeared at Sr. No. 8 in the merit list, but the persons low in merit have been issued appointment letters and no appointment letter has been issued to him.
He made representation Annexure P-6 and thereafter issued reminder Annexure P-7 to the respondent, but in spite of that he has not been issued the appointment letter.
On the contrary, the stand of the respondent is that there were adverse remarks in the Annual Confidential Report of the petitioner pertaining to the year 1982-83 about his honesty and as such he could not have been appointed to HCMS Group-A on the recommendations of the Haryana Public Service Commission according to provisions contained in Govt. Letter No. 4848-S- 72 dated 1871972, Annexure R-II.
According to the provisions contained in this letter, service record of the petitioner prior to his appointment was to be taken into consideration.
4.
While rebutting the above stand of the respondent, Counsel for the petitioner contended that the adverse remarks, if any, about the honesty of the petitioner pertained to the year 1982-83 In the appointment letter of the petitioner, Annexures P-2 dated 11101984 by which he was appointed on regular basis on the recommendations of the Haryana Public Service Commission, there was a stipulation that he will be on probation for a period of two years from the date of regular appointment which period could be extended, if necessary, upto 3 years.
The Counsel for the petitioner submitted that notwithstanding the adverse remarks about honesty, the petitioner was recommended for appointment on regular basis by the Haryana Public Service Commission and was in fact, appointed as HCMS II by the respondent.
Since the petitioner was appointed on regular basis w.e.f.
11101984, as per stipulation contained in his appointment letter, his period of probation was to expire in October, 1986 but it was not at all extended.
This clearly goes to show that the respondent-Department was quite satisfied with the work and conduct of the petitioner.
5.
I have considered the submissions made at the Bar and perused the entire paper-book.
There is no dispute about the fact that the petitioner was appointed in HCMS-II on ad hoc basis on 22.3.1982 and was again appointed on regular basis on 11101984 on the recommendations of the Haryana Public Service Commission.
As per his letter of appointment, Annexure P-2, he was put on probation for a period of two years.
It is also not in dispute that the adverse remarks about the honesty of the petitioner recorded in this Annual Confidential Report pertained to the year 1982-83 i.e. prior to the date of his regular appointment.
It is abundantly evident from the record that notwithstanding the above said adverse remarks, the petitioner was appointed by the respondent on regular basis.
It has nowhere come on the record that the period of probation was ever extended.
What the respondent-Department, while replying to para 7(iii) of the writ petition, stated is that the petitioner joined in HCMS-II on 16101984 on regular basis and his two years probation period was to expire on 15111986 which could be extended upto three years but the matter was still under active consideration.
It seems that the respondent is endeavouring to withhold the true position and reluctant to state clearly that the petitioner's probation period was not extended.
6.
Sub-rule (3) to Rule 11 of the Haryana Civil Medical Service (Class-II) Rules, 1978 envisages as under :-  "(3) On the completion of the period of probation of a person, the appointing authority may, if his work or conduct has, in its opinion, been satisfactory :- (i) confirm such person from the date of his appointment if appointed against a permanent vacancy;  (ii) confirm such person from the date from which a permanent vacancy occurs, if appointed against temporary vacancy, or, (iii) declare that he has completed his probation satisfactorily, if there is no permanent vacancy : Provided that if neither of the above three decisions is taken within six months of the expiry of the original or extended period of probation, if any, then at the expiry of the aforesaid six months' period the officer concerned would be deemed to have satisfactorily completed his period of probation."
From the above-referred provisions of Rule 11 of the 1978 Rules, the position is quite clear that maximum period for taking decision on any of the aforesaid three options by the appointing authority is three and a half years if the period of probation was extended and it is two and a half years if it was not extended.
Moreover, no communication was sent to the petitioner conveying that his probation period was extended.
So from all this, the fact remains that the petitioner's probation period was never extended by the respondent and he successfully completed the same.
7.
Furthermore, the application of the petitioner for direct recruitment in HCMS-I was forwarded by the respondent to the Secretary, Haryana Public Service Commission, Chandigarh vide letter dated 19.1.1988, Annexure R-1, with an indication that his integrity had been reported to be doubtful in the Annual Confidential Report pertaining to the year 1982-83.
So, this fact was within the knowledge of the Commission who recommended the petitioner for appointment in HCMS-I and of the respondent department which forwarded the name of the petitioner to the Commission.
It would not be out of place to mention that the Commission had recommended as many as 17 candidates including the petitioner for appointment in HCMS-I after considering their merits.
The plea of the respondent that as per Government provisions contained in letter dated 1871972, Annexure R-II, the service record of the person prior to his appointment is to be taken in view would not help the respondent as the relevant record was available with the Commission at the time of consideration for selection which was ignored by it for the reasons best known to the Commission.
8.
For the foregoing reasons, I have no option but to issue a direction to the respondent to give appointment to the petitioner in HCMS-I from the date the persons low in merit list than the petitioner were appointed.
It is made clear that the petitioner would be assigned seniority accordingly and given consequential benefits which might have accrued to him.
The writ petition is accordingly allowed with no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.