Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - The petitioner has filed this writ petition for issuance of a mandamus commanding the respondent to create a reserve quota for the handicapped and give admission to him in the MSc.
(Agriculture) under that quota.
2.
The case of the petitioner is that he applied for admission in MSc.
(Agriculture) in the respondent-University.
He is a handicap person being hard of hearing and a certificate in this respect is attached as Annexure P-3 to the writ petition.
He is also a sportsman of national level but despite this, he was not given admission.
On enquiry he came to know that the candidates lower in merit have been admitted.
He made representations Annexures P-4 and P-5 in this behalf, but the respondent did not take any action.
Petitioner also came to know that though no reservation was provided in the prospectus for the wards of freedom fighters yet reservation quota had been created for their wards who have been given admissions.
He further came to know that despite the fact that there was no reservation quota for sportswomen provided in the prospectus yet it has been created for them and they have been given admissions.
It was also averred in the petition that there is reservation for sportsmen in the prospectus but while filling up the admission form, inadvertently the petitioner could not seek his admission on the basis of his being a sportsman.
However, he claimed the weightage under the handicapped category.
3.
The grievance of the petitioner is that the respondent-University is not giving benefit of reservation of sportsman category by not creating an additional seat and that no weightage is being given to him of his being handicapped, whereas reservation quota has been created for the wards of the freedom fighters.
The respondent has filed detailed written statement and controverted the case of the petitioner.
4.
I have considered the submissions made at Bar and perused the entire paper-book.
5.
The petitioner applied for admission in MSc.
(Agriculture) and claimed only the weightage for physically handicapped person as is evident from column 7(a) and (c) of the application for admission, Annexure R-1.
He was given weightage (5 per cent marks thereby raising his percentage of marks from 5928 to 6428) for placing him in the open merit list.
The last candidate admitted in the open category was having 6663 per cent marks and no candidate below that percentage was admitted.
In view of this, the petitioner had no claim for admission as he was having 6428 per cent marks after having weightage of 5 per cent on the basis of his being handicapped.
6.
A perusal of clauses 23 and 24 of the prospectus shows that a separate merit list categorywise is to be prepared by the Dean and admissions are to be recommended as per reservation mentioned in the admission form.
These clauses clearly provide that those who are eligible under reservation can also opt for either reservation or weightage for a particular category and option to this effect must clearly be mentioned in the admission form in the appropriate column.
A close scrutiny of the application form of the petitioner, Annexure R-1 indicates that he had opted for claiming weightage of physically handicapped category and he did not claim reservation under the category of sportsmen.
The petitioner was placed in the list of open quota by giving 5 per cent weightage as per his admission form/option and, therefore, there was no occasion for placing him in the list of sportsmen category.
7.
So far as the stand of the petitioner that there was no provision of reservation in the prospectus of the wards of freedom fighters yet some additional seats were created for him, is concerned, the Academic Council by a decision taken in the meeting held on 271989 had framed rules for extending the benefit of reservation of the category of freedom fighters.
The petitioner cannot get that benefit and it is not his case that he was a ward of freedom fighter.
Hence, creation of additional seats for this category will not improve his case as he was considered in his own category as per his option.
It is thus categorical stand of the respondent that there is no difference in the category of sportsmen or the sportswomen provided in the prospectus and the admission were made as per provision 21 of the prospectus which provides 4 per cent seats for them.
So, on this count also, the petitioner cannot succeed.
8.
The crux of the matter is that the petitioner did not claim reservation in sportsmen category while submitting application form for admission nor was it claimed at the time of interview by the petitioner.
A candidate could not claim either reservation or weightage under a particular category.
The petitioner had only claimed weightage of his being a handicapped person and he was given due weightage of 5 per cent marks and placed in the list of open category candidates but being low in merit than the last candidate admitted, he was not given admission.
After competing with others and finding no place in the merit, petitioner cannot be allowed to change his stand/position.
9.
For the foregoing reasons, the writ petition is dismissed being devoid of merit.
No order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.