Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - The petitioner is seeking mandamus directing the respondents to allow him to continue is service upto the age of 60 years.
2.
The facts of the case in brief are that the petitioner was appointed on temporary basis as untrained teacher on 1561954 vide DPI Pepsu order No. E/29168-G/64 dated 1561954 (copy Annexure P-1) at fixed salary of Rs. 50/- per month.
He was allowed study leave by his erstwhile employer.
The petitioner on the merger of Pepsu into Punjab 1111965 continued to occupy the same position as he was holding prior to it.
By an order dated 16.5.1961 the petitioner was appointed as a trained Graduate Master since he had acquired qualifications for the same.
He was asked to fill up the pension papers by the respondents as his date of superannuation was to reach on 31101989 at the age of 58 years.
3.
The case of the petitioner is that after merger of Pepsu into Punjab his conditions of service continued to be the same as were in the State of Pepsu.
According to him his service conditions are governed by Pepsu Civil Service Regulations and he belongs to inferior service as in the erstwhile State of Pepsu the employees were categorized into two categories i.e. 'inferior' and 'superior'.
The age of superannuation in the case of employees belonging to inferior category is 60 years.
As such, he cannot be made to retire on attaining the age of 58 years.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has brought to my notice the various provisions of Pepsu Service Regulations.
On the other hand, Mr. GS Bal, Advocate, appearing for the respondents opposed the claim of the petitioner vehemently and urged that the petitioner does not belong to inferior service.
In order to fortify his argument, the learned counsel too has relied upon certain provisions of Pepsu Service Regulations.
4.
I have considered the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties at the bar and perused the paper-book.
5.
It is not in dispute that in the erstwhile State of Pepsu the age of superannuation in respect of employees belonging to inferior service is 60 years.
An inferior Government servant has been defined in rule 228 of the Pepsu Service Regulations which reads as under :-  "228.
Inferior Government servant is a Government servant included in the list given in Appendix-1."
A close scrutiny of Appendix-1 clearly indicates that all the employees mentioned therein belong to class IV category and their pay shall not exceed Rs. 16/-.
In the said Appendix a teacher has not been categorized as an employee belonging to inferior service.
More so, the petitioner, at the time of his initial appointment, was getting Rs. 50/- as fixed salary whereas the pay of a Government servant belonging to inferior service, as defined in rule 228 of Pepsu Service Regulations was not to exceed Rs. 16/-.
The petitioner has himself admitted that in the year 1961 he was appointed as trained Graduate Master vide order dated 16.5.1961 on a higher scale.
The petitioner had accepted the appointment as trained Graduate Master vide order dated 16.5.1961 on a higher scale.
The petitioner had accepted that appointment as trained Graduate Master without any reservation.
Assuming for the sake of argument that the petitioner belonged to inferior service at the time of his initial appointment as untrained teacher on 1561954, but on his appointment as Graduate Master in 1961, his status had definitely changed and as such he became a Class-III employee of the Punjab Government and it being so he was to retire on attaining the age of superannuation i.e. 58 years as per rule 326 of the Punjab Civil Service Rules.
The petitioner has not been able to bring any material to show that he belongs to inferior service and therefore he was being rightly retired at the age of 58 years.
The Counsel has also relied upon certain decisions which have no relevance in the case in hand as in all those cases the petitioner belonged to inferior service and as such were entitled to continue in service till the age of 60 years.
6.
In view of the foregoing reasons, the writ petition is dismissed being devoid of any merit.
Petition dismissed.