Amarjeet Chaudhary, J - The petitioner who is serving in the Haryana State Electricity Board (for short the Board) as an Assistant Executive Engineer has impugned order dated 991987 (Annexure P.8) passed by respondent No. 1 vide which in terms of Regulation 8 read with Regulation 12 of the Haryana State Electricity Board Employees (Punishment and Appeal) Regulations, 1980 an Enquiry Officer has been appointed to conduct an enquiry into the charges levelled against him as contained in charge-sheet served upon him vide memorandum No. 2/Conf.
932 dated 2231985.
2.
The challenge to holding of the enquiry on the basis of the aforesaid memorandum is on the ground that the petitioner had submitted his reply to the above said charge-sheet on 1541985 and the same having been found satisfactory, the charge-sheet was withdrawn with the approval of the Chairman of the Board.
As such no enquiry, on the basis of charge-sheet which was withdrawn vide order dated 3011987, can be conducted as it will amount to double jeopardy to the petitioner.
Therefore, order dated 991987 is not sustainable in the eyes of law and is liable to be quashed.
3.
The facts of the case are that the petitioner was issued a memorandum dated 2231985 (Annexure P.1) along with statement of charges (Annexure P.2) and summary of allegations (Annexure P.3).
He submitted his detailed reply to the same, the copy of which is Annexure P4 to the petition.
His reply was considered by the respondents and the same having been found satisfactory the charge-sheet served on him was withdrawn vide letter dated 3011987 (Annexure P.5).
It was on 991987 that the petitioner was informed vide order Annexure P.8 that charge-sheet bearing memorandum No. 2/Conf-932 dated 2231985 had been revived and a regular enquiry would be conducted against him.
4.
The respondents through their written statement contested the petition and pleaded that Chairman of the Board was competent to review his orders and that there were serious allegations against the petitioner which could be examined only through a regular enquiry.
5.
I have considered the arguments advanced at the Bar and perused the record.
I am of the view that the petition must succeed.
6.
Since the reply submitted by the petitioner to the charge-sheet was found to be satisfactory and accordingly the charge-sheet was withdrawn with the approval of the Chairman so there was no occasion to revive the same.
It is well settled that the competent authority after having passed executive/quasi-judicial order by applying its mind to the facts and circumstances of the case cannot review its own order.
Admittedly in the instant case reply to the charge-sheet submitted by the petitioner was considered by the Authorities and it was after its satisfaction that the charge-sheet was withdrawn.
Hence there was no occasion to revive the same.
Once the disciplinary case has been closed, Government cannot re-start the exercise in the absence of specific power to review or revise, vested by rules in some authority.
No such rule was brought to my notice nor produced on the record.
Hence, the authorities cannot restart the proceedings after the charge-sheet was withdrawn after satisfaction from the reply submitted by the petitioner.
7.
Another aspect of the present case is that no cogent reasons for review of order dated 3011987 Annexure P-5 have been given by the disciplinary authority while ordering the enquiry to be held.
It I is also an acknowledged principle of law that no person can be punished or put in peril twice for the same matter.
The dropping of certain charges against a public servant is an act of quasi-judicial nature and is not liable to be varied at the will of the authority concerned to make a review.
Accordingly, no de novo proceedings can be initiated with respect of those charges against the Government employees which were dropped by the competent authority after due consideration of the matter, unless the dropping of charges was as a result of fraud played by the delinquent official or by mis-stating the facts.
Neither of the two contingencies exists in the present case.
8.
For the foregoing reasons, the writ petition succeeds and is allowed.
The office order No. 367/Conf-932 dated 991987 (Annexure P.8) is accordingly quashed.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.