AK Ganguly, J - This writ petition has been filed by ten persons with a prayer for issuing direction upon the respondent-State to appoint them on the post of Secretariat Assistants on the basis of merit list prepared on 24th March, 1992 pursuant to the judgment of this Court delivered in CWJC No. 3352 of 1990.
The petitioners have also prayed for another direction upon the respondent Nos. 3 and 4, namely, the Bihar Public Service Commission (hereinafter referred to as the said Commission) and its Chairman for recommending the names of the petitioners for such appointment in the light of the directions contained in the Division Bench judgment of this Court delivered in CWJC No. 3352 of 1990 and in CWJC No. 6688 of 1996 along with MJC No. 3035 of 1995 and MJC No. 163 of 1996.
2.
It is not in dispute that the petitioner Nos. 1 to 6 are the Ministerial staff of Mofassil area and petitioner Nos. 7 to 10 are Ministerial staff of Secretariat and its attached offices in the State of Bihar.
3.
According to the Government policy 50% of the posts of Secretariat Assistants were reserved for the employee of the State Government.
Such posts were required to be filled up on the basis of the limited competitive examination of the Ministerial staff.
In connection with such examination an advertisement being Advertisement No. 13/97 was published for filling up the vacant posts of Secretariat Assistants for the Ministerial staff.
The petitioners appeared pursuant to the said examination which was held in the year 1988.
In terms of the rule of the advertisement the marks obtained in Hindi paper of the candidates were not to be taken into consideration for the purpose of preparing the merit list, inasmuch as the stipulation was only to secure qualifying marks in Hindi.
But the Bihar Subordinate Service Selection Board (hereinafter called as the said Board) wrongly prepared the said merit list and calculated the marks obtained in Hindi and the first result of the said examination was published on 22111988 by taking into consideration the marks obtained by the candidates in Hindi.
Thereafter, second result was published of the said examination on 3rd May, 1989 and modified result was also published on 7th May, 1990.
4.
On the basis of such results being published 308 persons were appointed on the basis of the merit list prepared on the aforesaid basis by the said Board.
Ultimately a writ petition was filed being CWJC No. 3352 of 1990 before the Hon'ble Court by some of the candidates raising a grievance that the merit list which was prepared on the aforesaid basis was incorrectly prepared by adding marks obtained in Hindi.
The said writ petition was heard and decided by a learned Judge of this Court on 24th March, 1992.
In the said judgment, the learned Judge allowed the writ petition, but did not disturb the appointments of 308 persons which have been made on the basis of the merit list so prepared.
But the learned Judge gave direction to prepare and publish promptly a fresh merit list of the candidates in connection with the aforesaid examination held in 1988 after calculating the marks obtained in Hindi, which is in excess of the qualifying marks.
The directions given by the learned Judge are set out below:  "The respondents 1 to 3 are hereby directed to prepare and publish promptly a fresh merit/seniority list of the result of the Secretariat Assistant 2nd Limited Competitive Examination after excluding the marks obtained in Hindi in excess of the qualifying marks by the respective candidates who had not been appointed until the date of filing of the present writ application, i.e., 2251990, but will include the cases of even those candidates who were appointed after the aforementioned interim order was passed by this Court and/or whose appointments were/are in the process of notification.
In short, the respondents 1 to 3 are directed to arrange the merit list according to the observation made above after treating Hindi as a qualifying subject only and make appointments pursuant thereof."
5.
It appears that when the matter relating to such preparation of the fresh merit list was pending consideration, the State Government came out with a resolution dated 3rd September, 1990 fixing new criteria for preparation of merit list.
In the meantime, contempt petitions were also filed and several proceedings were initiated, and the merit list on 15th March, 1994 was published by the Commission.
6.
After various proceedings, various writ petitions and the contempt proceedings, ultimately the matter rested by the Division Bench judgment of this Court delivered on 30th September 1996 in which the learned judge of the Division Bench dealt with CWJC No. 6688 of 1996 along with MJC No. 3035 of 1995 and MJC No. 163/96.
7.
It is not in dispute that the petitioners were not the parties in any of the proceedings mentioned before.
But the learned Counsel for the petitioners placed great reliance on some observations made in the Division Bench Judgment dated 30th September, 1996 in support of his case.
In paragraph-11 of the said judgment it has been directed that it would be more appropriate to recognise the appointments of all such candidates, who have secured more marks than the last candidate (out of 308 appointees) in their respective categories and have accordingly been placed above them in the revised merit list prepared pursuant to the judgment of the learned Single Judge irrespective of the number of vacancies notified/available pursuant to the Advertisement No. 13/87.
The learned Judges have also observed in para 11 of the said judgment that the Court cannot lose sight of the fact that such candidates, namely, those placed higher than the last candidate already appointed in the respective categories stand higher in merit, and therefore, they should not be made to suffer.
The said finding of the learned Judge has been further elaborated in para 12 of the said judgment where it has been stated as follows :-  "In other words, what the respondents are required to do is to issue a formal order retaining the services of such candidates, who have been placed higher in the revised merit list than the last person appointed in the group of 308 appointees in the respective categories and to terminate the appointments of the rest of the appointees.
This should be done within a period of one month from today.
Needless to say, that depending on their placement in the revised merit list, the cases of the contempt petitioners will also be considered like the intervenors and others."
8.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has relied on the observation italicised above, and has contended that the Division Bench also included their case within the expression of "others" and therefore, it is the duty of the said Commission to recommend their cases in view of the fact that they have obtained higher marks than the marks obtained by the last candidate out of those 308 persons.
9.
Learned counsel appearing for the State and the learned counsel appearing for the Commission have refuted the aforesaid stand of the Counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner.
The learned counsel appearing for the State on the basis of the affidavit filed has submitted that the 3rd limited Secretariat Assistant Grade Competitive Examination has been notified and the same is being conducted to comply with the judgment of this Court, and it has further been stated that in the Division Bench Judgment, nothing has been said on the basis of which this writ petition can be maintained by the petitioners.
Learned counsel further stated that the direction of the High Court must be read as confined to the cases of those persons who have been appointed and not the cases of those persons who have not been appointed.
In para 14 of the writ petition the petitioners have given the list to show the number obtained by the petitioners after excluding the Hindi marks.
10.
In the counter-affidavit which has been filed by the Commission in this proceeding, it has been very clearly stated that in terms of the order of the Hon'ble Court last candidate of each category was identified out of 308 appointees whose appointments were not to be disturbed by preparing the revised merit list, and it has been stated categorically in para-10 of the said counter-affidavit that in the Mofassil Cadre 114 vacancies were intimated by the Government.
Out of 114, there were 82 candidates among the 308 appointees, and as such, there remained only 32 vacancies in General Category, and in recommending 32 vacancies in the list of General Category, the last candidate in whose favour recommendation was made secured 106 marks which is higher than the highest marks secured by petitioner No. 2 who belongs to Mofassil cadre, who has secured only 94 marks.
It has also been stated that in the Secretariat Cadre 113 vacancies were intimated by the Government.
Out of 113 vacancies, 76 candidates were among 308 appointees.
So there remains only 37 vacancies against which recommendation was to be sent by the Commission, and in respect of these 37 candidates, last candidate of the General Category who was recommended secured 95 marks which was higher than the marks secured by the candidates, namely, petitioner No. 7 has secured highest marks among the petitioners of 01 category and has secured only 86 marks.
Therefore, the stand of the Commission is that even if for the sake of argument it is accepted that the cases of the petitioners come within the direction given by this Hon'ble High Court in the aforesaid Division Bench Judgment, even then the petitioners do not have any case on the basis of which this Court can direct the Commission to recommend their cases in view of the aforesaid disclosure of the facts.
11.
This Court has found that the aforesaid stand of the Commission is correct, and those paragraphs, namely, paragraph Nos. 10 and 11 of the counter-affidavit have not been disputed by the Counsel appearing for the writ petitioner.
In fact, there is no rejoinder to the affidavit filed by the petitioner contesting the aforesaid factual position.
12.
In that view of the matter, this Court holds that no direction, as prayed for in this writ petition, can be granted by this Court in favour of the petitioners.
This writ petition is therefore dismissed.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.