RS Mongia, J (Oral) - The petitioner is working as a Social Studies Master at Government Senior Secondary School, Jallalabad, District Ferozepur.
During the course of his employment, he became physically handicapped because his left leg was shortened in an accident.
He walks only with the help of crutches.
2.
A master in a school can seek promotion to the post of Lecturer or Headmaster.
It is not disputed that the appointing authority of the Lecturer/Headmaster is the Director of Public Instructions (Schools).
Vide order dated 9/15th September, 1988 (Annexure P-1), petitioner was appointed as a Lecturer purely on temporary and ad hoc basis in his own salary and pay-scale at Government Senior Secondary School (Girls), Jallalabad West (Ferozepur) against a newly created post.
Many other Masters were similarly appointed in various school.
The order appointing the petitioner and others was also endorsed to the District Education Officer concerned as well as to the petitioner and other similarly situated person.
In the endorsement to the District Education Officer by the Deputy Director for Director Public Instructions, Punjab, it has been mentioned as under (Translation from Vernacular) :  "It is also clarified that before relieving the employees, their up-to-date confidential reports/attendance reports, MA/B.T./B.Ed.
degrees, educational qualifications, MA pass, M.Sc.
pass and the permission to pass these examinations etc., etc., all the documents may kindly be checked.
The employee be relieved only after all the documents have been found satisfactory.
Affidavit may also be obtained from the concerned employee (option) whether he wants to be promoted as Head master or Lecturer."
In spite of this order, Annexure P-1, appointing the petitioner as Lecturer, he was not issued formal orders by the District Education Officer allowing him to join at the place of his appointment.
The petitioner is alleged to have made some representations but these did not bear any fruit.
However, vide order dated 24th November, 1988 (Annexure P-3) one Raj Kumar Verma was issued appointment letter appointing him as Lecturer at the same place where the petitioner had been appointed.
This order was issued by the Director of Public Instructions in the same terms as the earlier order which was issued to the petitioner.
3.
The petitioner in this writ petition impugns the action of the respondents in not allowing him to join as a Lecturer at Government Senior Secondary School (Girls), Jallalabad West (Ferozepur) in spite of the order of the Director of Public Instructions dated 9-15th September, 1988 (Annexures P-1) and instead appointed Raj Kumar Verma, respondent No. 3, in his place.
4.
Written statement has been filed by the respondents.
The Director of Public Instructions in his written statement has taken the stand that no cause of action has arisen to the petitioner as he was posted in his own pay-scale of Master on purely temporary basis being post-graduate on the basis of seniority and further it has been mentioned that a large number of Masters including the petitioner were adjusted against the vacant posts of Lecturers in various subjects to run the smooth instructional work.
The petitioner was not allowed to joined on the ground that the District Education Officer found that his result were very poor.
According to the Director of Public Instructions, a condition was attached in the appointment letter (which has already been quoted above), wherein it was stipulated that the District Education Officer would release the order of appointment only if he was satisfied that the Annual Confidential Reports etc. were satisfactory and up-to-date.
Since according to the Director of Public Instructions, the District Education Officer had found that the petitioner's results were poor, he was rightly not allowed to join by the Director Education Officer.
5.
I may deal with the point raised by the learned counsel for the respondents first that the order, Annexure P-1, was not an order of promotion, but only of adjustment for a temporary ad hoc period to cope up with the work, and, therefore, the said order appointing the petitioner on a temporary ad hoc post as a Lecturer did not give him any right.
From the perusal of the order (Annexure P-1) no doubt is left that this was an order of promotion.
It is mentioned in the order that in case the appointee does not join within the prescribed period then he would be deemed to have been debarred for two years.
This condition can always be put if a person foregoes his promotion.
In the next sentence in order, it is mentioned as under :-  "In case any teacher out of the provisional seniority list, has been left, who is senior to the person promoted, then he shall be reverted back to his original post without any notice."
In the latter part of the endorsement in the order to the District Education Officer, it has been mentioned by the Director of Public Instructions "Affidavit may also be obtained from the concerned employee (option) whether he wants to be promoted as Headmaster or Lecturer".
On availing one chance, he shall have no claim on the other.
Apart from the terminology to which reference has been made above, it is evident that the persons were being appointed on the basis of their seniority which would also go to show that this was a promotion order.
6.
The learned counsel for the petitioner has urged that the Director of Public Instructions is the appointing authority and it was on his satisfaction and consideration by him that the petitioner was promoted vide Annexure P-1 to the post of Lecturer and the District Education Officer was nobody to say whether the petitioner should be promoted or not and the District Education Officer had no authority to disallow the petitioner from joining the post in view of the order of promotion by the Director of Public Instructions.
From the order of promotion, it is evident that while passing the order of promotion, the Director of Public Instructions had not taken into consideration the Annual Confidential Reports and other matters and he left that matter to be seen by the District Education Officer.
In my view, it is the appointing authority which is to apply its mind and consider the case whether an individual is suitable for a particular post or not.
This duty cannot be assigned to one of its juniors.
It is for the appointing authority to see whether the records of a particular individual is good or not.
Since the order of promotion, Annexure P-1, was a conditional order to the effect that the District Education Officer should see whether on the basis of the record the petitioner could be allowed to join or not, no inviolable right came to be vested in the petitioner by that order.
Director of Public Instructions being the appointing authority, could not have left the consideration of the petitioner's record to the District Education Officer.
7.
It may be observed here that it is not disputed that respondent No. 3 was junior to the petitioner.
8.
Under the circumstances mentioned above, I direct the Director of Public Instructions (Schools), respondent No. 1 to consider the case of the petitioner within three months from the date of receipt of this order, on the basis of his record and other material whether he was suitable for promotion as Lecturer on 9th September, 1988.
Needless to mention that if he is found suitable on that date, he will be deemed to have been promoted from that date and all consequential benefits flowing therefrom shall follow automatically.
9.
With the observations made above, this writ petition is disposed of, with no order as to costs.
Order accordingly.