Mahesh Chandra, J - This writ petition is directed against the order dated 29th August, 1986 of respondent No. 5, Commissioner, Municipal Corporation of Delhi and order dated 22nd July, 1987 of respondent No. 4 Standing Committee of the Municipal Corporation of Delhi whereby the service of the petitioner was terminated and he was removed from service.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and have govern through the file and after giving my considered thought to the matter before me I have come to the followings findings :  2.
Facts giving rise to this writ petition are that the petitioner HS Singhal joined the service of Municipal Corporation of Delhi (hereinafter referred to as 'the Corporation') on 17th March, 1959 as overseer before coming into force of the Delhi Municipal Corporation Service Control and Appeal Regulations, 1959 and was appointed as Assistant Engineer on ad hoc basis w.e.f.
19th July, 1971 by the Corporation by Resolution No. 286.
After having worked in various departments of the Corporation the petitioner was posted in Building Department (City zone) but he made owing to his poor health certain representations to the Corporation for his transfer from the building department.
The petitioner had also represented against non-posting of Junior Engineers to assist him.
It so transpired that on 8th December, 1983 the petitioner was charge-sheeted for violation of Rule 3 (Conduct Rules) 1964 and it was alleged that the petitioner had failed to exercise proper supervision and control over the working of the Junior Engineers in respect of the unauthorised construction of a commercial nature in premises No. 1366, Baidwara, Maliwara, Delhi.
Said charges were denied by the petitioner and the enquiry proceedings were held and enquiry officer held that the charges were proved and in consequence the Commissioner terminated his services on 29th August, 1986 and his appeal to the Standing Committee was also dismissed on 22nd July, 1987.
These facts have not be disputed before me by counsel for the parties.
3.
Submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that the petitioner has been appointed by the Corporation and not by the Commissioner and as such in accordance with Section 95 of the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, the respondent No. 5 Commissioner of Corporation could not have terminated his services and removed him from service.
Section 95 of the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act (hereinafter referred to as 'the Act') lays down as under :  "95.
Punishment for Municipal Officers and other employees : (1) every municipal officer or other municipal employee shall be liable to have his increments or promotion withheld or to be censured, reduced in rank, compulsorily retired, removed or dismissed for any breach of any departmental regulation or of discipline or for carelessness, unfitness, neglect of duty or other misconduct by such authority as may be prescribed by regulations; Provided that no such officer or other employee as aforesaid shall be reduced in rank, compulsory retired, removed or dismissed by any authority subordinate to that by which he was appointed : Provided further that the Corporation may by regulations provide that municipal employees belonging to such classes or categories as may be specified in the regulations shall be liable also to be fined by such authority as may be specified therein.
(2) No such officer or other employee shall be punished under sub-section (1) unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken in regard to him; Provided that this sub-section shall not apply; where an officer or other employee is removed or dismissed on the ground of conduct which had led to his conviction on a criminal charge; or where the authority empowered to remove or dismiss such officer or other employee is satisfied for some reason to be recorded by that authority, that it is not reasonably practicable to give that person an opportunity of showing cause.
(3) If any question arises whether it is reasonably practicable to give to any officer or other employee an opportunity of showing cause under sub-section (2) the decision thereon of the authority empowered to remove or dismiss such officer or other employee shall be final.
(4) An officer or other employee upon whom a punishment has been inflicted under this Section may appeal to such officer or authority as may be prescribed by regulations."
4.
My attention has been particularly drawn to the first proviso of sub-section (1) of Section 95 which lays down that "Provided that no such officer or other employee as aforesaid shall be reduced in rank, compulsorily retired, removed or dismissed by any authority subordinate to that by which he was appointed."
My attention in this behalf has been drawn to Annexure 'A' to the petition which is copy of office order No. 79/Engg/Estt.
dated 27th August, 1971 which clearly brings out that the petitioner along with others had been appointed on ad hoc basis as Assistant Engineer (Civil) by the Corporation by the Resolution No. 286 dated 19th July, 1971.
The name of the petitioner appears at S. No. 9 in the said office order.
5.
It is not disputed before me that his ad hoc appointed continued after having been regularised by D.P.C./U.P.S.C.
until the services of the petitioner were terminated by the impugned order.
It is also not disputed that the order of termination of petitioner's service has been passed by the Commissioner which obviously is not the same as the Corporation.
In this view of the matter certainly it would follow that services of the petitioner have been terminated by an authority subordinate to Corporation which had appointed the petitioner as Assistant Engineer.
It has been urged on behalf of the respondent that the appointment of petitioner as Assistant Engineer was regularised vide office Order No. 2(2) ECI/Engg/Estt/165 dated 31.3.1975 (Annexure B) under the orders of the Commissioner and as such the Commissioner was competent to terminate the services of the petitioner but the recommendation of DPC and UPSC had already been made vide letter No. F-I/8(13)74-A-I dated 2nd January, 1975, and on that date it was only the Corporation which could have made appointment.
Mere fact that those orders were later incorporated by Commissioner in his order dated 24th March, 1975 would be of no consequence more so, because the appointing authority in respect of Asstt.
Engineers of the Corporation came to be vested in the Commissioner only on 10th January, 1975 (i.e. after the orders of regularisation) by amendment of Section 92 of the Act.
It was only a ministerial function which was discharged by the Commissioner in conveying the orders dated 2nd January, 1975 vide orders dated 31st March, 1975.
The amendment of Section 92(1)(a) of the Act which is relevant in the case of the petitioner which is relied upon by the respondent was effected by Act 55 of 1974 and came into force on 10th January, 1975.
Until then it was the Corporation which had the power to appoint.
Here is a case in which initial appointment on ad hoc basis was made by the Corporation which was regularised by the D.P.C./U.P.S.C.
before amendment of Section 92 with effect from 2nd January, 1975.
Consequently it cannot be accepted that the appointment was made by the Commissioner.
Even any delegation of such functions by the Corporation to the Commissioner cannot alter this situation and cannot nullify the statutory protection under the first provision to Section 95 of the Act.
Section 95 of the Act is based on the analogy of Article 311 of the Constitution and as such has to be strictly construed and no in-road into the protection granted under Section 95 to the Municipal officers can be permitted.
Mere fact that the order of termination of petitioner's services by Commissioner was later confirmed by the Standing Committee while rejecting the petitioner's appeal could be of no consequence.
One very importance fact which cannot be lost sight of is that regularisation of the petitioner was with effect from 2nd January, 1975 while the amendment of Section 92 of the Act was with effect from 10th January, 1975.
Till 10th January, 1975 it was the Corporation who was Appointing Authority of the petitioner and therefore for the case of the petitioner it cannot be accepted that the Commissioner was the Appointing Authority on the relevant date.
Thus the Commissioner who had imposed the penalty of removal from service of the petitioner was not the competent authority to terminate his service.
6.
Appointment and promotions made by an authority subordinate to the appointing authority can be deemed to be an appointment made by the Appointing Authority but the order of termination of service by an authority subordinate to the Appointing Authority cannot be deemed to bek terminated by the Appointing Authority.
Likewise confirmation of the order passed by authority subordinate to the Appointing Authority on appeal cannot ensure for the benefit of the Corporation so far as provisions of Section 95 of the Act above referred are concerned.
In this behalf my attention has been drawn by the learned counsel for the petitioner to Municipal Corporation of Delhi v. Shri Ram Pratap Singh, AIR 1976 SC 2301, in which it was held as under :  "The essence of the matter is the station or rank of the authority empowered to dismiss any officer subject to dismissal.
That rank cannot be delegated and therefore the delegatee if he is subordinate, cannot arrogate to himself the power to dismiss which the original appointing authority enjoyed."
He has also drawn my attention to the Management of DTU v. Shri Hajelay and anr., AIR 1972 SC 2452 in which it was held as under : "An employee of the Delhi Road Transport Authority carrying a minimum monthly salary of Rs. 350/- at the time of his absorption in the Delhi Corporation cannot be dismissed by authority below the rank of General Manager (Transport).
Neither delegation of his functions by the General Manager nor a regulation framed by the Corporation effecting such delegation can nullify this statutory protection under the provision to Section 95(2)."
On this analogy it has been urged by him that in the present case also the termination could not have been effected by the Commissioner in the circumstances of the case.
Learned counsel for the respondents has not been able to draw my attention to any ruling to the contrary.
He has not in fact disputed the principles of law laid down in the above rulings.
From my discussion above, it follows that the termination of services of the petitioner by the Commissioner who admittedly is subordinate to the Corporation which is the Appointing Authority of the petitioner, is in violation of Section 95 of the Act and as such null, void, illegal and ultra vires and subsequent amendment of provisions of law in this behalf cannot override the provisions of Section 95 of the Act.
7.
Since the order of termination of services of the petitioner fails on the grounds of its incompatibility with Section 95 of the Act and in violation thereof and has to be set aside, in consequence, I do not think there is any need to discuss any other question raised in his writ petition by the petitioner.
8.
In view of my discussion and findings above this writ petition succeeds and is allowed and it is declared that the order dated 29th August, 1986 of termination of services of the petitioner passed by Commissioner respondent No. 5 and order of the Appellate Authority Corporation dated 22nd July, 1987 are null and void, illegal and ultra vires and of no consequences and the petitioner is deemed to be in continuous services and is hereby ordered to be reinstated with full benefits.
No order as to costs.
Petition allowed.