HS Bedi, J. (Oral) - The petitioner joined as a constable in the Punjab Police on 1.10.1971.
After having passed the lower school course in April, 1978, he was promoted to the rank of Head Constable in August of the same year.
While posted as MHC in Police Station, Division No. 4, Jalandhar, two criminal cases i.e. F.I.R. No. 398 dated 29111982 and F.I.R. No. 79 dated 951986 both under section 409 of the I.P.C. were registered against him and he was, thereafter, prosecuted for the said offence.
The petitioner was, however, acquitted in the first case on 1081988 and in the second case on 17121988.
In the meantime, it appears that the case of the petitioner for being sent to the intermediate school course for coming on to promotional list `D' making him eligible for promotion to the rank of ASI came up for consideration and vide Annexure P1 dated 2441988, 12 Head Constables were confirmed but the petitioner was kept out for the reason that there were two criminal cases pending against him.
This exercise was repeated vide Annexures P-2 to P-7 in the year 1988-89 and various Head Constables junior to the petitioner were confirmed as such but the petitioner's confirmation was denied for the reason set out above.
After his acquittal in the two cases, the petitioner filed a representation praying that he should now be sent to the Intermediate School Course and on having been denied this benefit once again, he filed C.W.P.
No. 3477 of 1989 and this Court in its order dated 16.3.1989 Annexure (sic) directed that the representation filed by the petitioner should be disposed of within 15 days.
In compliance with this direction, the S.S.P.
Jalandhar vide order dated 31.3.1989 Annexure P-9 to the petition, declined the claim of the petitioner by observing that his service record had been found to be unsatisfactory in comparison with that of his contemporaries and that as an appeal against acquittal had been filed in the High Court with respect to the F.I.R. No. 398 dated 29111982, the petitioner's claim to confirmation as Head Constable was not tenable.
The appeal was, however, dismissed by the High Court through judgment dated 151991.
It appears that after his acquittal by the High Court, the department itself initiated an enquiry against the petitioner on which he got an injunction order from the Civil Court restraining the department from going on with the enquiry proceedings.
He also filed C.W.P.
No. 7439 of 1991 praying that as he had now been acquitted by the criminal court, his case for confirmation as Head Constable should be considered and this Court vide its order dated 4.12.1991 held that as the departmental proceedings which had been stayed on an application filed by the petitioner, no meaningful order could be given to him at this stage and direction was issued that the authorities should consider his case in accordance with the decree of the Civil Court within six months and if the authorities felt any difficulty in complying with the order, they could take appropriate proceedings after having the injunction granted by the Civil Court vacated.
It was also made clear that if during the period of six months, the petitioner's case for confirmation was not sent up for consideration, he would be sent for undergoing the intermediate school course commencing on 141992.
As the authorities were unable to get any modification in the interim order granted by the Civil Court which had also been confirmed in appeal by the Additional District Judge, Jalandhar by order dated 711993, the petitioner was sent to the intermediate school course and has also passed the same (August 1992).
It is the admitted case that the suit filed by the petitioner has been dismissed and the appeal up to the High Court too met with the same fate, with the result that the stay granted by the Civil Court in the initiation of the departmental enquiry has also been vacated.
2.
Mr. HS Mann, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has argued that once the petitioner had been acquitted of the criminal charges, a departmental enquiry on the same facts and circumstances could not have been initiated as provided under Rule 163 of the Punjab Police Rules, 1934 (hereinafter called `the Rules') as the case of the petitioner did not fall within the exception of (a) to (e) of the Rules.
He has also cited Union of India and another v. Yogender Singh, 1996(1) S.L.R.
133 : 1996(2) SCT 216, in support of his case.
3.
As against this, Mr. Gill has pointed out that the Civil Suit impugning the action of the authorities in initiating a departmental enquiry after the petitioner's acquittal by the Criminal Court had been dismissed and as such the same relief could not be claimed in the present writ petition.
4.
After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, I am of the opinion that the argument of the State Counsel has merit.
As already noticed above, the petitioner has challenged the initiation of the departmental enquiry after his acquittal by the criminal Court on the ground that Rule 163 precluded such action but the Civil Court having decided the matter the other way and an appeal up to the High Court has also been dismissed, the same relief cannot be granted in this writ petition.
5.
The matter, however, does not rest here.
To my mind, Rule 163 itself precludes a departmental enquiry after a police official has been acquitted by a criminal court except in a few situations set out in clauses (a) and (e).
It is equally true that the petitioner's juniors have been confirmed as Head Constables from 1986 onwards as would be evident from Annexure P-1 to P-7 and the petitioner has continued to languish as an unconfirmed Head Constable despite having been found innocent by the criminal Court.
In para 13 of the writ petition, it has been pointed out that various Head Constables who were charged for more than one criminal charge and had been awarded major punishments, had been confirmed as Head Constables whereas petitioner had not been granted this benefit.
The averments made in this paragraph had not been denied by the respondents.
I am, therefore, of the opinion that though the petitioner cannot be granted any relief in this writ petition, his case should be reconsidered in the light of Rule 163 and the judgment cited by Mr. Mann, referred to above.
It is also directed that should the petitioner be confirmed with retrospective effect, he would also be entitled to all the benefit from the date.
It is also ordered that the enquiry against the petitioner would be completed positively within a period of six months from the date, that a copy of this order is supplied to the respondents provided the petitioner does not delay the proceedings.
In case, the enquiry is not completed within that period and no further extension is sought by the respondents the petitioner shall be deemed to have been confirmed from 1.7.1986 as would be evident from Annexure P-1 to the petition.