SK Jain, JM - Shri Jaisi Ram, father of the present applicant, Shri Satya Parkash, was working as Railway Driver at Pathankot whereas the Applicant himself was working as a Fireman there.
On the retirement of Shri Jaisi Ram on 30121980, Railway Quarter No. 230-C at Pathankot, which was in occupation of Shri Jaisi Ram, as an allottee, was allotted to the applicant.
The applicant was transferred to Ferozepur Lacoshed in the year 1981.
Due to illness of his wife, the applicant made the representation for his transfer back to Pathankot but he was transfered to Jalandhar.
In the meantime his newly born child and wife died with the result that the applicant could not vacate the Quarter nor he was allowed to retain the same in relaxation of the relevant rules in-spite of his representations.
The applicant claimed that he was subjected to discrimination in as much as the cases of S/Shri Devinder Kumar, Fitter and Ved Paul, Driver, were regularised whereas in the case of the applicant, it was refused.
The applicant was ultimate suspended through order dated 931988 (Annexure A-12), although in case of unauthorised occupation of the Quarter, penal rent could be recovered from the applicant and his eviction could be secured under the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971.
On the day of suspension itself, the applicant was served with a charge sheet (Annex.
A-13) to which the applicant replied on 2531988 (Annex.
A-14).
In his reply, the applicant admitted that the Quarter was still in his occupation and explained that he was posted to different places during the years 1981 to 1985 during which period he lost his wife also.
The applicant accepted the charge that he had retained the Quarter in an unauthorised manner since 281981.
He further stated that there was no necessity for further enquiry but also claimed that no reply was received by him in response to his representation dated 16121987 (see Annexure A-15) dated 281988.
The applicant was ultimately removed from service on 16888 vide Annexure A-1 (English version Annexure A-1/A).
The applicant filed an appeal against the order of dismissal which was rejected on 26101988 (vide Annexure A-2).
The applicant has assailed the order of suspension (Annexure A-12), order of removal from service (Annexure A-1) and the order rejecting his appeal (Annexure A-2).
2-3.
The respondents contended the case of the applicant raising the preliminary objection that the applicant had filed a Review petition before the General Manager, Northern Railway, New Delhi against the order passed by the Appellate Authority (Annexure-2) and that the Review Petition was still pending when the present OA was filed.
It was claimed that the Application could not have been filed till the disposal of the Review Petition.
On merits, it was pleaded that the applicant remained in unauthorised possession of the Government Quarter for more than four years in spite of the fact that his representations for the regularisation of his occupation of the Quarter were rejected and he was also warned that in case he failed to vacate the premises, action would be taken against him under the railway Discipline and Appeal rules and also under the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971.
According to the respondents, it has become necessary to initiate disciplinary action against the applicant as he had continued unauthorised occupation of the Quarter in dispute and had also disobeyed the orders of the superior authorities to vacate the same.
It was denied that the applicant was subjected to any discrimination.
The respondent further claimed that in addition to charging of penal rent and eviction proceedings under the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971, action could also be taken against the applicant under the Discipline and Appeal rules for disobedience of the orders of the superior authorities.
The imposition of punishment of removal from service was justified on the plea that the same was imposed after providing the applicant an opportunity of defending himself in the inquiry.
4.
The primary question for determination in this case is whether unauthorised occupation of Government accommodation and non-vacation of the same despite order to that effect amounts to misconduct.
In "BR Venkappayya v. State of Mysore, 1972 SLR 59, it was held by a Division Bench of the Mysore High Court that a Govt. employee in occupation of Govt. accommodation, upon transfer, is bound by the rule to vacate the same on pain of coercive steps being taken to evict him and rents at rate being recovered from his salary.
It was further held that if it is not misconduct, it cannot be converted into misconduct, by an unnecessary order being made to do something which the rule itself requires the person to do.
If it is regarded as misconduct, the rule itself prescribed the punishment viz. forcible eviction and collection of rents at penal rates.
It was observed that making a separate order to obey the rule and then to hold a disciplinary enquiry for disobedience thereof, in addition to levying penal rent, will be either a totally invalid action of trying to punish something which is not misconduct or imposing two punishments in respect of the same misconduct.
It was held that the mandate disobeyed is that the rule and further that separate disciplinary proceedings, were incompetent.
Following the dictum in BR Venkappayya's case (supra), it ws held by the Ahemdabad Bench of the Central Administrative Tribunal in "Abdulmohit Mustakikhan v Union of India, A.T.R.
1987(1) CAT 567 that removal from service for failure to vacate the Government Quarter after transfer from one station to another is uncalled for.
Ahmedabad Bench of the Tribunal reiterated the same view in "Naval Singh v. Union of India and ors., 1988(6) Administrative Tribunal Cases 928.
Similarly, the Allahabad Bench of the Central Administrative Tribunal in "Hemendra Nath Mishra v Union of India and ors.," 1990(2) SLJ (CAT) 393, adopted the same view which was expressed by the Ahmedabad Bench of the Tribunal.
It was held therein that if it was impermissible to initiate disciplinary proceedings against a Govt. servant for unauthorised occupation instead of taking a recourse to the eviction proceedings under the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants), Act, 1971, it is even more impermissible to suspend him as a short-cut for securing eviction.
The Bhubaneswar Bench of the Central Administrative Tribunal in "Purna Chanddra Sahoo v. State of Orissa," 1990(2) SLJ (CAT) 482 also held that non-vacation of Government accommodation cannot be treated as misconduct.
The Patna Bench of the Central Administrative Tribunal in "Dukhan Ram v. SK Vij and ors.," 1987(2) SLJ (CAT) 390 held that unauthorised retention of Govt. accommodation is not misconduct and that attempt of the railway authorities to oust the application from the railway quarters by means of disciplinary proceedings without taking recourse to normal eviction proceeding was certainly intended to be as shortcut to achieve the desired result which had to be viewed with disapproval.
Again in "Saraj Ahmed v. Union of India," A.T.R.
1990(1) C.A.T.
85, the same Bench held that disciplinary proceedings retorted to enforce the eviction of the applicant from the railway quarter resulting in removal from service could not be sustained and were accordingly quashed.
In that case also (OA 370 of 1988) the order of removal from service was challenged and it was found that since the disciplinary proceeding was not being taken on account of actual misconduct or for lack of integrity and the orders of removal had been passed only to get the Government quarter vacated, the order of removal could not be sustained and was quashed.
Before parting with the case, we would also like to take notice of a decision of the Madras Bench in "S Ramalingam v. The Divisional Mech.
Engineer, Southern Railway," 1989(1) Administrative Tribunal Judgment 86.
It may appear that a contrary view was expressed therein in as much as it was observed that unauthorised occupation of Quarter may be taken as misconduct.
A careful reading of the facts will reveal that in that case, limited question for determination was about suspension.
Dealing with rule 5 of the Railway servants Discipline and Appeal Rules, it was observed that the said rule enabled the placing of a Railway servant under suspension where disciplinary proceedings were contemplated.
In that case also, the impugned order of suspension was passed in contemplation of disciplinary proceedings which were perhaps based on the charge of non-vacation of Government accommodation.
After the filing of the Application, disciplinary proceedings were in fact initiated and during the pendency of the application, proceedings had culminated in the imposition of penalty of Censure.
The question for determination before the Bench related only to suspension in contemplation of disciplinary proceedings.
The proposition whether non-vacation of unauthorised occupation of the government accommodation amounted to misconduct or not, was not directly in issue in that case.
It was notice therein that the applicant had not chosen to question the disciplinary proceedings either at the stage of initiation or after that and only the order of suspension had been assailed.
In the circumstances, it cannot be taken that a contrary view was expressed in S Ramalingam's case (supra).
In the circumstances, we are of the considered view that the applicant in the case could not be removed from service on the charge of misconduct based on his not vacating the Govt. accommodation which was in his possession as an unauthorised occupant.
5.
For the reasons, stated above, we conclude that non-vacation of Government accommodation and being in unauthorised occupation of the same could not be treated as misconduct and that the disciplinary proceedings resulting in removal from the service of the applicant could not be taken against the applicant.
Accordingly we quash the order of suspension dated 931988 (Annexure A-12), the order of removal from service dated 681988 (Annexure A-1) and the order passed by the Appellate Authority dated 261088 (Annexure A-2) and direct that the applicant be reinstated in service.
He will also be entitled to all the consequential benefits including back wages.
Compliance with the direction be made by the respondents within one month of the receipt of the copy of this order.
Appliation allowed.