JS Sekhon, J - The sole controversy in this writ petition is, whether the seniority of the Kanungos posted in different districts of Haryana State for promotion to the posts of Naib Tehsildars would be determined on the basis of Rule 12 of the Punjab Kanungo Service Rules, 1945 (hereinafter referred to as the Rules) as applicable to the State of Haryana from the date of their substantive appointment in district wise cadre or it should be governed by the continuous length of service as Kanungos serving in different districts irrespective of the dates of their confirmation, as per instructions issued in the year 1974 by the then Commissioner of Hissar Division.
2.
In brief, the factual matrix of the case is that the petitioner was confirmed as Kanungo in District Hissar under Rule 12 of the above-referred Rules with effect from 441969, whereas Respondents 4 to 15 serving in Districts of Mohindergarh, Gurgaon, Sirsa were confirmed later on in point of time, but these respondents were given preference in promotion to the posts of Naib Tehsildars/vis-a-vis the petitioner on the ground of their continuous length of service.
The grouse of the petitioner is that departmental instructions cannot dislodge the mandate contained in Rule 12 of the statutory rules in the matter of seniority of the Kanungos inter se from the date of their substantive appointment as such.
On other words, the case of the respondents is that although the seniority of Kanungos inter se in every district is governed by Rule 12 of the Rules from the date of their substantive appointment, but through departmental instructions, Commissioners of concerned Divisions are ignoring the spirit of this Rule by providing that continuous length of service of Kanungos serving in different districts should be considered for determining their inter se seniority for the purpose of their promotion to the posts of Naib Tehsildars.
3.
In the return filed by Shri Yogeshwar Sahal, Commissioner, Hissar Division on behalf of Respondent 1 to 3, the above-referred circular of the Commissioner, Hissar Division, in the year 1974 regarding determination of seniority in intra district cadres of the Kanungoas being governed by the continuous length of service was justified stating that in some districts junior officials are confirmed earlier in view of the vacation of permanent vacancies, but in other districts some time a senior official having more continuous length of service is not confirmed due to non availability of a permanent vacancy.
4.
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties besides perusing the record.
Rule 7 of the said rules reads as under :-  "7.
The service shall comprise the posts shown in appendix 'A' and all the Kanungos in a district shall effect the constitute a separate cadre; Provides that nothing in these rules shall affect the right of Government to make additions to or reductions in the service of posts specified in Appendix 'A' either permanently or temporarily."
Appendix 'A' shows the number of vacancies and different categories of Kanungos in the then districts of Hissar, Rohtak, Gurgoan etc. A bare glance through Rule 7 and Appendix 'A' leaves no doubt that all the Kanungos in a district constitute a separate cadre.
The question then arises, whether the inclusion of the name of petitioner in the list of Kanungo candidates with effect from 31.10.1972 of Hissar district maintained in the Directorate of land Records, Haryana (Annexure P4) would amount to concluding that the petitioner and other persons mentioned therein have become members of the State Cadre.
This assertion of the petitioner in the writ petition is misconceived as obviously it does not amount to merging the district-wise cadre of Kanungos in the State cadre of Haryana by any stretch of imagination.
On the other hand, it is maintained in order to have supervision over the posting and confirmation of Kanungo candidates in different districts of Haryana.
5.
Thus, under these circumstances, although Rule 12 provides that seniority of the members of the Service in each class of cadre specified in Appendix 'A' shall be determined on the basis of date of substantive appointment in that class, yet all the same, it would be of no consequence in determining the inter-district.
Seniority of the candidates posted in various districts.
The mere factum that according to Rule 15 of the Rules the Kanungos or members of the Service shall be governed by Civil Service Rules (Punjab) or general rules framed by the Government, as modified from time to time, in the matter of leave, pension and other matters, not specifically provided in these Rules, is of no consequence as the Punjab Civil Services Rules or other general rules have no specific provision regarding the determination of the seniority of different district-wise cadre of Kanungos in the matter of their promotion to the posts of Naib Tehsildars.
6.
On the other hand, the only logical and rationale criteria on which the seniority between the members of the different inter district cadres of Kanungos could have been determined for the purpose of promotion to the posts of Naib Tehsildars would be the length of continuous service in district-wise cadre of Kanungos in the State of Haryana.
If that is so, then Respondents 4 to 15 are certainly having more continuous service than the petitioner.
Consequently, it cannot be said that promotions of Respondents 4 to 15 are not in order or had resulted in arbitrariness or discrimination qua the petitioner.
7.
No other point has been urged by the learned counsel for the petitioner.
8.
For the foregoing reasons, there being no merit in this petition, it is hereby dismissed but without any order as to costs.
Petition dismissed.