RS Mongia, J - The sole question that arises in the present writ petition is whether on amendment of a rule or on promulgation of a new rule which repeals the earlier rule and fixes a quota for filling up the posts amongst the promotees and direct recruits (whereas there is no quota for the direct recruits at all in the earlier rules) such a quota would be applicable to the vacancies which arise after the amendment/promulgation of the rules or it has to be applied taking into consideration the strength of the cadre on the date of the amendment/promulgation of the rules.
2.
The answer to the above question is that the quota which has been prescribed under the amended or the new rules, would be applicable to the vacancies arising after the amendment/promulgation of the new rules without taking into consideration the number of posts held by promotees prior to the enforcement of new Rules.
3.
It is not necessary to give the detailed facts of the case.
Suffice it to mention the petitioner Nos. 1 to 3 were promoted to the posts of Head Analyst in the department of Food and Supplies in the State of Haryana on various dates and petitioner Nos. 4 to 8 were appointed to the posts of Junior Analysts in the same department.
The conditions of their service were governed by the statutory rules framed under Article 309 of the Constitution of India, known as the Haryana Food an Supplies Department (State Services) Class III Rules, 1968 (hereinafter called the 1968 Rules).
According to Rule 2 of 1968 rules, the post of Assistant Food and Supplies Officer in the department was to be filled by promotion only and not by direct recruitment.
According to this rule, 80% of the total vacancies of the posts of Assistant Food and Supplies Officers were to be filled in by promotion from amongst the Inspector of Food and Supplies and the remaining 20% were to be filled in by promotion form the pool comprising of (a) all posts in Assistant scale of pay; and (b) Head Analyst.
There was a roster also providing as to how the vacancies of the posts of the Assistant Food and Supplies Officers from amongst the above categories were to be filled by promotion.
A new set of rules known as Haryana Food and Supplies Department Sub Offices (Group C) Rules, 1982 (hereinafter called the 1982 Rules) were promulgated under Article 309 of the Constitution of India and were published in the Government Gazette on 28th September, 1982 1982 Rules cover the posts of Junior Analyst, Head Analyst, Inspector and Assistant Food and Supplies Officer.
It was for the first time that 1982 Rules provided a quota for direct recruits for filling up the post of Assistant Food and Supplies Officer.
Under Rule 9(c) of 1982 Rules, it was provided that 67% posts of the Assistant Food and Supplies Officers were to be filled in by method of promotion from amongst the Inspectors, Head Analysts, etc., and 33% of the posts of Assistant Food and Supplies Officers were to be filled in by direct recruits.
The manner of filling up the posts was provided in a roster, which is Appendix E to 1982 Rules.
This roster provides a cycle of 22 vacancies of Assistant Food and Supplies Officers and the various categories of Officers are mentioned against the roster points from whom the posts are to be filled.
It may be mentioned that in the roster, 7th and 18th points in a cycle of 22 are meant for Head Analyst.
For ready reference Rule 9(c) of 1982 Rules is reproduced below :-  "9(c) in the case of Assistant Food and Supplies Officers : (i) 67% by promotion from amongst Inspectors, Head Analysts, Ministerial Staff working at Headquarters and the Ministerial staff working in the field in the manner as provided in Appendix 'E' and shall be repeated accordingly thereafter.
Note :- The ministerial staff to be considered for promotion will be as follows :- Ministerial staff working at Headquarters :- Assistants, Senior Scale Stenographers and Accounts; Ministerial Staff working in the field : Assistants, Statistical Assistant and Accountants; Their inter-se seniority for the purpose of promotions shall be determined on the basis of their continuous appointment as such; and (iii) 33% by direct recruitment;" 4.
It is the case of the petitioner that direct recruitment to the extent of 33% of the vacancies under 1982 Rules is permissible only against the vacancies of the posts of Assistant Food and Supplies Officers which arose the promulgation of 1982 Rules, i.e. 26th September, 1982.
According to the petitioner, what the department was doing was that they were filling the posts by direct recruitment in excess of their quota by taking into consideration the cadre strength of the posts of Assistant Food and Supplies Officers on 26th September, 1982 and were giving 33% of the posts to the direct recruits on the basis of the strength of the cadre and not on the basis of the vacancies which arose after 26th September, 1982.
To illustrate this point, the petitioner has given breakup in the writ petition of the vacancies of the posts of Assistant Food and Supplies Officers which arose after 26th September, 1982 and how these have been filled.
It has been mentioned as follows :-  Vacancies available after 2691982 42 (i) Filled by the recruitment 20 (ii) Filled by promotion 5 (iii) Remained unfilled 7 According to the petitioner if 67% of the vacancies were to given to the promotees and 33% to the direct recruits, then by the direct recruitment only 14 vacancies could be filled and the balance of 28 should have been filled by promotion.
5.
The learned counsel for the respondents submitted that the quota of 67 :33 between the promotees and the direct recruits had to be applied by counting the vacancies from the strength of the cadre and since all the posts upto 26th September, 1982 had been filled by the promotees, the direct recruits were to be given 33% posts of the total posts cadre posts already filled upto 26th September, 1982 and according to him, it was wrong to confine the quota only to the vacancies which arose after 26th September, 1982.
It has been further pleaded by the respondents and also submitted by their learned counsel that provision for appointment by direct recruitment to the extent of 33% was introduced by way of draft Service Rules of 1977 and these rules superseded the provisions of the Rules of 1968.
These draft Rules of 1977 were approved by the Government on 2nd May, 1977 and were followed to regulate the service conditions of the incumbents till the rules were finalised in the year 1982.
6.
In the present of the 1968 Rules, the draft Rules of 1977 till they were promulgated in the year 1982, could not be enforced.
There is nothing on the record to show that there is any conscious decision of the Government to enforce 1977 draft Rules till they were promulgated, so that the Rules cold be taken as executive instructions.
Even if such a decision was there, I am of the opinion that such executive instructions could not override 1968 Rules till the draft Rules became enforceable as Rules by promulgation in the Official Gazette.
That being so, any direct recruitment made on the basis of the draft Rules of 1977 till the date of promulgation of 1982 Rules, would be illegal.
Prior to 1982 Rules, all promotion etc. had to be carried out in accordance with 1968 Rules.
7.
As far as the contention of the learned counsel for the respondents that the vacancies which fell after the enforcement of 1982 Rules, have to be filled by taking into consideration the number of vacancies for the direct recruits to be worked out on the basis of the cadre strength already existing upto 26th September, 1982, has no force.
If this contention is to be accepted then all promotees beyond 67% on 26th September, 1982 would become in excess of their quota.
1982 Rules have to be enforced with effect from 26th September, 1982 and the vacancies which arose thereafter have to be filled in the ratio of 67 :33 amongst promotees, and the direct recruits.
The promotees and the direct recruits.
The promotees' quota has to be filled in, in accordance with the roster provided in Appendix E to 1982 Rules.
The direct recruitment to the vacancies which have arisen after 26th September, 1982 to the extent of 33% of the vacancies would be valid and the rest of the direct recruitment would not be in accordance with 1982 Rules.
8.
In view of what has been stated above, a directions is issued to the official respondents to fill in the posts of Assistant Food and Supplies Officers in the vacancies which arose after 26th September, 1982 in the ratio of 67 :33 amongst the promotees and the direct recruits.
The promotees would be considered for promotion from the date the vacancies fell in their quota and if they are found suitable they will be promoted from that date with all the consequential benefits.
It will be for the State Government to see that if for giving effect to the above mentioned direction some direct recruits are to make room for the promotees, then the State Government might consider the feasibility of creating supernumerary posts for the direct recruits.
9.
It may further be mentioned that this direction would ensure to other posts also which are covered by 1982 Rules and the quota would be applicable to the vacancies which have arisen after 26th September, 1982 when 1982 Rules were promulgated.
With these directions the writ petition is disposed of, with no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.