RS Mongia, J - The petitioner was working as a Junior Commissioned Officer in the Indian Army and retired as such in the year 1974.
As an ex-serviceman he joined on a Class IV post in the office of Director Tourism Department, Punjab respondent No. 2.
At that time his basic pay was Rs. 168/-.
Rule 720 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume II, (hereinafter called the Rules) provides for the fixation of pay of ex-serviceman who are re-employed in service of the Punjab Government.
Rule 720(a) of the Rules deals with the fixation of pay of the Commissioned Officer in the Military service who obtains an employment in Civil Department after having been granted military pension; whereas Rule 720(b) of the Rules deals with Junior commissioned Officers or other ranks formerly in military service who obtain employment in Civil Department after having granted military pension.
Rule 720(b) of the Rules, which is relevant for the purpose of this case, is quoted below :-  "720(b) When a Junior Commissioned Officer or other rank formerly in military service obtain employment in Civil Department, after having been granted military pension, he shall continue to draw his military pension.
His pay in the Civil post shall be fixed at a stage in the time scale of the Civil post which is equal to the basic pay exclusive of the allowances of any kind drawn at the time of retirement or, if there is no such stage, the stage next below that pay plus personal pay equal to the difference to be absorbed in to next increment, subject to the condition that it shall not in any case be below the minimum or above the maximum of the time-scale of the Civil post in which he is re-employed.
He will be allowed to draw usual annual increments in the time scale of the Civil post."
2.
Vide notification dated 6th April, 1984, published in the Punjab Government, Part I, dated 20th April, 1984, Note I-B was inserted after Note I-A to Clauses (a) and (b) in Rule 720 of the Rules.
Note 1-B reads as under :-  "Note" - 1.B - The existing incumbents who could not exercise their option to switch over to the new pay fixation formula within the period specified in Note 1-A shall be permitted to do so within the period specified in Note 1-A shall be permitted to do so within period of four months from the date of issue of the Punjab Civil Services, Volume II (First Amendment) Rules, 1984, subject to the conditions specified in the aforesaid Note."
3.
The petitioner's case is that the above mentioned amendment was never circulated in the office where he was working and he was never apprised of the same, but after coming to know from his own sources about the above said amendment to Rule 720, he sent his option for fixation of his pay under the new pay fixation formula on 29th August, 1984, vide annexure P-2.
All these years, he had been making representations to the concerned Authorities to act on his option conveyed on 29th August, 1984 and to fix the pay under the new pay fixation formula.
Ultimately, vide his representation date 4th August, 1989 (Annexure P-9) he again submitted that there is no fault of his in not opting within four months of the insertion of Note 1-B, and, therefore, his option should be acted upon.
The concerned Authorities, however, rejected the representation of the petitioner vide order dated 14th September, 1989 (Annexure P-10) and informed him that "The Government regrets its inability to agree to the proposal."
This led to the petitioner's filing the present writ petition.
4.
The learned counsel for the petitioner submits that there was no fault on the part of the petitioner in not submitting the option within four months of the date of notification dated 6th April, 1984, which was the prescribed period under Note 1-B as the concerned Authorities had never brought to the notice of the petitioner that under the new Note 1-B referred to above, he could send his option.
It has been further submitted that even earlier to the insertion of Note 1-B, he was never informed or asked to give his option under the old Rules, the immediate officers of the petitioner recommended his case to the Government that the delay in submitting the option should be condoned.
The petitioner has office which when translated, in substance reads that as the Government had earlier vide Notification No. 6/72/89/1FR(L)/4123, dated 15th January, 1980, had amended Rule 720 and the government had given 4 month's time to the ex-servicemen to submit their options for fixation of their pay according to certain formula, but according to the office where the petitioner was working the copy of the said notification had not been received in the office and due to this fact the instructions were not got noted from the petitioner.
Further when again the amendment was made in the rules by insertion of Note 1-B vide Notification dated 6th April, 1984, the same had also not been received in the office and it was through his own sources that the petitioner had come to know about the notification and had submitted his option which was delayed by about 23 days.
Since there was injustice with the petitioner for no fault of his, it was recommended that the delay of 23 days in submitting the option by the petitioner should be condoned.
5.
Though the petitioner's counsel submitted that there was delay of 23 days in submitting the option by the petitioner, but I find that in fact the Notification dated 6th April, 1984 by which Note 1-B was inserted to Rule 720 of the Rule was in fact published in the Government Gazette dated 20th April, 1984 and it should be from that date that four months period should be counted.
So, accordingly, the petitioner could submit his option by 20th August, 1984, whereas according to the petitioner he had submitted his option on 29th August, 1984, i.e. a delay of about 9 days only.
6.
The petitioner, who is a Class IV employee, could not possibly know that another chance had been given to give option by way of amendment of Rule 720 of the Rules by insertion of Note 1-B.
The immediate Authorities of the petitioner are also admitting that the petitioner was not made known regarding the above mentioned amendment.
In view of these facts, I consider it that in fact there was no delay in submitting the option by the petitioner and in any case it was a fit case where this delay should have been over looked by the Authorities for granting the benefit which the petitioner wanted by giving his option.
7.
In view of what has been stated above, this writ petition succeeds and the impugned order, Annexure P-10 is quashed.
The respondents are directed to consider the option of the petitioner submitted by him on 29th August, 1984 (Annexure P-2) and fix his pay according to the new pay fixation formula and grant him all the consequential benefits of arrears of pay etc. admissible under the Rules, within a period of two months from the receipt of this order.
There shall be no order as to costs.
Orders accordingly.