RS Mongia, J - The petitioners in this writ petition, who are working as Coaches in various games in the Sports Department of the State of Haryana, are claiming pay parity with the District Sports Officers working in the same department.
2.
The case as put forth in the writ petition is that the petitioners are working as Coaches in the Sports Department of the State of Haryana.
The Coaches and the District Sports Officers formed one cadre in the department where they had joint seniority and a post of a Coach and that of the district Sports Officer are interchangeable.
It has been further averred that prior to 1968 the pay scale of Coaches and the District Sports Officers who formed a joint cadre was Rs. 250-500, which was revised to Rs. 300-600 after 1968.
Further it has been stated that with effect from Ist April, 1979, the pay-scale of both Coaches and the District Sports Officers in the joint cadre was revised to Rs. 700-1250 with selection grade of Rs. 750-1450 to 20% posts of the joint cadre of the Coaches and the District Sports Officers.
However, vide order dated 2nd October, 1984 (Annexure P-4) the State Government had revised the grade of District Sports Officers, including the Sports Officer at Headquarters from Rs. 700-1250 to Rs. 800-1600 with effect from 28th September, 1984.
The grievance of the petitioners is that though the Coaches and the District Sports Officers formed one cadre; they had a joint seniority and their posts were interchangeable, yet they had been discriminated against by the State Government, in as much as the pay scales of the district Sports Officers had been revised from Rs. 700-1250 to Rs. 800-1600, whereas the pay scale of Coaches has not been revised.
According to the petitioners this action of the State Government was arbitrary and discriminatory and violative of Article 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
3.
Mr. JL Gupta, Senior Advocate, learned counsel for the petitioners, has submitted that since Coaches and the District Sports Offices formed one joint cadre; they had a joint seniority and their posts were interchangeable and they were getting the same pay scale as the District Sports Officers, the Government could not just revise the pay scales of the post of District Sports Officers and not of Coaches.
According to the learned counsel, the Government must justify as to why while revising the pay scale of the District Sports Officers, the pay scale of Coaches was not revised.
He further submitted that since there was no justification to treat the Coaches differently then the District Sports Officers for the purpose of pay scales and there was no reasonable classification between these two categories of Officers, the action was wholly arbitrary and violative of Article 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
There is force in the submissions of the learned counsel for the petitioners.
4.
On the other hand, Mr. Madan Dev, learned counsel for the State, argued that with effect from 28th September, 1984, when Annexure P-4 was issued, the cadre of the District Sports Officers and that of Coaches was separated and they had a separate seniority from the said date.
Taking into consideration the duties performed by the District Sports Officers, their pay scale was revised.
In the written statement, it has been admitted that prior to the order Annexure P-4, which was issued on 2nd October, 1984, the Coaches and the District Sports Officers had a joint seniority and they formed one cadre.
It has been further stated that it was only the senior most Coach who was made the District Sports Officer and the posts were not interchangeable.
5.
Annexure P-2 with the written statement is gradation list as it existed on January 1, 1983 in the department of Sports, Haryana, wherein I find that the first three officers in the gradation list are District Sports Officers, whereas the officer at No. 4 is a Coach, Officers at Nos. 5 and 6 are again District Sports Officers (Officer at No. 5 has been posted Officer at headquarter) whereas No. 7 is again a Coach.
From this gradation list it is apparent that it was not necessarily that the senior most Coach was being appointed as District Sports Officer.
6.
Mr. JL Gupta, learned counsel for the petitioners, has drawn my attention to Annexure P-3, which is an order of the State Government dated 2nd March, 1984 showing that the post of District Sports Officer and Coach was interchangeable with each other.
Be that as it may, once the Coaches and the District Sports Officers formed joint cadre right prior to 1966 to 1984, the Coaches and District Sports Officers were in the same pay-scale, having a joint cadre and joint seniority, I find no justification not to treat the Coaches equally with the District Sports Officers for the purpose of pay scales.
Once these two categories of posts were held to be equal for the purpose of pay scale, then there cannot be any discrimination between them for the purpose of scales.
Once these two categories of posts were held to be equal for the purpose of pay scale, then there cannot be any discrimination between them for the purpose of revision of pay scales.
I may also mention that the argument of the learned counsel for the State that since these two classes of officers perform different duties, therefore, the pay scale of District Sports Officers was revised, has no force, inasmuch as, as stated above once these two classes were joint for the purpose of seniority and pay scale, then there cannot be any discrimination between them.
Otherwise also, it is the quality and the responsibility of the post which has to be seen.
In no way it can be said that the Coaches were in any way inferior to the District Sports Officers regarding the nature and the quality of the work and duties.
The post of a District Sports Officer is not a higher or a promotional post from the rank of a Coach.
It is not the case of the respondent State that District Sports Officers started performing some different or additional duties which they were not performing prior to issue of order Annexure P-4 dated October, 2, 1984.
7.
In view of what has been stated above, this writ petition is allowed and the State Government is directed to equate Coaches with the District Sports Officers for the purpose of pay scale and the petitioners who were Coaches be granted the same revised pay scale as that of the District Sports Officers from the same date as it was granted to the District Sports Officers.
The arrears of the revised pay scale shall be released within a period of three months from the date of the receipt of this order.
There will be no order as to costs.
Petition allowed.