Bhagabati Prosad Banerjee, J - The subject matter of challenge in CO No. 10495(W) of 1993, is the adverse remarks in the Annual Confidential Report for the year 1991-92, as communicated by the memo, dated 19.6.1992, and the memo, dated 15.1.1993, communicating the rejection of the petitioner's representation dated 1871992, against the adverse report.
2.
The subject matter of CO No. 8411(W) of 1992, is the memo dated July 8, 1992, issued by the Chairman, Calcutta Port Trust, to revert the petitioner from the post of Deputy Land Manager to Assistant Land Manager, and consequential order dated 871992, passed by the Officer-on-Special Duty, Calcutta Port Trust, for reversion of the petitioner.
3.
The subject matter of challenge in CO No. 876(W) of 1992, is the chargesheet under the memo, dated January 20, 1992.
4.
The facts of the case are that the petitioner was appointed as the Assistant Land Manager, Calcutta Port Trust, on August 3, 1970, and that in the hierarchy of the Port Trust, the post of Assistant Land Manager is the post for promotion into the post of Deputy Land Manager, and promotion is given from the post, and that the post of Land Manager is filled up by promotion from the post of Deputy Land Manager.
Before 1980, the post of Land Manager was used to be filled up by direct recruitment from the incumbents in the post of Deputy Land Manager, having prescribed qualifications.
But after 1980, the Calcutta Port Trust adopted a policy to fill up the post of Land Manager by officers brought on deputation having relation and/or acquaintance with the high functionaries of Calcutta Port Trust.
This had, in effect, resulted in the deprivation of the eligible Deputy Land Manager.
In 1986, the petitioner having 16 years experience in the Land Management Department of the Port Trust, became eligible and entitled to promotion to the post of Deputy Land Manager which was kept vacant since 1982.
Between 1987-89, the petitioner was subjected to a disciplinary proceeding on the ground of non- reporting about loan incurred by the petitioner's wife.
It is alleged that this was done with the object to deny promotion to the petitioner and to continue with the policy of filling up the post of Deputy Land Manager by deputationists.
In the proceeding, the petitioner was awarded punishment in the nature of withholding promotion for two years by the Chairman, Calcutta Port Trust, being the Appellate Authority, when the Deputy Chairman was the disciplinary authority of the petitioner.
On June 27, 1990, Calcutta Port Trust adopted a resolution to fill up the post of Land Manager by deputation, failing which by the direct recruitment.
5.
It is stated that in order to withhold promotion, the petitioner was implicated in a CBI enquiry with regard to passing of a plan submitted by M/s SK Oil, on the eve of expiry of the period of his aforesaid punishment, of withholding of promotion for two years which was awarded earlier.
The said enquiry was closed as nothing objectionable and improprer was found.
Thereafter, the Port Trust caused commencement of another CBI enquiry with regard to grant of permission of M/s Lipton (India) Limited for mortgaging their fixed assets of the leasehold land.
6.
The facts and circumstances under which Lipton (India) Limited's representation was disposed of, are set out below.
7.
One Mr. TS Dutta received a representation from Lipton (India) Limited on 1191985.
Then the same was processed by different officers at different levels.
From the note sheet which is produced before this Court, it appears that the petitioner and one A.K.R.
reported to the Assistant Land Manager-I, that "the unauthorised construction as stated by the tenant may be removed during raid.
This may be noted by FSI".
Then several notes and comments were filed by various authorities, and ultimately, a note was put before LI (D- II) by one S.K.S., that "today I have inspected the site when you were also present.
No encroachment was found.
A copy of our property sheet showing the different structures inside the occupation as recently surveyed by M/s HK Sen and Associates is attached.
This is for your information and n.a.
please".
This note was given on 26.12.1986.
8.
Thereafter a further note was given by some other officers before the Assistant Land Manager pointing out that the Assistant Land Manager, namely the petitioner, that there were some unauthorised constructions not covered by the approved plan, and it was shown to them by Shri B Mukherjee, who at the time of the inspection, had requested to remove them.
There was no other violation of the lease terms and they were paying rent regularly, and that from the note dated 27121986, it appears that the rents were paid up to November, 1986, whereupon the petitioner gave a note as the Assistant Land Manager, on 27121986, that "they may remove the encroachment or regularise the same by payment of penalty".
9.
Thereafter, a joint note was prepared by an Inspector, BCB and the petitioner, to place before the Assistant Land Manager-I, after making inspection and having looked into the matter and pointed out that the plans had not covered all the structures and that the party wanted some more time to enable them to search the records and produce the approved plan for a few other structures.
Ultimately, the petitioner, on Feburary 14, 1987, gave a note before his higher authorities that after perusing the plans, he considered that the structures to be functional, but being without approval were unauthorised and stated that the Port Trust have to decide whether the Port Trust may issue permission to mortgage with the said lacuna, and ultimately opined that the Port Trust may issue the permission and take up regularisation of those structures or their removal subsequently.
The tenants proposed to raise capital for their operations and their applications might become delayed without the permission.
Ultimately, the Land Manager was informed that "the lease term will expire in two years time in 1989.
Our permission for mortgaging leasehold interest could only be for the residual period.
I wonder whether this will help".
This note was given on 1621987.
Then the files passed through several officers who were placed there and it appears that on 1821987, the Assistant Land Manager No.
I, ordered lease for 30 years from 181960, with two options for renewal for 30 years each and whereunder the petitioner had given a note that a plan was placed below showing the unauthorised constructions.
The reasons for which the tenant could not immediately remove the structures were stated in their letters which were in the file.
It was stated by the petitioner that the permission by Port Trust to mortgage clearly indicates that the same will be valid for the period of lease only.
The Land Manager had discussed the matter with the representatives of M/s Lipton (India) Limited, and that in the note dated 2021987, it was observed that on removal of the sheds further action for obtaining approval to the permission for mortgage for leasehold interest would be taken up.
Ultimately, before the petitioner, a note was put by the Subordinate Officer, GCD, that he had inspected the site and stated that the party had removed major portions of the unauthorised structures, but some structures were yet to be removed.
The removal work was still under progress.
Whereupon, the petitioner had put up a note on 23.2.1987, that "you may like to see the above report.
This has reference to noting on pre-page.
Permission to mortgage may now issue after administrative sanction".
Whereupon, one Mr. A Bhattacharya and the petitioner jointly put up a brief note for obtaining administrative sanction.
Ultimately, Sri A Bhattacharjee, the Land Manager, had, on consideration of the facts and circumstances of the case and on perusal of several notes, put up a note before the Deputy Chairman that permission for mortgage to M/s Lipton (India) Limited be granted on usual terms and conditions, and the said note of the Land Manager was placed before the Deputy Chairman and the Deputy Chairman approved the same.
The draft was put for according permission and accordingly permission was granted by the Deputy Chairman on the basis of the final note given by the Land Manager.
10.
With regard to the grant of permission in favour of M/s Lipton (India) Limited, the petitioner was served with the charge sheet, which is the subject matter of CO No. 876(W) of 1992.
The said charge was :  "Shri Basanta Basu while functioning as Asstt.
Land Manager under the Land Manager, Calcutta Port Trust, during the year 1986-88, committed gross misconduct inasmuch as he recommended for according permission to M/s Lipton (India) Ltd. for mortgaging the CPT Land acquired by M/s Lipton (India) Ltd. on lease without ensuring the removal of unauthorised structures from the said land and without realising any penalty and thereby favoured the party.
Sri Basanta Basu, thus failed to maintain absolute integrity and devotion to duty and thereby contravened Regulation 3(I) of the Calcutta Port Trust Employees' (Conduct) Regulation, 1987."
11.
This charge sheet was issued on January 20, 1992.
The purported involvement of the petitioner in respect of the said matter was at a point of time when the petitioner was the Assistant Land Manager and the charge sheet has been issued after the petitioner has been promoted to the post of Deputy Land Manager.
In this connection, Mr. Saktinath Mukherjee, learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioners, relied on the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of State of Punjab v. Dewan Chuni Lal, reported in AIR 1970 SC 2086, wherein the Supreme Court held that after a Government servant was allowed to cross efficiency bar, the adverse remarks or materials prior to the date of crossing the efficiency bar could not be taken into consideration subsequently for the purpose of initiating a departmental proceeding as the crossing of the efficiency bar must be regarded as giving him a clean bill up to that date and that when he was given a clean bill in respect of anything done, the same could not be reopened after the crossing of the efficiency bar.
12.
The Supreme Court in the case of Baidyanath Mahapatra v. State of Orissa, reported in AIR 1989 SC 2218 : 1989 Lab IC 2089, it was held (at p. 2091 of LIC) :  "When a Government servant is promoted to a higher post on the basis of merit and selection, adverse entries if any contained in his service record lose their significance and those remain on record as part of past history.
It would be unjust to curtail the service career of Government servant on the basis of those entries in the absence of any significant fall in his performance after his promotion.
It is also settled view that it is not permissible to prematurely retire a Government servant on the basis of adverse entries, representations against which are not considered and disposed of."
13.
Similar view was taken by the Supreme Court in a number of cases.
A point was also taken by the respondents in this case that there were effective alternative remedy for getting the relief.
The Supreme Court, in the case of Hirday Narain v. IT Officer, reported in AIR 1971 SC 33, held that if the High Court entertains the writ petition and gives hearing on merits, the said petition could not thereafter be rejected on the ground that statutory remedy was not availed of.
14.
In AT Venkateswaran v. RS Wadhwani, reported in AIR 1961 SC 1506, it was held that the rule that the party who applies for the issue of a high prerogative writ, should before he approaches the Court have exhausted other remedies open to him under the law is not one which bars the jurisdiction of the High Court to entertain the petition or to deal with it, but is rather a rule which the Courts have laid down for exercise of their discretion, and that the matter is one for proper exercise of discretion and that no inflexible rules could be laid down.
In this connection, the House of Lords, in the case of O `Relly v. Macman, 1983(2) AC 237, have given a new approach on the part of the Courts to judicial review with a view to control potential abuse of powers of large number of statutory bodies which were brought in the ambit of public law and judicial review.
In this case, a number of prisoners were seeking to establish their disciplinary decision by the Board of Visitors removing remission were ultra vires as the Board had acted in breach of natural justice.
Some prisoners sought a declaration of nullity by instituting ordinary action, some by a writ and some by originating summons.
The issue that came up before the House of Lords was that whether it was an abuse of the process of the Court to seek declaration by ordinary action and not by judicial review.
Lord Diplock, giving the unanimous judgment of the House of Lords, said that it would ".... as a general rule, be contrary to public policy, and as such the abuse of the process of the Court to permit a prisoner seeking to establish that a decision of a public authority infringed rights to which he was entitled to protection under public law to proceed by way of ordinary action and by this means to evade the provisions of Order 53 for the protection of such authorities".
The power conferred in England under Order 53, Rule 1 is not so wide as in the case of the provision of Article 32 or Article 226 of the Constitution.
The Order 53, Rule 1, provided the power of the Court to issue order of Mandamus, Prohibition or Certiorari.
Accordingly, it can be said that the remedy provided under the Service Rules or remedy provided by filing a suit or pursuing any other remedy, could not supersede the remedy provided under Article 226 of the Constitution.
When the Constitution has provided a remedy, which is a public law remedy, in that event, no other remedy can curtail, override or supersede the power of the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution.
15.
Accordingly, in the facts and circumstances of the case, the alternative remedy cannot be treated as a bar to get the relief as prayed for.
16.
In the instant case, admittedly, the Enquiry Officer has travelled beyond the charges and that he had been found guilty in respect of some charges in respect of which no charge was there in the charge sheet.
17.
In Sur Enamel and Stamping Works Limited v. The Workmen, reported in AIR 1963 SC 1914, the Supreme Court held that the order of dismissal was illegal in view of the fact that the charge being for causing damage to the property and the Enquiry Officer's report being in respect of the same, the dismissal order was passed for something else and that it was sufficient ground for setting aside the order of dismissal.
Accordingly the Enquiry Officer and the disciplinary authority had to confine themselves to the charges which are only material and relevant for the purpose of imposition of penalty.
A penalty of dismissal or any other penalty could not be imposed on the basis of some allegations which were not incorporated in the charge sheet.
Accordingly, the writ application succeeds and the order of reversion of the petitioner from the post of Deputy Land Manager to the post of Assistant Land Manager cannot be sustained and accordingly set aside.
18.
The subject matter of the writ application in CO No. 10495(W) of 1993, is the rejection of the petitioner's representation for expunging the adverse remarks passed by the competent authority and communicated by the Secretary, Port Trust, dated January 15, 1993, is concerned, the same was rejected without giving any reasons and/or grounds.
In the annual confidential report for the year 1991-92 it was alleged that the petitioner did not pay attention to the details and was inclined to be superficial and his judgment is also superficial, his presentation of the case is just good enough and his ability in noting and drafting was average.
It was also alleged that he was quite often slow in disposal of work.
Against this adverse remark, he made a detailed representation running about four and half pages and that representation was rejected without disclosing any reasons and/or any grounds.
19.
The Supreme Court in the case of Sukhdeo v. Commissioner, Amravati Division, reported in 1996(5) SCC 103 : 1996(3) SCT 613 (SC), have held that the controlling officer has to use diligence in making remarks.
It would be salutary that the controlling officer, before writing adverse remarks would give prior sufficient opportunity in writing by informing the officer concerned of the defects he noticed for improvement.
In spite of the opportunity given if the officer does not improve, then it would be an obvious fact and would form material basis in respect of the adverse remark.
It was also mentioned that had he been given prior opportunity in writing for improvement and yet the same was not availed of so that it would form part of the record.
The power exercised by the controlling officer in that case was found to be illegal.
The adverse remarks have a very important role to play in the service career of the employee.
The adverse remarks may entail compulsory retirement and the same also may visit withholding of promotion.
If the service record is destroyed for adverse remark, in that event he would not be entitled to promotion.
Further, in my view, the adverse remarks must not be based on vague allegation.
The remarks must have some actual or factual basis and that this basis must be disclosed not simply by saying that one had not paid attention into details or that he is superficial.
These are vague statements.
It is needless to point out that the adverse remarks, if any, must be specific and must be self-explanatory.
The disciplinary authority have no jurisdiction in recording its personal opinion without any actual or factual basis.
The disciplinary authority may have likes and dislikes, but the disciplinary authority must remember that while exercising the power, it must do so in the interest of the administration which is the interest of the public.
The officer should show objectivity, impartiality and fair assessment without any prejudice whatsoever and highest sense of responsibility to inculcate in the officers devotion to duty, honesty and integrity so as to improve excellence of individual officers, lest the officers get demoralised which would be deleterious to the efficacy and efficiency of public service.
When an officer makes remarks, he must eschew making vague remarks causing jeopardy to the service of the subordinate officer.
He must bestow careful attention to collect all correct and truthful information and give necessary particulars when he seeks to make adverse remarks against the subordinate officer whose career prospects and service were in jeopardy.
This principle is well-settled.
20.
Further, in my view, the representation in the adverse remarks must be disposed by giving a speaking order.
The employees concerned have a right to reasons for consideration or rejection of the representation.
The Supreme Court in the case of State of West Bengal v. Atul Krishna Shaw, reported in AIR 1990 SC 2205, reiterated that giving of reasons is an essential element of administration of justice.
A right to reasons is therefore an indispensable part of a sound system of judicial review.
The reasoned decision is not only for the purpose of showing that the citizen is receiving justice, but also a valid discipline for the authorities concerned.
Therefore, the statement of reasons is one of the essentials of justice.
21.
Giving of reasons is a good safeguard against sheer arbitrariness.
Speaking orders are necessary commitment of the rules of natural justice.
Even quasi-judicial orders or administrative orders are liable to be quashed in the absence of reasoned orders.
In Gurdial Singh Fijji v. State of Punjab, reported in 1979(2) SCC 368 : 1979 Lab IC 1186, it was observed that it should be understood that reasons to be given are indeed links between the materials on which certain consequences are based and the actual conclusion and consequently a speaking order giving reasons is a must.
Accordingly, the adverse remarks based in the Annual Confidential Report, 1991-92, cannot be sustained in view of the principle laid down by the Supreme Court mentioned above.
22.
Further, the order rejecting the representation filed by the petitioner by the competent authority, communicated by the Secretary, dated January 15, 1993, is also set aside.
It has not disclosed any reasons and/or the grounds for rejecting the adverse remarks which could not be sustained in the facts and circumstances of this case.
Accordingly, the writ application in CO No. 10495(W) of 1993, succeeds, and the Annual Confidential Report for the year 1991-92 and the order passed by the Chairman rejecting the representation is set aside.
23.
The subject matter of challenge in CO No. 8411 (W) of 1992, is memo dated 871992 issued by the Chairman, Calcutta Port Trust to revert the petitioner from the post of Deputy Land Manager to the post of Assistant Land Manager and the consequential order dated 871992, passed by the Officer-on Special Duty.
The adverse remarks which were communicated and the rejection of the representation against the said has already been set aside and in that view of the matter and the setting aside of the order of punishment was passed in disciplinary proceeding having been set aside.
On the basis of the dossiers, the selection committee placed the name of the petitioner at the top of the promotion to the post of Deputy Land Manager with effect from August 19, 1992, on probation for two years, and accordingly, the petitioner was promoted to the post after obtaining necessary clearance from the Chief Vigilance Officer.
So the petitioner was promoted on the basis of his merit and performance as recorded in his A.C.R.
till August 1991, and in consideration of the result of the CBI enquiry relating to M/s Lipton (India) Limited and M/s SK Oil.
24.
In this connection, the plea of giving permission to the petitioner (on) sympathetic consideration, appears to have no factual basis and is contrary to the memo of promotion dated August 19, 1991.
After the promotion, the petitioner was not communicated about any adverse entry in his A.C.R for the period 1991-92.
Before the expiry of the period, the Deputy Chairman communicated the adverse remarks to the petitioner on 19.6.1992, and directed the petitioner to submit representation within one month from the date of communication.
Before the expiry of the period, representation was filed and the same was rejected.
There was inordinate delay in this matter.
The action taken on the basis of Entry `C' giving opportunity to submit representation and before the expiry of the period, the withholding right to submit representation is violative of the principles of natural justice.
As the adverse remarks have been set aside, in that event, the order of reversion cannot also stand, the same is also set aside.
25.
Accordingly, the writ applications succeed for the foregoing reasons and the order of reversion from the post of Deputy Land Manager to Assistant Land Manager stands set aside as the basis of such reversion no longer exists in view of the reasoning given above.
26.
Accordingly, the writ applications are allowed.
In view of this order if any appointment is given the same shall abide by the result of the writ application.
The authorities are directed to consider this aspect of the matter.
The learned Advocate for the respondents has prayed for stay of operation of the above order.
The same prayer for stay was considered and rejected.
Applications allowed.