GS Singhvi, J - This is petition to quash Annexure P.6 issued by the Secretary, House Allotment Committee, Chandigarh, rejecting the request of Shri GS Batta for retention of the Government House No. IV/996, Sector 7-B, and for directing the respondents to allot a suitable accommodation to the petitioner in accordance with the Government Residences (Chandigarh Administration Pool) Allotment Rules, 1972.
2.
The petitioner is presently working as a Senior Assistant in the Office of the Director of Public Instruction (Schools).
Shri Gurcharan Singh Batta, father of the petitioner was an employee of the High Court of Punjab and Haryana.
He retired from service w.e.f.
31.1.1996 while holding the post of Superintendent Grade-I During his employment, Shri Gurcharan Singh Batta was allotted House No. IV/1996, Sector 7-B, Chandigarh.
After his retirement, Shri Gurcharan Singh Batta made an application on 23.3.1996 to the Secretary, House Allotment Committee for permission to retain the government accommodation allotted to him.
He repeated this request vide application dated 15.6.1996.
The House Allotment Committee rejected the same as would appear from letter Annexure P-6 dated 19.9.1996 written by the Secretary, House Allotment Committee.
Simultaneously action was initiated against Shri Gurcharan Singh under Section 5 of the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971.
Upon this the petitioner's father vacated the house.
However, the petitioner continued to pursue and press his claim for allotment of house under the Rules of 1972 and having failed in his attempt to persuade the respondents to allot suitable accommodation to him in accordance with the Rules of 1972 the petitioner has invoked the jurisdiction of this Court for issuance of a mandamus to the respondents to allot him appropriate government accommodation.
3.
Shri Paramjit Batta assailed the decision of the House Allotment Committee rejecting the claim of the petitioner and his father to be allowed to retain House No. IV/996, Sector 7-B or to allot some other house to the petitioner in accordance with the Rules of 1972.
Learned counsel argued that as the applications were submitted by the petitioner and his father prior to the coming into force of the Government Residences (Chandigarh Administration General Pool) Allotment Rules, 1996, the same should have been considered and decided in accordance with the Rules of 1972 and the failure of the respondents to do so is clearly illegal.
Shri Batta argued that decision of the House Allotment Committee is contrary to Article 14 of the Constitution because in cases of many other employees allotment of houses have been made under the old rules.
He placed reliance on the orders dated 14.11.1996 and 9.12.1996 passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal in OA No. 727-CH/96 and in OA No. 843-CH/96 respectively.
4.
We have thoughtfully considered the submission of Shri Batta but are unable to agree with that the House Allotment Committee acted illegally in refusing to accept the request made by Shri Gurcharan Singh Batta and the petitioner to allow them to occupy House No. IV/996, Sector 7-B or to allot some other house to the petitioner.
The issue relating to allotment of houses under the Rules of 1972 came to be examined by a Full Bench of this Court in Court on its own motion v. Adviser to the Administrator, UT Chandigarh and others, 1995(2) PLR 450.
One of the issues which was considered by the Full Bench related to the allotment of residential accommodation to the family member of the retired government servants who is also a government servant.
After considering the issue, this Court held :-  "It has also been urged by Mr. Sarin that the policy of the UT Administration to allot residential accommodation to a family member of a retired government servant, provided the family member was also a government servant, did not have the sanction of the rules, and, as such, the instructions on that point could not be enforced.
There is merit in the stand of the learned counsel.
Admittedly, the rules do not envisage the kind of allotments that have been made with respect to the family members of retiring government servants and in the absence of any such sanction, no allotments can be made.
We, therefore, direct that the UT Administration will not make any such allotments in future, but those who have already secured allotment and entered into possession as of today, will not be disturbed."
5.
Although the decision of the Full Bench was stayed by the Supreme Court on a petition for Special Leave to Appeal filed by the Administration of Union Territory, Chandigarh, their Lordships subsequently approved the Rules of 1996 framed by the Administration.
These rules do not contain any provision for out-of-turn allotment in favour of the son or daughter or other member of the family of a retired government employee.
In the absence of any such provision in the rules, we do not find any reason to hold that the House Allotment Committee acted illegally when it rejected the request made by the father of the petitioner for retention of the House No. IV/996, Sector 7-B or the request of the petitioner for out-of-turn allotment of government house.
6.
No doubt, the orders dated 14.11.1996 and 9.12.1996 passed by the Central Administrative Tribunal do support the argument of Shri Batta that the application of the petitioner should be dealt with and decided as per the old rules but we are unable to agree with the Tribunal that on the basis of application submitted by a member of the family of retired government servant before the coming into force of the Rules of 1996 a right accrues in his/her favour to be allotted house under the old rules.
The Tribunal appears to have proceeded under a misconception that mere making of application for allotment of a house confers a vested right on the applicant and, therefore, those who had applied prior to the coming into force of 1996 Rules should be governed by the old rules.
In our opinion, a person who applies for allotment of house gets nothing more than a right of consideration alongwith other similar applicants under a particular set of rules which are applicable at the time of such consideration.
If the rules are amended, modified or substituted after the making of application, the right of consideration will be regulated by the amended, modified or substituted rules and not by the old rules.
Therefore, all the applications pending at the time of commencement of 1996 Rules will have to be dealt with and decided in accordance with the new rules and no applicant can claim allotment of a Government house as of right under the old rules.
7.
It appears to us that attention of the Tribunal was not drawn to the fact that the Full Bench of the High Court had directed the Union Territory not to make allotment to the family members of a retired government servant only on the ground that such member is also a government servant, and, therefore, the Chandigarh Administration had no option but to reject all such applications after 161995.
The fact that the Apex Court had stayed the operation of the order of the Full Bench did not ipso facto empower the administration to make allotment under the old rules.
Rather, their Lordships of the Supreme Court had also restrained the administration from making further allotments.
Thus the petitioner is not entitled to the issuance of any direction on the basis of the two orders passed by the Tribunal.
8.
We also do not find any substance in the argument of Shri Batta that the decision of the House Allotment Committee should be struck down on the ground of discrimination.
Learned counsel submitted that family members of some of the retired government servants have been given out-of-turn allotment after the commencement of the Rules of 1996.
In our opinion, any allotment which has been made de hors the rules is void and the same cannot be made basis for issuance of a mandamus or a writ or a direction in the nature of mandamus for allotment of house in violation of the existing rules.
In exercise of powers under Article 226 of the Constitution, the High Court can enforce a constitutional or legal right but it has no power to issue a writ to direct the executive authorities to act in violation of the provisions of the Constitution or any other law on the ground that such violation has been committed in the case of another person.
In our considered opinion, the extra-ordinary and equitable jurisdiction vesting in the High Court cannot be exercised for directing a public authority to act in breach of the statute.
For the reasons mentioned above, the writ petition is dismissed.
A copy of this order be sent to the Adviser to the Administrator, Union Territory, Chandigarh to examine whether any allotment has been made by the House Allotment Committee in violation of the provisions of the Rules of 1996 and if any such allotment has been made then to take steps for cancellation of the same after due notice to the affected person.
However, this direction shall not apply where allotment has been made in compliance of the order made by any Court or Tribunal.