Jawahar Lal Gupta, J - Is the action of the respondents in terminating the services of the petitioners in these cases violative of the principles of natural justice and thus illegal ?
This is the primary question that arises for consideration in these 22 writ petitions.
Learned counsel for the parties have primarily referred to the facts in CWP Nos. 13718 and 13929 of 1996.
Learned Counsel for the respondents have also produced copies of certain documents/record.
Factual position as appearing from the pleadings of the parties and the record may be briefly noticed.
2.
On November 2, 1993, the Haryana State Co-operative Land Development Bank advertised 20 posts of Managers, 2 posts of Technical Assistants and 2 posts of Junior Scale Stenographers.
On December 21, 1993, a corrigendum was issued by which it was clarified that persons having the qualifications of MA, MCom.
and MSc.
shall also be eligible.
The selection and recruitment to the 20 posts of Managers was held from December 11, 1995 to January 2, 1996.
26 candidates were selected.
They were deputed for training.
They joined duty on completion of the requisite training.
3.
On January 21, 1996, the Bank issued another advertisement by which the posts of Field Officers, Junior Accountants, Typists, Land Valuation Officers and Clerks were advertised.
The qualifications for recruitment to various posts were specifically laid down.
Provision for reservation of posts for Scheduled Castes, Backward Classes and Ex-Servicemen was also made.
In the advertisement, it was inter alia provided that "the number of posts may vary according to actual requirement."
Initially, it was notified that the applications should be submitted up to January 30, 1996.
However, on January 26, 1996, the last date for receipt of applications was extended to February 5, 1996.
4.
In response to this advertisement, 2800 applications were received for recruitment to the 50 posts of Land Valuation Officers.
A three member committee was constituted for the purpose of interviewing the candidates.
This committee interviewed the candidates in March, 1996.
In pursuance of the recommendations of the committee, the offer of appointment was made to the selected candidates vide letter dated May 3, 1996.
The candidates reported for duty on May 10, 1996.
Orders of posting were issued.
The training as contemplated under the rules was also imparted to the petitioners.
5.
On May 11, 1996, the newly elected Government was sworn in.
On May 12, 1996 the Chief Secretary to the Government of Haryana sent the following note to various officers including the Financial Commissioner Co-operation :-  "It has been mentioned to CM that large scale recruitments are being made/ have recently been made in the Universities in the State and in the different organisations in the Co-operation Department.
He has desired that keeping in view the need in economy in expenditure, no further appointment be made in the Universities/Cooperative Institutions.
He has further desired that information in regard to the recent appointments made in these institutions be also furnished.
Action may please be taken accordingly.
Sd/- M.C.
Gupta  C.S.  12.5.1996  F.C.
Cooperation  C.E.L.
Special Secretary Agriculture."
On May 13, 1996, the Principal Secretary to CM sent the following note :-  "CM has desired that list of persons along with their addresses who have been appointed as LVOs, Clerks etc. in the Haryana State Cooperative Land Development Bank during the last 6 months may be submitted to me immediately.
Sd/-  PSCM  1351996  FC and Secretary Cooperation."
On May 14, 1996, the Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Haryana passed an order by which Ms Shashi Gulati, IAS, Additional Registrar, Cooperative Societies (Administration) was directed to make an inquiry "regarding recruitments in HSLDB and find out the facts and report to the Government within 5 days."
Two officers were also appointed to help her.
She was also "directed to ensure that no further appointment order be issued and no candidate be allowed to join the duty after today."
On May 17, 1996, Mr. NK Sharma who was working as the Managing Director of the Bank was recalled and posted as Additional Registrar (Headquarters).
Ms. Gulati was given the additional charge of the post of Managing Director.
She took over as Managing Director on the afternoon of May 17, 1996.
On May 21, 1996 Ms. Gulati submitted her report.
Soon thereafter, on May 27, 1996, Mr. KS Bhuria was posted as the Registrar of Cooperative Societies and Ms. Rajni Razdan as the Commissioner Cooperation.
On June 5, 1996, the Commissioner proposed that Mr. NK Sharma be suspended and that the case be referred to the Legal Remembrancer after framing the issues for his opinion.
According to the learned counsel for the respondents, this note was approved by the Chief Minister on June 8, 1996.
Thereafter, on June 21, 1996, Ms. Gulati, the Managing Director, submitted a note pointing out that "on perusal of the documents pertaining to the recruitment and the information briefed by the officers involved in the conduct of fact-finding inquiry Shri JP Narayanan, Shri Naresh Chaudhary and the officers of the SLDB" various irregularities have been noticed.
She inter-alia suggested that the matter may be got examined from the Legal Remembrancer.
This proposal was approved by the Commissioner and a reference was made to the Legal Remembrancer.
The opinion was received on June 26, 1996.
On June 28, 1996, the matter was forwarded by the Commissioner to the Chief Minister who directed that "CC may examine LR's views and offer comments."
On July 4, 1996, the Commissioner recorded the following note :-  "Discussed the matter with PSCM on telephone as he is on tour to Delhi.
I suggested that we may obtain the advice of the Advocate General in the matter.
He agreed and hence the file is being sent to AG, Haryana.
Sd/- R Razdan  4.7.1997  Advocate General Haryana."
hMr.
HS Hooda, the learned Advocate General recorded his opinion on August 6, 1996.
He noticed that various irregularities had been committed.
He concluded his note as under :-  "Keeping in view the above mentioned facts, I am of the view that selection in question is unfair and as such competent authority may proceed to annul the selection.
However, this could be done after following due process of law i.e. giving due opportunity of being heard to the persons who are likely to be affected by this decision.
Sd/- HS Hooda,  Advocate General, Haryana  681996.
J.SC"  On August 8, 1996, the matter was forwarded by the Commissioner to the Chief Minister.
On August 12, 1996, the following note was recorded :-  "CM has considered the matter.
He is of the view that the competent authority, namely, the Board of Haryana State Land Development Bank should take a view of these cases of excess and irregular appointments in its meeting in the light of the advice given by Advocate General.
Sd/-  PSCM  1281996.
CC"  On August 12, 1996, the Commissioner Cooperation forwarded the file to the Joint Secretary who recorded the following note:-  "We have two choices (i) we send to the MD in single file, or (ii) we communicate the decision only.
Submitted for orders.
Sd/-  13.8.1996  C.C"  The Commissioner Cooperation observed as under :-  "Option (ii) be exercised.
MD be asked to discuss with AG or LR.
in case there are any doubts in her mind.
Sd/- R Razdan  14/8"  Accordingly, vide letter dated August 16, 1996, the Managing Director of the Bank was informed that "after careful consideration of the matter, the Government have decided that the competent authority, namely, the Board of Directors of Haryana State Co-operative Land Development Bank should take a view about the excess and irregular appointments in its meeting in the light of the advice given by the Advocate General.
It is requested that the matter be placed before the Board of Directors urgently."
On August 19, 1996, the Managing Director put up a note observing inter alia that :  "The Bank proposes to convene the next meeting of Board of Directors shortly.
For convening the meeting 15 days" clear notice is required.
It is, therefore, requested that a date convenient to your goodself may please be conveyed so that the meeting can be fixed accordingly.
Proposed agenda items for the meeting are also enclosed for your kind information please.
Sd/-  19.8.1996  MD HSLDB  Chairperson, HSLDB."
It appears that Ms. Razdan who was the Commissioner Cooperation was also the Chairperson of the Bank.
On August 20, 1996, she ordered that the meeting be convened for September 3, 1996, at 11 am The agenda notes for the meeting were ordered to be circulated on August 27, 1996.
On August 20, 1996 the Managing Director requested the Registrar to grant approval for "convening the meeting of the Board of Directors of the Bank on 391996 at a shorter notice...." The necessary permission was granted by the Registrar on the same day vide memorandum dated August 20, 1996.
Accordingly, the Board met on September 3, 1996.
It resolved to annul the appointments.
The Managing Director was authorised to issue termination orders along with one month's salary in lieu of notice to all the appointees.
In case of persons who had not yet joined duty, it was directed that the offers for appointment be withdrawn.
In pursuance of this resolution, telephonic instructions were issued to the Regional Manager to relieve the concerned candidates.
Letters were despatched by speed post for termination of the services of the employees.
Aggrieved by these orders, the petitioners filed the present writ petitions.
They have challenged the orders of termination on various grounds.
It has been inter alia alleged that the orders are violative of the principles of natural justice.
These are arbitrary.
The meeting of the Board of Directors was held in contravention of the mandatory procedure prescribed in the bye-laws.
The orders of termination were violative of the Staff Service Rules.
The services of the petitioners have been terminated "as a consequence of change of Government in the State of Haryana."
6.
The written statement was filed on behalf of respondent No. 3, the Bank.
It was averred that the members of the selection committee had not given marks to the candidates.
The scrutiny was indicative of manipulation and tampering.
Appointments have been made in excess of the total number of vacancies.
The rules of natural justice have not been violated.
Accordingly, it has been prayed that the writ petitions be dismissed.
7.
It may be noticed that the Motion Bench had stayed the operation of the orders of termination challenged in different petitions.
Resultantly, the petitioners have continued on their respective posts during the pendency of these cases.
8.
Counsel for the parties have been heard.
On behalf of the petitioners, the arguments have been addressed by Mr. JS Khehar, Senior Advocate, Mr. PS Patwalia and Mr. RK Malik, Advocates.
Learned Counsel contended that the impugned action was violative of the principles of natural justice inasmuch as the orders of termination were passed without the grant of any opportunity to the persons who were adversely affected.
It was also contended that if any opportunity had been granted, the petitioners could have shown that the reasons assigned by the Board of Directors for holding that the selection was unfair were untenable.
It was also contended that the meeting of the Board of Directors was not held in conformity with the bye-laws as the requisite notice of 15 days had not been given.
The action was also challenged on the ground that it violated the provisions of Staff Service Rules.
It was also contended that the whole action was vitiated by mala fides.
It was only on account of the change in Government that the decision to terminate the services of the petitioners had been taken.
9.
On behalf of the respondent, Mr. PP Rao, Senior Advocate, contended that an illegal appointment conferred no right and thus the principles of natural justice could not be invoked.
10.
It is in the background of these contentions that the question as posed at the outset arises for consideration in the present case.
11.
Natural justice defies a `precise' definition.
The application of the principles of natural justice was initially confined to cases where a body was acting judicially and where `rights and not privileges' were in issue.
With the passage of time, it was recognised that an individual should have a right to participate in the making of the decision that affects him.
It was also felt that it would help in improving the quality of the decision.
Thus, even procedural propriety came to be recognised as one of the grounds for judicial review.
Today, the administrative process has become "less opaque."
The Courts insist that every decision that affects a person must be reached after giving him an opportunity.
Principles of natural justice have been recognised as a part of Article 14 of our Constitution Whenever an order is tainted with violation of the principles of natural justice, it suffers from the vice of arbitrariness and is vitiated.
12.
It is true that sometimes it may not be possible to comply with the principles of natural justice.
The oft cited example is of the fire brigade squad demolishing a house.
It may not be possible for it to grant an opportunity of hearing to the owner of the house before the building is brought down.
Similarly, if contaminated food is being served, it may not be possible to grant an opportunity before it is impunded or even destroyed.
A vehicle which is not road worthy may have to be taken off the road without any loss of time.
In certain cases, even post-decisional hearing has been considered as sufficient compliance with principles of natural justice.
Sometimes, even though the violation of the principles of natural justice has been established, the Courts have not interfered as no prejudice was shown to have been caused.
However, a swallow does not make a summer.
An exception does not constitute a rule.
Such cases are becoming rarer by the day.
Courts recognise that whenever there is violation of the principles of natural justice, the order is lacking in propriety and is, thus, vitiated.
13.
What is the position in the present case ?
Admittedly the posts had been duly advertised.
A large number of candidates had applied.
The applications were processed.
The respective selection committees had made their recommendations.
The selected candidates were offered appointments.
Some of them were even imparted training.
They were posted at different places.
They had joined.
While they were working on the posts, they were served with orders of termination.
They were also given cheques in lieu of salary for a period of one month.
14.
Having got the jobs, the petitioners had a reasonable expectation that they shall be entitled to continue so long as they work well and perform their duties satisfactorily.
Their service career in the Bank was sought to be interrupted on the basis of a totally ex parte inquiry.
They were not associated at any stage in any form.
Surely, if the Government or the Bank had any reason to suspect that the selection was not proper or that there was any other infirmity, it could have put its doubts to the employees and given them a chance to comment or represent their view point.
This would have enabled the competent authority to consider the matter objectively.
It would have been alive to the other side of the story.
The decision-making process would have been more meaningful.
It would have been fair.
Grant of opportunity to the employee would have not only enabled the respondents to ensure procedural fairness but also given them an opportunity to assess the capability and competence of each employee.
Neither the Managing Director of the Bank nor the Board nor any of the other respondents ever conveyed any ground to the employees on which the appointments were sought to be cancelled.
This was anything but fair.
15.
Mr. PP Rao was vehement in contending that the appointment being illegal no opportunity was required to be afforded to the employee.
Learned counsel referred to the fact that there were reports in the press which reflected adversely on the selection made by the Bank.
There were other complaints also.
Resultantly, the authorities had looked into the matter and on finding that the selection was not fair and proper, the impugned orders were issued.
On these premises, it was sought to be contended that the employees were not entitled to any opportunity.
This contention cannot be accepted.
16.
In our country, it is customary with the people to make complaints.
It has become a national past-time.
However, even if it is assumed that the complaints were made bona fide and the reports in the press were absolutely true, still no body can be hanged if it is reported in the press that he has committed a murder.
The right to a fair trial is not taken away.
Similarly even if a report suggests that the selection has not been fair, the authority cannot presume the report to be correct.
It cannot take a unilateral decision to set aside the selection and annul the appointments.
Such a course of action suffers from the vice of arbitrariness.
It is unfair.
It is unreasonable.
It is violative of the principles of natural justice.
It cannot be sustained.
17.
Mr. Rao referred to certain decisions.
The first decision was in The State of Punjab v. Jagdip AIR 1964 SC 521.
This was a case where certain persons who were officiating as Tehsildars were confirmed in spite of the fact that no permanent posts were available.
On merger of Pepsu with Punjab, the Government cancelled the order of confirmation.
The aggrieved employees approached the High Court which took the view that the order of reconfirmation without the grant of any opportunity was violative of the provisions of Article 311(2).
On appeal, the view taken by the High Court was reversed.
It was held that the provisions of Article 311(2) were not attracted.
It was inter alia observed that "where a Government servant has no right to a post or to a particular status, though an authority under the Government acting beyond its competence had purported to give that person a status which it was not entitled to give, he will not in law be deemed to have been validly appointed to the post or given the particular status."
Such is not the position in the present case.
Neither the Managing Director nor the Bank had acted beyond its competence in giving appointment to the employees.
Still further, it was found as a fact in Jagdip Singh's case (supra) that permanent posts were not available and as such the order of confirmation passed by the Financial Commissioner of Pepsu ``was no confirmation at all and was thus invalid."
There is no parallel between the present case and that of Jagdip Singh.
18.
Learned counsel then placed reliance on the decision in Union Territory of Chandigarh v. Dilbagh Singh and others, 1993(1) S.CC 154 : 1993(2) SCT 276 (SC).
Herein, the Selection Board constituted by the Chandigarh Administration was required to select 32 candidates for appointment as Conductors.
On examination of the select list, it was found by the Administration that "members of the Board in the garb of awarding marks to candidates for their performance in the interview had brought in to the select list the least qualified candidates who had been awarded least marks for their educational qualifications and that uniform standards had not been applied to all candidates by the Selection Board in their selection."
It was contended on behalf of the aggrieved candidates that the action of the Administration in cancelling the select list without hearing the members of the Board was unfair and illegal.
The contention was negatived.
Still further, the plea that the candidates should have been heard was rejected.
It was observed that a selected candidate does not acquire an indefeasible right to be appointed and, thus, cannot claim to have a right to be heard before the select list is cancelled for bona fide and valid reasons.
It is apparent that the selected candidates had not been appointed.
Thus, the decision has no application to the case where the candidates had only joined but had been functioning for a considerable length of time before their services were terminated.
19.
Reliance was also placed on the observations of their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Dr. Suresh Chandra Verma and others v. The Chancellor, Nagpur University and others, 1990(4) S.CC 55 : 1991(1) SCT 369 (SC).
Reference was only made to the observations in paragraph 16 wherein it was observed that services "are to be terminated in view of the change in the position of law and not on account of the demerits or misdemeanour of individual candidates.
It is not necessary to hear the individuals before their services are terminated."
The rule has no application to the present case.
Herein, it is not suggested that the services are being terminated on account of change in law.
In fact, it has been repeatedly urged that the selected candidates were not meritorious.
Demerits of the individual candidate was one of the reasons for the passing of the impugned orders.
20.
Mr. Rao then referred to the observations of their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Biswa Ranjan Sahoo and others v. Sushanta Kumar Dinda and others, 1996(5) S.CC 365.
In this case, it was found that marks have been altered at several places.
Such is not the position in the present case.
21.
Mr. Rao also placed reliance on certain other decisions which are clearly distinguishable.
Still further in Shridhar v. Nagar Palika, Jaunpur and others, 1990(1) R.S.J.
(SC) 30, it was observed as under :-  "The High Court committed serious error in upholding the order of the Government dated 13280 in setting aside the appellant's appointment without giving any notice or opportunity to him.
It is an elementary principle of natural justice that no person should be condemned without hearing.
The order of appointment conferred a vested right in the appellant to hold the post of Tax Inspector.
That right could not be taken away without affording opportunity of hearing to him.
Any order passed in violation of principles of natural justice is rendered void.
There is no dispute that the Commissioner's Order has been passed without affording any opportunity of hearing to the appellant.
Therefore the order was illegal and void.
The High Court committed serious error in upholding the Commissioner's Order setting aside the appellant's appointment.
In this view, Orders of the High Court and the Commissioner are not sustainable in law."
(emphasis supplied) 22.
The facts of the present case are similar to those in the case of Sukhmander Singh v. State of Punjab and others, 1994(3) S.LR.
(SC) 366.
In this case, recruitment to the posts of Clerks had been made by the Cooperative Bank.
An inquiry was held.
Thereafter, even a show cause notice was given.
However, the inquiry report was not furnished.
It was held that there was denial of reasonable opportunity.
The relevant observations are contained in paragraph 7.
These are as under :-  "It is perfectly within the competence of the employer to take appropriate action for termination of services of a person appointed after regular selection in case it discovered that the selection is vitiated by violation of the rules or any other constitutional provisions.
In that eventuality what the employer is required to do is to comply with the rules of natural justice and then pass appropriate orders.
What has the respondent-Bank done in the present case is to have given a notice to the petitioners to submit their representations against the proposed action and then it has issued the impugned orders.
It can, thus, be said that the respondent-Bank has made an attempt to make a show of compliance of the rules of natural justice before taking action resulting in an adverse order qua the petitioners.
However, what is to be seen by the Court in these cases is as to whether the notice given by the respondent-Bank to the petitioners was sufficient for real and substantial compliance of the rules of natural justice.
A look on the contents of the impugned order Annexure P-4 as well as the averments made in the writ petitions and the replies filed by the respondents shows that some enquiry was conducted in the matter of selection made by the respondent-Bank as per the directions given by the Registrar, Co-operative Societies, Punjab.
That enquiry was not held by associating the petitioners.
Rather it was an enquiry held at the back of the petitioners.
May be that the said enquiry was a fact-finding enquiry but this is an admitted position that the report submitted by the Inquiry Officer constituted the basis for initiation of action by the respondent-Bank under the directions of the Registrar, Co- operative Societies, Punjab.
That report was not made available to the petitioners along with the notice dated 2121980 or at any time thereafter.
That report formed the material adverse to the petitioners and, therefore, use of the same by the respondent-Bank could have been justified only if the report was made available to the petitioners and they were given an opportunity to make representation against the contents of that report and to controvert the findings given by the Inquiry Officer.
That having not been done, I have little hesitation in holding that before passing the impugned orders the respondent-Bank did not make real and substantial compliance of the rule of audi alteram partem."
Similar view appears to have been taken in Shrawan Kumar Jha and others v. State of Bihar and others, 1993(3) SCT 747 (SC), and Ms. Monika and others v. State of Haryana and others, 1996(1) A.I.J.
690 : 1996(4) SCT 456.
Still further, as observed by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in SL Kapoor v. Jagmohan and others, A.I.R. 1981 SC 136, the principles of natural justice know of no rule of exclusion.
Whenever action is sought to be taken against a person, he has a right to be informed of the grounds and given an opportunity to give his representation.
In Rattan Lal Sharma v. Managing Committee, Dr. Hari Ram (Co-education) High er Secondary School and others, A.I.R. 1993 SC 2155 : 1993(3) SCT 525 (SC), it was held that "rules of natural justice are foundational and fundamental concepts and law is now well settled that the principles of natural justice are part of the legal and judicial procedures."
In the present case, the `fundamental' and `foundational' concepts of law have been clearly violated.
Admittedly, no candidate, no member of the selection committee and no employee of the Bank was at all associated.
This was in spite of the fact that the Advocate General had categorically advised the respondents to follow the due process and to give opportunity to the employees.
Even the Legal Remembrancer had made a similar suggestion in his note dated June 26, 1996.
23.
Why did the respondent not follow the advice of the Legal Remembrancer and the Advocate General ?
24.
Learned counsel for the petitioners contend that the Government had changed.
It was keen to get rid of the persons who had been selected and appointed by the previous Government.
The inquiry by a chosen officer and the majority decision of the Board of Directors which had been backed by the Government was a foregone conclusion.
Learned counsel vehemently contended that the action was mala-fide.
They also submitted that each one of the reasons given by the respondents for setting aside the selection was untenable on facts as well as law.
All those persons, who knew nothing about the selection and had been appointed to the Board by the newly elected Government, had voted for the termination of the services of the employees.
To illustrate, it was pointed out that six posts of Typists had been advertised by the Bank; the selection was made on the basis of the academic qualifications and the result of the type test and no interview was held.
Yet, the appointment of the selected candidates has been arbitrarily set aside.
Similarly, the factual basis for the findings of the Enquiry Officer as well as the resolution passed by the Board of Directors has been seriously contested.
It was also contended that the meeting of the Board of Directors was not held in conformity with the bye-laws.
Learned counsel submitted that the entire exercise was a device to terminate the services of the petitioners.
25.
The apprehensions expressed by the counsel for the petitioners may not be wholly without basis.
However, for the present, it does not appear to be necessary to go into all these questions.
It would suffice to say that there was no good reason which could have compelled the respondents to ignore the advice of the learned Advocate General.
A new broom does not necessarily clean better.
It is only by use that it gets smooth and cleans properly.
The respondent Bank in the present case acted in haste in proceeding to terminate the services of the petitioners without granting any opportunity to the persons who were likely to be adversely affected.
This action was not in conformity with the principles of natural justice.
The orders of annulment of selection and termination of services of the petitions were not passed after following a proper procedure.
These were, thus, not legal and valid.
In view of this conclusion, it is not necessary to go into the other questions as raised on behalf of the petitioners.
26.
Resultantly, the impugned decision of the Board of Directors to annul the selection and appointment of the petitioners is set aside.
Since the petitioners have continued in service on account of the interim orders passed by the Motion Bench, the necessity for passing any consequential orders is obviated.
However, the petitioners would be entitled their costs.
The records which are in the custody of the Court Reader Mr. MS Gill shall be entrusted to the Registrar (Judicial).