PS Mishra, CJ - This appeal has to fail for the reason of the judgment delivered by us in Writ Appeal No. 385 of 1996.
Learned counsel for the appellant, however, has pointed out that while in the case of Writ Appeal No. 385 of 1996 or in Writ Petition No. 8015 of 1992, disposed of by us today, the employer is a statutory authority and thus is a body amenable to the writ jurisdiction of this Court, the appellant in the instant appeal is a public limited company, which, although is a legal entity, is not a `State' under Article 12 of the Constitution of India.
The Court ordinarily shall not issue a writ in the nature of mandamus and/or any other form of writ or direction and leave the parties to seek their remedies under the general law of the land.
He has also addressed us in some details that even if it is not a dispute that the appellant is a factory for the purposes of Section 46 of the Factories Act, 1948, the employees of the canteen may not be workmen as defined under the Industrial Disputes Act and may accordingly be not competent to raise an industrial dispute.
It will be difficult, unless one enters into the realm of conjectures and surmises to treat the employees in a canteen as not workmen defined under the Industrial Disputes Act.
The law on the subject is no more in doubt.
Thus, who are employed in an industry are workmen as defined under the Industrial Disputes Act and any dispute as to service conditions of an employee in an industry, if he is a workman, is an industrial dispute and thus a reference of the dispute to a Labour Court or Tribunal cannot be doubted.
On the question whether a writ at all would issue if the appellant herein is not a statutory authority or instrumentality of a State, we do not propose to detain ourselves for, the question has been examined in abundant details by a Bench of this Court in Rakesh Gupta v. Hyderabad Stock Exchange, 1996(2) ALD 1042.
After a thorough prospecting of the scope of the power of judicial review and to issue any prerogative or direction or order in exercise of plenary power under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, this Court has summarised the judicial conscious as follows :  "(1) The High Court's power under Article 226 of the Constitution is as wide as the amplitude of the language used indicates and so can affect any person even a private individual and be available for any other purpose, even one for which another remedy may exist; (2) Strictly speaking, the inhibitions recognised by the Courts in England upon the powers of the Courts to issue prerogative writs do not operate in India except as self-imposed restrictions by the Courts themselves; (3) Wise and clear restraints on the use of extraordinary remedy have been indicated in various pronouncements of the Supreme Court and High Courts, and the High Courts will not go beyond those wholesome inhibitions.
However, where the situations warrant or exceptional circumstances cry for timely judicial interdict or mandate, the Court shall have the power to issue any writ, order or direction.
In the words of the Supreme Court - "the mentor of law is justice and a potent drug should be judiciously administered.
Speaking in critical retorspect and protentous prospect, the writ power has, by and large, been the people's sentinel on the qui vive and to cut back on or liquidate that power may cast a peril to human rights."
(4) Mandamus, certiorari and prohibition are recognised as public law remedies.
They are not available to enforce private law rights;  (5) The word `authority' in Article 226 of the Constitution of India is not restricted to the same meaning as the words `other authorities' should receive in the definition of the `State' in Article 12 of the Constitution of India.
The former must receive a liberal meaning.
The latter is relevant only for the purpose of enforcement of fundamental rights.
The High Court's power under Article 226 of the Constitution, however, unlike the power of the Supreme Court under Article 32 of the Constitution is more pervasive in the sense that it can issue writs for enforcement of fundamental rights as well as non-fundamental rights.
The words `any person or authority' used in Article 226 are, therefore, not to be confined only to statutory authorities and instrumentalities of the State.
They may cover any other person or body performing public duty.
The form of the body concerned is not very much relevant.
What is relevant is the nature of the duty imposed on that body.
The duty must be judged in the light of positive obligation owed by the person or authority to the affected party, no matter by what means the duty is imposed; and  (6) The judicial control over the fast expanding maze of bodies affecting the rights of the people should not be put into water-tight compartments.
It should remain flexible to meet the requirements of various circumstances."
2.
Number 5 in the summary above thus will not exclude this Court's power under Article 226 of the Constitution of India to issue any writ, direction or order provided the Court is satisfied that the appellant has a public duty to perform by providing a canteen for its workers.
The test to be applied to judge whether any public duty is imposed by Section 46 of the Factories Act and the rules framed thereunder i.e., Rules 65 and 71 of the Andhra Pradesh Factories Rules, 1950 upon the appellant, which is recognised as the person or the authority, to provide the canteen and the provisions thus create a positive obligation upon the appellant to appoint such persons who are needed for the work of the canteen.
It will be difficult for the appellant to urge that interest of the employees is not such which can be equated with public interest.
It cannot obviously suggest that the purpose of conferring rule- making power upon the State Government under Section 46 of the Factories Act was not in the public interest and that the rules framed by the State Government are not in the public interest.
In fact, no challenge has been raised before us as to the validity either of Section 46 of the Factories Act or the rules framed by the State Government.
Since rules, in our view, are framed in public interest, they do create a public duty upon every management to provide a canteen and thus all consequences of the duty of providing a canteen must be deemed to be a public duty for the management.
This Court shall refrain to interdict in disputes between the employer and the employee even if they are referable to the conditions of service and may decline to exercise its power under Article 226 of the Constitution of India in such cases.
It shall cut back and act within the bounds of self-imposed restrictions when a dispute of fact would be required to be determined or where it would be in doubt whether a public duty is cast upon any person or authority and such person has failed to discharge his duty.
In the instant case, however, when it is found that the appellant has ignored its obligation under the Rules 65 to 71 of the Andhra Pradesh Factories Rules and under Section 46 of the Factories Act, it can reasonably be found to be a case falling within the dicta in Praga Tools Corporation v. Sri C.A.
Imanual, AIR 1969 SC 1306, in which it is observed :  "A mandamus can issue, for instance, to an official of a society to compel him to carry out the terms of the statute under or by which the society is constituted or governed and also to companies or corporations to carry out duties placed on them by the statutes authorising their undertakings.
A mandamus would also lie against a company constituted by a statute for the purpose of fulfilling public responsibilities", and as pointed out in the said judgment in the words of professor De Smith: "To be enforceable by mandamus a public duty does not necessarily have to be one imposed by statute.
It may be sufficient for the duty to have been imposed by charter, common law, custom or even contract."
It is thus, in our view, a case in which people's sentinel on the qui vive, as the Supreme Court has pointed out, with full restraint should see that its jurisdiction does not become a jurisdiction of free exercise like a bull in a china shop.
We hold that the learned single Judge has committed no error in issuing the impugned directions.
There is no merit in the appeal.
3.
The appeal is dismissed.