S Parvatha Rao, J - The petitioners claim advance increments on the basis that they acquired Law Degree qualifications relying on GOMs.
No. 182 dated 1771987, and contending that GOMs.
No. 142 dated 341996 cannot be interpreted as to deprive them of that benefit.
It is not in dispute that the 1st petitioner was promoted as Clerk in Munsif Magistrate Court at Cheepurupalli in 1982 under PR No. 588/82 dated 7101982 of the 3rd respondent, which at the relevant time was a post falling under Category 5 under Division IV of Rule 5 of the Andhra Pradesh Judicial Ministerial Service Rules (`the Rules' for short), and that the said post was subsequently redesignated as Junior Assistant falling under the same category.
This is admitted in the counter-affidavits dated 22111996 of the 3rd respondent.
The 2nd petitioner who was working as Examiner of copies in the Munsif Magistrate Court at Cheepurupalli was promoted as Telgu Typist under order PR No. 50/85 dated 621985 of the 3rd respondent.
It is not in dispute that this post is also in Category 5 of Division IV of Rule 5 of the Rules.
2.
In the counter-affidavists of the 3rd respondent it is stated that after 1st petitioner was promoted as Junior Assistant he was converted as Additional Typist as per proceedings in PR No. 6 of 1983 dated 26.1.1983, and that the 2nd petitioner was not converted from the post of Junior Assistant to the post of Typist as she was directly promoted as Telgu Typist from the category of Examiner of copies on the basis of her typewriting qualifications in English and Telgu.
It is also stated that the scale of pay of Typist/Additional Typist is equivalent to that of Junior Assistant.
It is further stated that the promotions to the post of Junior Assistant/Typist/Steno-typist, shall be made from the common seniority list of Examiners (Category 6 of Division IV), Amins (Category 1 of Division V), Reader (Category 2 of Division V) and Copyists (Division VI) as per Rule 6 of the Andhra Pradesh Judicial Ministerial Service Rules and that because of their seniority and eligibility they have been promoted to the post of Typist.
It is also stated that juniors to the petitioners are drawing advance increments for acquiring Law Degree qualifications as they are working in the cadre of Junior Assistants.
It is submitted in the counter-affidavits that the petitioners were not allowed to draw advance increments because the posts of Typists shown in Category 5 of Division IV of the Rules, though on par with those of Junior Assistants, do not carry the same duties, and that the duties of Typists are quite different from the duties discharged by Junior Assistants, and that Typists are getting special pay in addition to their pay scales in view of their typing qualifications.
3.
The learned Counsel Mr. P Ravi Prasad appearing for Respondent Nos. 2 and 3 seeks to draw support from the judgment of a Division Bench of this Court in Md Azamathulla Khan v. State of AP, 1996(2) ALD 873 (DB) in which the scope of GOMs.
No. 182 dated 1771987 was dealt with.
The Bench referred to the essential term laid in the said G.O.
Ms. No. 182, which is as follows:  ``The higher qualification, the acquisition of which entitles one for additional increment is being sanctioned should be relevant to the post held by him.''
Applying this test, the Bench held as follows:  Successful administration of justice depends, to a great deal, on effective court management.
Knowledge of law is, therefore, essential to enable the court employees to perform their duties more effectively.
To put it differently, promotion of excellence in the administration of justice is inter linked with the court staff comprising law degree holders.
In a general way, it is undeniable, knowledge of law contributes to better understanding of all questions or disputes concerning civil and political rights as well as the structure of government and political and democratic institutions.
But this cannot be the touchstone for deciding the question as to the applicability of GOMs.
No. 182 to judicial employees.
As already discussed by us supra, the test is whether LL.B., degree is a higher qualification and relevant for the posts held by the petitioners.
The duties of court employees in different branches - taking down dictation of judgments, preparing cases for hearing, preparing decrees in accordance with the judgments, supervising service of process and execution proceedings, translating depositions of witnesses and documents into English, to name only a few - are all but integral parts of effective Court management warranting high degree of proficiency, for the attainment of which the contributory factor is a degree in law.
When the object of the scheme of advance increments as adumbrated in the two GOMs.
- GOMs.
No. 89 and GOMs.
No. 182 - and several other subsequent orders, being promotion of excellence, exclusion of the judicial employees fulfilling the prescribed criteria clearly smacks of arbitrariness.
It must be noticed that the scheme was not brought into existence for the first time by GOMs.
No. 182; it had been there for quite a few years and continued by GOMs.
No. 182 by adding three more departments/categories to claim the benefit.''
Dealing with the specific post in Division IV of the Rules, the Bench held as follows:  ``We therefore, declare that no one holding a post lower than that of Junior Assistant would be eligible for the benefit of advance increments.
Although persons holding the posts of Record Assistant, Typist, Copyist, Examiner, Amin, Bailiff, Process Server etc., which are lower than the post of Junior Assistant, are borne on the establishments of the High Court and the subordinate Courts, they are not entitled to the benefit of advance increments since they do not satisfy the test laid down by G.O.
Ms. No.
182.''
4.
The subsequent GOMs.
No. 142 dated 341996 was issued in the light of this judgment, which is as follows:  ``The Government accordingly hereby accords sanctioning for allowing two advance increments to the following categories of employees working in the AP High Court, District Courts and Subordinate Courts under Judicial Department for possessing or acquiring the degree of law from any University recognised by the University Grants Commission.
A High Court of Andhra Pradesh: Assistant Registrars, Court Officers, Section Officers, Court Masters, Deputy Section Officers, Assistant Officers and Junior Assistants of High Court of Andhra Pradesh.
B.
Districts and Subordinate Courts in Judicial Department.
Sheristadars, Nazirs, Deputy Nazirs, Translators, Senior Assistants, UD Record Keepers and Junior Assistants working in Subordinate Courts of Judicial Department.
These orders shall come into force with effect from 1.7.1986.''
5.
This has to be interpreted keeping in view the observations of the Division Bench in Md Azamathulla Khan's case.
The Bench made it very clear that persons holding posts of Typists, Copyists, Examiners, etc., lower than the post of Junior Assistant would not be entitled, but those holding the posts of Junior Assistants or equivalent would be entitled to advance increments.
6.
In the present case, admittedly the 1st petitioner was promoted as Junior Assistant initially and then was posted as Additional Typist under proceedings dated 26.1.1983, which is admittedly a post equivalent to that of Junior Assistant.
This was done in view of administrative exigencies.
Similarly, the 2nd petitioner was promoted and appointed as Telugu Typist, which is also a post equivalent to that of Junior Assistant.
This was also because of administrative exigencies in view of her typing qualifications.
In the counter-affidavits it is admitted that those who are junior to the petitioners, but promoted as Junior Assistants are drawing additional increments after getting the law degree.
Under the circumstances, depriving the petitioners of the same benefit when they also passed the Law degree would be discriminatory and violates Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
They cannot be denied the benefit when they are in the posts equivalent to that of Junior Assistant and not lower than the post of Junior Assistant.
This would be in keeping with the judgment of the Division Bench in Md Azamathulla Khan's case.
G.O.
Ms. No. 142, dated 341996 has expressly included Junior Assistants working in subordinate Courts of Judicial Department in the category of persons entitled to the additional increments for possessing Law degree.
This has to be interpreted to mean that those promoted to the posts equivalent to those of Junior Assistants from the same channels of promotion, who could have been promoted as Junior Assistants, but for administrative exigencies, should also be given the benefit of additional increments.
In the view we have taken, the writ petition has to be allowed.
It is accordingly allowed.
No costs.
Petition allowed.