GS Singhvi, J - This is a petition for issuance of a writ of mandamus to the respondents to consider the petitioner's candidature for appointment as Ayurvedic Medical Officer.
2.
The record of the case shows that in response to the advertisement published in the daily newspapers on 29.11.92 for recruitment of six Ayurvedic Medical Officers, the petitioner had applied on 20.12.1992.
At that time, she was within the upper age limit of 35 years.
However, the appointing authority did not complete the process of selection.
After about a year and nine months of the issue of advertisement, the Government of Punjab constituted the Punjab Subordinate Services Selection Board vide notification No. 12/16/94-1 P.P.3/18181 dated 1991994 and declared that all initial appointments to the Class-III and Class IV services or posts under the Punjab Government except the posts under the Punjab & Haryana High Court, Punjab Vidhan Sabha Secretariat and those which may be excluded by the Government from the purview of the Board, shall be made on the advice of the Board.
However, consultation with the Board was not required for making temporary appointments for a period not exceeding six months.
On the same very day, the Government of Punjab, Department of Personnel and Administrative Reforms issued circular No. 12/16/94-1 PP3/18189 and directed that where the departmental selection committes have not completed the process of selection, the records thereof be immediately sent to the Board and further action for selection of suitable candidates shall be taken by the Board.
These instructions were modified vide circular letter No. 12/42/94-1PP3/4336 dated 2021995 whereby the Government decided that all the applications pending with the departmental selection committees should be filed by the departments and no record be forwarded to the Board and also that only the requisition/demand for filing of the posts of different categories of Class-III should be sent to the Board.
3.
It appears that instead of making regular selection through the agency of the departmental selection committee, the respondent No. 2 resorted to ad hoc appointments of Ayurvedic Medical Officers for a pretty long time.
Even after the constitution of the Board such appointments were continued to be made.
After about three years and five months of the publication of the advertisement for recruitment of six Ayurvedic Medical Officers, the Board issued an advertisement for 18 posts.
The last date for submission of applications was notified as April 30, 1996.
The age qualification came to be prescribe 18 years (minimum) and 33 years (maximum).
Another advertisement was issued on 171996 for 46 posts of Ayurvedic Medical Officers in respect of which requisition was sent by the respondent No. 2 on 19.6.1996.
At the same time, the upper age limit was increased from 33 years to 35 years as on 111996.
4.
It also appears from the record that the Board issued advertisement No. 3 of 1996 for recruitment of 569 Multi Purpose Health Workers (Female) (hereinafter called as `MPHW (F)').
In this advertisement, the Board clearly indicated that those persons who had applied for the posts of MPHW(F) in response to the advertisement issued by the respondent No. 2 on 1271992 will be considered eligible qua the age requirement in terms of the conditions specified in the advertisement dated 1271992.
5.
The petitioner has challenged the omission of the Board to consider her candidature by asserting that the Board cannot apply different yard-sticks for judging the eligibility of persons who had applied for recruitment as Ayurvedic Medical Officers in response to the advertisement published on 29111992 and those who had applied for recruitment as MPHW(F) in response to the advertisement published on 1271992.
Her case is that the respondents cannot take advantage of their failure to make regular selection in response to the advertisement published on 29111992 and the candidates like her who were fully eligible for recruitment against the six posts advertised by the respondent No. 2 cannot be treated ineligible for recruitment in pursuance of the advertisement dated 141996.
6.
The respondents No. 1 and 2 have not filed reply to the writ petition.
In the written statement filed on behalf of the respondent No. 3 the averments made in the writ petition have not been denied.
Rather the Board has offered no comments on some of the statements of facts.
Consideration of the candidature of the persons who had applied for recruitment as MPHW(F) in response to the advertisement published on 1271992 has been justified on the basis of the order passed on 19121995 in C.W.P.
No. 1762 of 1995.
The Board has pleaded that in response to the advertisement for 150 posts of MPHW(F), the department had appointed 646 persons.
These appointments were quashed by the High Court.
Those whose appointments were nullified by the High Court filed various writ petitions and while deciding those writ petitions including C.W.P.
No. 1762 of 1995 the High Court directed continuance of the petitioners till fresh selection and also allowed all such candidates to compete for fresh selection.
The Board has also stated that 64 posts of Ayurvedic Medical Officers have been advertised on 171996 and only those who fulfil the conditions of eligibility enumerated in the last mentioned advertisement can be considred.
7.
On 7.10.1996 we had issued notice of motion to the respondents and had directed the Board to provisionally interview of the petitioner for recruitment as Ayurvedic Medical Officer.
The respondents were directed to produce the result of the petitioner's interview in a sealed cover before the Court.
In compliance of the direction given by the Court on 11101996, the Board interviewed the petitioner.
Her result was produced in a sealed cover before the Court on 29111996.
The sealed envelope was opened in the Court and it was found that the petitioner has secured 66 marks whereas last candidate selected in the general category secured 715 marks.
In view of this, we cannot direct the respondents to appoint the petitioner as Ayurvedic Medical Officer.
Notwithstanding this, the learned counsel for the petitioner argued that the issue of eligibility of the petitioner should be decided in this petition.
He pointed out that selection made by the Board has been challenged before this Court and in case the selection is invalidated, the issue of eligibility of the petitioner will again assume significance and if it is not decided in this petition, the petitioner will have to move the Court once again.
Ordinarily we would have refrained from adjudicating upon a question which is more or less of academic importance.
But keeping in view the fact that similar question is being raised in a large number of petitions filed in this Court and also keeping in view the fact that the question relating to the eligibility of the petitioner will again arise in the event of nullification of the selection made by the Board, we have considered it appropriate to decide the same.
8.
The parties are in agreement that the recruitment of Ayurvedic Medical Officers in the State of Punjab is not regulated by the rules framed under proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution Rather the learned counsel for the parties stated that the selection for appointment of Ayurvedic Medical Officers is made on the basis of the advertisement issued either by the respondent No. 2 or by the respondent No. 3.
It is also not in dispute that the respondent No. 2 had advertised six posts of Ayurvedic Medical Officers in November, 1992 vide publication dated 29111992 and that as on the last date fixed in the advertisement for receipt of the applications the petitioner was eligible in all respects.
It can, thus, be said with reasonable amount of certainty that the petitioner's candidature would have received due consideration if the departmental selection committee had completed the process of selection.
Similar advertisement was issued for recruitment of MPHW(F) in July, 1992.
Over 600 candidates were appointed after the selection.
Why the respondent No. 2 could not continue with and complete the process of selection for appointment of Ayurvedic Medical Officers has not been explained to us.
Rather, the respondent have not controverted the allegation that instead of completing the process of selection, the respondent No. 2 resorted to the methodology of ad hoc appointments.
A substantial number of persons were appointed as Ayurvedic Medical Officers on ad hoc basis and they continued in that capacity for long time.
After about three years and five months of the issue of previous advertisement, the respondent- Board again initiated the process of recruitment of Ayurvedic Medical Officers vide advertisement dated 141996 and fixed 3041996 as the last date for the receipt of applications.
Similar action was taken for recruitment of MPHW(F) because the earlier selection was nullified by the High Court.
In the advertisement issued for recruitment of MPHW(F), the respondent-Board incorporated a clause making all those persons eligible who had applied for selection in response to the advertisement dated 1271992.
This would be evident from the following extract of the advertisement dated 1271992:-  "The upper age limit for the candidates who had applied for this post in response to Advt.
dated 1271992 of Director Health and Family Welfare, Punjab and Chairman Departmental Selection Committee, Punjab, Chandigarh shall be the same as prescribed in that advertisement i.e. in case any of those applicants who have become overage by now, she shall not be considered ineligible on that account..." However, in the advertisement issued for recruitment of Ayurvedic Medical Officers, such a clause was not incorporated and the eligibility of the candidates was left to be judged on the basis of the conditions specified in the advertisement dated 141996.
As a result of this a large number of candidates who had applied in response to the advertisement dated 29111992 were rendered ineligible solely on account of the fact that they had crossed the upper age limit as on April 30, 1996.
In our opinion, the failure of the Board to incorporated in the advertisement condition similar to the one incorporate in the advertisement a dated 2441996 for recruitment of MPHW(F) resulted in grave injustice to those who were the applicants for recruitment as Ayurvedic Medical Officers in the year 1992.
It has not been disputed by the respondents that six posts which were advertised in the year 1992 also formed part of 18 posts advertised on 141996 and 64 posts advertised on 171996.
It must, therefore, be held be held that the respondent-Board acted arbitrarily by excluding the candidature of those who had applied in response to the advertisement published on November 29, 1992.
The petitioner and other candidates like her did not have any control over the process of selection.
They could have taken part in the test and/or interview only if the departmental selection committee had taken steps to hold such test and/or interview.
Thus, the failure of the respondent No. 2 and the departmental selection committee to complete the process of selection cannot be made the basis for penalising the petitioner and other similarly situated persons by treating them ineligible with reference to age requirement.
9.
Even in cases where the recruitment is made in accordance with the rules framed under proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution, the posts/vacancies which occur at a particular point of time are ordinarily required to be filled on the basis of eligibility conditions specified in the rules as they then stand and the subsequent amendment in the rules cannot take away the right of consideration of those who are eligible at the time of advertisement of the posts.
Therefore, in the instant case, where recruitment is not regulated by the statutory rules, the respondents cannot deviate from the conditions of eligibility enumerated in the advertisement in response to which the petitioner had applied.
In this connection, we may refer to the decision of this Court in Jatinder Kumar v. State of Haryana, 1995(5) SLR 380.
That case related to the recruitment of Haryana Civil Service (Judicial Branch).
An advertisement was issued by the Haryana Public Service Commission on 151993 for 32 vacancies.
After the expiry of the last date fixed for the receipt of the applications, the Governor of Haryana amended the rules in the light of the decision of the Supreme Court in All India Judges Association v. Union of India, 1993(4) SCT 248 (SC) : 1993(6) SLR 37.
That amendment was made effective from 2481993.
Subsequently the Commission issued fresh advertisement for the posts which were already advertised in the year 1993 and the posts which had become available thereafter.
Some of the candidates who had applied in response to the advertisement No. 2 of 1993 were treated as ineligible in the light of the changed conditions of eligibility.
This decision of the Haryana Public Service Commission was challenged in a batch of writ petitions.
A division Bench of this Court referred to the decisions of the Supreme Court in YV Rangaiah v. J Sreenivasa Rao, 1983(1) SLR 789; P Ganeshwar Rao v. State of Andhra Pradesh, 1988(4) SLR 548; P Mahendera v. State of Karnataka, 1990(1) SLR 307; NT Devin Katti v. Karnataka Public Service Commission, 1992(2) SCT 578 : 1992(2) SLR 378; State of Andhra Pradesh v. T Ramakrishna Rao, 1971(1) SLR 453; AA Calton v. Director of Education, 1983(1) SLR 785 and held:  "The process of selection commences with the inviting of the applications and ends with the making of appointments.
The eligibility of the candidates is required to be judged with reference to the date fixed in the advertisement.
Any other date would lead to serious anomaly and uncertainty.
Therefore, those who were qualified and eligible on the date specified in the advertisement dated 151993 did acquire a right to be considered for selection in accordance with the terms and conditions of the advertisement."
10.
We may also take notice of the judgment of the Supreme Court in AP Public Service Commission v. B Sarat Chandra, 1990(4) SLR 235.
The Public Service Commission of Andhra Pradesh issued advertisement inviting applications for selection in a combined competitive examination which was to be held in November, 1983.
The post of the Deputy Superintendent of Police was one of the posts for which applications were invited.
The minimum age prescribed for the post of the Deputy Superintendent of Police was 21 years as on 1.7.1983.
The respondent who did not complete 21 years of age on 1.7.1983 applied for recruitment as Deputy Superintendent of Police.
He was not considered for appointment to the post of Deputy Superintendent of Police.
After the selection was completed, he approached Andhra Pradesh Administrative Tribunal by contending that the minimum age prescribed under the notification was contrary to Rule 5 of the Andhra Pradesh Police Service Rules, 1966.
He contended that such date ought to be the date of the preparation of the list of the selected candidates and not any date anterior to it.
The Tribunal accepted this contention and directed the Government to create an additional post of the Deputy Superintendent of Police for the petitioner.
Their Lordships of the Supreme Court overruled the view taken by the Tribunal that the selection can be treated to have been made only when the list had been prepared and, therefore, the eligibility of the candidates as to the age must be determined at that stage.
Their Lordships held:-  ".......If the word `selection' is understood in a sense meaning thereby only the final act of selecting candidates with preparation of the list for appointment, then the conclusion of the Tribunal may not be unjustified.
But round phrases cannot give square answers.
Before accepting that meaning, we must see the consequences, anomalies and uncertainties that it may lead to.
The Tribunal in fact does not dispute that the process of selection begins with the issuance of advertisement and ends with the preparation of select list for appointment.
Indeed, it consists of various steps like inviting applications, scrutiny of applications, rejection of defective applications or elimination of ineligible candidates, conducting examinations, calling for interview or viva voce and preparation of list of successful candidates for appointment.
Rule 3 of the Rules of Procedure of the Public Service Commission is also indicative of all these steps.
When such are the different steps in the process of selection, the minimum or maximum age for suitability of a candidate for appointment cannot be allowed to depend upon and fluctuating or uncertain date.
If the final stage of selection is delayed and more often it happens for various reasons, the candidates who are eligible on the date of application may find themselves eliminated at the final stage for no fault of theirs.
The date to attain the minimum of maximum age must, therefore, be specific, and determinate as on a particular date for candidates to apply and for recruiting agency to scrutinise applications.
It would be, therefore, unreasonable to construe the word `selection' only as the factum of preparation of the select list.
Nothing so bad would have been intended by the Rule making authority."
(Underlining is ours).
In our opinion, the ratio of the judgments in Jatinder Kumar's case (supra) and B Sarat Chandra's case (supra) directly applies to the cases like the present one.
11.
Here it is also significant to mention that the advertisement published on 29111992 was not withdrawn by the respondent No. 2 till the constitution of the Board.
While constituting the Board, the Government directed that the pending selections should be processed and finalised by the Board.
Therefore, there was no justification for the respondents No. 2 and 3 not to make a co- ordinated effort to complete the process of selection initiated with the publication of the advertisement on 29111992 for recruitment of six Ayurvedic Medical Officer.
Even in the circular letter dated 2021995 the Government enjoined upon the various authorities to send the requisitions to the Board.
Therefore, it is clear the respondent No. 2 never abandoned the selection process initiated in the year 1992 and when the respondent No. 3 advertised the posts afresh on 141996, six posts which had been advertised in the year 1992 were clubbed with the posts which became available thereafter.
We, therefore, hold that the respondent No. 2 acted illegally in not treating those candidates eligible for recruitment as Ayurvedic Medically Officer, who had applied in response to the advertisement published on 29111992 and were eligible in terms of the advertisement.
12.
In the result, we dispose of this writ petition by declaring that the petitioner was eligible for recruitment as Ayurvedic Medical Officer and the respondent-Board acted illegally in not considering her candidature on the premise that she had not applied in response to the advertisements dated 141996 or 171996 and that she had crossed the upper age limit of 35 years in the context of the last date fixed in the advertisements dated 141996 and 171996.
However, we decline the prayer of the petitioner for directing the respondents to consider her for appointment because she has failed to secure a place in the select list prepared by the Board.